Developing a Faculty-Librarian Community of Inquiry:
A Blended Learning Approach to Facilitate Information Literacy Education

by

Annette Alyce Melgosa

Abstract
The purpose of the study was to explore how disciplinary understanding around
Information Literacy (IL) might be achieved between faculty members and librarians through the
design and implementation of a blended Community of Inquiry (CoI) (Garrison, 2011) FacultyLibrarians CoI Workshop (FacLibCoI) within a social constructivist epistemology. A mixed
methods, design-based research (DBR) approach was used to build and test the FacLibCoI
prototype and was based on Pool and Laubscher’s (2016) micro/meso iterative-cycle approach to
McKenney and Reeves’ (2012) Generic Model for Educational Design Research.
An environmental scan of the literature and the university where the study took place
comprised phase one of the study. In addition to the review of literature, university reports were
reviewed, and focus group interviews were conducted with university faculty members and
students. Analysis revealed that faculty viewed research as discovery while students equated it
with term papers. Students who had learned IL in general studies writing courses demonstrated
good conceptual knowledge but poor implementation skills.
Phase Two comprised the design phase. The FacLibCoI was designed to last two months
and include three in-person sessions with accompanying asynchronous online discussions.
The FacLibCoI workshop was implemented and analyzed in phase three. The design
changed to four in-person sessions and two asynchronous discussions. Data included before-andafter participant interviews, transcripts, CoI questionnaires, and group artifacts.
All CoI presences and metacognition were achieved in the FacLibCoI. Participants
demonstrated group cohesion and disciplinary-based, shared understanding of IL, producing a
disciplinary IL Model, IL learning goals mapped to disciplinary and IL standards, and an action
plan for IL implementation. A CoI was established in less time than in studies reported in the

ii

literature and holds promise for scaling up. The online portion of the design proved
unsustainable, and technology platforms and busy schedules were negative factors. Online
collaboration between librarians and faculty may prove successful during a later departmental IL
implementation phase. This phase should be considered in future iterations. Consulting
participants on selection of a technological platform is advised.

Keywords: Blended Learning, Community of Inquiry, Design-based Research, Information
Literacy, Inquiry-based Learning, Interdisciplinary Collaboration, Social Constructivism


Chapter One: Introduction
Library science has always had an educational component. In early days, this was termed
bibliographic instruction (BI). BI focused on teaching concepts in information categorization and
retrieval (e.g. catalogs, indices and classification schemes) to library users. In 1974, Zurkowski,
who was an executive in the Information Industry Association, coined the term information
literacy (IL) to describe worker training “in the application of information resources” (p. 6). IL
grew out of a perceived societal need for workers able to navigate the information terrain.
Responding to information changes in society and exposure to constructivist theories of
learning, library science adopted IL terminology and re-envisioned BI into generic lifelong
learning skills that could be applied anywhere. The American Library Association (ALA) voted
the Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education (Association of College
and Research Libraries, 2000), referred to hereafter as the Standards, as the guide for IL in
higher education (HE). The Standards (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2000)
defined IL as “a set of abilities requiring individuals to ‘recognize when information is needed
and have the ability to create, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information’” (p. 2). Both
the term and its conceptualization as a generic skill have been challenged in library science
literature and have continued to develop through this ongoing discussion. This led in 2015, to the
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education (2000) being replaced by The
Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 2015). The progression of how the concept has developed and changed is discussed
further in chapter two.

2

Information Literacy in Higher Education
HE in the United States is structurally and philosophically divided into subject domains.
Faculty members belong (in terms of domain vocabulary, culture, theoretical affinity, and
content) to disciplinary departments or schools (Brint & Clotfelter, 2016; Frost & Jean, 2003;
Strober, 2011). They are masters within their own classrooms and work with trusted collegial
partners within siloed departments. Further, HE tends to focus on specialist knowledge and
research (MacPherson, 2007) with faculty members expected to guide students into the
knowledge, culture and thought processes of the subject domain.
More recently, this culture of siloed knowledge increasingly bumps up against a global
knowledge society that expects graduates to demonstrate critical thinking and problem-solving
across a variety of contexts within environments of collaborative communication. It is no longer
enough to simply be proficient in the content, discourse and skills of a narrow profession. In
response to this societal demand, interdisciplinary initiatives in HE have increased over the last
30 to 40 years (Brint & Clotfelter, 2016).
Within these parameters of HE, teaching IL can be difficult. Unlike a disciplinary
department with its narrow focus, the library provides information to students and faculty across
all the various disciplines of the university. Librarians must therefore liaise with faculty members
and curriculum committees from various disciplinary departments, and sometimes with
administration, to develop and insert IL into the curriculum. Yet, the generalist and inclusive
nature of their work which enables librarians to serve varying sectors of the university
population, puts them at a disadvantage in the classroom where they are not as proficient in the
discipline-specific nature of the curriculum.

3

Academic librarians provide IL in various ways. They may offer credit-bearing courses
for which the library is responsible. Or they may be guest lecturers invited into classes by faculty
members. In some instances, they are invited to co-teach as fully-embedded team teachers. They
may also provide online IL tutorials accessible from the library website. A 2015 survey of US
academic libraries (Cohen et al., 2016) reported guest lecture IL sessions as the most-used
strategy. Other popular methods included embedded assignments and information guides, and
tutorials or videos (Charles, 2017; Cohen et al., 2016). These methods are usually customized
and specific to individual classes and are not easily implemented more broadly. IL programs thus
tend to miss significant numbers of students (Church-Duran, 2017).
Problem
This study explores how librarians and faculty members might foster a shared
understanding of IL within a discipline. With a shared understanding of IL, both faculty and
librarians might be better prepared to engage students in reflective and critical thinking around
IL in order to collaboratively construct knowledge and solve problems (Andrews & Patil, 2007;
Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015) within their chosen disciplines.
To address this problem, one must turn to HE and its structures. Although individual
universities, or schools within these universities, may use general studies curriculum committees,
communities of practice, faculty forums, or other similar bodies, there are few mechanisms or
processes within HE whereby faculty members across the institution (let alone faculty members
and librarians) may regularly and systematically engage in cross-theoretical discourse. Without
such a mechanism, it is nearly impossible for librarians and faculty members to arrive at shared
philosophical, theoretical and pedagogical understanding that would release IL from its librarycentric focus to collaborative sponsorship, discipline by discipline, across the university.

4

Given that faculty members and librarians in HE value inquiry and critical thinking, I
chose an inquiry-based process model, the Community of Inquiry Theoretical Framework (CoI),
to design and pilot a blended CoI faculty member-librarian workshop on IL.
Research Questions
To what extent might collaborative learning within a design-based, blended community
of inquiry (CoI), hereafter referred to as the FacLibCoI, provide an efficient and sustainable way
for faculty members from a single discipline and librarians to construct shared understanding of
IL?
1. How might inquiry-based learning methods within a design-based FacLibCoI
facilitate shared understanding of IL between faculty members and librarians?
2. How might collaborative learning within the FacLibCoI foster shared understanding
and collaborative approaches to IL within the discipline?
3. To what extent might a blended, technology-enhanced learning environment (TELE)
support efficiency within a FacLibCoI while maintaining the social, teaching, and
cognitive presences of the CoI Framework?
A Blended Workshop-design Intervention
For this study, I developed and implemented a technology-enhanced learning
environment (TELE) in the form of a blended (face-to-face and online) FacLibCoI workshop
with faculty from a social sciences department and university librarians. Brown (2013) defines a
TELE as a “complex learning environment that enable[s] appropriate use of technological
resources in order to continually enhance the conditions conducive to learning” (p. 304). A
blended TELE design offered flexible, asynchronous collaboration, which I posited would
shorten the time needed in face-to-face collaboration, an important criterion for engaging busy

5

faculty members. The intervention included four face-to-face sessions with corresponding online
discussions.
Purpose and Rationale
I chose to design and pilot the FacLibCoI workshop that would include as participants
faculty members within a single department and librarians. The purpose was to foster theoretical
and design propositions that would guide further iterations or inform other researchers. This
model also fit my applied research goal to provide a mechanism to help faculty members within
a given department and librarians develop shared understanding and sponsorship of IL that could
help their students to apply IL thoughtfully across their discipline studies and within their career.
Typical issues in the way IL is currently taught in HE led me to conclude that authentic,
learning-focused approaches to IL across the entire university will only occur through
collaborative efforts between faculty members (within a department) and librarians. When
faculty members and librarians clarify and develop shared understandings of IL and how it
relates to their discipline as well as how students relate to it, they will be better able to integrate
IL within their classes (Saunders, 2012). IL is increasingly viewed in relationship to critical
thinking and other higher order thought processes (see the definition of this term later in this
chapter) (Deitering & Jameson, 2008; Detmering & Johnson, 2011; Elmborg, 2006), which
require students to not only understand formal search strategies within databases, for example,
but to situate these strategies within the framework of critical and reflective thought. From this
perspective, faculty members may be better positioned to help students make these connections.
Faculty members do not always realize, however, that IL encompasses some of the same learning
goals that are valued across HE and within their discipline (e.g. analytical and evaluative
strategies related to sources) or that they might incorporate IL within course discourse related to

6

these learning goals. Meanwhile, librarians, who are more familiar with the typical IL-related
pitfalls encountered by undergraduates, champion IL whenever and wherever they can within the
university. But because they do not often share the faculty member’s disciplinary background,
they may find it more difficult to build the discipline’s philosophy, discourse or scholarship into
the way that they present IL to students. Nor are they present most of the time to integrate IL
within typical classroom discourse. Given the disparate yet complementary capabilities of faculty
members and librarians, I posit that it is time for faculty members and librarians, within the
confines of disciplinary departments, to share their knowledge with each other and to build a
more cohesive approach to IL for their students.
Epistemological Stance
This study supports a social constructivist stance where knowledge is built by learners
who connect new knowledge to previous understanding through social inquiry and interaction
with their environment (Lenters, 2013). Social refers to interaction with other human(s) (e.g.
colleagues, experts, etc.) and with human-produced artifacts such as oral stories or written or
recorded artifacts. Social inquiry, then, refers to a social endeavor in which learners collaborate
to build self and shared knowledge (Dewey, 1938; Morgan, 2014).
Theoretical Framework
Researchers designed the CoI Framework (Garrison, 2011; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008),
as a process model to inform the study of collaborative learning communities within an online or
blended learning environment. The CoI Framework has been used over the years in HE to inform
practice and research. Using the CoI Framework in studies with faculty members is less usual
and using it within IL to build shared understanding between two faculties is unique to this
study. Nevertheless, the CoI may be an ideal mechanism for building a TELE workshop that

7

supports collaboration and shared sponsorship of IL among faculty members and librarians,
discipline by discipline.
Through collaborative inquiry such as discourse, negotiation of shared meaning, and
collective cognitive and teaching responsibility, the CoI Framework supports a collaborative
process wherein committed learners build meaning together and create new forms of
understanding in relationship to their shared learning goals as a community (Garrison, 2011;
Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006; Zhang, Scardamalia, Reeve, &
Messina, 2009). The CoI Framework incorporates three presences (social, cognitive, and
teaching) which support an inquiry-based community (Garrison, 2011).
Overview of Methodology
Approach. I incorporated a design-based research (DBR) approach to develop and test a
faculty member-librarian workshop. DBR facilitates focus on a local need in a real-world setting
and is an appropriate methodological approach for an intervention that is attempting to
encourage inquiry, shared understanding, and sponsorship of IL (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012;
McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Rawson & Hughes-Hassell, 2015). I also chose DBR for its focus
on simultaneously developing practical interventions that inform practice along with theoretical
insights (McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Rawson & Hughes-Hassell, 2015). DBR encourages
flexible and iterative refinement through authentic implementation and revision and therefore fits
a blended TELE (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012).
Setting. The study took place in a small (fewer than 3,000 students), private US
university. With fewer than 200 faculty, academic departments are also small. The university
offers degrees in liberal arts, social and professional sciences, and STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics).

8

Sample. Because my study is design-based, it consisted of two data collection points.
The first data collection point was during the university environmental scan where I conducted
focus group interviews of 15 faculty members/librarians and department chairs who volunteered
to participate from across the university. I also conducted focus groups with 16 students who
volunteered from the social sciences department which was selected as the department in which I
would conduct a blended, CoI workshop. In addition, I conducted a private interview with the
Vice President for Academic Affairs. I used the results from this university environmental scan
to inform the design of the FacLibCoI workshop, which occurred in phase two of the study. The
second data collection point occurred in phase three with the implementation of the FacLibCoI
workshop, which included 14 participants (faculty members from a social sciences department
and university librarians). Participant numbers for each of these are summarized in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1. Participants of the Study
University Environmental Scan
FacLibCoI Workshop
(Focus Groups)
16 students from the social sciences
14 participants (made up of 10 faculty
department that participated in the
members from a social sciences
FacLibCoI Workshop
department and 4 librarians*)
15 faculty members/librarians and
department chairs
1 academic administrator
*I was also a librarian, but I was there as researcher and facilitator, not as participant.
The workshop consisted of four, two-hour face-to-face sessions held over two months
with an asynchronous, online discussion thread that followed each face-to-face session. The full
participant group would meet with the facilitator at the beginning of each face-to-face session.
Typically, the group would divide into smaller groups, which had been previously defined to
ensure a mix of social sciences faculty members and librarians in each group. The small groups
would discuss a topic or work through a problem that had been proposed to the full group.

9

Participants would come together at the end to compare their work and to build consensus. After
each face-to-face session, participants were asked to collaborate in an asynchronous forum over a
problem that remained unresolved from the previous face-to-face session.
By focusing on a single disciplinary department and the library, the participants could
build their shared meaning making in ways that would potentially benefit the students within that
academic department. Because academic departments at the university are small, the full faculty
membership of the social sciences department and the full cohort of librarians participated. There
were 14 participants (I was the fifth librarian but was serving as researcher/facilitator).
Data gathering and analysis. I collected and analyzed data using mixed methods
appropriate to the research questions. These various views provided confirmation and contrast,
clarified anomalies, and helped to establish trustworthiness. I collected data in two phases, the
university environmental scan and the FacLibCoI workshop. This is illustrated in Figure 1.1.

Figure 1.1. Diagram of Study Highlighting Data Collection Points
During Phase One, the university environmental scan, three forms of data were collected
which included a review of literature, a review of university documents, and focus group
10

interviews with faculty from across the university and students from a social sciences
department. This data was used to inform the content for the design in Phase Two of the study.
Four types of data were collected during Phase Three when I implemented the FacLibCoI
workshop design with faculty within a social sciences department and librarians. Data included
pre- and post-interviews with participants, session transcripts, CoI questionnaires, and
participant-produced artifacts. The various types of data collected in Phase One and Phase Three
are described below:
Phase One: University environmental scan
•

A review of literature provided theoretical and design information to inform the
design and implementation of the study.

•

University-produced documents, such as accreditation reports and strategic plans,
were used to build a conceptual understanding of the environment in which the
study would take place.

•

Research assistants (RAs) and I took careful notes throughout the focus groups
that I conducted with faculty members and department chairs from across the
university and with students from a social sciences department. I used these notes
to inform the content of the FacLibCoI workshop.

Phase Three: FacLibCoI workshop between social sciences faculty and librarians
•

Transcripts were gathered from pre- and post- semi-structured interviews with
participants (faculty members from a social sciences department and librarians). I
used this data to explore participant understanding of and attitudes toward themes
covered in the FacLibCoI workshop.

11

•

CoI surveys were administered after each face-to-face session of the FacLibCoI
workshop. I used descriptive statistical summarization of results to explore
participant perception of the three CoI presences.

•

Transcripts derived from audio recordings of face-to-face discussions as well as
text transcripts from asynchronous discussions of the FacLibCoI were collected. I
performed deductive analysis on the transcripts to identify instances of shared
understanding of IL, efficiencies/non-efficiencies in the design, and ideas for
collaborative approaches to IL.

•

Participant-created artifacts by the faculty members and librarians were used to
identify shared understandings.

Researcher Assumptions
In choosing the CoI Framework, I assumed that through meaningful and collaborative
discourse and reflection learners would construct self- and co-developed understanding around
IL that would lead to recommendations for IL sponsorship within the discipline. I also assumed
that contemporary educational technology, used in pedagogically-appropriate ways, would
expand the collective potential for dialogue and collaboration (Lock, 2015) between faculty
members and librarians. Finally, when developing workshop content, I assumed that librarybased academic research, which tends to be narrowly focused and published only within library
science publications, inhibits information strategies from transferring to other situations (Head,
2012; Julien, 2016; Lloyd, 2011; Waters, Kasuto, & McNaughton, 2012).
Researcher Background
My bias comes from the library science profession as I was working as a librarian who
spearheaded and taught in the library’s information literacy program at the university where the

12

study took place. At the university, we had a strong IL curriculum within the general studies
program that reached most, if not all, undergraduate students. The program was not without its
difficulties, but it was, at least, in place and functioning smoothly. Nevertheless, I saw firsthand
the difficulties that students experienced trying to understand the relevance to their discipline
courses of the IL instruction in their general studies classes. In addition to my professional role
as an academic librarian teaching IL, I came to this study with a background in educational
technology. The methods used to teach IL, of necessity because librarians are merely guests in
someone else’s classroom, fell short of engaging students and helping to foster curiosity and a
desire to learn. I was therefore eager to learn more about how to encourage intellectual curiosity
through the current IL program and what could be done to enhance student learning.
Definitions and Terminology
Blended learning. In this study, blended learning refers to a mix of face-to-face and
online learning modalities (Graham, Henrie, & Gibbons, 2014; Vaughan, Cleveland-Innes, &
Garrison, 2013) that includes verbal and written discourse (Vaughan et al., 2013). The purpose of
blended learning is to provide convenience and flexibility (Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014) while
enhancing student engagement and satisfaction (Garrison, 2017; Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014).
Community of Inquiry (CoI). A CoI is a group of learners whose focus is on “actively
searching for personal meaning and shared understanding” (Garrison, 2017, p. 24). Members
build their learning and that of the group through respectful sharing and challenging of one
another’s ideas and assumptions.
Higher order thinking. This term has been used in critical thinking and the CoI
literature. Halpern (2007) sees higher order thinking as the larger concept under which critical
thinking fits. Ennis (1989) viewed the two terms as related but different. In this study, I use the

13

term to refer to thought processes that “require judgment, analysis, and synthesis, and…[which
are] not applied in a rote or mechanical manner; …[processes that are] reflective, sensitive to the
context, and self-monitored” (Halpern, 2007). These contrast with memorization, or rote recall.
Information literacy (IL). I created a working definition, critical thinking applied to
information, (Allen, 2008; Phillips, 2004; Weiner, 2011). This conforms to the Framework’s
(Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015) alignment of IL with critical thinking. It
also supports Halpern’s view (2007), that critical thinking is thoughtful engagement of cognitive
strategies towards contextualized problem solving, which increases the likelihood of reaching
desired goals. This definition of IL places it within a discourse familiar to faculty members.
Shared understanding. As used in this study, shared understanding is greater than and
different from the mere summation of everyone’s knowledge in the group. It is new knowledge
negotiated and agreed upon together as a group.
Organization of the Dissertation
In this introductory chapter, I presented the historical background, context, and problem
that the study sought to address. I presented the rationale and significance and the research
questions that governed the study. I identified my epistemological stance, the theoretical
framework, methodology, assumptions, and my background. I presented definitions of terms that
are used in a specialized way in this study.
In the second chapter, I review the literature that provides the basis for the study. I
explore information literacy as it has been theorized and practiced along with its various
collaborative approaches. I briefly explore possible collaborative models and then review the CoI
theoretical framework and associated blended learning strategies.

14

In chapter three, I explore the philosophical and methodological underpinnings of this
study. I explain the theoretical framework and the study’s design, which is based on McKenney
and Reeve’s (2012) Generic Model for Educational Design Research (Generic Model).
I then lay out the setting and sample for the study in chapter four. Data sources and data
collection and analysis techniques are outlined and discussed. Issues of trustworthiness and
ethical considerations are discussed, and limitations and delimitations are stated.
In chapters five and six, I present the findings of the study. In chapter five, I share the
findings of phase one, the university environmental scan, where I interviewed one academic
administrator and conducted focus groups consisting of 14 faculty members and department
chairs across the university as well as 16 students from a social sciences department.
In chapter six, I enumerate the results of phase three, which corresponded to the main
intervention, the FacLibCoI workshop with 14 participants made up of faculty members from a
social sciences department and librarians.
I finish with chapter seven where I discuss the results presented in chapters five and six. I
then draw conclusions and recommendations based on three areas: knowledge advancement,
design refinement, and professional application.
The learning plan developed for the FacLibCoI workshop (consisting of unit and lesson
plans) is provided in the appendices. The questionnaire used to collect data in phase three is also
presented as are two of the three artifacts produced by the FacLibCoI workshop participants. The
first participant-produced artifact is included in chapter six.

15

Chapter Two: Review of Literature
Overview
Undergraduate students today conflate IL with computer literacy much as they did a
decade ago. They feel competent, having grown up with technology, and equate ease in Internet
browsing with research capability, and information search and evaluation skills.
(Gross & Latham, 2009, 2012; Johnson, 2007; Julien, Tan, & Merillat, 2013; Wang, 2016).
Librarians are aware of this phenomenon, and literature produced by IL practitioners
shows a plethora of studies aimed at bringing more engaging IL to more students in the
university. While this is certainly a worthy aim since IL has not always been approached in the
most engaging of ways, the problem is broader. Not only do librarians struggle to engage
students in IL, but they also struggle to engage some faculty members. Without engaging more
faculty members, librarians stand little chance of guiding students who come from the various
disciplines into meaningful learning around IL. Yet, HE lacks a systematic way for faculty
members and librarians to build shared understanding around IL. In this study, I explore a design
to address this problem.
Given the diversity of themes, I limited the review of literature to major historical and
current threads that relate to the study and which represent the larger body of literature under the
various related themes. The review is necessarily selective. Vast bodies of literature exist for
topics such as IL, collaboration with faculty members, or faculty communities. I necessarily
concentrated on aspects of these large topics that might impact this study such as the various
theoretical approaches to IL or blended learning within a CoI. With these delimitations in mind,
the areas I reviewed come primarily from library science literature in the form of information
literacy (IL), and from the learning sciences literature for community and collaboration, the CoI

16

Framework, and blended learning within a CoI. Interestingly, social sciences theory has often
been used in IL and these instances are noted.
Information Literacy (IL)
The perceived need for an information literate workforce and citizenry has maintained a
firm foothold in the conceptualization of IL (Elmborg, 2016), and this has only increased with
the onset of the knowledge economy. For example, the Hart Research Associates study (2013)
surveyed over 300 employers in the United States who not only thought that HE should place
more emphasis on problem solving, collaboration and communication, but that it should teach
research-related strategies. Those who believed research strategies to be important ranked it
alongside creativity and innovation and above teamwork and collaboration, ethics, knowledge of
science or technology, and knowledge about statistics and numbers (p. 8). A full 72 percent of
employers indicated that universities should place more emphasis on teaching how to navigate
“the location, organization, and evaluation of information from multiple sources” (p. 8). In 2015,
the questionnaire underwent revision making equivalent results difficult to extract and compare.
Pressure upon HE to prepare people for the demands of the knowledge economy has
increased over time. Employers in the US and elsewhere want university graduates who can
think critically, solve problems, collaborate, and communicate well (National Association of
Colleges and Employers, 2016). In the current decade, employers consistently express the belief
that HE should not only provide graduates with the skill set of a given discipline but should help
them to gain soft skills and capacities such as communicating well in oral and written form or
applying analysis to problem solving in real world settings (Hart Research Associates, 2013;
National Association of Colleges and Employers, 2016; Sokoloff, 2012). Critical thinking, selfregulated thought, and the ability to critically use information are further coveted soft skills

17

(Bird, Crumpton, Ozan, & Williams, 2012; Bridgstock, 2009; Howard, 2012; Sadler, 2013;
Waters et al., 2012).
Indications are that this desire for an information literate workforce is a worldwide issue.
Australian employers, for example, value similar employee competencies as those preferred by
their American counterparts. The Foundation for Young Australians presented an analysis of job
adverts showing that employers’ demand for problem-solving, creativity, critical thinking, and
digital literacy competencies increased between 25 and 200 plus percent between 2012-2015
(Foundation for Young Australians, 2016). The study further indicated that by the end of the
current decade, 90 percent of the Australian workforce would need to be at least at a digitalcitizen level of competency, defined as being able to “use technology to communicate, find
information and transact” (p. 16).
On the other hand, Elmborg (2016) asserts that when librarians argue the importance of
IL to the workforce, they are falling back on early 20th century progressive administration
conceptualizations and that they should, instead, be adopting the ideals of progressive pedagogy.
Progressive administration focused on the needs of the economy and envisioned educational
systems and organization to train citizenry for the workforce. Progressive education, on the other
hand, as espoused by John Dewey, considered knowledge-building as paramount. Continued
focus on the economy, even the knowledge economy, rather than on education, itself, is at odds
with critical thought or creative knowledge building, according to Elmborg (2016) who criticizes
IL for not exploring more critical approaches.
Historical background. As IL began to emerge out of BI, the Presidential Committee on
Information Literacy Final Report, submitted to the American Librarian Association by the
Association of College and Research Libraries (1989), explained the concept of information

18

literacy and put forth a number of recommendations that included establishing the Coalition for
Information Literacy by the American Library Association. It also recommended that research
needed to promote the concept and that it should be addressed at the White House Conference on
Library and Information Services. This began a new approach within the library field that came
to be known as information literacy or IL. Unlike BI which focused on library tools, IL focused
on literacy and listed objectives which, if accomplished, should demonstrate IL.
The Presidential Committee defined an information literate person as someone who is
“able to recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and
effectively use the needed information” (Association of College and Research Libraries, 1989,
Introductory section, para. 3.). Along with their recommendation for increased research into IL,
they recommended that IL be taught in schools and across higher education. School and
academic librarians embraced these two recommendations and ten years later, the ACRL
Standards Committee approved the Standards (Association of College and Research Libraries,
2000), which expanded the concept to include…
“determin[ing] the extent of the information needed, access[ing] the needed information
effectively and efficiently, evaluat[ing] information and its sources critically,
incorporat[ing] selected information into one’s knowledge base, us[ing] information
effectively to accomplish a specific purpose, [and] understand[ing] the economic, legal,
and social issues surrounding the use of information, and access and use information
ethically and legally.” (pp. 2-3)
At the conceptual level, the authors of the Standards (Association of College and
Research Libraries, 2000) linked IL to HE and to constructivist theory when they declared that

19

the purpose of HE is to promote “reasoning and critical thinking,” along with lifelong learning
by helping students “construct” their own “framework for learning how to learn” (p. 4).
Librarians within HE mobilized around the Standards (Association of College and
Research Libraries, 2000). As experts in information access but not necessarily coming from a
teaching background, these librarian practitioners were tasked with providing IL to an entire
institutional student body. The outcomes-based, blueprint-style approach of the Standards
(Association of College and Research Libraries, 2000) were understandable and the standards,
performance indicators, and learning outcomes feasible. Elmborg (2016) noted that much of the
language and substance of the eventual Standards (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 2000) came from a much earlier ERIC Digests report by Vicki Hancock (1993).
A changing definition of IL. While scholarly discourse among practitioners within the
library science field continued to examine learning outcomes based on the Standards, theorists
examined IL’s underlying philosophy and theory, sometimes applying theory from fields such as
social and psychological sciences or education. Elmborg’s (2006) seminal article, which reviews
critical approaches to IL as a way to incorporate teaching and learning theory, is an example
from these conversations. He and others believed that a skills-based pedagogy that can easily be
measured by competencies or standards, such as IL at the time, fell short of contemporary
educational theory that saw learning as being less about knowledge acquisition and more about
meaning making that is situated in authentic context (Elmborg, 2006; Špiranec & Zorica, 2010).
In 2015, the Association of College and Research Libraries (2015) filed the Framework
for Information Literacy for Higher Education, hereafter referred to as the Framework, with
ALA. Voted in 2016, the Framework provides a less-prescriptive view of IL that focuses on

20

reflection, understanding, and knowledge building. As part of this new emphasis, a new
definition for IL emerged. IL is a set of:
“integrated abilities encompassing the reflective discovery of information, the
understanding of how information is produced and valued, and the use of
information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in communities
of learning” (p. 3).
The Association of College and Research Library’s (2015) new definition better
approaches higher order thinking goals for IL, such as inquiry-based exploration, information
evaluation and interpretation, understanding contextual authority, and critical self-reflection.
Placing IL within higher order thinking moves it from the domain-specificity of library science
to engage other academic disciplines.
The Framework. As mentioned earlier, a decade ago, when search engines began serving
up ever greater amounts of information and privileging some results over others, research
documented that this led to student anxiety as they engaged in early stages of research (Kuhlthau,
2008). In addition to these challenges, today novice researchers face new difficulties. How does
one judge the credibility and objectivity of crowdsourced information, blogs, and fake news?
Wiebe (2016), in an article in which he discussed IL in higher education, commented that young
people tend to ignore these innate flaws of the Internet and conflate Googling with research.
They feel falsely confident in their research abilities. Mechanical approaches to IL do not meet
this and other similar challenges. The Framework (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 2015) is an attempt to move IL further along the continuum between mechanistic
methods to more sociocultural approaches that can withstand the information challenges of the
21st century. It is now the guiding document for IL within HE across the United States.

21

The Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015) expands the
responsibility for IL from lone librarians and their IL programs to collaborative relationships
with faculty members and the entire HE institutional community. It also introduces changes to IL
in terms of theory and practice. A phrase-by-phrase comparison between the Framework and the
Standards (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2000, 2015) is provided in Table 2.1.
Incorporated within the Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries,
2015) are a number of theoretical concepts from within and outside of Library and Information
Science. Perhaps the main theory upon which the document is based is that of threshold concept
theory adopted from learning environments for economics. The term threshold is defined as
“those ideas in any discipline that are passageways or portals to enlarged understanding or ways
of thinking and practicing within that discipline” (p. 2), In a related IL study (Townsend, Hofer,
Hanick, & Brunetti, 2016), threshold concepts are further defined as “an approach to teaching
and learning,” which uses “core ideas and processes in a discipline that students need to grasp in
order to progress in their learning, but that are often unspoken or unrecognized by expert
practitioners” (p. 24). The Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015)
seems to apply thresholds to the discipline of IL, itself (p. 2), while also encouraging
collaboration between faculty members and librarians to identify the disciplinary threshold
concepts around which IL instruction may be built (p. 13).
The Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015) is made up of six
interrelated frames and each contains a threshold or critical concept to the development of IL
understanding and practice. Also linked to each threshold concept are knowledge practices and
dispositions. Knowledge practices are not prescriptive learning outcomes. Instead they may be

22

Table 2.1. Comparison of the Definitions of IL (Standards/New Framework)
Standards (2000)
Information literacy is a set of abilities

Comparison→
Set of abilities
→Metaliteracy of
understandings that
lead to engagement
on multiple levels.

Framework (2015)
Information literacy is a metaliteracy
made up of understandings that are
reflected in personal engagement
with information on multiple levels.

requiring individuals to…

Normative
→self-regulated

engagement with…

Information literacy is the basis for
lifelong learning. It is common to all
disciplines, learning environments, and
education levels.

Universal/
transferable
→Contextualized
engagement with the
ecosystem

the information ecosystem in various
communities

It enables learners to master content and
extend their investigations, to assume
more control over their learning and be
more self-directed

Leads to selfdirected, selfcontrolled learning→

underpinned by metacognition,
including critical self-reflection.

…recognize when information is needed
and have the ability to locate, evaluate,
and use effectively the needed
information. An information literate
individual is able to:
• Determine the extent of information
needed
• Access the needed information
effectively and efficiently
• Evaluate information and its sources
critically
• Incorporate selected information into
one’s knowledge base
• Use information effectively to
accomplish a specific purpose
• Understand the economic, legal, and
social issues surrounding the use of
information; access and use
information ethically and legally

 Breaks down into
clearly defined
behaviors that, if
accomplished, define
a person as being
information literate
→Lists a series of
understandings that,
when combined, form
the concept of
information literacy
→Collaborative
learning guided by
critical self-reflection

Information literacy is the set of
integrated abilities encompassing the
reflective discovery of
information, the understanding of
how information is produced and
valued, and the use of
information in creating new
knowledge and participating ethically
in communities of learning.
• Authority is Constructed and
Contextual
• Information Creation as a
Process
• Information has Value
• Research as Inquiry
• Scholarship as Conversation
• Searching as Strategic
Exploration

considered as examples of how to interact with the threshold idea. As such, they are to be
contextualized within the learning environment where they will be applied. According to the
Framework (2015), dispositions serve as examples of the attitudes and values held by the person
23

embracing the threshold concept. Again, these would need to be crafted to the specific learning
environment.
The goal of the six threshold concepts is to free learners from rote, formulaic application
of IL strategies and to foster deep thinking as they engage with the information environment.
When people develop larger understandings of the complex information world, they are better
able to determine their discovery process. The term, “information ecosystem” as used in the
Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015, p. 2), may represent a
symbiotic (interdependent but not automatically mutually beneficial) relationship between the
learner and the information environment.
The six threshold concepts attempt to encompass the breadth of IL while reflecting
sociocultural learning theory and changes occurring in HE. I summarize the six themes from the
Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015) below. Pages within the
Framework where the specific frame may be found are noted next to each one:
1. Authority is constructed and contextual (p. 4). Authority is dependent upon things
like origin and information need. Authority is granted by a community and the
information seeker should become familiar with the typical authority indicators
within their individual communities.
2. Information is created as a process (p. 5). Because information quality is based on
processes of research, writing, editing and publication, these must be understood and
considered when deciding how to use a source. While an expert may disregard
format, she will consider the processes behind it in determining the usefulness of the
information.

24

3. Information has value (p. 6). Information may be a commodity, a way to exert
control, an educational tool, or a way to explore the world. It is governed by
economic, legal and sociological factors. Participation in the information ecosystem
as consumer or contributor carries risks, responsibilities, and benefits.
4. Research is viewed as inquiry (p. 7). The research process is based on inquiry
wherein questions lead to answers which lead to further questions. This iterative
process occurs within or between disciplines but also expands to the community and
contributes to directions of inquiry, methodological approaches used in inquiry, as
well as to inquiry-informed practice.
5. Scholarship is seen as conversation (p. 8). Conversation takes place within learning
communities and any information produced reflects this conversation.
6. Searching is viewed as strategic exploration (p. 9). Seeking information is not a onesize-fits-all, prescriptive process. Certain strategies may inform the search, but it
remains a non-linear discovery process that crosses various pathways.
To summarize, the Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015)
guides understandings, practices and dispositions used to engage with a complex information
ecosystem. These make up a person’s information literacy repertoire, which can grow, change,
and be flexibly applied. Six threshold concepts are presented as necessary to the understanding
and practice of IL. Each threshold concept includes examples of knowledge practices and
dispositions to assist in designing IL learning processes.
Path forward under the Framework. A decade ago, Elmborg (2006) noted that
librarians in HE faced increased complexity as they took on a clear educational role that
challenged traditional conceptualizations of librarianship. This complexity, instead of

25

dissipating, may increase with the new theoretical approaches outlined in the Framework (see
Association of College and Research Libraries, 2015). Today, librarians and faculty members
must together create an environment where students learn to find and use information in
sophisticated and appropriate ways. In spite of the broad strokes of the Framework (Association
of College and Research Libraries, 2015) that encourage librarians to establish holistic IL
programs that will engage faculty members and other groups across campus to incorporate IL at
various points in a student’s academic career (2015), current literature continues to lament the
fact that the demands upon the teaching librarian are unrealistic in terms of required expertise
across multiple disciplines and groups, and in terms of time required (Church-Duran, 2017).
Practitioners and theorists have begun to further explore and define the frames to
implement this less-prescriptive Framework (Association of College and Research Libraries,
2015) across various disciplines. This is resulting in a very recent and new body of literature.
Vong (2017), who engaged in workshops for colleagues, indicates that three camps have
emerged among practicing librarians: the adopters, those wanting to understand the frames
within their context, and the exasperated. She indicates that debate continues around “the use and
pedagogical value of the frames,” and notes with concern that there is need to recognize these
emotional responses (p. 392). The long-term value of the Framework (Association of College
and Research Libraries, 2015) will depend upon how well the underlying theory is understood
and embraced by IL practitioner librarians.
Although it is too early to judge the long-term efficacy of the Framework (Association of
College and Research Libraries, 2015), there is no doubt that it is already stimulating efforts to
bridge the theory-practice gap. The Disciplinary Applications of Information Literacy Threshold
Concepts (Godbey, Wainscott, & Goodman, 2017), released in November, 2017, by the

26

Association of College & Research Libraries, is one such attempt. This and other initiatives will
lead to applied and theoretical research far into the foreseeable future.
IL theory. IL is a rapidly expanding, complex and diverse topic. Using only the Library
and Information Science Abstracts (LISA) database (that is, excluding other related databases
where cross-disciplinary IL literature would be found), I searched IL literature chronologically
by historical landmarks within the IL field. The first search, 1980-1989, included the period
leading up to the Presidential Committee Report on Information Literacy (Association of College
and Research Libraries, 1989). The second search comprised IL literature from 1990-1999, the
period of time between that document and the Standards (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 2000). The third period stretched one-and-a-half times longer, or 15 years, from 20002014, the time that the Standards (Association of College and Research Libraries, 2000) were in
use. Lastly, I searched the short period of time since the release of the Framework (Association
of College and Research Libraries, 2015) or the three most recent years of 2015-2017. Results
below show just how quickly IL literature has exploded:
Table 2.2. Information Literacy Literature (in LISA)
Period

# Years

1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-2014
2014-2017

10
10
15
3
Total

# of Information
Literacy Results
More than 60
More than 400
More than 6,700
More than 1,700
More than 8,860

Mean # Results
per Year
6
40
447
567

Within IL literature, there are many localized, practitioner-reported applied studies. Over
the last 15 years, however, researchers such as Detlor, Booker, Serenko, and Julien (2012)
published serious theoretical pieces that call for establishing a theoretical and pedagogical base
for IL to guide it beyond transmission modes of education to more active learning approaches.
27

Such theoretical essays call IL away from a focus on generic skills and attributes defined in
mechanistic and positivist ways (Diekema, Holliday, & Leary, 2011; Lloyd, 2010). Instead, they
seek to guide IL into more theoretical approaches based on a variety of epistemologies (e.g.
constructivist, critical, or sociocultural stances). Other theorists highlight the need for conceptual
models and attention to learning theory in order to bridge the gap between theory and practice
(Kuhlthau, 2013; Lloyd, 2017). These researchers moved beyond defining IL to exploring how it
occurs (Lloyd, 2011). Perhaps the truly important takeaway is that theoretical schools or
approaches to IL formed and now exist (Bruce & Hughes, 2010; Freeburg, 2017; Lloyd, 2017).
Researchers are not only pursuing various topics within different epistemological stances, but
based on these stances, they are questioning the core ideas of IL. It is to epistemology that we
now turn our attention.
IL researchers are beginning to form various epistemological camps. Major ones are
cognitive, sociocultural, process-oriented phenomenographic, and critical approaches. The
remainder of my review of IL literature provides examples of IL research conducted from these
perspectives. Within each camp, key researchers made important contributions and could be seen
to represent a larger body of ongoing research. As I review each perspective, I relate it to the
present study.
Example from a constructivist perspective. Carol Kuhlthau published groundbreaking
research in which she developed the Information Search Process (ISP) Framework (1991), which
is based on constructivist theory. Kuhlthau developed and tested the ISP through a series of
studies stretching over two decades (Kuhlthau, 2008, 2013; Maniotes & Kuhlthau, 2014). Work
on the ISP stretched across a number of studies that included school-age and high-school
students, undergraduate students in college and finally different types of professionals within

28

workforce environments (Kuhlthau, 2008, 2013). This Framework has been utilized by many
researchers to study IL from the 1990’s to today.
Kuhlthau’s (1991, 2008, 2013) holistic view of the learner experience, which included
thoughts (cognitive), feelings (affective) and action (physical), relates the importance of human
experience to how people engage in information seeking. Identified in the ISP Framework are
seven stages of the information search process (initiation, selection, exploration, formulation,
collection, presentation, and assessment). Thoughts, feelings, and action are laid across these
information search stages (see Table 2 in Kuhlthau, 1991).
More recently, Kuhlthau developed the Guided Inquiry Design Framework, and Maniotes
and Kuhlthau (2014) provided a classroom example of guided inquiry. The ISP Framework and
other conceptual work by Kuhlthau maintained a strong and extended influence on IL.
Several key findings emerge from Kuhlthau’s research that are important to the concept
of IL and the role it may play in the construction of knowledge. I briefly outline below those that
bear influence on this study:
•

Feelings of uncertainty and anxiety occur once a person has decided upon the subject
of their research and started to gather information during the exploration phase
(Kuhlthau, 2013). During this stage, the person may have trouble finding information
on their topic or they may find contradictory information. If this cognitive uncertainty
and affective anxiety surprise the information seeker, it can lead the person to end the
experience and miss out on learning opportunities (Kuhlthau, 2008).

•

Throughout the information search process there are zones of intervention, a concept
modeled after Vygotsky’s (1997) zone of proximal development, during which time
the information seeker will benefit and appreciate assistance and support from experts

29

in ways they would not during times outside of the zone. Such assistance allows the
person to move forward (Kuhlthau, 2008). If librarians and faculty members
understand this concept, they are better equipped to utilize these times to effectively
and efficiently provide IL instruction.
•

Different types of goals and behavior lead to different information impacts.
Depending upon the goal that the information user has, the impact that the
information can make will differ. Kuhlthau (2008) provides the example of a
professional who wanted to increase knowledge. Meanwhile, a novice information
user searched for the right answer. In this example, the personal goal determined the
level of learning experienced through the information search.

Kuhlthau (1991) lamented the traditional focus within library science on systems and
how to navigate them and presented ISP as a way to shift focus to how a user experiences those
systems throughout the process. In 2013, she proposed reconsidering the Standards because of
“positivist” and “mechanical” language. She explicitly linked the purpose of IL to “a person’s
capacity for deep thinking, reflecting, constructing, innovating, and learning” (p. 97). Her work
has helped the IL field focus upon the experience of the person conducting the search and on
how we might encourage knowledge building through the process.
Example from a phenomenographic perspective. Christine Bruce, along with various
team members, utilized phenomenographic research to study the information experience. She
focused on the user’s relationship to the information and the system used to retrieve it. Bruce
(2000) reported on her own research that took place during the last half the 1990’s within the
workplace where she described how users experience IL through seven faces. These faces are
information technology (e.g. emphasis, competencies), information sources (e.g. bibliographic,

30

human assistance), information processes (e.g. problem-solving, decision-making), information
control (e.g. managing information), knowledge construction (e.g. development of one’s own
point of view), knowledge extension (e.g. uses knowledge to produce solutions), and wisdom
(e.g. uses knowledge to benefit others) (Taken from Table 1, p. 216). Bruce asserted that these
seven faces relate to workplace processes familiar to people and provide a bridge into that
domain (Bruce, 2000). A roadmap for applying information literacy is found in examples of the
seven faces as they apply to informed learning within academe, the workplace and within the
community along with experiences from each context (Bruce, Hughes, & Somerville, 2012).
Informed learning is another concept that developed from applying the variation theory
of learning to IL. This concept grew out of the premise that IL is a way of contextuallyinteracting with information through one’s own information processes rather than possessing a
set of skills that can be once learned and universally applied (Bruce & Hughes, 2010; Bruce et
al., 2012). Informed learning is made up of the following six constructs: second-order
perspective, simultaneity, awareness, relationality, the nature of information, and information
practices (Bruce & Hughes, 2010).
Another important construct is the Nature of Information. Bruce and Hughes (2010)
proposed that information is experienced in a variety of ways and can be defined differently by
different user groups and even by individual users. This conceptualization, if true, represents one
area of productive dialogue among faculty members and librarians seeking to better understand
IL within a discipline so that they may better design learning opportunities for their students.
In summary, informed learning is an attempt at giving due importance to the notion that
teachers and learners can be aware of their information use and the role it plays in their learning
experience. By placing IL within contextualized processes (e.g. creating a project presentation,

31

preparing a medical report, solving a personal problem), users become aware of their learning,
which empowers them to incorporate information into further learning (Bruce et al., 2012).
The learning sciences literature, which addresses inert knowledge and a student’s ability
to access it, has a bearing on this research within the IL literature. Knowledge retrieval seems to
be dependent upon connections that link various knowledge pieces together. When these
connections are lacking, inert, or inaccessible knowledge results (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1985).
Learning sciences literature has addressed this problem in a variety of ways. Lu, Bridges, and
Hmelo-Silver (2014) present problem-based learning (PBL) as an active learning approach that
helps students make these necessary connections. PBL is based on sociocultural, constructivist
theory and seeks to engage students in collaborative work where they must communicate their
knowledge to others, have it critiqued, and through the process, learn to reflect upon and revise
their knowledge. When students become aware of their knowledge they are able to connect it
with other knowledge that they possess and with that of others.
Another learning method where students visualize their learning is through cognitive
apprenticeship (Collins & Kapur, 2014). In cognitive apprenticeship, the novice learner observes
and is mentored by the expert to engage complex concepts and arrive at successful outcomes.
Students learn this conceptual knowledge in rich context, which allows them to connect it with
contextual knowledge and with the disciplinary or professional field. Situating conceptual
knowledge “in problem solving” (2014, p. 115) or real-world contexts enables the student to
locate and apply this knowledge in ways that traditional, transmission-style teaching does not.
Whatever the form that active learning takes, the point is to lead to knowledge that can be
retrieved and applied (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1985).

32

This type of active learning is built or constructed within sociocultural contexts (Lu et al.,
2014), such as collaborative learning communities (Garrison, 2016). While collaboratively
working on a problem, research question, or design in which IL may inform the learning,
students share their knowledge with each other, submitting it to critique and thus making it
obvious to themselves, so that they may reflect and revise their knowledge (Lu et al., 2014). To
support this process, different community learning models have arisen. Communities of practice
and communities of inquiry are two examples of models that have been developed, tested, and
implemented to guide a collaborative learning experience (Garrison, 2017; Wenger, 2010).
Identifying associations like this between learning sciences and IL literature may prove
helpful to both fields. Examples of emerging topics within IL that relate to learning sciences
literature include cross contexts or spaces for inclusive informed learning and methodological
approaches such as informed learning design or informed systems (Bruce et al., 2017).
To summarize, concepts from a phenomenographic perspective of IL that seemed to
relate to learning sciences and this study included:
•

Second order perspective, or the importance of how users experience information.

•

Information is contextual to the processes in which users engage with it.

•

Awareness of one’s own learning surrounding IL helps to empower the user.

•

The role of technology is contextual to things like availability or capability.

•

Effective use of information requires informed learners with appropriate skills.

Example from a sociocultural perspective. An influential voice in sociocultural research
into IL is that of Annemaree Lloyd. Lloyd (2011) studied IL within the workplace and concluded
that it is a process that is made up of many, entwined actions within a contextualized and situated
dialogue. Based on her workplace research, (Lloyd, 2011) rejected the idea that IL is made up of

33

transferrable skills. Instead, she viewed it as a contextualized and constructed, sociocultural
practice. Several studies (Head, 2012; Lloyd, 2011; Waters et al., 2012) seem to suggest that
when IL is tied to academic research processes and sources it does not easily transfer to the
workplace. Head (2012), for example, found that recently-hired graduates exhibited
academically-focused information skills and quick Internet search capabilities but struggled with
ill-defined information problems and with formulating workable solutions that tapped industry or
proprietary sources other than the Internet. Nor did graduates perceive value in team-based
research or in longer, non-linear search processes.
Lloyd’s emergency services studies (referenced in Lloyd, 2007; Lloyd, 2011) found that
IL in the workplace is intimately related to group problem solving. Lloyd (2011) argued that
because IL does not automatically transfer, research should focus on contextualized IL to better
understand the sociocultural influences that impact transfer. In line with this concept, Lloyd
defined IL as “a critical information practice that encompasses not only the mastery of
information skills but also a mastery of the information landscape” (Lloyd, 2011, p. 285). Lloyd
(2017) clearly categorizes IL as a practice and goes on to describe this practice as “situatedness,
relatedness, negotiation, embodiment and collectivity” (p. 91).
Based on the sociocultural understanding of IL practice, Lloyd (2017) proposed an IL
model diagrammed by a set of four concentric circles. The innermost core represents the
information environment. Moving outward, the next circle is split into three pie sections
(physical, social, and epistemic/instrumental modalities). The third circle represents literacies of
information, and the outermost circle, information landscapes. Any number of landscapes may
exist. According to the model, a researcher might enter a given information landscape through its
core (the information environment), while a teacher enters through the literacies of information.

34

Lloyd’s sociocultural approach to IL has implications for this study in that perhaps IL, in
its current form of discourse is not relatable to faculty members within their own disciplinary
discourses. Lloyd observed that IL, as managed and implemented in HE, is too narrowly focused
on library-based search strategies within academic sources. According to Lloyd (2011), librarybased understandings of information make IL less transferrable.
Example from a critical perspective. Over the years, some researchers view critical
theory and IL as a natural philosophical match due to the long-espoused belief within the library
field that information holds a democratizing power (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 1989). One of the key theoretical voices in critical approaches to IL is Elmborg (2006).
Elmborg’s theoretical essays approach IL from various library science perspectives and highlight
it within various critical forms.
In one of his earlier works, Elmborg (2006) pointed to Freirean views of American
education as knowledge banking that deposits information into students’ heads. He contended
that HE is structured to acculturate students into specific ways of knowing. In this same work,
Elmborg (2006) proposed a critical approach to IL to incorporate real world problem solving.
In an essay about IL for adult learners, Elmborg (2010) considered the hegemony that HE
wields and the difficulties encountered by students from less-privileged backgrounds who do not
possess the “school literacies” necessary for success. He argued that much of IL process-oriented
research and pedagogy reinforces this hegemony by placing discrete skills devoid of authentic
environments over socioculturally relevant inquiry and knowledge creation (2010). Critical
literacy, he argued, provides a way to democratize the academic community by helping
newcomers engage in academic conversations, supporting them as they learn the skills and
norms that govern the community’s discourse (Elmborg, 2010).

35

Elmborg (2010) proposed that when working with adults, critical information literacy
will embrace a constructivist approach which places the power back in the hands of the learner.
It will help to engage students in meaningful conversations within their zone of proximal
development (Vygotsky, 1997) and cultural perspectives. Elmborg (2010) proposed that literacy
is defined by the community based on how they value and thus define it. Based on this value and
definition, a literate person would be able to decipher and understand the corresponding codes.
Accordingly, then, “literacy is fundamentally connected to community, and community members
are the judges of literacy competency” (p. 73). IL is an attempt to help members of communities
(academic or professional) learn how the community values and defines information and its
appropriate use. This then becomes a dynamic learning situation. On the one hand, new members
learn to embrace the literacy culture of their community. On the other, they begin to engage in
value-building and defining processes for themselves as novice members of the community.
In another theoretical piece, Elmborg (2012) explored a broad approach to IL in which
critical information literacy is relational and multifaceted rather than something that can be
objectified and classified. One concept that relates to the CoI Framework in this study is his
suggestion that librarians take on the role of co-learner to model knowledge-seeking behavior.
This is in contrast to the role of an expert and viewing “students as ‘objects’” (p. 89).
Elmborg (2016) examined the term, lifelong learning, historically in terms of its coinage
and use in 19th- and early 20th-century America, including the Dewey-Snedden debate between
human growth and democratization (progressive pedagogy) and the utilitarian means to maintain
a useful citizenry (progressive administration). He proposed that, within this historical context,
the concept of lifelong learning can continue to be “a task-driven, programmatic initiative” that

36

can be easily measured or it can become “problem-posing, one-on-one exploration” (Elmborg,
2016) leading to knowledge building within contextualized settings.
Elmborg is but one voice in the critical information literacy field. For more voices in this
growing field, Tewell’s (2015) review of critical information literacy is useful. The most direct
link between critical theory and my study is the critical stance that is so much in evidence within
the social sciences disciplinary department that participated in this study.
Summarizing IL research. Špiranec and Zorica (2010) present an excellent and still
informative review of early paradigmatic discourse within IL. Research from that period until
today is moving IL beyond positivist, transmission-focused learning to approaches that are
integrally linked to social and constructivist learning theory and dependent upon context,
experience, and collaborative processes.
Through various lines of research, IL is becoming a more robust concept that holds
promise for helping people navigate the rich and complex information landscapes of today’s
knowledge society. These views include research into the processes of IL, variance in how
people experience it, IL as a practice based on sociocultural interactions, and IL as a
democratizing influence. As part of this, IL literature also considers the role that theory should
play in schools of library science. Julien (2016) recently called for increased attention to the
teaching of theory in these schools.
Collaborating to Teach IL
All these views, along with others, provide valuable insight into how we conceptualize
IL. They hold promise for more robust and meaningful approaches within HE and for increased
understanding of how best to encourage collaboration around IL between faculty members and
librarians. What might a formal, systematic collaborative approach to IL involve?

37

IL teaching in HE. IL instruction in higher education is typically promoted by librarians,
and it may take a variety of forms from no- or one-credit classes or modules, to serving as an
embedded librarian within classes across the curriculum, or to preparing online resources for
disciplines or classes. Librarians worked hard over the last 15 years to incorporate IL into HE.
But, for various reasons, some still continue to apply the Standards (Association of College and
Research Libraries, 2000) well into the 21st century in erroneous ways that more closely
approach knowledge transmission methods and cookie-cutter learning goals rather than sociallyconstructed, contextualized knowledge (Hicks & Lloyd, 2016; Kuhlthau, 2013). This approach
has often reduced IL to a series of skills to be ticked off rather than thought processes to be
nurtured over time. This slowed IL’s trajectory from BI’s emphasis on narrowly-defined library
tools to an emphasis grounded in theories of literacy (Elmborg, 2006).
Unfortunately, in spite of much hard work in HE classrooms all over the nation, IL is still
too often conceived of as one-shot sessions where librarians are invited into the classroom for a
guest lecture to demonstrate library search tools (Cohen et al., 2016; Wang, 2016). Wang (2016)
observes that single IL sessions are the most used method of IL instruction across HE. In a study
about graduate student experiences in IL sessions, Monroe-Gulick & Petr (2012) note that
librarians resort to this method in a desire to reach more students. A student in their study
observed, “whenever they’re [librarians] given an opportunity to…speak, to give the incredible
training that they usually have had to do their jobs, they get very excited. And sometimes
encourage professors to do it lots of times….” (p. 328).
In spite of its popularity, this type of one-shot IL session, as it is referred to in the
literature, has also been criticized as being largely ineffective (Wang, 2016). In my own personal
experience, such sessions often lead to redundancy for students who receive the same

38

information across several unrelated classes. Some believe that one-off sessions provide students
with teaching “at a point of need” (Wang, 2016, p. 620) because the librarian can demonstrate
resources specific to the assignment in that class. While this can be true, I often found myself
generalizing more than would be helpful to upper-division or graduate students due to my lack of
knowledge in their discipline. Meulemans & Carr (2013) posit that librarians are doing students a
disservice by acquiescing to provide one-off IL sessions and that they should strive, instead, to
work with faculty members to develop learning opportunities that are based on pedagogicallysound principles.
To reach beyond the one-shot session, librarians developed other models as mentioned
above. A decontextualized, for-credit IL course, for example, is provided at some HE institutions
during the student’s first year. The benefit of such an approach is that it reaches all students
across the institution. The danger, of course, is that students will see this as a course that is
isolated from and irrelevant to the content of their other courses.
Another approach is to embed IL within courses, usually as a research module or as part
of an ongoing class project. This helps to contextualize IL. For this to happen, though, librarians
must develop one-on-one relationships with faculty members and take on various roles within a
course (e.g. co-lecturer, curriculum designer, consultant to both students and professor, and
reader). Often the librarian works with the professor to design a learning problem for which IL is
part of the solution (see case examples such as Hoffman, Beatty, Feng, & Lee, 2017; or
Kirkwood & Evans, 2012). The theoretical validity of this method notwithstanding, it is difficult
to scale up a program like this due to the intensity of time needed to establish individual
relationships and the disproportionately low numbers of librarians when compared to those of
faculty members and classes.

39

Librarians might also play a supportive role to faculty members to help them take on the
teaching of IL within their own classes. Two studies (Bury, 2011, 2016) conducted five years
apart among faculty members at a large university in Canada (the 2011 study surveyed over
1,000 faculty members and the 2016 study involved in-depth interviews with 24 faculty
members) revealed that although faculty members showed openness to collaborating with
librarians and admitted a role for librarians in teaching students how to access resources, faculty
members took personal responsibility for student learning in things like academic writing or
critical reading. One may ask whether faculty members might be the ones best suited to teach IL
alongside these other concepts.
Collaborative models. Designing a successful workshop for faculty members across
disciplines is a complex process due to the differences in disciplinary knowledge, teaching and
scholarship. Academic disciplines carry their own philosophy, epistemology, practice and
vocabulary that can inhibit meaningful exchange and lead to misunderstandings and lack of trust.
The imperative, therefore, is to find ways to establish cross-disciplinary intellectual communities
where trust can flourish and collaboration between librarians and faculty members can grow.
Before deciding to use the Community of Inquiry (CoI) Framework in this study, I
examined the Faculty Learning Community (FLC) and Community of Practice (CoP) models.
FLC’s are designed as a way for faculty members from different disciplines to forge intellectual
and collaborative relationships (Cox, 1999, 2004; MacPherson, 2007) and can be cohort- or
issue-focused around teaching and learning (Cox, 1999; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008). An FLC
typically lasts for a full year (Cox, 1999; MacPherson, 2007). Communities of Practice (CoP) are
another form of learning community which may continue indefinitely. The literature on CoP’s is
extensive and outside the parameters of this study except as I briefly considered them before

40

deciding upon the CoI. People use CoP’s across organizations including education and business
(Lesser & Prusak, 2000; Sherer, Shea, & Kristensen, 2003; Wenger, 2010). CoP’s are a
community of individuals who are engaged in informal relationships and committed to
intellectual engagement in order to create and sustain an ongoing domain or area of interest or
expertise (Lesser & Prusak, 2000; Wenger, 2010).
Although the CoI focus of the FLC fit my study, I rejected this model because it seemed
to require a significant length of time to build community, something that is unavailable to
librarians. The process of the CoP seemed more appropriate to my study, but the purpose, which
centered around practice rather than collaborative inquiry, caused me to look elsewhere.
The CoI Theoretical Framework (CoI Framework)
The CoI Framework is the model I selected for this study. The CoI Framework is situated
within the learning sciences literature and researchers within the field of IL may find it a useful
concept with which to engage. The Framework identifies a CoI as the ideal setting where teacher
and students may engage in collaborative and discursive discovery and where three distinct roles
or presences combine within an e-learning setting to enhance personal and community learning.
These presences are social presence, cognitive presence and teaching presence (Garrison, 2011;
Garrison, 2017) The CoI Framework posits that these three components overlap and interact in
co-regulatory ways to create the educational experience.
The CoI Framework finds its theoretical base in collaborative constructivist learning
theory and in Dewey’s transactional conceptualization of education as an interaction between a
learner’s personal world of ideas and the objective or social world with which the learner
transacts or interacts to construct new knowledge (Garrison, 2017). These collaborative
interactions occur through thoughtful reflection and discourse (Garrison, 2017).

41

The CoI Framework is a theoretical process model developed to help achieve a
collaborative, constructivist learning environment. It presents a unified representation of
processes that together assist in the design and implementation of a meaningful transactional
education experience in an e-learning setting (Garrison, 2017). The goal of this process model is
to promote “critical inquiry and the collaborative construction of personal meaningful and shared
understanding” (2017, p. 24). Importantly, its emphasis on the unified whole of the collaborative
inquiry experience helps learners to construct and confirm understanding (2017).
It bears mentioning here that the CoI Framework may be misinterpreted or misused by
some who view the three presences (which are interconnected and co-dependent) or the four-step
process of the Practical Inquiry Model (a model that describes cognitive presence) as fixed or
inflexible. Others may erroneously split the whole apart in an effort to better understand one or
more of the pieces (Garrison, 2017). In the third edition of his book on e-learning, Garrison
(2017), insisted on the theoretically-based unity of the educational transaction within the CoI
Framework. He made statements such as, “in a collaborative constructivist educational
experience, teaching and learning can only be separated artificially—in reality they are one,” (p.
158) or “the functional perspective of the theoretical framework…reflects a ‘collaborative
constructivist’ view of teaching and learning,” which is “a recognition of the inseparable
relationship between the social environment and personal meaning making” (p. 9)
CoI development. Early work on the CoI Framework explored HE instruction and
learning literature as well as textual communication within distance learning (Garrison, 2011;
Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 1999). This initial research led to the development of the CoI
conceptual framework (Garrison et al., 1999) which sought to explain the three core parts that

42

make up an educational experience within a CoI and to transform educational use of computermediated communication (a term that predated the term, e-learning).
A template and indicators for each of the presences enabled the analysis of text-based
transcripts (Garrison et al., 1999). A guiding study around this time analyzed the way other
researchers in the field used quantitative content analysis. The research team examined 19
studies in their attempt to establish valid and reliable transcript analysis tools that could be used
for research and within practice (Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 2001). Throughout the
next decade, numerous studies utilizing transcript analysis studied one or more parts of the
conceptual framework. Towards the end of that period, researchers called for a new approach
that could be applied to larger studies (Arbaugh et al., 2008). A subsequent published survey
instrument and its testing in large cross-institutional studies provided a validated way to measure
the three presences (Arbaugh et al., 2008; Garrison, 2011).
Kineshanko (Befus) (2016) examined research that referenced a seminal article by
Garrison, Anderson and Archer (1999). She found a steady incremental increase of publications
from 2001 through 2014 across conference papers, books or book sections, articles, and theses
and dissertations ranging from fewer than 10 in 2001 to more than 250 in 2014 (Kineshanko
(Befus), 2016, see Figure 5.). She finalized on 1,515 artifacts and eliminated those that did not
contribute meaningfully to the CoI Framework to arrive at 329 artifacts which met her criteria
for thematic analysis (2016). She found that the “terms, concepts, processes, and tools described
in the seminal publication are still germane to distance, blended, and online researchers and
educators” and that they are “technologically neutral” or applicable to a variety of educational
technology environments (Kineshanko (Befus), 2016, p. 98).

43

Garrison (2011) posited that the CoI “is the most coherent theory to date in guiding the
research and practice of e-learning” (p. 29). Now referenced as a theoretical framework,
according to Garrison (2017), the CoI Framework constitutes the main lens used today to study
e-learning. He further asserts that steady increases in the use of the CoI Framework and the
questionnaire that accompanies it shows that it is relevant, lasting, and methodologically
compelling. Adding to these attributes, Kineshanko (Befus) (2016) considers that the CoI may be
useful to designers and teachers as they seek to build pedagogically-sound, e-learning courses.
Elements of the CoI Framework. As mentioned earlier, the CoI Framework is made up
of three elements: social, cognitive, and teaching presences. This conceptual framework, which I
used in this study, is found in Figure 2.1. In the diagram, we see that the three presences overlap
in a Venn diagram with the center making up the educational experience. Where two of the
presences intersect, various characteristics are seen.
For example, supporting discourse occurs where social and cognitive presences overlap,
while setting and climate are found at the intersection of social and teaching presence.
Monitoring and regulating learning occurs between teaching and cognitive presences.
According to the CoI Framework, each presence has its own significant role to play in the
success of the community. These are briefly described below.
Social presence. This presence helps initially to establish the online inquiry community
identity and builds and maintains group unity through open and affective communication. It also
helps to establish an environment of trust wherein participants construct group identity through
engagement in reflective and critical discourse (Garrison, 2011). Creating social presence in an
online environment is challenging but possible through a text-based medium. It is less about
making personal connections for social purposes and more about developing feelings of

44

Figure 2.1. Graphical Representation of the Community of Inquiry. This model
shows three interdependent presences that create a collaborative educational
experience. By D. Randy Garrison, (2011, Fig. 3.2, Kindle location 696). Used
with permission; a revised graphical representation was published after my design
was implemented and would be used in any future iterations of this study (Figure
3.1, in Garrison, 2017, p. 25).
belonging within an educationally-motivated group. Social presence refers to “a climate that
supports and encourages probing questions, skepticism and the contribution of explanatory
ideas” and is therefore “inclusive and critical” at the same time (Garrison, 2017, p. 37).
Social presence is built over time and exerts an influence upon the other two presences in
co-dependent ways. Studies show that social presence develops when people are engaged in
learning together, that it can inhibit cognitive presence if it exceeds certain parameters, and that
it plays an intervening role between teaching and cognitive presence (Garrison, 2017).
Social presence includes the categories of affective expression, open communication, and
cohesive communicative responses. Respectful welcoming messages establish a positive
affective climate and build trust that enables open communication. Through open
communication, a member of the inquiry community responds to the questions and thoughts of
45

others in the group in open and respectful ways. Group cohesion occurs as social presence is
established. Some practical ways to build group cohesion are by using participant names and
inclusive pronouns, and encouraging collaborative, respectful dialogue (Garrison, 2017).
Cognitive presence. This presence includes the processes that support “critical thinking
and discourse and higher order knowledge acquisition and application” (Garrison, 2017, p. 50).
It is explained through the Practical Inquiry Model (PI), wherein four inquiry phases (i.e. trigger,
exploration, integration, and resolution) make up the inquiry process. The process is modeled in
cyclical fashion, but this is a guideline only. Starting in the shared world with a triggering event,
the process leads to perception and on into the private world of exploration. Through inductive
deliberation, the process then moves towards integration. This occurs first privately in reflection
but then moves towards collaborative insight and understanding and on to shared resolution.
Resolution leads to shared action which then leads into a new triggering event where the process
begins again (Garrison, 2011).
It has been noted that teaching presence is critical to move the process towards resolution
which is a cognitively challenging stage. Another finding showed that resolution often occurs
offline especially in large projects (Garrison, 2017). Significant work has been done since 2011
in shared metacognition and it has been found that collaboration in cognitive work is important.
Another area that is being explored is that of self- and co-regulation within a shared
metacognitive construct.
Teaching presence. This presence provides structure to the learning experience. It
facilitates a CoI through design, sharing knowledge, collaborative discourse and reflection, as
well as designing and implementing appropriate assessment. Yet, the presence is called
teach(ing), not teach(er) presence because the role can be shared between all members of the

46

inquiry community (Garrison, 2017). Naturally, the instructor will fulfill this role more heavily
in the beginning and at key junctures where guidance or clarification are necessary. But the
collaborative nature of a CoI means that the collaborative group bears shared responsibility for
the community, which may, for example, translate into negotiating the learning goals and the
assessment as a group. This is an important clarification because perceived control over one’s
learning is linked to success (2017).
Teaching presence involves design and organization, facilitating discourse, and direct
instruction. Design and organization include preliminary planning and ongoing decision-making
as the learning environment progresses. Facilitating discourse and reflection is important in an
online environment because it helps the community to establish cohesiveness and meet its
educational goals. It also assists them towards sustaining and correcting themselves. Finally,
direct instruction is concerned with focusing discourse, identifying faulty understanding and
confirming concepts and thought processes. It involves providing access to content from various
sources and assisting with technology. In summary, it is within teaching presence where the
learning environment is designed and guided, and it is from here that the educational experience
is supported (Garrison, 2017).
Critique of the CoI Framework. The CoI Framework’s three presences and the
instrument items have been validated in various studies and used in hundreds more (Garrison,
2017; Kineshanko (Befus), 2016). The CoI Framework has received great acceptance, yet it has
not been without its critics. I briefly examine some of the major criticism, which has tended to
fall within the areas of cognitive and social presences.
Cognitive presence and learning outcomes. Rourke and Kanuka (2009) conducted a
review of more than 200 studies referencing the CoI Framework and concluded that “deep and

47

meaningful learning does not arise in CoI” (p. 43). They suggested that future research should
study learning outcomes (2009).
In a published response to Rourke & Kanuka’s (2009) assertion that deep learning did not
occur within the CoI, the CoI research team clarified that as a process model the CoI Framework
sought to explain the educational transaction not measure learning outcomes (Akyol et al., 2009,
p. 124). They also questioned how the researchers selected the articles for review and why the
methods used to measure learning excluded the Practical Inquiry Model, which is an integral part
of the CoI Framework (Akyol et al., 2009).
Breivik (2016) published a theoretical piece in which he considered cognitive presence as
a tool to measure critical thinking. After a philosophically-based examination and a review of
some studies using the CoI Framework, he concluded that cognitive presence does not measure
critical thinking and asked the research community to join him in studying its construct validity.
Social presence as a construct and its relationship to emotions. A study that utilized
quantitative content analysis from discourse generated in two semester-long online college
courses found social presence difficult to interpret (Shea et al., 2010). They called for further
clarification. In a second study, Shea et al. (2012) questioned the CoI Framework’s ability to
explain learner behavior and they proposed a new learning presence. By 2014, this team
published a third study in which they used quantitative content analysis and social networking
analysis with a group of doctoral students (Shea et al., 2014). They proposed retention of the
original three presences but suggested renaming them as Social-Learning Presence, SocialTeaching Presence, and Socio-Cognitive Presence, which, according to them, “reflect the unique
contributions of students and teachers and also embeds the social dimension as part of each
presence” (p. 15).

48

Annand (2011) conducted a review of CoI Framework-based literature and posited that
Social Presence received more prominence than it warranted and questioned the need for
“sustained, contiguous, two-way communication” for successful online learning (p. 52). Annand
(2011) further called for the subcategories of social and teaching presences to be re-evaluated
and controlled studies conducted to investigate the relationship between the presences and to
compare sustained communication. Garrison (2017), on the other hand, points out that
“traditional distance education with its focus on prescriptive course packages to be assimilated
by the student in isolation… [is] …a misconception that learning is largely an individual
cognitive process,” (p. 35) and concludes that “the optimal level of social presence is dynamic,”
but that “it has been shown that social presence is a mediating variable with regard to cognitive
and teaching presence” (p. 49).
A study conducted by Cleveland-Innes and Campbell (2012) in graduate online courses
across disciplines studied the emotional aspect related to the learning experience. They analyzed
transcripts and open-ended questions to identify and use emotional presence indicators in further
data collection. This led to a call for further study into a possible new emotional presence.
Although conducted in a K-12 online math’s coaching program, I include the Swedish
study by Stenborn, Jannson, and Hulkko (2016) who tested a new Emotional Presence construct
within the coach-student relationship. They found evidence for all presences, but cognitive and
teaching presences took prominence.
Armellini and De Stefani (2016) sought to establish the three CoI Framework presences
through three iterations of a blended professional development program between 2007-2010
among English-language teachers in Uruguay. Researchers found that social presence did not
perform well as its own construct, but it played a decisive role in the other presences. They

49

proposed a new model in which social presence is in the center with the other two presences
overlapping it and each other to create the central educational experience.
In his latest work, Garrison (2017) addressed the various attempts at adding a presence as
well as assessments of the model’s construct. He argued that calls for Emotional or Learning
Presence are not strong enough to warrant another presence and noted that adding additional
presences would break the principle of parsimony. He also argued that the CoI Framework is
based on collaborative constructivism and that attempts to focus on specific learn(er) or teach(er)
roles would pull the CoI Framework away from the theoretical base of collaborative cognition.
Finally, Garrison (2017) observed that while further research into things like critical thinking or
emotional aspects of learning can help to further define the various parts of the CoI Framework,
they should be viewed as part of the environment or elements external to the model. He further
pointed out that the CoI Framework cannot be judged by criteria that considers critical thinking
as something that occurs to an individual in isolation.
Blended Learning Within a CoI
A technology-enhanced learning environment or TELE integrates technology and
pedagogy to guide and enhance learning. It may be fully face-to-face but infused with
technology. Or, it may be a blended learning environment that combines face-to-face and online
sessions. It might also be a fully online environment with no face-to-face interaction. Its defining
characteristic is that electronic technologies, especially those that facilitate collaboration, may be
combined with appropriate learning theory and methods to design and implement a curriculumbased learning environment that enables students to connect and collaborate in the creation of
knowledge (Brown, 2013; Lock, 2015).

50

By way of example, Kidron and Kali (2015) used technology-enhanced cognitive
apprenticeship concepts to facilitate interaction between experts and novices within a CoI. They
proposed that a mixed-discipline TELE where various levels of expertise are represented could
lead to understanding across disciplines.
In researching blended learning, I compiled a list of its various characteristics. This list is
not exhaustive, but it highlights the main characteristics related to my study. Blended learning,
therefore:
•

Is comprised of a thoughtful mix of face-to-face and online learning modalities
(Graham et al., 2014; Vaughan et al., 2013).

•

Consists of verbal and written discourse (Vaughan et al., 2013).

•

Provides convenience and flexibility (Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014).

•

Can enhance student engagement and satisfaction (Garrison, 2017; Moskal &
Cavanagh, 2014).

•

Can support and enhance active, deep learning (Dziuban, Hartman, Moskal, Sorg, &
Truman, 2004; Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Garrison & Kanuka, 2004;
Joosten, Barth, Harness, & Weber, 2014; Riley et al., 2014).

•

Is interactive; students interact with content and the technology, with self, and with
others (Vaughan et al., 2013; Wegmann & Thompson, 2014).

•

Involves redesign from lecture to learning-centered instruction (Garrison, 2017; Riley
et al., 2014; Vaughan et al., 2014).

•

Requires proper technical support and scaffolding (Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014).

•

Must include time management strategies for students (Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014).

•

Involves self-motivation through collaboration (Garrison, 2017; McDonald, 2014).
51

The CoI Framework is a theoretical process model designed to work within an electronic
environment, one of which is blended learning. The CoI Framework has a history with blended
learning almost from inception. Merely two years after the term, blended learning, emerged at
the Annual Sloan-C 2002 Conference (Picciano, 2014), Garrison and Kanuka (2004) wrote a
position paper in which they applied the new concept to the CoI Framework.
Garrison and Vaughan (2008) explored a blended faculty member CoI in order to show
how to use the four stages of the Practical Inquiry Model of critical inquiry (trigger, explore,
integrate and resolution). I particularly found the course redesign planning framework questions
included in this work to be helpful. These help a teacher develop learning outcomes, activities,
assessment, and technologies to support learning. The book also contains many useful examples
of learning activities that can be used in face-to-face and online learning environments to foster
different phases of inquiry. For example, one can incorporate web-based readings or an online
quiz as a trigger event in an online environment while using brainstorming activities in a face-toface session. For integration and resolution, the authors suggested that participants could be
asked to present their redesign or other integration pieces to colleagues in the CoI.
Garrison and Vaughan (2008) also focused on the teaching presence of the CoI
Framework and presented seven principles of practice that were deductively generated. Five
years later, Vaughan, Cleveland-Innes, and Garrison (2013) revised and updated these
principles. A person who implements these seven principles will:
“plan for the creation of open communication and trust, [and] for critical reflection and
discourse, establish community… cohesion, [and] inquiry dynamics (purposeful inquiry),
[as well as] sustain respect and responsibility, sustain inquiry that moves to resolution,
[and] ensure assessment is congruent with intended processes and outcomes.” (p. 17).

52

Linking each of these seven principles to the three responsibilities—design, facilitation,
and direct instruction—that define teaching presence, Vaughan et al. (2013) provided examples
and types of assessment that included self- and peer- or instructor-based assessment, rubrics, and
more. Finally, these researchers (2013) reviewed a variety of technologies that may be used for
educational purposes including social media, digital storytelling, or virtual worlds. They also
provided examples of how technologies facilitate inquiry.
The strength of blended learning is its ability to engage participants within a CoI.
According to Garrison (2017) blended learning is about…
“actively involving all participants in the educational experience. Its essence is moving
away from using scarce face-to-face time for information transmission. To use blended
learning to disseminate content is to ignore its inherent advantage to engage learners
(face-to-face and online) and sustain these connections over time and space” (p. 103).
Positioning This Study Within the Literature
Information literacy literature shows a need for collaboration between faculty members
and librarians and includes various attempts at collaborative initiatives, such as one-shot IL
sessions, embedded librarians, IL programs tied to specific general education courses, or webbased literature guides rolled out to faculty members and students (Cohen et al., 2016; Hoffman
et al., 2017; Kirkwood & Evans, 2012; Wang, 2016). IL theoretical literature shows that IL is
being approached from various epistemological and learning theory lenses (Kuhlthau, 2008;
Tewell, 2015; Wang, Bruce, & Hughes, 2011). This highlights an aspect that has been largely
ignored in applied IL, that of cross-disciplinary discourse (for example, sharing with each other
theory from each discipline that might relate to IL), which could help to build shared
understanding.

53

Faculty member collaboration leads back to professional-development types of
experiences, wherein faculty members either work within their own disciplinary or in crossdisciplinary groups to build a sense of community and overcome issues inherent to the life of an
academic professional (e.g. tenure, isolation, publishing). Or, they may work within a supportive
group on improving their own teaching (Cox, 2004). Meanwhile, the CoI Framework and
blended learning literature show how a CoI can be used in faculty member professional
development (Garrison, 2017). Uses typically fall within the same categories as those listed
above. One advantage to CoI-based faculty member professional development programs is that
members can experience collaborative inquiry-based learning firsthand before attempting to
create it in their own classrooms.
There seems to be a unique space in the cross point between IL, faculty member
collaboration, and CoI literature for exploring how to foster dialogue between librarians and
faculty members that incorporate the disciplinary discourse of both groups. The purpose is to
develop shared understanding and sponsorship of IL.
Summary
This review informs the design and implementation of the FacLibCoI workshop with
social sciences department faculty and librarians. I reviewed literature on information literacy,
faculty member and librarian collaboration, communities of faculty members and specifically the
CoI Framework along with blended learning within a CoI. The review helped to define the
theoretical viewpoints and issues surrounding IL. It also provided a foundational view of the CoI
Framework and its underlying philosophical stance. This review helped me to design and
implement the FacLibCoI within a social sciences department.

54

Chapter Three: Methodology
Introduction
This chapter presents the philosophical and methodological perspective of the study and
leads into chapter four where methods are presented. The chapter begins with the philosophical
paradigm of pragmatism, specifically that of John Dewey. I explore Deweyan pragmatism within
the confines of this study which I base in sociocultural constructivist epistemology and IL and
place within the CoI Framework that is also based on collaborative constructivism. The
philosophical foundations of the CoI Framework are briefly presented, and the study’s problem
statement and research questions are linked to this philosophical and theoretical base.
DBR as the methodological approach chosen for this study is then discussed. DBR is
defined, its strengths and limitations presented, and the rationale for choosing DBR explained.
Select DBR design models are explored and the model used in this study identified.
Next, I present and explain the research design. The philosophical rationale and the
various phases of the design are explained. The design provides the framing for the remainder of
the methodological steps (e.g. context, methods and analysis, trustworthiness, ethics, other
considerations), which are presented in chapter four. The chapter finishes with a description of
the study’s commensurability between philosophy and design.
Philosophical Paradigm: Pragmatism
The philosophical paradigm that governs this study is Deweyan pragmatism, which is
based on the philosophy of John Dewey. Given the controversy sometimes attached to
pragmatism, I wish to briefly address it up front. Later, some of its challenges are further
explored. Morgan (2014) highlights how there is often a “crude summary of pragmatism” as
merely “what works” (p. 1046). Both Johnson and Onwuegbuzie (2004) and Morgan (2014),

55

when pointing to mixed methods as a typical approach of choice for pragmatist studies,
acknowledge that some theorists on both sides of the objectivist-interpretivist debate reject
mixing methods and paradigms. These authors argue against the conventional wisdom that says
that methods are predetermined by paradigmatic choice. Instead, they offer the alternative view
that choice of methods should be based on the research questions and goals. They point out that
philosophical pragmatism, which is often unfairly reduced to a simplistic view of mixed methods
research, is a much larger theory (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Morgan, 2014). It is my aim
in this section, where I present a summary of philosophical pragmatism, to explain how
pragmatism provides a paradigmatic guide for this study.
Definition. Crotty (1998) describes pragmatism as a philosophy where “the authentic
meaning of ideas and values is linked to their outcomes and to the practices in which they are
embedded” (p. 73). Crotty (1998) points to the practical dimension of pragmatism wherein the
world is viewed as one “to be explored and made the most of” (p. 74). In that sense, pragmatism
focuses on an experiential reality of living and interacting within the contextual world of the
physical, social, and internal (Dewey, 1938; Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Vanderstraeten,
2002). From a research perspective as expressed in Pierce’s pragmatic maxim (Johnson &
Onwuegbuzie, 2004), a pragmatist judges an idea’s warranted truth or falsity from the experience
or consequences of its use in the real world. Following this line of thought, and transposing from
philosophy to methods, I chose a mixed-methods approach to study my own understanding and
design of a CoI. I chose methods based on the pragmatic view that these would allow me to
make warranted assertions based on actual perception, experience, and consequences.
Response to ontological dualism. Dewey departed from the traditional philosophical
emphasis on the “abstract” when he asserted that knowledge is based on experience not in

56

metaphysical reasoning (Dewey, 1929; Morgan, 2007). Dewey viewed philosophical dualism as
artificial and problematic. In his mind, dualistic philosophical stances led to a separation between
the external world and the inner being and stood in opposition to his educational ideal (Garrison
& Vaughan, 2008) of a unified educational transaction where the organism exists within an
external reality with which it interacts organically to build knowledge (Dewey, 1938; Garrison,
2011; Vanderstraeten, 2002). Dewey’s form of pragmatism contrasts with more abstract and
divisive paradigmatic focuses on the nature of reality (Morgan, 2007; van Merriënboer & de
Bruin, 2014) in that it reformulates the nature of reality to be about “the experience of actions in
the world” (Morgan, 2007, p. 68) rather than about an external or internal reality devoid of those
experiences. From a more abstract ontological perspective, the way that a person defines reality
will determine the types of knowledge available and the methods used to attain that knowledge.
But Dewey’s pragmatic stance starts with epistemology, specifically the view that knowledge is
constructed. The emphasis is on the importance of lived reality in the creation of knowledge as
opposed to abstract theorization about its ultimate nature (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Schuh
& Barab, 2007).
Pragmatic epistemology. Dewey argued that the way we gain knowledge (not an
abstract theoretical reality) is based within the realm of experience instead of abstract theorizing.
He rejected ontological dualisms like “realism vs. idealism” (Morgan, 2007, p. 1048) and
epistemological ones like “subjectivism vs. objectivism” (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004, p. 18).
Dewey’s conceptualization of how knowledge takes place is based on his view of
experience as a unified transaction between individual and environment. Dewey’s (1896)
transaction originates with the organism who actively engages with the environment. For him,
the uniting of the inner world of the individual with the outer world through personal action is

57

important, and knowledge is based on something that the person actively does and the
consequences that she experiences rather than upon something external to her (Johnson &
Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Vanderstraeten, 2002).
As a person engages with her environment, she becomes curious, which prompts inquiry;
she experiences, and begins to form belief based on that experience. The sum of various acts and
experiences upon that belief results in the construction of knowledge. Through active inquiry and
experience over time, a person comes not to know truth but to form warranted assertions
(Morgan, 2007; Vanderstraeten, 2002). Warranted assertions are different than absolute truth and
in this, pragmatism “endorses fallibilism” (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004, p. 18), which leaves
room for error and correction through continued and more nuanced understanding.
It should be mentioned here that the link between individual and environment means that
inquiry within context is an important piece of Dewey’s theory. Morgan (2014) points out that
pragmatism does not begin in the abstract realm of discussions about veracity or ontology, but
within the context of life. This means that experience, which comes out of the organismenvironment relationship, is “context-dependent” (Morgan, 2014, p. 1046).
Pragmatism and education. Dewey saw the organism-environment transaction as the
basis for education. It is here, through experience, that knowledge is built and not compliantly
accepted (Vanderstraeten, 2002). Dewey unequivocally rejected education that viewed the
student as a passive receptacle because such an educational model does not help the student to
engage in future educational experiences (Dewey, 1938). Instead, Dewey’s view of education is
grounded in lived reality. He viewed curiosity, inquiry, and active knowledge-building within the
real world as the standard for education. Knowledge cannot be separated from the environment

58

or from the person’s actions within it. Knowledge is therefore intimately associated with the act
of doing (Vanderstraeten, 2002).
Dewey also viewed knowledge as co-constructed or socially dependent (see a fuller
explanation of this in the next section, Pragmatism and Constructivism). Knowledge is built
when the individual engages her inner world with the environment, which includes the social
world, in which she lives.
Dewey used the standard of workability (that is, what worked to help us resolve doubt,
solve problems, and arrive at equilibrium in the real world) as the measure of successful inquiry
(Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004). Yet, he rejected education that emphasized only educational
experience to the detriment of educational planning that would ensure quality experiences for
students (Dewey, 1938). In Dewey’s pragmatist pedagogy, the educational environment matters
greatly and educators should use it to build helpful learning experiences (Dewey, 1938).
Pragmatism and constructivism. How pragmatism and constructivism relate to each
other is important because constructivism presents itself in the CoI Framework which is being
used in this study. The CoI Framework is based on collaborative constructivism and Dewey’s
theories (Garrison, 2011).
Constructivism grew out of developmental psychology at the time when Piaget’s theories
became popular in America (Sawyer, 2006). Piaget linked development and learning (Lenters,
2013; Sawyer, 2006). Cognitive constructivists view the mind and environment as separate and
recognize the need for engagement with the environment in the form of meaning making or
knowledge construction (Schuh & Barab, 2007). Constructivists assert that one builds knowledge
through the process of linking new concepts with old (Lenters, 2013).

59

Social constructivism, on the other hand, is based on the idea that knowledge is sociallyconstructed (Lenters, 2013; Schuh & Barab, 2007) within one’s context. An example of this
concept in action may be found in the subject of history. A social constructivist would argue that
history should not be studied as something that only happened in the past. Inquiry into history,
according to Dewey (1938), must be based on the learner’s present experience (and must
therefore be context-dependent) if meaning-making is to take place. History is a representation of
socially-constructed knowledge. One relies upon the sociocultural knowledge produced by others
and links it to current context to understand one’s own history. Interestingly, Vygotsky, who is
considered one of the forefathers of social constructivism, believed that one’s sociocultural
development was linked with cognitive development. His theory of the zone of proximal
development (the space between where a learner is able to perform with assistance or
independently) presupposes a knowledgeable other and socially-linked learning (Confrey, 2006).
Although the term constructivism is not found in the writings of Dewey, his name is often
associated with constructivm in the literature. For example, Kivinen and Ristelä (2003) list
Dewey as one of a number of theorists who influenced constructivism. Swan and Ice (2010) refer
to social constructivism and Dewey’s concept of inquiry when describing the CoI Framework.
Vanderstraeten (2002) argues that Dewey’s transactional theory of an individual and the
environment constitutes constructivist views.
In relation to the CoI Framework, Garrison and Vaughan (2008) refer to collaborative
constructivism when they discuss Dewey’s sociological component of education. They go on to
argue for a learning community and for a teaching presence, both of which are social constructs.
In line with the concept of a teaching presence, Dewey believed in the role of an educational

60

guide, whose job it was, in part, to organize the learning environment utilizing creativity to foster
learning experiences that are contextual and social (Dewey, 1938).
Pragmatism and research. Johnson and Onwuegbuzie (2004), in their article about
mixed methods research, consider the philosophical underpinnings of pragmatism from the
perspective of research. They point out that pragmatism’s aim is to bridge philosophical dualisms
to provide a pathway that works. Pragmatic research emphasizes “practical empiricism” (p. 18),
or research based on experience. It is humble in its assertions of truths (“lower case t” as opposed
to universal Truth with a “capital T”) (p. 18), adopts a “value-oriented approach to research,” (p.
18), and promotes understanding as something that should be continually improved.
Challenges to the pragmatism paradigm. Some challenges exist within pragmatism. It
is often blamed for non-rigorous applications of mixed methods research. Even if mixed methods
research is applied properly, researchers run the risk of focusing on their methods more than on
the theoretical rationale for the selection of these methods; the same can be said for the way
pragmatic research is often reduced to only solving problems (Morgan, 2014). Pragmatism, as a
paradigm, should be robust enough to disallow easy reductionist tendencies.
A strength of pragmatism, but also a potential weakness, is its emphasis in applied
research (Elmborg, 2012), which can de-emphasize pure research (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie,
2004) to the detriment of both. Because pragmatism rejects the traditional dualistic views of the
nature of reality through its emphasis on knowledge making within a unified organismenvironment transaction (Vanderstraeten, 2002), it can accommodate various forms of research.
Yet, there is the danger that it can be considered a paradigm for applied research only rather than
one that bridges the objectivist-subjectivist philosophical gap (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004).

61

Finally, pragmatism tends to result in small changes over time rather than transformative
and disruptive change (small truths rather than Truth). This causes some to question the
usefulness of its solutions (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004).
Summary. Pragmatists view the nature of knowledge (as opposed to the nature of reality)
as the truly important question. In this respect, ontological theorizing about the nature of reality
make little difference to them and some claim that pragmatism is a possible bridge between the
various philosophical and ontological dualisms (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004).
Vanderstraeten (2002) explains that Dewey viewed knowledge as “a relationship between
the activities of the organism and the consequences these activities bring out” (p. 238).
Dependent upon inquiry and action within a social context not upon an abstraction between mind
and environment (Morgan, 2014), knowledge is a social experience (Dewey, 1938; Morgan,
2014) wherein the individual engages in active inquiry in order to interact with the environment
(or, in educational terms, the student actively does inquiry in order to learn). This sociallyinterpreted interaction utilizes language, culture, and experience as tools towards understanding.
From a research perspective, pragmatist researchers consider the importance of the
environment and its values, view discovery of truth as tentative, and see the truth-making process
as iterative and active. They believe that pragmatism can help to resolve dualistic paradigmatic
arguments and guides the choice of research methodology (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004).
Statement of the Problem
We now turn to the problem that this study seeks to address. The problem starts with how
students might be expected to transfer generic types of IL learning which they may have
experienced previously to the contextualized settings of their disciplines and their careers
through learning how disciplinary scholars and professionals think and through disciplinary

62

approaches to problem solving. Without collaboration between faculty members, who guide
students into disciplinary ways of thinking and knowing, and librarians, whose area of expertise
is IL, it seems unlikely that most students will learn to contextualize IL (Andrews & Patil, 2007;
Lloyd, 2011) to their discipline and their profession. Elmborg (2006) proposes that particular
types of discourse belong to specific communities and that one of the jobs of HE students is to
learn academic and professional discourse and that this happens within disciplines. If this is the
case, universal, general learning competencies in HE, such as critical thinking, communication
skills, or IL (Sadler, 2013), must also fall within the disciplinary community if they are to
become part of that discourse. The problem with IL is that it is a different discourse from that of
the student’s discipline. How to engender conversations that lead to a shared community,
discipline by discipline, between librarians and faculty members to build IL into the student’s
disciplinary discourse and practice becomes the real question.
Theoretical foundation. This study sought to explore the CoI Framework as a means for
facilitating the construction of shared understanding around IL between faculty of a given
discipline and librarians. The core features of the CoI align with Dewey’s pragmatism. His
organism-environment transaction (Vanderstraeten, 2002), for example, is constructivist in
essence, dependent upon sociocultural interaction, embedded in context, and is based on active
inquiry. It is also receptive to teaching presence.
Complexity. Numerous studies (Ducas & Michaud-Oystryk, 2003; Julien & Given,
2004; Julien et al., 2013; Meulemans & Carr, 2013; Sterngold, 2008) reveal that there is a
persistent and complex relationship in the way in which librarians and faculty members within
HE understand each other and IL and collaborate together to teach IL to their students. These
studies show that improvements across decades are noted but fully-shared understanding and

63

collaboration remains a challenge. This complex problem, from within the realm of higher
education, fits the definition of a wicked problem as coined by Rittel and Webber (1973) in an
article about social planning that is often referenced in learning sciences and DBR literature
(Plomp, 2010). Wicked problems exist across the social sciences and are defined in part by the
fact that they are difficult to define and can never be definitively solved (Rittel & Webber, 1973).
In this study, the wicked, ill-defined nature of a problem lies in the various complex
issues that combine to create the problem. It may be argued that pervasive and persistent
conditions within HE make collaboration between librarians and faculty members difficult to
build and maintain. For example, a university offers various disciplinary fields, each with its
unique philosophical, pedagogical and research focus. How one provides IL attuned to these
disciplinary differences is a persistent issue that has led to ongoing theoretical debates. The
debate between generic vs. situated approaches to teaching IL is only one example (Bury, 2011;
Farrell, 2012; Lloyd, 2010). Saunders (2012) found that faculty members across various
disciplines tend to believe in the importance of information literacy but may define it differently,
consider the importance of types of sources differently, and value different skills of information
evaluation depending upon their discipline. Although in recent years, universities made efforts
towards interdisciplinary initiatives and librarians and faculty members hold shared
responsibility to sponsor IL learning, the structure of separate disciplines works against
collaborative efforts in general and with IL, specifically (Gillis et al., 2017; Kissel et al., 2017).
Other barriers exist within HE, including heavy curricular requirements and limited time
to cover material, which may lead to a faculty member’s reticence to include concepts perceived
as peripheral to the core curriculum. Collaboration between librarians and faculty members is
necessary if IL is to succeed within HE, but it remains difficult to achieve.

64

Characteristics of complex problems that bear relationship to this study. Some
characteristics of complex problems as defined by Rittel and Webber (1973) apply to this study:
•

Wicked problems may be approximated but will only be defined when the solution is
found. This study sought to explore the problem of collaborative understanding
around IL within HE by testing a designed solution against an approximated problem.

•

One cannot easily define and independently apply a complete solution because the
solution is intimately intertwined with the definition of the problem. (Rittel &
Webber, 1973). Where faculty members bring different philosophical views and
levels of perceived importance to IL, a possible solution may be to facilitate an
interdisciplinary IL discussion. Rather than providing a complete solution, however,
the discussion may reveal additional problems (such as faculty member time
constraints) that require further consideration towards future solution design.

•

Wicked problems, such as long-standing educational problems, tend to show no
definite stopping point (Rittel & Webber, 1973). Given the constraints imposed, is it
possible to encourage collaborative understanding around IL and to what extent?
How approximate to that ideal of collaborative understanding is approximate enough?
Questions such as these determine a feasible level of approximation to a solution.

•

Wicked problems are “essentially unique” (Rittel & Webber, 1973). Facilitating
shared understanding of IL between faculty members with different philosophical and
theoretical foundations as well as educational approaches brings a high level of
complexity and highly contextualized issues to the problem. For example, each
university struggles with its own complex mix of disciplinary fields, institutional
priorities, student and faculty member profiles, and learning goals.

65

•

Every solution that is implemented for a wicked problem has potentially-significant
consequences (Rittel & Webber, 1973). That is, consequences matter and impact
future iterations or solutions. Inefficiency, for example, is one potentially-devastating
consequence that must be considered in the design and implementation of a model
that involves faculty members who are busy and librarians who are sensitive to the
potential scalability of a proposed solution across the university campus. If an initial
model is tested and proves to be inefficient, busy faculty members and librarians will
likely reject it, making further iterations difficult if not impossible to implement
within the same university.

Fit between pragmatism and the problem. I believe that a wicked problem such as the
one in this study, where barriers to shared understanding of IL exhibit persistent properties
across time and location, benefitted from application of pragmatist methodology. A pragmatist
perspective allowed me to consider faculty members and librarians as well as the environments
within which they think and work as a unified whole. It supported my view that how faculty
members and librarians might build shared understanding is important to the study’s design. And
it meant that I viewed possible solutions as necessarily involving librarians and faculty members
engaging in active and collaborative knowledge-building through interaction within their
environment.
Research Questions
Based on this complex, wicked issue and attempts to problematize it, the following
research questions guided this study:

66

To what extent might collaborative learning within a design-based blended community of
inquiry (CoI), hereafter referred to as the FacLibCoI, provide an efficient and sustainable way for
faculty members from a single discipline and librarians to construct shared understanding of IL?
1. How might inquiry-based learning methods within a design-based FacLibCoI facilitate
shared understanding of IL between faculty members and librarians?
2. How might collaborative learning within the FacLibCoI foster shared understanding and
collaborative approaches to IL within the discipline?
3. To what extent might a blended, technology-enhanced learning environment (TELE)
support efficiency within a FacLibCoI while maintaining the social, teaching, and
cognitive presences of the CoI Framework?
Pragmatism as Research Design
Thus far, I have laid out the pragmatism of Dewey as a philosophical paradigm that
underpins this study. I presented the problem and the research questions that guided the study
and how pragmatism guided the design that follows.
Morgan (2014) argues for attention to the larger perspective of philosophical pragmatism
on the one hand, and acknowledgement of its capability to handle qualitative, quantitative or
mixed methods designs on the other. It is this dual capability of a pragmatist approach that
informed the design of the study. Viewing pragmatism from philosophical paradigmatic and
research perspectives helped me to thoughtfully choose the methods for the study rather than
relying upon the label of pragmatism to justify an “anything goes,” hodge-podge of methods.
Methodological Approach
I chose Design Based Research (DBR) as the methodological approach for this study.
DBR, which is variously referred to as a “research framework,” by Amiel & Reeves (2008, p.

67

34), a research paradigm by some (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003, p. 5; Wang &
Hannafin, 2005, p. 5), a research methodology by others (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012, p. 16;
Barab & Squire, 2004, p. 2), and a genre by McKenney & Reeves (2012) has been embraced and
developed within the learning sciences field (Barab & Squire, 2004; Hoadley, 2004a), among
others. DBR developed out of a perceived need for a research methodology that could support
research about learning while simultaneously making a real difference in education by
“designing learning environments for particular contexts” (Hoadley, 2004a, p. 11). Much as
other design fields (e.g. engineering, medicine) utilize design research to iteratively and
sustainably improve design solutions, DBR researchers seek to produce contextualized
educational innovation through the iterative and collaborative process and to apply empirical and
design method to provide theoretical foundations able to sustain innovation (Bereiter, 2002).
DBR history. DBR is a research approach used to address real world problems in
educational contexts via collaboration between researchers and practitioners and yielding design
principles that apply to and inform theory. Bereiter (2002) described DBR as research that uses
the method of sustained development to produce innovative solutions. Design-based research as
a methodological approach began twenty-five years ago when Brown (1992) and Collins (1990)
used the term design experiments to describe a type of research wherein researchers “attempt to
engineer innovative educational environments and simultaneously conduct experimental studies
of those innovations” (Brown, 1992, p. 141). Others use the terms design research, development
research, design-based research, and educational design research (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012;
McKenney & Reeves, 2012; Wang & Hannafin, 2005).
DBR developed to meet the perceived need within educational research to more closely
align scientific inquiry to the contextual complexity of the classroom rather than the controlled

68

environment of the laboratory (Hoadley, 2004b; McKenney & Reeves, 2014). Researchers
design and apply real world interventions to contribute to learning theory, which can then be
practically reapplied to problems (McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Rawson & Hughes-Hassell,
2015). Bereiter (2002) describes design research as “sustained innovative development” (p. 326).
DBR’s purpose. DBR is meant to lead to innovative development of learning
environments “in context through the systematic design and study of instructional strategies and
tools” (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003, p. 5). The process, according to Wang &
Hannafin (2005) is “to improve educational practices through iterative analysis, design,
development, and implementation based on collaboration among researchers and practitioners in
real-world settings,” and lead to “contextually-sensitive design principles and theories” (pp. 6-7).
Various authors use terms such as design, develop, or construct (Jacobsen, 2014; Plomp, 2010;
Reimann, 2013) to describe the process whereby the researcher creates an intervention to solve a
problem, extend theoretical understanding, and to further understanding “about the
characteristics and the processes used to design and develop interventions” (Plomp, 2010, p. 12).
A central question about using DBR for educational research is how it might enhance the
field. DBR contributes to education in four ways: “(a) exploring possibilities for creating novel
learning and teaching environments, (b) developing theories of learning and instruction that are
contextually based, (c) advancing and consolidating design knowledge, and (d) increasing our
capacity for educational innovation” (Design-Based Research Collective, 2003, p. 8).
A decade later, DBR within the field of educational technology is described as
contributing information about how an innovation is implemented along with its impact. It is also
seen as a contributor to “learning theory” and “design methodologies” (Reimann, 2013, p. 46).

69

DBR’s unique fit. DBR was an appropriate methodological approach for this study for
several reasons.
•

First, DBR is an approach to addressing complex (Plomp, 2010), wicked problems
(Rittel & Webber, 1973).

•

Second, it is a flexible approach used across a variety of educational research
situations, phenomena, or processes (Bell, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2012).

•

Third, it allows for the study of a phenomenon while at the same time allowing for
study of the intervention design, itself (Barab, Gresalfi, & Ingram-Goble, 2010;
McKenney & Reeves, 2012). For example, I was able to simultaneously observe the
development of shared theoretical understanding of IL while I explored an initial
design of a blended CoI prototype within a situated, real-world setting.

•

Fourth, DBR supports research and theoretical refinement of goals towards
educational improvement (Joseph, 2004).

By exploring the nature of collaboration and shared understanding around IL through a
DBR approach, I sought to discover important theoretical principles capable of improving IL
learning. DBR allowed the possibility of informing future iterations toward improving
educational praxis (Bell, 2004; Jacobsen, 2014; Joseph, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2012).
DBR, with its roots in participatory research, educational technology and learning
sciences, and with its ready alignment with social constructivist learning theory, fits with the CoI
Framework (Jacobsen, 2014) in that the framework’s premise is that social presence supports
collaborative construction of knowledge via cognitive and teaching presences and it is the
cohesive functioning of these processes that guide individual learners to construct their own and
shared knowledge (Garrison, 2011). The CoI Framework also provides a theoretically-grounded

70

mechanism for building social presence through trust and collaboration (Garrison, 2011;
Jacobsen, 2014). By utilizing a DBR design coupled with the CoI Framework, I sought to
encourage collaboration towards shared understanding around IL while generating design
principles and theoretical assertions that could inform future design improvement. Based on
theory and practice perspectives (McKenney & Reeves, 2012; Reimann, 2013), I designed and
implemented a practical intervention (workshop) of the CoI Framework. The intervention
provided a contextualized view of the problem allowing me to observe consensus-building
efforts and co-construction of potential solutions.
DBR Characteristics as They Relate to this Study
Several DBR characteristics are germane to this study:
A concern for complex problems or issues. DBR attempts to address complex problems
through workable solutions. It joins theory and design to practice in real-world settings. By
identifying theoretical principles, the problem and solution are further defined and refined
(Amiel & Reeves, 2008; Anderson, 2005; Barab & Squire, 2004). In this study, DBR was used to
build understanding around IL between social sciences and the library. It may also serve to
introduce learning sciences (e.g. education, education technology) and library & information
science to each other (Anderson, 2005; Rawson & Hughes-Hassell, 2015; Wang & Hannafin,
2005).
A pragmatic approach grounded in theory, informed by practice. This DBR study is
based on social constructivist epistemology and utilized the CoI Framework to develop an
intervention and test how well the design represented the CoI Framework and worked in a real
world setting with faculty members and librarians. It is this grounding in both theory and a
contextualized setting and the potential for producing real change that contributes towards

71

further theory development (Barab & Squire, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Wang &
Hannafin, 2005). Tracing back to American pragmatism, DBR flexibly and pragmatically
integrates authentic, real-world complexity into design to induce change and contribute to design
and theory (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Barab & Squire, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2014).
The use of multiple methods of data collection. DBR’s flexible nature allows it to
accommodate a variety of methods, including mixed methods design. Decisions governing the
selection of methods depend upon the nature of the study, the context of the intervention, the
type of change that is being proposed, and the theoretical approach. Methods should accomplish
dual goals of effecting meaningful change in the messiness of the real world while contributing
to theory through carefully-reported findings (Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Barab & Squire,
2004; Oh & Reeves, 2010; Wang & Hannafin, 2005).
In this study, I purposefully selected methods based upon the social-constructivist
foundations of the study, the problem as defined according to the review of literature, and the
needs of the contextualized setting. A mixed methods approach allowed for discursive
triangulation to build deep and rich understanding (Fielding, 2012; Mertens & Hesse-Biber,
2012). Combined, mixed methods allowed me to confirm, compare, or contrast results across
methods, to clarify anomalies, and to build a nuanced picture of the problem and potential
solution (Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2005).
Although I did not use this related concept in its full definition or its process form, I
found crystallization to be an attractive mind image as I studied the problem and designed
towards a solution. Crystallization is a concept borrowed from social ethnographic writing and
was coined by Richardson and St. Pierre (2005). It differs from triangulation in that it mixes
methods and genres (film, written text, etc.) to provide multiple views of a phenomenon. As a

72

crystal reflects and bends light, it projects different angles, and grows in its own organic fashion
(Ellingson, 2009; Richardson & St. Pierre, 2005). In this study, I use triangulation of data
sources to build credibility. However, these various mixed-methods data points, when viewed
together, not only serve to build trustworthiness in individual findings but they invoke fullbodied, robust imagery (not dissimilar to that produced by crystallization) of the problem and the
prototyped solution. When considered as its own unique, organic whole, the combined data
provides robust insights for future design iterations.
An iterative and flexible approach. DBR involves iterative cycles of research (Amiel &
Reeves, 2008; Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Barab & Squire, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2014;
Oh & Reeves, 2010). Processes like exploration, design, testing, and analysis and evaluation
combine into iterative implementation cycles leading to improvement over time (Bereiter, 2002;
Pool & Laubscher, 2016; Wang & Hannafin, 2005). Iteration, broadly defined in the present
study, included a foundational and ongoing review of theory along with design refinement to
improve learning, identify design principles, and generate theory (Amiel & Reeves, 2008;
Ejersbo et al., 2008; Hjalmarson & Lesh, 2008; Kelly, Baek, Lesh, & Bannan-Ritland, 2008).
This study utilized exploratory research and multiple data gathering methods. These were
compared back to the literature. This iterative approach within a single setting and study allowed
for a contextualized design solution while providing documentation for the design in order that
its results might be applied in new contexts (Barab & Squire, 2004; Oh & Reeves, 2010).
An approach that occurs in a naturalistic, real-world setting. DBR is contextualized
in real-world educational settings to better address the complexity of educational problems
(Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Barab & Squire, 2004; Hoadley, 2004a, p. 11; Jacobsen, 2014). I
considered the assertions from the literature that context and learning cannot be separated (Barab

73

& Squire, 2004; Oh & Reeves, 2010). I used student perceptions of research and IL gleaned from
phase one data collection to inform the design (phase two) of the curriculum in phase three. This
allowed participants and researcher to consider contextualized, complex explanations and
solutions. Authenticity contributes to a sense of trustworthiness allowing the researcher to further
refine design methodologies and theoretical principles and for other researchers to consider them
within their own contexts (Barab & Squire, 2004; Oh & Reeves, 2010; Reimann, 2013).
An interventionist and collaborative approach. Penuel, Bell, Buffington, and Falk
(2016) as well as others (McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Plomp, 2010) point out that design-based
research is a partnership between practitioners and researchers in which collaboration helps to
identify and analyze the problem and to design and test an innovative intervention. In this study,
the chairs of the social sciences department and the Library advised on the timing for the
FacLibCoI workshop in which their departments would participate. The chairs gave access to
faculty members and librarians. Faculty members offered advice and cooperation as I solicited
volunteers for the university environmental scan focus groups from among their students. Both
department chairs encouraged their faculty members/librarians to participate in the FacLibCoI.
The social sciences chair voluntarily provided valuable feedback as problems arose.
Collaboration is based on real-world contexts (Amiel & Reeves, 2008; Herrington,
McKenney, Reeves, & Oliver, 2007; McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Wang & Hannafin, 2005),
which means that it may take various forms or processes as appropriate within the context or the
problem being addressed. Some examples of this type of collaboration might include seeking
permissions and advice from stakeholders such as school district or teachers or exploring issues
and themes with participants through interviews and surveys. During the intervention,
participants, with the guidance of the researcher/facilitator, explored together the foundational

74

concepts of the two disciplines, developed an IL model for the discipline, and collaboratively
mapped IL standards to their national standards.
Challenges to DBR
Despite DBR’s many strengths, it is not without its challenges. One of the strongest
critiques of DBR came from Barab & Squire (2004) early in the use of DBR. In a more recent
discussion of DBR, Barab (2014) presents a set of steps that a DBR researcher may take to
mitigate these weaknesses. I summarize Barab’s steps after this list of weaknesses:
Consequentiality. It can be harder to demonstrate “consequentiality” (p. 8) than to show
local changes. Researchers must therefore reveal the limitations of their research. DBR is only as
good as connections that can turn local results into theoretical understanding (p. 8).
Complexity. The complexity of a DBR study can make it difficult to include enough
detail in the narrative to clearly express the problem and the project’s design while maintaining
theoretical relevance for the larger educational research community (pp. 8-9).
Researcher bias. This may be a concern if the researcher takes on multiple roles of
designer, researcher, and sometimes even participant (p. 10). The researcher may mitigate this
risk to some degree by building safeguards into the study. In this study, I took on the roles of
researcher, designer, and facilitator. I also built interrater reliability, triangulation, and researcher
reflection safeguards into the study. My intimate knowledge of IL within the university allowed
me to make strategic initial and on-the-fly decisions that would have been more difficult for a
neutral designer or facilitator, but which improved the study. For example, I not only developed
appropriate semi-structured questions (focus groups and pre- and post-interviews) but, more
importantly, I was able to follow up initial responses with more nuanced questions.

75

Sustainability and scalability. DBR, due to its local and contextualized nature, does not
tend to address system issues such as scalability or sustainability (p. 11) This problem was
carefully considered in this study because efficiency towards scalability and sustainability were
part of my research question. One of the things I tested about the CoI theoretical framework was
whether it could support an efficient, scalable, and sustainable design for developing shared
understanding between faculty members and librarians.
Time and resources. Anderson & Shattuck (2012) raised the challenge of time and
resources. DBR, which is based on multiple iterations and refinements of design, takes time that
researchers, practitioners and participants may not be able to afford. DBR as a methodological
approach is time and resource heavy, a factor that should not be ignored in planning (Anderson
& Shattuck, 2012). Later, I discuss how Herrington, et al. (2007), McKenney and Reeves (2012),
and Pool & Laubscher (2016) addressed this when using DBR in a doctoral dissertation.
Significance of findings. An additional challenge to DBR, also described by Anderson
and Shattuck (2012) as part of their analysis of 47 design studies, is that most of DBR studies
result in local rather than large-scale changes. They questioned whether DBR can produce largescale, sustainable change. It should be noted that McKenney & Reeves (2013) express some
degree of skepticism to the Anderson and Shattuck study based on the literature review
methodology and selection criteria used.
Practical Steps to Mitigate Challenges to DBR
By utilizing certain protocols, DBR researchers may turn DBR weaknesses into strengths.
Barab (2014) presented several measures that can strengthen DBR studies. He suggested that (a)
the DBR researcher should document all theoretical assumptions, (b) recognize that the design
and the intervention are intimately tied together, and they should (c) collect multiple forms of

76

relevant data. He also (d) proposes protocols to establish rigor in the analysis and reporting. First,
(e) the researcher should base analysis in theory, and (f) consider both the projected and the
unintended results that may help to reveal any hidden agendas. Next, the researcher should (g)
encourage critique and (h) impose structures that will help to regulate the process. Finally, (i) the
researcher should engage with theory and literature through dialogue with fellow researchers.
DBR and the Dissertation
The strong demand that DBR incorporate iterative revision and testing raise concerns as
to how this might be accomplished within the limited time frame of a doctoral dissertation.
Herrington, et al. (2007) proposed that the various stages of a dissertation could be mapped to
Reeves’ (2006) vision of DBR. The authors include a sample timeline. The approach seems
aligned to a research doctorate where the dissertation is the main degree component.
Pool & Laubscher (2016) reported on how McKenney and Reeves’ (2012) Generic
Model could utilize micro-, meso-, and macro-cycles across the phases of the model to facilitate
iteration. They used this approach in a PhD study that tested an online course design.
In this study, I built micro and meso iterative cycles within each of the phases of the
Generic Model (McKenney & Reeves, 2012) to facilitate iteration within and across a single
intervention. I also incorporated two stages of data collection within the study. The final design
is described later in this chapter and shown graphically in Figure 3.2.
DBR Research Design Models in the Literature
Educational design research as a methodological approach has grown out of the fields of
“psychology, learning sciences, or instructional design.” (McKenney & Visscher-Voerman,
2013). As such, it has been influenced by a wide variety of design and research models which are
described and proposed in the literature. For this study, in which I adopted a DBR

77

methodological approach and sought to explore the phenomenon of how faculty members and
librarians might collaborate on information literacy, a research design model that incorporated
both the goals of design and research were paramount (2013). With this goal in mind, I initially
reviewed the literature to select research design models that might meet the needs of this study. I
explored four for best fit. I briefly present the three which I did not choose for this study along
with the rationale for why I ultimately rejected them. I then describe the selected model.
DBR research model. The first of these, the DBR Research Model, the principles of
which Reeves (2006) describes, is iterative and its purpose is to refine problems, follow proper
research methods and result in real-world solutions as well as design and theoretical principles. It
is made up of four phases—analysis, development, testing, and iterative refinement and
reflection. The iterative refinement and reflection phase provides opportunity for further cycles
and refinement (McKenney & Reeves, 2012; Pool & Laubscher, 2016). Using this model,
Herrington et al. (2007) mapped a research doctoral degree to components of Reeves’ (2006)
four phases. I would find this approach problematic for a shorter Doctor of Education program
that splits its time between classes and dissertation limiting the time available to implement a
DBR design. Furthermore, the model did not provide guiding details that could help me to
develop my own research design making it problematic for this study.
Osmotic model. The Osmotic Model (Ejersbo et al., 2008) presented the research
pathway and the design pathway as co-existent processes that work in tandem towards solving
the problem. The authors (Ejersbo et al., 2008) found the model helpful to understand these two
processes. However, the model proved to be an ideal that was difficult to apply. My main
objection to this model is its dualistic splitting apart of the theoretical and design processes in
contradiction to pragmatic philosophy that would promote a more wholistic approach.

78

Integrative learning design framework. The Literacy Access Online (LAO) study
(Bannan-Ritland, 2003; Bannan-Ritland & Baek, 2008) attempted to utilize the Integrative
Learning Design Framework (ILDF) to design a technological solution that would assist teachers
and other facilitators to support students with reading difficulties. The ILDF sought to integrate
design, educational theory, and empirical research processes to create and study an actionable
solution. The study presented these and other processes in linear terms (See Fig. 1, 2003).
Stacked together, the various processes provided an integrated view that showed how the
processes singularly and simultaneously moved towards solution design and intervention.
Perhaps due to the “program-level perspective” (Bannan-Ritland, 2003, p. 21) in the
LAO study, the ILDF model strikes me as complex. It comprises four phases (Informed
Exploration, Enactment, Evaluation: Local Impact, and Evaluation: Broad Impact) that each
break into numerous sub-processes (2003). For example, the Informed exploration phase
includes a variety of exploratory processes (e.g. a needs analysis, literature survey, development
of theory, and audience characterization). Guiding research questions accompany each phase,
and methods can be determined within each. Across the four phases, feedback loops and iterative
cycles occur. After formative testing, for example, one might return to the earlier step of
researching the system design should the formative testing warrant it.
The ILDF, as used in the LAO study, was an attempt to adequately prepare for and
handle any complex processes of design-based research that might arise. However, in my view,
this complexity in the ILDF would make it difficult for a single researcher to follow and apply.
Generic model for educational design research (Generic Model). McKenney &
Reeves’ (2012) Generic Model was my model of choice. It emerged out of a review of
instructional, curriculum, and educational design research models and frameworks (McKenney

79

& Reeves, 2012). Its strength lies in its refined elegance and versatility. At its core, it is a lean
model with robust capabilities. It can accommodate multiple smaller iterations (micro-, meso-,
and macro-cycles) which add layers of flexibility within a given research project as McKenney
& Reeves have pointed out (2012). They also confirmed that while the model can be used with
large and complex research designs, solutions, and scope, it can equally be leveraged for smaller
projects. The Generic Model incorporates foundational concepts from various other models and
seems the most flexible for this study and for others that might follow. It is commensurate with
DBR research which is based on theory, grounded in context and collaboratively involves those
within that context in iterative interventions towards making a difference in learning (p. 61).
The Generic Model (see Figure 3.1 in the next Section) is an adaptation of Reeves’
(2006) model and comprises three phases of analysis/exploration, design/construction, and
evaluation/reflection. Evaluation/reflection leads to two outputs represented by Maturing
Intervention and Theoretical Understanding. The model shows an iteration loop, but between
each phase smaller iteration loops may exist. Outputs may iteratively feed back into any phases.
Implementation occurs across all phases (referred to as implementation/spread), becoming
broader and stronger as the process progresses (McKenney & Visscher-Voerman, 2013).
McKenney & Reeves (2012) included an extensive set of guidelines to implement the
model. This is useful when designing a doctoral-level study. My design follows the three phases
of Reeve’s model: analysis/exploration, design/construction, and evaluation/reflection. The
authors recommended avoiding a formulaic use of the model due to the variable nature of
educational design research (McKenney & Reeves, 2012). They suggested that the ideas behind
the model be used to provide guidance within an individual study. McKenney & VisscherVoeerman’s (2013) assertion that the basic model allows for various iterative approaches

80

confirms this idea. Pool and Laubscher (2016) showed how McKenney & Reeves’ (2012)
description of micro-, meso-, and macro- stages might be leveraged for a doctoral dissertation.
Its simplicity and flexibility allow for multiple iterative cycles within the design while also
accommodating smaller, single-researcher studies that come with greater constraints.
Research Design for this Study
Generic model for educational design research. I adopted the Generic Model for
Educational Design Research (see Figure 3.1), as it is based on an extensive review of literature
and therefore represents the major characteristics of the DBR process as currently practiced.
A brief description of the phases (McKenney & Reeves, 2012) provide a background for
how this study has been designed. The Analysis/Exploration Phase includes problem analysis as

Figure 3.1. The Generic Model Process Path. (McKenney & Reeves, 2012, p. 76),
shows the stages within the process model; used with permission.
well as an exploration of the literature, the design and the environment. The Design/Construction
Phase includes the design of the conceptual framework, the study’s design, and construction of a
solution. Implementation of a solution occurs in the Evaluation/ Reflection Phase where
collected data is analyzed, and design and theoretical principles are formulated.

81

Additional concepts in the model are Implementation and Spread and Maturing
Intervention/Theoretical Understanding. Implementation expands as the study progresses with
spread occurring in later stages. Theoretical and design principles as well as recommendations
are developed during Theoretical Understanding and inform the Maturing Intervention stage.
Design representation. The design for this study is based on the Generic Model depicted
in Figure 3.1 (McKenney & Reeves, 2012). Utilizing micro- and meso-cycles within each phase
(Phase One: Analysis/Exploration, Phase Two: Design/Construction, and Phase Three:
Evaluation/ Reflection) provided necessary structure to the study. I divided these phases into
meso-cycles and smaller, iterative micro-cycles. Each phase represented is described in more
depth to provide a complete picture of the way that I applied DBR in this study (see Figure 3.2
for a visual representation of the simple elegance of the Generic Model along with the
complexity added by the meso- and micro-cycles that made up this study).
Phase one--analysis and exploration. The first phase of the Generic Model design
corresponded to the analysis of the problem and exploration of the local environment and
possible contextualized solutions. It included an Explore-Define-Reflect meso-cycle. In my
design, each micro-cycle contains a row of boxes for what was explored, defined, or reflected
upon. For example, in phase one, I show boxes for Literature, Documents, and Focus Groups, the
three areas of exploration. The iterative nature of each micro-cycle is illustrated by arrows.
Literature review. I consulted the literature in iterative fashion to formulate the problem,
seek a proposed solution within theory and to decide upon the methodological approach,
formulate the conceptual framework, and determine the research design. Literature based on
social constructivism and inquiry-based learning informed the teaching and learning strategies as
well as the design heuristics.

82

Figure 3.2. Research Design (based on the Generic Model for Design Research in Education, McKenney & Reeves, 2012).
83

University environmental scan. I examined the university’s mission, vision and
academic goals from various university-produced documents. I also examined the professional
association policies and standards guidelines for the social sciences and library science
disciplines which were selected to participate in the blended, CoI faculty member-librarian
workshop (FacLibCoI).
University environmental scan from a needs assessment perspective. I used the focus
group format to interview 15 faculty members/librarians and academic department chairs from
across the university, each in their respective focus groups. I conducted a private interview with
one academic administrator. I also used focus groups to interview 16 undergraduate students
from the social sciences department that was selected to participate in the FacLibCoI workshop.
Reflection. During the reflection piece of each micro-cycle within this first phase, I used
the emerging research questions and themes (See Figure 3.3) to inform next phases.

Figure 3.3. Sub-figure from Figure 3.3 Representing Meso Cycle One.
Phase two--design and construction. Figure 3.4 illustrates phase two of the study and is
made up of the second and third meso-cycles of the study. McKenney & Reeves (2012) defined
84

this phase as involving distinct but related design processes that lead to the construction of the
intervention (which may be a prototype) and which are tested in the next phase.
Meso-cycle two, theoretical framework, study design, methods. In this meso-cycle, I
developed the theoretical framework and study design and defined the methods. I placed each
into its own micro-cycle, and I used these to develop the initial design and theoretical
assumptions as well as requirements and propositions for the prototype intervention.
Meso-cycle three, prototype intervention. I used the first micro-cycle to develop the
interview and survey questions that would be used to study the design of the FacLibCoI
workshop and the learning that resulted. The curriculum and session plans for the intervention
were designed during the second phase and I asked Dr. D. Randy Garrison, CoI main researcher,
and two faculty from the university’s School of Education to evaluate it for systemic issues and
perspectives that should be considered during the FacLibCoI workshop.

Figure 3.4. Sub-figure from Figure 3.3 Representing Meso Cycles Two and Three
Phase three—implementation, evaluation and reflection. The evaluation/reflection
phase included two meso-cycles (meso-cycles four and five) as illustrated in Figure 3.5.
85

Figure 3.5. Sub-figure from Figure 3.3 Representing Phase Three
Meso-cycle four--implementation. The intervention, as well as the data gathering
activities, served as a prototype as defined by McKenny & Reeves (2012). I implemented the
FacLibCoI workshop with faculty members from a social sciences department and librarians
over a two-month period. During the implementation, some on-the-fly redesign occurred,
substituting a fourth face-to-face session for two of the online, asynchronous sessions. I collected
participant responses in pre- and post-intervention interviews, research notes, transcripts,
artifacts, and questionnaires filled out by each participant after each session.
Meso-cycle five—evaluation and reflection. In this cycle, I analyzed the data collected
during implementation. I also reflected upon the data and literature review findings, revisiting
the literature for explanation. This reflection led to the articulation of design and theoretical
principles and recommendations that contribute to knowledge and inform future research.
Philosophical and Design Commensurability
Viewed from the standpoint of commensurability, I adopted a philosophical and
methodological set of stances, which is shown in Figure 3.6.
86

Paradigm—pragmatism. My research design is based on the pragmatist paradigm.
Knowledge or warranted assertions, develop over time through socially-constructed inquiry
embedded in a real-world setting. This is applied to the problem through the CoI Framework and
a blended learning environment to explore how it might facilitate transactions between learner(s)
and the environment to build shared understanding around IL.
Epistemology—social constructivism. I built and studied the FacLibCoI workshop for
faculty members from a social sciences department and librarians to explore how the CoI
environment might facilitate social construction of knowledge and lead to shared understanding
around IL. The CoI Framework is based on Dewey’s transactional approach to inquiry and in
collaborative constructivism (Garrison, 2011).
Methodology—DBR. The methodological approach for the study is DBR. DBR is a
pragmatic approach to solving sticky educational problems and simultaneously contributing to
research through iterative design. McKenney & Reeves (2012) noted that DBR is agnostic
towards specific methods and can accept those most suitable for researching and resolving the
problem at hand.
Methods—mixed. Given that my study sought to explore how a specific blended CoI
design might help university faculty members from two different disciplines (in this study, a
social sciences department and the library) build a shared understanding of IL, I chose a mixed
methods design so that I could explore deeply participant understandings of research and IL
before the intervention as well as afterwards, while gathering participant perceptions of the
intervention and their learning based on the CoI Framework’s various elements (e.g. three
learning presences). And I wanted to gain insight into the design of the intervention in

87

terms of how well it fit the CoI Framework. Finally, I wanted to gain real-time insights into the
level of success of the intervention to make on-the-spot iterative changes based on observation.

Figure 3.6. Philosophical and Methodological Commensurability . This figure
shows the study’s epistemological stance, theoretical framework, methodological
approach and design.
Given these design choices, my mixed methods study design involved two points of data
collection. The first occurred as I explored the university environment in which the FacLibCoI
workshop design would be implemented. The workshop, itself, comprised the second data
collection point. Participants for each of these data collection points are presented in Table 3.1.

88

Table 3.1. Participants of the Study
University Environmental Scan
(Focus Groups)
• 16 students from the social sciences
department that participated in the
FacLibCoI Workshop
• 15 faculty members, librarians and
department chairs from across the university
• 1 academic administrator

FacLibCoI Workshop
• 14 participants (made up of faculty
members from a social sciences
department and librarians)

I employed the following methods of data collection:
University environmental scan.
•

Focus Groups—I conducted focus groups with 16 students from a social sciences
discipline and 15 faculty members/librarians and chairs from across the
university. I also conducted a private interview with one academic administrator.
These were used to inform the content of the intervention.

•

Institutional Documents—I obtained and reviewed various university governance
documents such as regional accreditation reports, strategic plans, and a capital
campaign proposal.

FacLibCoI workshop.
•

Pre- and post-interviews—In the FacLibCoI workshop, which included 14 faculty
participants from a social sciences department and the library, I gathered several
types of data. The first of these were pre- and post-workshop-interviews with each
participant, which I used to compare knowledge and attitudes before and after the
workshop.

89

•

CoI Questionnaires—Participants filled out a CoI Questionnaire after each session
of the intervention. The questionnaire items related to the various elements of the
CoI Framework and participant perceptions of the intervention.

•

Session Transcripts—I collected transcripts of each session of the intervention
along with research notes to reveal themes related to design, implementation, and
participation.

•

Artifacts—Finally, I collected group-created artifacts of knowledge construction.

My methodological stance, research design and methods are summarized in Table 3.2:
Table 3.2. Summary of Commensurability Within This Study
Context of Analysis
Research Paradigm:
Pragmatism
Theoretical
Perspective:
Intentional designbased intervention to
sponsor change and
inform learning
theory and design

Units of
Analysis
• Collaborative
group
• Community of
Inquiry
blended
design

Units of
Observation
• Group
• Individual
Participants

Data Generation
Methods
University environmental scan (focus
groups)
• Facilitator notes
• RA notes
• Researcher notes
• (to develop themes that would
inform the main intervention)
Intervention (FacLibCoI workshop)
• Group Transcripts and Notes
(facilitator, RA) (to observe
collaboration, individual/group
learning, and design
successes/failures)
• Group produced artifacts (to
observe group learning,
collaboration)
• Participant Surveys (to observe
perceptions of design
success/failure, perceptions of
learning)
• Participant pre- and postinterviews (to observe individual
perceptions of learning,
collaboration, design successes or
failures)

Epistemological
Stance: knowledge is
co-constructed
Theoretical
Framework:
Community of
Inquiry
Research Design:
Generic Model for
Design Research in
Education
Methods: Mixed

90

Summary
This chapter presented the rationale for choosing a pragmatist paradigm for this study.
When pragmatism is purposefully chosen for its philosophical stance towards learning and
knowledge, it can be used to guide in the selection of rigorous yet diverse data collection
methods that are based not only in mechanistic processes of doing research but in a consideration
of the reasons for doing it (Morgan, 2014). Next, I explained pragmatism’s relationship to the
study’s social constructivist epistemology and to the CoI Framework. Finally, I explored the
methodological approach of DBR and the Generic Model that I used. Finally, I showed how all
of these are commensurate and presented my own adapted design.
In chapter four, I present the context of the study, the research team and the mixed
methods design approach used. Data collection methods are described for each phase as well as
data analysis techniques with examples. Issues of trustworthiness are examined along with
limitations, delimitations, and ethical concerns.

91

Chapter Four: Methods
Introduction
In this chapter, I present the methods used in the study. I begin with a summary of the
rationale for the mixed methods approach of the study as well as the mixed methods design.
Next, I present the university context in which the study took place. Following on, I discuss the
research sample and research team and their roles.
From there, I move into an in-depth description of the methods for each phase of the
research. I provide thick description along with actual examples from the data to illustrate the
methods employed.
Once the methods for each phase are described, I address trustworthiness, present the
limitations and delimitations of the study and discuss pertinent ethical considerations. I end the
chapter by introducing the two Findings chapters that follow this one.
Mixed Methods Approach
My study follows a mixed methods approach utilizing data and analysis types which are
congruent with the study’s philosophical paradigm, the research questions, the theory governing
the study (Cresswell, 2009) and the type of knowledge being sought. For example, the
questionnaire used with the CoI model provides a validated way to test the three presences of the
CoI. A mixed methods approach to data selection and collection fits the pragmatist paradigm
governing this study (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004; Morgan, 2014) and is also a typical
approach within a DBR methodology (McKenney & Reeves, 2014). Additionally, it fits well
with other aspects of this study. The desire to effect change through iterative development is well
supported by a mixed methods approach within a pragmatist paradigm (Johnson &
Onwuegbuzie, 2004). A poorly understood problem and solution also merits a flexible, mixed-

92

methods approach to data collection and analysis that is based on a consideration of reality as
well as out-of-the box possibilities within a trusted team relationship where members adopt the
attitude of “OK let’s try that” (Rittel & Webber, 1973, p. 164). In line with social constructivist
views that value interpretivist and action stances (Lincoln & Guba, 2000) resulting in
collaboratively-constructed reality, this study mixed methods to support interpretivist discovery.
Consideration of goodness. To counteract possible concerns that pragmatically-defined
mixed methods lead to a less than rigorous, anything goes approach, I adopted the constructivist
view of a “goodness factor” or “extended considerations of validity” (Lincoln & Guba, 2000, p.
173) that considers validity in terms of triangulation of voices, methods, or interpretations. The
crystalline view (in a broad adaptation of the concept from exploring a phenomenon through
various genres to exploring them from various perspectives) of a new organically-developing
phenomenon (p. 181) in order to build a more robust understanding was appealing. This form of
validity based on authenticity (p. 180) was applied through a mixed methods approach.
Mixed methods design. I considered Cresswell’s (2009) and Miles, Huberman, and
Saldaña’s (2014) design approaches for this study. Cresswell (2009) breaks mixed methods
design into sequential, concurrent or transformative approaches:
•

The sequential approach is used to expand upon the findings from one type of data
collection using another data form.

•

The concurrent approach uses two or more types of data collection at the same time to
build a complex picture. Both are analyzed together and form part of the total results.

•

The transformative approach uses mixed data collection methods in a design that is
based on theory and may incorporate sequential or concurrent methods.

Miles et al. (2014, pp. 43-44), on the other hand, describe four mixed methods designs:

93

•

In the first, collection of quantitative and qualitative data follows a wholistic,
cohesive approach wherein both are collected.

•

The second design collects different forms of data from different data streams running
simultaneously. One data stream may inform the other and lead to iterative changes.

•

In the third type of design, different (qualitative, quantitative) types of data are
collected at different stages in the research. One type is used for exploratory purposes
and different types of data collection follow to further explain things brought up
within the first form of data collection.

•

The fourth design utilizes one form of data collection to further determine the design
for the rest of the study which includes additional forms of data collection.

This study takes an approach that aligns most closely to transformative design procedures
or the fourth design approach. I collected data from exploratory focus groups to help inform the
design of the main intervention. Within the intervention, itself, I used a concurrent method of
mixed methods (i.e. transcripts, research notes, survey, artifacts) along with pre-and-post
interviews on either side of the intervention.
Under this transformative approach, then, the main data collection is qualitative and is
supported by quantitative data collection and analysis to verify the main method (Cresswell,
2009). The study’s transformational, mixed methods approach is displayed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1. Sequence of Mixed Methods
Sequential
QUAL
(Focus Groups)

Concurrent
[QUAL
(QUALS+QUAN)
(Interview)
(Intervention)
Transformative Mixed Methods

94

QUAL]
(Interview)

Through various types of data, I triangulated results to build holistic understanding, on
the one hand, while creating multifaceted, reflective (crystallized) views (Richardson & St.
Pierre, 2005) of how faculty members from a social sciences department and librarians formed
(or did not form) a learning community and achieved (or did not achieve) shared understanding
around IL. As already described, the study comprised two data collection stages, an exploratory
one to provide information about the environment, and the main data collection that took place
before, during and after the main FacLibCoI workshop intervention.
During the first phase, I conducted an initial environmental scan at the university where
the study took place to explore the views of the academic community towards research and IL.
This environmental scan included a review of literature, a university and standards documents
review and focus group interviews with members of the university community (see Figure 3.3).
In phase two, I designed the intervention and the curriculum that I would pilot in phase
three to explore how to foster efficient and sustainable collaboration between faculty members
from a social sciences discipline and librarians around shared understanding and sponsorship of
IL. In the third phase, I implemented the workshop and collected pre- and post-interviews,
questionnaires, RA and researcher notes, session transcripts, and participant-produced artifacts.
Across all phases, the study is grounded contextually. This occurs through the
combination of data collection methods across different data collection points.
Research Context
This exploratory, DBR study took place at a small private university in the United States
during winter and spring quarters, 2015. The university is a small teaching institution (i.e. under
3,000 students and fewer than 200 faculty members; as opposed to a large research university
where research plays a key role).

95

The university is fully accredited by the appropriate regional and subject organizations
and offers degrees in liberal arts, STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and
social and medical professions. I chose the university for the following reasons:
Well-developed information literacy program. The university boasted a developed
information literacy program run by the library through coordination with the English
department. Over several years, university librarians worked side-by-side with English faculty
members to incorporate information literacy into the general studies writing sequence that
included a writing class taken in a student’s first year and a scholarly writing class taken in the
student’s second year. Librarians entered all sections of these courses with a set curriculum and
assignments. Information literacy also featured within the academic goals of the institution, and
the university included student IL achievement metrics in its standardized reporting to its
regional accreditors. Additionally, librarians presented one-off sessions of IL in some but not all
senior or graduate-level research classes across the main campus. This level of IL integration
across campus made the university an ideal place to conduct a study with faculty members who
already understood the basic concept of IL.
Accessibility. The design of the study required a full academic term. At the time of the
study, I worked as a librarian at the university, which facilitated accessibility for this length of
time. I took precautions to avoid coercive tactics and to mitigate researcher bias (both are
discussed in more detail later in this chapter).
Program spread. The varied nature of programs offered at the university allowed me to
survey faculty members from many disciplines during the university environmental scan focus
groups. This proved helpful towards gaining a broad understanding of how faculty members
across the university related to IL and the teaching of research.

96

Fit within HE. The university operates along accepted parameters for universities of its
size, academic emphasis and philosophical base. Practitioners and researchers from other similar
small teaching and/or faith-based universities should therefore be able to relate to the findings.
Research Sample
In this study, I engaged with members of a social sciences faculty and librarians. As part
of exploring the university overall, I first conducted focus groups with faculty members and
chairs of academic departments across the university as well as upper-division, undergraduate
students from the social sciences department. This exploratory environmental scan was to help
create a picture of the culture and practice of the university, the library and social science
department related to research and scholarship as well as IL.
Research Team and Roles
The research team comprised the Researcher/Moderator and two Research Assistants
(RA). At least one RA attended the various focus groups and the FacLibCoI workshop. They
also fulfilled the role of interrater once I organized codes into categories and later themes. The
roles and responsibilities governing members of the research team are listed in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2. Research Team Roles and Responsibilities
Researcher/Moderator
Research Assistants
• Introduced the
• Attended close but
research assistant(s)
apart from the groups
• Described the purpose
• Took notes
of the study
• Served as reviewers
• Explained the rules of
for the themes derived
behavior
from phase one focus
groups
• Explained the length
of discussion
• Answered questions
• Facilitated discussions
• Thanked participants
• Dismissed participants
97

Both
•
•

•

Reviewed notes
together after each
session, filling in gaps
Transferred notes
from RA to researcher
after cleaning them
(approximately one
week after a session)
Engaged in dialogue
to ensure notes, codes,
and themes were
accurate

In addition, the researcher worked with a few additional experts during the study. The
chair of the social sciences department selected for the study assisted in building contact with the
faculty members of the department beforehand and in providing key input when things seemed
be going awry or exceedingly well during the intervention. Additional reviewers included an
education professor at the university where the study took place who reviewed the learning plan.
D. Randy Garrison reviewed the adapted CoI questionnaire and the FacLibCoI learning plan.
Phase One: Environmental Scan and Data Collection
In the first meso-cycle, phase one, Analyze and Explore the Problem, I collected
preliminary data from the university where the study occurred. I hoped to better understand the
university setting in which the research would take place. I wanted to learn whether various
members of the university community considered a knowledge of how to access information to
be an important part of scholarly research. I also wanted to understand the role that they believed
these two concepts should play within the undergraduate curriculum and how they experienced
current practice. I hoped that the viewpoints expressed by participants could help to guide the
content of the FacLibCoI workshop that I would design and implement.
As stated in chapter one, I sought to explore whether collaborative learning within a
design-based blended CoI provides an efficient and sustainable way for HE faculty members and
librarians to build shared understanding through collaboration around information literacy (IL)
within a given discipline. I found it important to engage with the variety of viewpoints as well as
the collective culture of the university’s academic community towards IL and research as I
sought to build a learning environment conducive to shared understanding around IL. Two subquestions, therefore, guided this stage of research:

98

•

How do members of the university academic community (faculty, librarians,
academic administration) understand research and scholarship and their relationship
to knowing how to access information?

•

How do members of the university academic community envision research and
information use fitting within the undergraduate curriculum and experience?

The data collected in phase one included:
•

A review of IL literature, inquiry and collaborative learning, the CoI Framework
literature as well as other related themes.

•

University and standards documents (university accreditation report, university
demographic data, university strategic and capital campaign plans, IL standards and
the standards governing the social sciences department that participated in the CoI).

•

Responses from focus groups among (a) students from the social sciences department,
(b) university-wide, faculty members and librarians, and (c) academic department
chairs from across the university in the form of recorded transcripts, research assistant
notes, facilitator notes, and researcher reflection notes.

•

Researcher notes from an interview with Vice President for Academic Affairs.

Literature review and university and standards documents. As noted above, I
performed a review of theoretical literature in various related areas. These included the theory of
information literacy as well as its historical and current practice. It also included cross and
interdisciplinary approaches to faculty member collaboration as well as faculty member
community models. This led into the literature about the CoI Framework. I also reviewed
literature on technology-enhanced learning environments. I also performed a literature review to

99

inform the design process. It included literature on the theory of classical pragmatism, designbased research, and on mixed and focus group methods.
I performed an environmental scan of the university. I reviewed one of its self-prepared
accreditation reports, a capital funding proposal, and university and library strategic plans. I
reviewed the national IL and disciplinary standards under which the FacLibCoI participant
departments functioned.
Focus groups. I chose to conduct focus groups for the first phase of my research to
explore the university environment where the FacLibCoI workshop would occur. I found that
engaging with small social groups from within the university helped me to reduce my own bias
as a member of the community by gaining a broader view (Barbour, 2007; Yilmaz, 2013).
Sampling. I used non-probability sampling based on homogenous stakeholder groups
(groups within the university based on their potential relationship to IL). This type of purposive
sampling is typically used not to generalize from smaller group to larger group but to allow for
the gathering of rich insight and a wealth of knowledge around the study’s contexts and people’s
interactions to them. Homogenous groups allow for group cohesiveness and focus and provide a
basis for comparative analysis across groups (Palinkas et al., 2015; Yilmaz, 2013). I hoped that
through thick description of displayed attitudes, behaviors, and observations of small
homogeneously-chosen groups I would be able to discern meanings around IL and research
concerns within the university. I also hoped to identify existing attitudes and understandings
among the university’s academic members towards IL and research. I identified the following
homogenous university groups in relation to my study: academic administration, university-wide
academic department chairs & deans and faculty members/librarians, and third- or fourth-year

100

undergraduate students within the social sciences department that was selected to participate in
the FacLibCoI workshop.
Homogenous within themselves (that is, faculty members from across the university
formed one group, and students formed another group) (Hennink, 2014, p. 39), collectively focus
groups included a cross section of the academic members of the university.
I designed groups to provide a diverse cross-section of viewpoints. Any individual who
wished to join the focus group upon invitation could do so. As mentioned above, I did not use
purposeful sampling to generalize findings as in quantitative methods, but to explore the
environment through multiple member voices to gain a broader spectrum of insights that would
inform the design and content of the intervention to follow (Palinkas et al., 2015; Yilmaz, 2013).
Based on Hennick’s (2014) and Barbour’s (2007) observations, I anticipated that focus
groups would comprise three different homogeneous populations at the university (i.e. academic
department chairs, faculty members and librarians from across the university, and undergraduate
students within the social sciences department participating in this study), and would contain 4-8
participants each. This allowed me to replicate homogenous groups and to identify confirmation/
disconfirmation within a group and across different homogenous types (Miles et al., 2014).
Because I hoped to gain in-depth understanding of the phenomena of IL and research at
the university, I did not restrict the exploration through research saturation, nor did I seek
representation from or generalize to any disciplinary area within the university. For example, I
welcomed faculty members from any university academic department into the university
environmental scan faculty focus groups and I did not assume that a comment by a math
professor could represent the math department or all university faculty, at large. Instead, I took
each comment as part of the pool of comments by all faculty members in the focus group and

101

ultimately by all participants across all focus groups. In this way, I better identified “collective
narratives” (Hennink, 2014, p. 3) within an assortment of viewpoints coming from among and
across university academic groups (Barbour, 2007, p. 58).
Composition of groups. Composition of the focus groups is now described:
Officers, chairs & deans, faculty members. I contacted the university officers, chairs and
deans, and faculty members in an official letter of invitation. The office of the Vice President for
Academic Affairs sent the letter and follow up via university email. The letter requested willing
participants to contact me directly via email to volunteer to be part of a focus group. Most
responses came to me and the office of the Vice President forwarded any misdirected responses.
In the end, five chairs and deans and one officer responded. The officer who responded
directly supervised chairs and deans, so I chose to interview the officer separately. The chairs
and deans formed a focus group. Among the non-administrative, faculty members and librarians,
eleven responded. I then used Survey Monkey to schedule a time for the focus group and to
assign the participants to groups according to their preferred times. We arranged time slots which
would accommodate all the faculty member participants. I distributed luncheon takeout menus
from one of the university cafes and each focus group member submitted their orders to me. I
ordered, picked up and distributed these during the focus group meetings.
Students. In the case of the student focus groups, I consulted with the participating
department on how best to select upper-level, undergraduate students for the focus groups. In
consultation, we decided that because third-year students had completed the entire Library
sequence of information literacy lessons given during College Writing (normally taken in the
first year of university) and Research Writing (usually taken in the second year of university),
they could answer questions concerning this process and how it prepared them for university-

102

level research and academic writing. Once we determined the student level, the department
selected a class required for all third-year students. The professor invited me into the class and
introduced me to the students and suggested that this exercise might help them to better
understand the research process for their own upcoming senior research projects. I explained my
study and my desire to interview them in a focus group setting. I requested voluntary
participation, and I passed around a sign-up sheet.
Once students signed up, I used Survey Monkey to determine possible timeslots. Not all
students who initially signed up availed of the online survey, and I could not interpret some
answers. Once I narrowed the scheduling options, I distributed a signup sheet to their class. The
signup sheet listed the buffet supper menu that would be provided along with two possible
supper timeslots from which they could choose. I provided a buffet supper on both occasions.
Size of focus groups. Except for Group 5, which was one of the two student focus groups,
the groups all fit within 4-8 members. The groups are shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3. Phase One: Exploratory Focus Groups
University Group
Administrators
Faculty Members/
Librarians
Chairs and Deans
Students

Focus Groups
Interview (University Officer)
Focus Group 1 (Faculty/Librarians)
Focus Group 2 (Faculty/Librarians)
Focus Group 3 (C&D)
Focus Group 4 (Students)
Focus Group 5 (Students)

Number of Participants
1 participant
4 participants
6 participants
5 participants
6 participants
10 participants

Data collection protocols. The Research Team met before any focus groups took place
and formulated a set of notetaking strategies. Each member of the research team then used these
strategies to practice with a YouTube video clip of a focus group. Each member watched the
YouTube video alone and took notes using a form made up of three columns: in the first column
the RA noted down the participant being observed (participant 1, 2, 3…). In the second column,
103

the RA took notes on what the person said. The RA used the third column for a second viewing
of the video. Each row represented a comment by a different individual. When too much backand-forth conversation between people on the video occurred, one line could be used to describe
the back and forth. After watching the video and taking notes twice, each RA reviewed their
notes, and using a highlighter, marked either in the first or second column what seemed to be the
essence of the comment. Afterwards, the team reconvened and revised the strategies accordingly:
•

Take down preliminary information about the focus group (diagram seating
arrangement, focus group name, researcher/moderator name, research assistant(s)
name(s), number of participants in focus group, start and stop time, etc.

•

Notes are an objective record. The note taker’s observations were solicited but not
their opinions. For example,
o “Appeared angry’ vs. ‘I don’t know why the participant was angry. There was
no reason to be…’
o ‘…Forcefully objected to previous comment’ vs. ‘Participant 2 obviously
dislikes participant 1. No matter what participant 1 says, participant 2 objects.’

•

Paraphrase main points using quotations inside quotation marks when warranted or
using summary description; note down other observational things that help to explain
what was happening.
o Participant might say: “In my field, it is all we can do to teach the students the
content. There is so much content to cover that there isn’t time for research
projects. Students must learn so many scientific concepts in college that they
don’t have time to conduct real research. Research is what they learn how to
do at master’s level.”

104

o Notes might summarize: Content prioritized over research at college level, or
Not enough time for research. Content is king.
o Note key phrases used that convey meaning: “Too much content;” “Critical
thinking is key.”
o Record body language or other cues (leaned in, smiled, raised voice, shakes
head in disagreement).
o Record who says something (P1, P2, P3 to distinguish participants)—this can
help to show exchanges in dialogue between one or more participants as well
as different views between participants.
o Record observations (lively or serious discussion, thoughtful comment).
The RAs and I agreed upon the format of the notes template that they subsequently used.
The template had a brief instruction section at the beginning. The rest of the template was made
up of three sections to accommodate demographic or preliminary descriptive data, a participant
seating chart, and a three-column section to record the dialogue (i.e. Listing of each participant
as they spoke, comments, other observations). Each row held one participant’s comments.
Protection of subjects. Guided by the research approval processes implemented by the
University of Calgary and the university where the study took place, I implemented the
following protocols to ensure that I conducted the study with due concern towards conflict of
interest and protection of the participants from harm. I, therefore:
•

Required Research Assistants to sign a confidentiality form.

•

Required Focus group members to sign consent forms before participating.

•

Informed all participants of expectations of confidentiality.

105

•

Informed participants that this study related to my personal degree program through
another university not to my position within the university.

•

Assured participants of anonymity in the final report.

•

Informed participants that note-taking would be the primary method of record and
that individual comments form part of the group report and cannot be withdrawn.

•

Informed participants that research assistants would take notes on the side. The
moderator (researcher) would take public notes on a flip chart and would check these
summary notes with participants as the conversation progressed.

•

Provided participants with written statements. I orally reviewed these with
participants. I asked participants to sign that the statement informed them of their
right to leave at any time and that if they left this would be documented in the notes.

Script. I drafted a semi-structured script to guide the discussions. The script started with
me introducing myself along with my relationship to the university, my research interests, and
this study. I then introduced the Research Assistants and their role. Next, the script led me
through the administrative responsibilities where I explained confidentiality and reviewed the
rights of the participants. From there we moved into the questions, which I used to guide the
discussion, but which varied slightly from group to group.
Semi-structured questions. As part of the university environmental scan, I drafted a
series of semi-structured questions to use in the focus groups that would provide me with
personal perspectives on how research and scholarship were understood by faculty members,
librarians, academic administrators, and students. I also investigated how the members of the
various focus groups used information sources to solve problems and conduct research (see
Table 4.4 for the list of questions). I did not pilot test the questions beforehand mostly due to

106

timing constraints. The questions for students focused on the research assignments in which they
typically engaged in their coursework as well as how they experienced and understood IL.
Questions for faculty members and chairs focused on the essence of scholarly research, how it
related to IL, and how it should be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum.
The information that I gathered from these focus groups informed the content of the
presentations that I prepared for the FacLibCoI workshop. Participants in the FacLibCoI
considered this information as they discussed and designed ways in which to incorporate IL into
the social sciences department curriculum.
Meeting logistics. The university environmental scan focus groups took place during the
month of February 2015 while the interview with the administrator occurred in March 2015.
Focus groups met at their given time slot over lunch time in a conference room in the library
(faculty members and chairs focus groups) or at supper time in the social sciences department
building or library (student focus groups).
I set up the room with a table in the middle. In two opposite corners of the room, I set up
a long table (one in each corner) for the RAs. From these angles, the research assistants could
view the faces of the participants seated at the center table. Each research assistant used a laptop
to take notes. I set up a flipchart in another corner and directed the conversation from there.
Data collection. I collected three types of data from the focus groups:
Notes on a flip chart. I took notes on a flip chart as I moderated. Before moving on to the
next point, I reviewed this with the group to ensure that it represented the actual conversation.

107

Table 4.4. Questions for Focus Groups and Administrator Interview
Student Focus Group Questions
Describe a typical class assignment that
required you to find and use one or more
information sources (do research).

Faculty Members and Chairs Focus Group and
Administrator Interview Questions
Define research.
Define scholarship.

What steps did you follow to complete the
assignment?

What are the components of research that
undergraduate students need to learn?

What steps or processes were easy or difficult?

What are the components of scholarship that
undergraduate students need to learn?

What could have better prepared or helped you
to complete the assignment?
How many similar assignments did you
complete throughout the previous quarter in all
your classes?
Describe a recent class assignment that
required you to solve a problem that would be
like what you might find in the workplace.
What steps or processes did you follow to
complete the assignment?
What steps or processes were easy or difficult?
What could have better prepared or helped you
to complete the assignment?
How many similar assignments did you
complete throughout the previous quarter in all
your classes?

What higher order thought processes do
undergraduate students need to learn to engage in
research? In scholarship?
Review the following statement written after reading
drafts of what was later voted as the Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education
(Association of College and Research Libraries,
2015):
Students preparing for the knowledge economy
require a repertoire of understandings, practices, and
dispositions for engaging with the information
ecosystem. This repertoire involves understanding
why the way information is created and presented
affects its credibility and usefulness. It involves
critical thinking and self-reflection about information.
Within communities of learning, scholarship and
practice, students learn to find, evaluate and engage
with information in ways that help them critically ask
and answer questions and to self-reflect as they learn
to participate in the creation of new knowledge.
How do you see this fitting within the university’s
academic goals?
Is it part of general studies?
Is it part of the curriculum in one’s major subject
courses?
Who is responsible for teaching it?

Each session produced several flipchart pages of notes. An example of a single page is
shown in Figure 4.1:

108

Figure 4.1. Sample Sheet of Notes. This is taken at one of the focus group sessions.
Research assistant notes. The RAs took notes during the focus group. Notes consisted of
three parts: (a) summary information about the group (date, time, location, number of
participants), (b) a seating chart with each participant identified as P1, P2... (see Figure 4.2),
(c) notes of the session consisting of participant-by-participant summary of comments as well as
non-verbal activities that occurred or anything else that they considered noteworthy.

Figure 4.2. Sample Seating Chart. This chart is from a group of faculty members.
After a focus group session, the RAs and I met together to review their notes and to
clarify any anomalies while we could remember the session. The RAs then took their notes and

109

individually cleaned them up and submitted them to me. In most cases, I received an independent
record from each of the two RAs. In a few instances, only one RA could be present.
Below is an extract of research assistant notes. In this case, the Moderator asked the
questions, “How do you define research? What does it mean to you and your discipline?” After
some discussion, the moderator moved the discussion forward by asking, “Is scholarship the
same thing or different?” The following excerpt illustrates the notetaking style:
M: Anything else?
P4: feels like entering into longstanding conversation. Not sure [??] there yet (P3
nodding). It’s like making a genre. In movie, don’t go and create a new genre. It’s
not until later. Might create prototype [scholarship takes place w/in a field]; [it
might later become a genre, but you wouldn’t know until years later] [P3 seemed to
be helping P4 explain this, interjecting some clarifications]
P2: shoulders of giants.
P4: [stomachs] of corpses.
P3: zombie film now?
P1: where does creativity come in? Esp. in fields where objective isn’t discovering new
but creating new? Do we add that to scholarship?
P3: it goes with how it’s presented. It’s that elegance thing.
P2: speaks to P1
M: thinking of creative disciplines but what about ones following protocols.
P1. Yes, but I’m going with those doing something new.
M. clarifying ‘engaging in creativity.”
P2 nodding.

110

P1. Can see? then standing on the shoulders of others. Person painting still painting
within tradition.
P3. Film is example. Genre/trope/made up of pieces made up from other pieces
[sometimes from obscure other pieces]
P1: nothing new
P?: “nothing new under the sun”
P3: trying to add something new to the conversation. Maybe…
Researcher reflections. After each session, I drafted a short series of reflections. These
reflections included impressions of the session along with any other things that struck me during
the session as being especially noteworthy or of interest. Here is an excerpt from the universitywide, faculty member focus group used as illustration above:
…there was one participant who was interested in making sure that we considered
research in the context of personal discovery... wanting to find out something because I
need to find it out... not as an abstract concept. I had a hard time understanding this but
the more I have thought about it, I think that is a good summary. He mentioned
something regarding not about vetted sources, not about the way the library does
research...it is research for what I need to know, and I go to places I trust to get the
information. Yes, a good summary I believe is that research is not just abstract research
using approved protocols. It is really all about personal discovery and going to where
trustworthy information may be found (wherever that may be?). Is this the problem with
the way we teach research? This triggered discussion from another participant that it is
often hard to help undergraduates understand that what they do in their personal life
might be considered research. They tend to separate academic work (research) from real-

111

life exploration. Hmm...a really good tie-in to some comments from the first student
group...
Data analysis for phase one. Due to unforeseen delays in the ethical approval process
that pushed the first data collection later than anticipated, I performed an abbreviated rather than
extensive data analysis on phase one research that involved manual coding and extraction of
themes. I used this to inform the design and the contents of the intervention in phase three. I
then, iteratively, revisited the data after phase three and completed a thorough analysis that I
report in chapter five. In the extended analysis, I confirmed that the basic themes uncovered in
the first analysis held true while a few additional themes emerged.
Data organization and summarization. To keep data together while summarizing it
through various iterations, I organized the data by spreadsheets in Microsoft Excel.
The first spreadsheet, Focus Group Summary, gathered all the notes from a given focus
group (i.e. the notes from research assistant(s), the flipchart notes recorded by the researcher, and
any researcher reflections written shortly after the focus groups). Each set filled a column, and
rows contained each snippet of dialogue or reflection. This allowed me to view each individual
snippet from all three data across a single row. I incorporated an end column for summarization
which became my first-level coding. Once I consolidated all notes from a given focus group into
one spreadsheet, I read over the data several times to become familiar with its flow. I then
conducted row-by-row, first-stage coding. I present an extract from one of the focus group
spreadsheets in Table 4.5.
Once I completed initial coding for all focus groups, I reviewed the data several times
and then reduced and consolidated codes for simplicity and clarity.

112

Table 4.5. Excerpt from a Student Focus Group Summary
Research
Assistant I
Q: Okay,
you’ve sort of
already talked
about it; what
out of these
processes do
you find really
easy or more
difficult?
P1: Sometimes,
I find things I
want to talk
about, but I
can’t find
sources; I don’t
understand
[named
database] (many
agree); if I find
a book it’s from
the 70s; I have
to fit my topic
to sources
available (P4
and P7 agree)

Research
Assistant II
Q: What do
you find
easy/difficult?

P1:
Sometimes, I
can find what
I want to talk
about, but
then can’t find
any sources. I
don’t
understand
[named
database].
Don’t have
anything on
the topic in
books or if do,
it’s from the
70’s.

Moderator

Researcher Reflection

Summary

Students felt that they had to
change their research topics
to fit the sources they could
find rather than researching
what they wanted to
research, and they disliked
this very much. I found this
interesting because it seems
to coincide with
observations from faculty
members that students want
to start with answers and
find sources to prove their
point of view rather than
letting the research lead their
topic and enjoying the
process

Search
--Write paper first
then find sources to
match
Extrapolate: start
with answer and fit
sources accordingly
Library
Resources/How
Library Webpage
works
--Books are old
--Don’t understand
[named database]
(meaning
databases/website??)

Q: What do
you find
easy or
difficult
about the
research
process?

Sometimes I
can find
things I want
to write—
can’t
understand
[named
database] or
books—
switch topic
to fit sources

Next, I created a draft Focus Group Master Codes List (or code document) and reapplied
these to the original data, replacing the first-level, summary coding. In some cases, I did a further
code revision to ensure that they aligned with the raw data. I include an example of a focus group
master codes spreadsheet in Table 4.6.
Once I had successfully applied codes back to the raw data, I re-examined each code
along with the accompanying raw data and I wrote a definition for each code which was added to
the Master Code Lists. As I wrote definitions, some recoding took place to better align data to

113

Table 4.6. Individual Focus Group Coded Data Set Example (from Master Codes List)
RA1
P5 if have topic
library has a lot
of, then can
easily find.
[some]Times [I]
had more in [my]
personal library
than [I could find
in the] library had
or [consortium
had] but if have a
lot…Pffts

Facilitator
Easy if
library has
lots of
materials on
a topic.
Hard if you
have a topic
that library
doesn’t have
access

P4 I would search
[“by exact title”]
but it came up
with like 2,000
results (A:
Frustrating) it
was random and
dumb. Google
more specific

Hard—exact
title gave
too many
results

Researcher Reflection
They also criticized the holdings.
In some topics, there is a lot and it
is easy to do research. For other
topics, there are few resources. I
know this is true in some
disciplines. But [social sciences
department represented] doesn’t
seem to be one that this would be
true about. So, it begs the question,
what are they looking for and how
are they searching? What is
breaking down in the process? Why
aren’t they finding the resources?

Code#
SFG-24

SFG-36
SFG-45

SFG-14

SFG-45

Code
Finding good
sources is
dependent on the
topic.
Quantity of
library resources.
Research process
(level of
difficulty).

Difficult to get
good results from
library online
resources (often
referred to as
website, but
broader)
Research process
(level of
difficulty).

codes. Next, I added example excerpts from the raw data to each code in the Master Code List
and conducted one more revision to ensure a good match. I present an extrapolation from the
Master Code List in Table 4.7 with revisions highlighted. In the end, I produced two master code
lists, one for faculty and the other for student focus groups. Each contained near 70 codes.
Coding. At this point, it is appropriate to briefly examine the types of codes used. Coding
was organic and emerged directly from the data. I took these granularly-attached codes that
represented small segments of data and synthesized them from across sources into summary
codes. Summary codes necessarily became more objective than subjective and less emotional. In

114

fact, many of the codes ended as descriptive or process-oriented codes as opposed to value,
belief, or emotion codes. In vivo coding fell aside as codes became formalized. This
Table 4.7. Master Code List with Revisions Example
Code #

Code

Definition

Quotes and Comments from Raw Data

SFG-46

Source
restrictions
imposed
by
professors.

Professors’
research
assignments
need to be less
restrictive in
terms of sources
students are
allowed to use.
// Revised: //
Students express
opinion that
professors'
research
assignments
need to be less
restrictive in
terms of sources
students are
allowed to use.

"Teachers want peer-review articles;" [While it is true that
the students were reacting to the fact that in one assignment
the full text wasn't available, the reality is that they were
criticizing the fact that the teacher imposed the restriction:
"hard to get to an entire article…"they advertise the
abstract but there is no link to find the entire article;"] [my
observation: assignment was limited to a list of titles of
which many did not have full text available]; Note from
RA1 "Assignment they were given did not allow them to
use many journals, it was a very specific list;" Still on same
assignment "A lot of information we were looking up
through the library you had to basically pay; there was so
much information that were paid sites;" And more on this
assignment, this time note from RA1 "Had to be part of [an
organization website, redacted here for anonymity]. Some
organization website. Teacher may have gotten list from
this website and prof had access, but the library did not
have everything;" "Earlier on, when I find my sources
many classes have requirements that they be after a certain
year, so I have to exclude some" [within 5 years]; "...the
restrictions are often stifling on my research;” Note from
me: they want sources 5 years or less; this eliminates
useful, historically significant articles.)

resulted in a set of high level, uniform codes that lost some of the life of the dialogue. However,
it also resulted in a toolset that turned out to be invaluable for identifying themes (higher level)
while retaining the values, beliefs, and emotions within the raw data examples that were attached
to the codes (granular level). I provide an exemplar in Table 4.8.
Theme creation. Once I coded all data streams, I organized them into themes. I went
through this inductive process several times, reading and rereading the example data and codes
as well as going back to the original raw data until themes emerged. I then identified categories

115

within the themes and included the supporting codes, code definitions, and raw data examples in
a new spreadsheet form.
Table 4.8. High Level Formalization of Codes Example
Code #

Code

SFG-19 ENGL122/
223 Library
assignments
(various
opinions).

Code Definition
ENGL122/223
library
assignments are
helpful or not,
along with
examples.

Examples from Raw Data
From a student tutor "Lib assign are heavily weighted,
no assistance, going through [it] more would be useful."
Semi-exact quote from student with added notes from
RA1: "I found in classroom “It is obnoxious” but nice to
see explained up front “Kindergarten boring” but does
explain “How to do it “Keywords, gives “tricks” not
taught other places." Note from researcher notes "What
about the learning environment the students experience
is not good? How can we change it? … Student "For us
who have been here forever, we go through College
Writing I and II. They [librarians] come in and show us
how to use it. They walk us through it." From student.
"I’ve taken Research Writing a few times b/c didn’t do
well first time. Get all this nonsense at beginning of
quarter…

I asked the RAs to cross check the process and results. They reviewed the Master Code List,
made up of codes, definitions, and examples from the raw data. I provide an example from their
review in Table 4.9. Their comments may be seen in the rightmost column of the example and
my revisions based on those comments are shown by the highlighting in the example.
RAs also reviewed a list of the themes and categories that I had inductively extracted
along with the codes and raw data examples that I had included under each theme. At this point
in my analysis, I had also linked the themes back to one or more of the study’s research

116

Table 4.9. Data Review Changes Example

Code
Use library
resources after
Google. //
Revised: //
Literature
research
process
(brainstorm,
Internet
search).

Code Definition
After Google, go
to library website.
// Revised: //
Student describes
literature search
process as
brainstorming
and then going to
the Internet.

Examples
from raw
data
"Brainstorm
topics then
Wikipedia or
Google to
find initial
feedback;"

Does the
code
name
represent
the data?
If not,
why not?

Does the
definition
explain
the code
name? If
not, why
not?

Are the example
quotes representative
of the raw data? If
not, why not?
RA 1…--No; no
mention of using
library resources after
Wikipedia/ Google in
example /
RA 2…--No. leading
that library resources
follow Google, not
clear from discussion.

questions. An example from this list of themes and categories is provided in Table 4.10. Note
that RAs added the highlighted items in the example.
Table 4.10. Reviewer Notes Example
THEME 2: Practicing Literature-based, Research-Related and Scholarly Writing Skills
(Answers Research Question 2)
2.1 Identifying Types of Information Tools and Sources Used
Code #
Code
Code Definition
Student Views on
Student comments indicate that some value books while others do
SFG-3
Books (use/do not use). not use them.
List tools they use— [database titles redacted here], select [subject
SFG-28 Use Library databases. area redacted] in [given database].
SFG-56 Use Google Scholar.
Google Scholar was listed as an information source.
Use Google to do
SFG-57 research.
Use Google as primary search engine to do research.
Use Library online
Library Website was listed by students. (See SFG-14 and SFG-45
SFG-58 resources (website).
for issues with the library website).
Students list scholarly journals as an information source that they
SFG-60 Use scholarly journals. use.

As a final review process, I asked the RAs three questions about the themes:
Q1. Do the themes represent the data overall? Why or why not?
117

Q2. Do categories represent the data and the themes overall? Why? Why not?
Q3. Are there any other themes/categories that "jumped out at you" by their absence?
A sample segment of their review is provided in Table 4.11.
Table 4.11. RA Comments Example
Q. 3. Are there any other themes or categories that "jumped out at you" by their absence?
RA-1--No. / RA-2--Yes and I am not sure if it's a new theme or a category within theme 2, 3, or 4. The
students made numerous distinctions or comments about personal interaction. It is a big part of their
major and came out through the discussions (e.g. SFG-8, 20, 38). Also, the students made note of a
number of stumbling blocks (e.g. SFG-30, 32, 46, 50, 51). These are perceptions and reflections, but
they are also a major theme or, rather, a category of their own. Perhaps to keep the language unbiased,
simply separating 4.1 into "4.2. Research-related attitudes" and then determining what is reflection and
what is attitude. I'm not sure that makes sense, but, there it is!

I used feedback from the RAs to finalize codes and themes. The final list of themes and
sub-themes is reported in chapter five.
Phase Two: Design--Building the Intervention
In a meso-cycle within phase two, I designed the FacLibCoI workshop to explore how to
foster efficient and sustainable collaboration between faculty members in a social sciences
department and librarians that would enable these participants to build shared understanding and
sponsorship of IL. I chose a blended technology-enhanced learning environment (TELE) for its
unique capacity to enhance student engagement (Moskal & Cavanagh, 2014) and support active
learning through the careful design of face-to-face and asynchronous environments (Dziuban et
al., 2004; Garrison & Vaughan, 2008; Picciano, 2014). I also selected the CoI Framework for the
design. Figure 4.3 illustrates how the CoI Framework’s social, cognitive and teaching presences
form the educational experience (Garrison, 2011).

118

Figure 4.3. CoI Framework . Graphical representation of the three
inter-dependent presences and educational experience. By D.
Randy Garrison (2011). Used with permission.

Themes. I extracted and used tentative themes from phase one data and from Garrison
and Vaughan’s (2008) CoI work to inform the FacLibCoI workshop design (see Table 4.12). The
themes from Garrison’s work correspond to the CoI presences (e.g. social presence themes=SP,
etc.). The themes that I derived from the focus groups are labelled IL. These themes were then
used in the design phase of the FacLibCoI and were assigned to the learning plan that I
developed (available in Appendix A).

119

Table 4.12. Themes Extracted from Environmental Scan
CoI Themes Informing the Design

Information Literacy Themes Informing Content
Student research competency—faculty
member/student focus groups

Social Presence
SP1. Design face-to-face climate for personal
connections and to create a comfortable,
open environment.
SP2. Use online directed activities to create
discussion and collaboration for social
presence and group cohesion.
SP3. Design trusting and respectful environment
where participants discuss, challenge ideas,
acknowledge others’ points-of view, and
successfully handle conflict.
SP4. Use a survey to assess perception of social
presence

IL1. Undergraduates tend to view research as an
academically-focused activity using scholarly
sources. Both students and faculty members
confirmed that students do not equate solving
real-world problems using non-library search
tools and resources as real research.
IL2. Both students and faculty members indicated
that the teaching of research varies across the
university.
IL3. Student and faculty member comments indicate
that students start research with a formulated
opinion, seeking confirmation not discovery.
While initially excited about a topic, they
wonder why they are not learning much.
Frustration often leads them to abandon a topic
if confirmatory sources cannot be found easily.
IL4. Student and faculty member focus groups
confirmed that students find the following
processes difficult:
a. Determine which library databases are most
suited for the topic.
b. Create search strategies that lead to targeted
results.
c. Create and understand citations.
d. Understand the dangers of sloppy
scholarship and how it can result in
unwitting plagiarism.
e. Write in a scholarly manner (e.g.
introduction, thesis statement, transitions).
f. Read and engage with (e.g. through
judgement, questioning, and critique) a
scholarly article.

Cognitive Presence including Metacognition
CP1. Design for the Practical Inquiry Model
(trigger, exploration, integration,
resolution) to allow participants to define
their learning. Design for inquiry (explore,
discuss, refine) using suggested or
discovered sources.
CP2. Design opportunities for critical discourse,
hypothesis, and debate in order to engage
participants in exploration.
CP3. Design individual sense-making and
reflective written communication to
integrate shared understanding.
CP4. Design activities that will encourage
participants to use shared understanding to
work towards resolution.
CP5. Design activities to develop awareness of
one’s existing knowledge and to examine
one’s understanding.
CP6. Use an assessment questionnaire to prompt
participants to consider their learning
processes and strategies and to assess their
perception of learning.
CP7. Design activities that help participants
listen to and reflect on others’ ideas,
strategies and activities.

120

Table 4.12. Themes Extracted from Environmental Scan (Continued)
CoI Themes Informing the Design

Information Literacy Themes Informing Content
Current disciplinary department and library
standards

Teaching Presence
TP1. Use facilitation/direct instruction to help
participants negotiate roles and define
learning goals and outcomes.
TP2. Use facilitation/direct instruction to
encourage inquiry and responsibility
(summarize agreement/disagreement,
encourage on-task behavior, explore
concepts, use content expertise to challenge
thought/build community)
TP3. Design for deep understanding not
information overload.
TP4. Use a survey to assess perception of
teaching presence.
TP5. Use facilitation and direct instruction to
diagnose misunderstanding and provide
feedback.
TP6. Use solutions developed by the group to
assess understanding and collaboration.
TP7. Provide participants opportunity to monitor
learning, help others learn, and to develop
teaching presence.

IL5. Faculty members and librarians share
responsibility for ensuring that students
become information literate.
IL6. Students will understand research to be a
process that involves the need for
information and the identification, evaluation
and critical analysis of the information before
integrating it and constructing new
knowledge.
IL7. Students will understand that information has
value and there are many entities and many
interests involved in its production, free or
paid distribution, and use. Students know
how to ethically use information.
IL8. Students will recognize that research is a
process of asking question.
IL9. Students will understand that by engaging in
research they are entering a scholarly
conversation. They will disseminate their
findings in ways that lead to researchinformed practice and practice-informed
research.

SWOT analysis. To inform the design phase, I did an initial overview analysis of the
pre-interviews with faculty and librarian FacLibCoI participants before the initiation of the
FacLibCoI workshop. This revealed some additional insights for the design. Based on these
insights and the themes from the previous table, I performed a SWOT analysis (see Table 4.13)
to help identify important issues to the design. Several useful propositions resulted.

121

Table 4.13. SWOT Analysis and Propositions for the FacLibCoI Arising from Analysis
STRENGTHS
•
•
•
•
•

WEAKNESSES
•

Participants know each other, and good
collegial relationships are assumed
Some participants excel in face-to-face
while others prefer asynchronous
dialogue
IL and social sciences standards are in
agreement
Some participants are aware of active
learning strategies; others are good at
finding information
Student/faculty member analysis of
research and learning needs are similar

•
•
•
•

OPPORTUNITIES
•
•
•
•

Extrovert participants may overwhelm
introvert participants
Extrovert participants may be less
inclined to engage asynchronously
Model requires significant time from
participants
Buy-in is more about helping the
researcher, not in learning
Undergraduate students dislike hard
work associated with research.

THREATS
•

Establish relationships where strengths
of each group complement weaknesses
Gain interest in learning how to
collaborate on IL
Find common ground to address student
research skills needs
Harness knowledge of active pedagogy
to drive recommendations

•
•
•

Collegiality may lead participants to
accept basic understanding and
agreement and gloss over differences
May not engage fully due to time
constraints
Faculty member reticence of student
research abilities
Student misunderstanding of research

PROPOSITIONS ARISING FROM THE ANALYSIS
SWOT1. Utilize the strengths of the group to establish relationships (Social Presence)
SWOT2. Harness knowledge of active pedagogies and student learning needs to establish interest
in learning about information literacy that leads to collaboration (Content)
SWOT3. Engage participants in deep learning (Cognitive Presence)
SWOT4. Encourage participation despite time demands (Teaching Presence)
SWOT5. Consider faculty member/student conceptualizations of student research needs when
proposing recommendations (Content)

Designing the intervention. Based on the exploratory review already described, I
developed a seminar that consisted of four face-to-face sessions combined with accompanying
asynchronous work among smaller groups between sessions. I designed the asynchronous forums
to allow the faculty member and librarian participants to work in smaller groups (each was a mix

122

of social sciences faculty and librarians) towards producing outcomes that could be brought back
to the larger group in the next session, thus continuing the learning feedback loop.
In Table 4.14, I condense and list by category and code the various themes from the
Environmental Scan (previously shown in Table 4.12) and the design propositions derived from
the SWOT analysis (shown above in Table 4.13). I used this list to develop the Learning Plan
(unit and lesson plans) for the seminar and to cross check the design.
Learning plan. I developed the seminar’s learning plan and submitted it for review to
two professors within the University and a researcher with the CoI Framework. One of the
university’s education professors and the CoI Framework researcher, D. Randy Garrison,
returned their comments, which I incorporated into the Learning Plan. The plan included a unit
plan summary, high level session plans, and lesson plans:
•

The unit plan summary included a description of the subject, unit, timeframe, learning
goals and outcomes, and necessary materials.

•

The session plans incorporated the purpose and design themes (CoI presences to be
incorporated in the lesson, and description of goals, specified materials needed,
facilitator-provided resources, session activities and the content and participant
outputs).

•

Lesson plans built out the specific objectives and learning content and provided a
summary and assessment for each session.

Once the Learning Plan was developed, I checked it against the list of design themes
(shown in Table 4.13) and mapped these back to the Learning Plan. A full copy of the unit and
lesson plan is available in Appendix A for referral during planning additional iterations of the
FacLibCoI workshop.

123

Table 4.14. Coded Design Themes Used in Instructional Materials
Categories

Coded Themes

Social
Presence

SP1:
SP2:
SP3:
SP4:

Cognitive
Presence

CP1: Design for Practical Inquiry Model (trigger, exploration, integration, resolution)
CP2: Facilitate critical discourse of exploration stage
CP3: Facilitate integration through individual learning/shared reflective
communication
CP4: Facilitate resolution through activities designed to lead to recommendations
CP5: Design activities for self-awareness (existing knowledge; question
understandings)
CP6: Use assessment survey to prompt self-consideration of learning
processes/strategies and to assess perception of learning
CP7: Design activities that encourage listening to and reflecting upon others’ ideas

Teaching
Presence

TP1: Design for group negotiation of problem, learning goals, outcomes, roles and
protocols
TP2: Use facilitation/direct instruction (e.g. encouraging, summarizing, exploring,
challenging)
TP3: Design for deep understanding not information overload
TP4: Assess perception of teaching presence using surveys
TP5: Use facilitation/direct instruction to diagnose misunderstanding
TP6: Use the artifacts produced along with their development to assess
understanding/collaboration
TP7: Design activities to help participants take on teaching presence and help others
learn

Information
Literacy

IL1:
IL2:
IL3:
IL4a:
IL4b:
IL4c:
IL4d:
IL4e:
IL4f:
IL5:
IL6:
IL7:
IL8:
IL9:

Design F2F to support personal connections
Design online to support SP and build cohesion
Design learning environment to build trust and respect
Use a survey to assess perception of social presence

Undergraduates do not see real-world problem solving as research
Research expectations across campus are variable
Students use research as confirmatory rather than exploratory
Students find it difficult to determine the correct database to use
Students find it difficult to create quality search strategies
Students find it difficult to create and understand citations
Sloppy scholarship results in unwitting plagiarism
Students find it difficult to write in a scholarly manner
Students find it difficult to engage with a scholarly journal article
Faculty members and librarians share responsibility for teaching students
information literacy
Students should understand the research process (identify need, find, evaluate
and use)
Students should use information ethically and understand the value of
information
Students should recognize that research is about asking questions
Students should understand research as scholarly conversation informing
practice and vice versa

124

Table 4.14. Coded Design Themes Used in Instructional Materials (Continued)
Categories
Strengths,
Weaknesses,
Opportunities,
Threats

Coded Themes

SWOT1: Use group strengths to establish relationships (Social Presence)
SWOT2: Use group knowledge about pedagogy and student learning needs as
trigger (Content)
SWOT3: Engage participants in deep learning (Cognitive Presence)
SWOT4: Encourage participation in the face of time demands (Teaching Presence)
SWOT5: Encourage group to consider student perspective of research when
developing recommendations

Development of data collection tools for phase three intervention. I also developed a
set of semi-structured questions for one-on-one, open-ended interviews with participants. These
questions came out of my knowledge of the university and my literature review. I did not pilot
test the questions. I used the interviews to gauge participants’ thoughts about teaching research
and their understandings of collaboration, inquiry and IL. The post interviews allowed me to
consider how participant thoughts on these topics may have changed.
I chose to use a Likert-scale instrument for the second data collection method. I utilized
and combined the questionnaires designed for CoI and presented in two studies (Arbaugh et al.,
2008; Garrison & Akyol, 2015). I chose these because the studies showed that the items in these
questionnaires had undergone various statistical analyses to test the validity of the CoI presences
construct and an emerging self and co-regulation metacognitive construct. For the 34-item
questionnaire, results “support[ed] the use of the CoI instrument as a valid measure of Teaching,
Social, and Cognitive Presence,” (Arbaugh et al., 2008) although the authors noted that Teaching
Presence items might need refining. In the second study, researchers revised a metacognitive
construct from three dimensions to two and tested the revised construct with graduate students.
Results confirmed a shared metacognitive construct of self and co-regulation (Garrison & Akyol,
2015) as proposed by the CoI Framework. On this basis, I felt comfortable adapting these two
125

questionnaires to explore whether the FacLibCoI workshop prototype design was able to support
and sustain the three presences and metacognition of the CoI Framework. I gained permission to
use questions from the 34-item CoI Framework survey (listed in Table 2, Arbaugh et al., 2008)
and from the shared metacognition questionnaire items (listed in Table 1, Garrison & Akyol,
2015). I combined and adapted these into a 66-item Likert scale instrument, which is available in
Appendix B.
I planned to administer the survey to participants immediately after a workshop session
and so I made minor adaptations to the wording of survey items to better match the context of the
FacLibCoI workshop (i.e. changing an item from present to past tense). For example, I changed
“I am aware of my effort” (Garrison & Akyol, 2015, p. 69) to “I was aware of my effort.” (see
Appendix B). I also changed relative terms such as course to workshop, work to teaching, or
instructor to facilitator. I generalized questions in the original 34-item questionnaire that
referenced online to fit a hybrid CoI that included face-to-face and online components (e.g.
online discussions became discussions). Finally, I created five items to assess participants’ views
towards specific learning strategies or artifacts used in each session. I adapted three of the five
from previous items and simply repeated them in this section of the questionnaire (e.g. changed
reflection on the workshop content and discussions helped me understand fundamental concepts
in the workshop to It helped me to understand important concepts). I added the following two
items: it helped me to meet the learning target, and I found it clear and easy to use.
Participants completed the scale after each face-to-face session. This enabled me to
measure participant perceptions of each session and how they experienced the collaboration and
inquiry that took place within that session.

126

I audio-recorded the face-to-face sessions (including small break-out groups) for the third
data collection method. I procured four portable audio recorders from the university’s IT
department (and participants volunteered a couple of cell phones loaded with recording apps).
We switched these on during each session to create .mp4 files, which I downloaded, deleted from
the original recording devices, and later transcribed. In addition, research assistants followed the
same protocols established in the phase one focus groups and took notes throughout the main
sessions (although they did not participate in the small breakout groups).
Phase Three: Prototyping the FacLibCoI Workshop and Analysis
TELE. In phase three, I implemented the FacLibCoI workshop prototype that I had
designed in phase two. Before beginning this intervention, I conducted one-on-one preinterviews with the social sciences faculty members and librarians. After the intervention ended,
I conducted post-interviews. All participants took part in the pre-interviews and all minus one
participated in the post interview. I recorded and later transcribed the interviews and took notes
during each. Interviews lasted between one-half hour and one hour each. The questions used for
the pre- and post-workshop interviews are shown in Table 4.15.
The FacLibCoI included four face-to-face sessions and accompanying online,
asynchronous forums that took place over two months. During these sessions, the group met
collectively and broke out into smaller groups, which were divided to ensure that both the social
science department faculty and librarians were represented in each group. I also organized
collaborative space within the university’s course management system, which I selected as the
medium of choice because faculty members used it with their own students. The collaborative
space allowed participants to post responses to questions given to the groups by the researcher.

127

Table 4.15. Questions for Semi-Structured Interviews
Before Workshop Interviews
1. What do you know about this
workshop?
2. Why have you agreed to be part of it?
3. What do you hope to gain from your
participation?
4. What do you understand IL to mean?
5. What do you understand by
collaboration?
6. How do you feel about collaboration?
7. What do you understand by
collaborative learning?
8. How do you feel about collaborative
learning?
9. What do you understand by inquiry
learning?
10. How do you feel about inquiry
learning?

After Workshop Interviews
1. In what ways was the workshop what
you expected?
2. In what ways was it different?
3. What do you feel you gained from your
participation?
4. What would you have preferred had
been done differently?
5. What do you understand the term IL to
mean?
6. What do you understand by
collaboration?
7. How do you feel about collaboration?
8. What do you understand by
collaborative learning?
9. How do you feel about collaborative
learning?
10. What do you understand by inquiry
learning?
11. How do you feel about inquiry learning?

I audio recorded all but one of the face-to-face sessions. I failed to switch the recorder
device back on after one of the breaks and missed recording the session. In addition to the audio
recordings of these face-to-face sessions, one or two research assistants took field notes
throughout the group sessions. On a few occasions where the sessions ran over time and the
research assistants needed to leave, notes stopped part way through. Small groups also recorded
their sessions, but I did not assign any direct observation.
At the end of each face-to-face session, participants filled out individual questionnaires
The questionnaire is available in Appendix B.
Data analysis for phase three. As presented earlier, I used a mixed methods approach to
collect data for the main intervention (see Table 3.2). I conducted individual interviews with
each participant (QUAL) beforehand. Then, during the intervention itself, I utilized the following
mixed methods data collection methods:
128

•

Group transcripts and notes (QUAL)—thematic analysis using self-developed coding
methods.

•

Online transcripts (QUAL)—thematic analysis using self-developed coding methods.

•

Surveys (QUANT)—descriptive statistical analysis compared with qualitative results.

•

Documents/Artifacts (QUAL)—narrative review.

Transcripts, notes, and interviews. To analyze transcripts, researcher assistant notes and
interviews, I chose a more deductive approach (with an added inductive option) than I had used
to analyze phase one data. The intervention resulted in vast amounts of data that I needed to
quickly organize to ensure that I adequately addressed the research questions. Rather than the
themes being drawn directly from the data as in phase one, I preselected four main categories
based on the study’s research questions. I present and describe the four coding categories below:
•

Blended Design—Codes included any evidence of a blended TELE design (presence,
efficiency, sustainability). What parts of the design or other phenomena contributed
to or did not contribute to a blended TELE?

•

CoI—Codes included any evidence of a developing CoI along with evidence of its
three presences (social, cognitive, teaching).

•

Learning—Codes include evidence of individual and collaborative, inquiry-based
learning (including identification of its forms and any collaborative learning that did
not occur or that was problematic).

•

Shared Understanding—Codes included evidence of shared IL understanding
including evidence that inquiry-based and collaborative forms of learning that
contributed to that understanding (in what ways). They also included any evidence

129

that collaborative forms of learning might contribute towards collaborative
approaches to IL within the discipline.
Using MaxQDA, a mixed methods data analysis software package, I conducted four
levels of coding, one for each category, to chunk the data by category. I used descriptive coding
to quickly chunk the data by the main categories above. Within each category, I performed
preliminary ad hoc coding to develop a list of protocol codes. I then defined and compared these
against the data. I recoded each chunk of data based upon a unified codes list.
Next, I coded the chunked data with emotional codes as well as with V (Value), A
(Attitude) or B (Belief) based on Miles et al.’s (2014) definitions of these codes. This level of
coding supports a more wholistic Deweyan view (non-dualistic view of the organismexperience-environment that involves the whole person, including emotions and beliefs)
(Morgan, 2007; Vanderstraeten, 2002).
One of the weaknesses of qualitative data is the copious amounts of data that tends to be
generated and that ultimately goes to waste. To mitigate in some small way this weakness, I
chose to also include an inductive approach to coding. On clean data, free from any chunking, I
used descriptive and in vivo codes to highlight things not captured within the four pre-defined
categories. Descriptive codes identified the data’s essence while in vivo codes captured its ‘life.’
Questionnaires. Surveys make up the quantitative part of the study. I described these
earlier. In summary, the questionnaire included 4-point forced choice Likert items as well as an
open-ended question that sought perceptions from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree.
Participants filled out a questionnaire after each face-to-face session giving their perceptions
about that session.

130

I used descriptive statistics to summarize the data from the questionnaires, specifically
mean and standard deviation. I compiled descriptive statistics for each item, for each scale, and
for the entire questionnaire. I laid these summarizations out into a series of tables that are
presented in chapter six.
Trustworthiness of the Study
As validity is used in quantitative studies to ensure that the study actually measures what
it sets out to measure, trustworthiness or creditability is used in qualitative or mixed-methods
research to ensure that the picture that emerges describes reality in all its richness (Barab &
Squire, 2004). These authors point out that any positive changes that result could be considered
evidence of trustworthiness since the changes occurred within real-world settings. Golafshani
(2003) indicates that naturalistic studies value careful process and reporting as well as the ability
to transfer findings to other settings as opposed to the traditional definitions of reliability. I
conducted this study within the real-world, naturalistic setting of a university among members of
its academic community. Detailed documentation and description has been incorporated in this
report to provide evidence of external validity. I used triangulation to build credibility and
trustworthiness that the findings are representative of the reality in which the study occurred
(Golafshani, 2003; McKenney & Reeves, 2012) and to provide clear evidence of how I assigned
themes and derived findings (Barab & Squire, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2012). I also used
rich description to tie results and context to theory. In this sense, although I did not use
crystallization, which requires the mixing of methods and genres, I find its imagery descriptively
compelling because it serves as an illustration of how multiple data views such as those used in
this study may provide credibility and trustworthiness. For triangulation, I used multiple views of
the phenomenon to tease out meaning. Specifically, I used triangulation during:

131

The exploratory phase of the study. I collected data across various focus groups
(faculty members and chairs from across the university and students from the social sciences
department) as well as an interview with the VP for Academic Affairs which could then be
contrasted and compared. I also examined university-level reports and standards adopted by the
university which allowed for triangulation between focus group data, written university
documentation, and appropriate standards.
The FacLibCoI workshop intervention. I conducted pre- and post-interviews with all
faculty members from the social sciences department and librarians, collected transcripts from
the workshop face-to-face and online, asynchronous sessions, administered questionnaires to
participants after each session, and collected artifacts produced by the participants; these provide
material for triangulation of results from the workshop.
A third method used to establish trust in the study is rigor. Rigor is often an issue in
studies that use multiple methods. Hoadley (2004b) posits that methodological alignment is a
potential way of addressing rigor and suggests that this is “encouraged” when “the same
people…engage the theory, the implementation of interventions, and the measurement of
outcomes” (p. 205). My dual role within the study as researcher and facilitator provided me with
the opportunity to align methods to the theory of social constructivist learning theory and the CoI
Framework. For example, the choice of DBR as a methodological approach allowed me to
design a prototype to potentially fit the CoI Framework while, at the same time, to study not only
the design, but also the learning of the participants. It allowed me to play the dual role of
researcher and facilitator and enabled iterative changes midstream when certain realities of the
design threatened complete failure. One example that comes to mind and that I explore in more
depth in chapter six is how one of the faculty chairs approached me early in the intervention to

132

share that in faculty meeting, some members expressed feelings of frustration over the study.
They felt that it took too much of their time. Knowing this, I engaged the group in dialogue and
allowed them to renegotiate some of the planned activities.
I adopted a facilitator role in this study in addition to my researcher role and used DBR
approaches to design and facilitate the workshop intervention. Based on the literature of DBR, I
adopted this intimate, participatory role in order to arrive at common understanding of the
participants and their developing CoI as well as to be able to understand and relate
environmental and contextual issues from the intervention to theory and to further refine theory
and intervention (Barab & Squire, 2004; McKenney & Reeves, 2014; Penuel et al., 2016). I
sought to develop a solution to a real-world problem while identifying and refining design
principles that contribute to contexts beyond this study.
Contextually-produced findings from multiple methods hold high ecological validity; that
is, they approximate closely the real world setting (McKenney & Reeves, 2012). Nevertheless,
my dual role as researcher-facilitator could increase the likelihood of researcher bias. I therefore
made the conscious choice not to generalize results to non-researcher influenced contexts (that is,
a typical faculty colloquium that is not part of a research study). I also set up and followed
appropriate methodological and analytical practices that included pre- and post-interviews,
triangulation across methods, and used interrater reliability for verification of thematic analysis
(Anderson & Shattuck, 2012; Barab & Squire, 2004; Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2005).
In regards to researcher bias, DeWalt & DeWalt (2011) advise that participant
observation (wherein the researcher is a full member of the group but continues to record data)
should only be one form of data collection and should be corroborated by other data collection

133

methods. Although I took on the role of facilitator, not full participant, the advice is still helpful.
I tried to mitigate bias in the following ways:
•

I used a more objective form of data collection (anonymous questionnaires) to
provide unbiased evaluation of the intervention from the participant perspective.

•

I used research assistants to take notes throughout the focus groups in phase one of
the study and in the FacLibCoI, itself, in phase three.

•

Research assistants were employed to review my data reduction and coding.

Limitations and Delimitations
Several limitations apply to the study and are listed below.
•

I completed one full iteration of the prototype, but the design would allow for a
second iteration.

•

Potential researcher bias required extra effort in areas of design, data collection, and
analysis to try to mitigate negative effects.

•

I collected large amounts of data that required pragmatic decisions to limit analysis
due to time and energy constraints.

•

Limitations suggested by the social sciences department meant that in the first phase
only third-year students participated in focus groups. In hindsight, senior students and
perhaps even graduate students might have contributed additional insights.

•

I found that my choice to schedule the study late in the academic year played a
limiting role. Faculty members seemed especially busy and less forgiving of their
time.

•

The available space within the academic calendar equated to a time slot of
approximately half of one semester within which to conduct the study.
134

The following delimitations were used:
•

I chose faculty members in a social sciences department and librarians.

•

I planned one complete iteration.

•

I limited the design for the prototype intervention to a short-term, workshop-style
design that could be accomplished within half of one semester.

Ethical Considerations
Among the most important ethical considerations that fall within the broad parameters of
the overall study are the participant’s right to privacy, confidentiality and anonymity, effects of
experimenter bias, researcher truthfulness and honesty, participants’ being informed of risks and
benefits, informed consent and ability to withdraw, imbalance in power or conflict of interest,
and fairness (Bloomberg & Volpe, 2012; Cresswell, 2012). As Cresswell (2012) points out,
ethics should be considered in all stages of research.
Conflict of interest. I worked as a librarian at the university and knew some of the
participants well. Conflicts of interest could arise unless I kept the study separate. I informed
department heads and participants in the project that I chose to keep the study independent from
any other responsibilities due to my position. Data from the study would not be extracted for
uses in any future university-related initiatives. I only conducted focus groups with upper-level
undergraduates who would no longer have the potential to have me as an IL lecturer.
Impact and operational approvals. I sought and obtained ethics board approval through
the Conjoint Faculties Ethics Review Board at the University of Calgary and the ethics review
board at the university where the study took place. I also sought and received approval from each
of the heads of the departments that specifically participated in the study.

135

Risk assessment. Risk is assessed in terms of how it compares with normal daily
routines that are similar to those of the study (Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, & Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada, 2010). Participants in this study volunteered from among students,
librarians and faculty members of the university. I conducted open discussion focus groups using
semi-structured questions to guide dialogue. This mimicked discussion-type courses or academic
discussion groups in which participants normally participated in their line of work or study.
Participants could refrain from speaking and I promised anonymity. I recruited student
participants from upper-level undergraduates who had already completed library-based IL
instruction and who would not be subject to future instruction in courses taught by the facilitator.
Faculty members (including librarians) who participated in phase one and phase three came from
academe and regularly worked in group situations. The study therefore represented no greater
risk than that implied in their normal work. The study might impact future work relationships,
however, and so I informed participants of the study’s purpose, the expectations for collaborative
involvement, and that I took seriously my responsibility as the facilitator to mitigate negative
human interactions within the confines of the study.
Benefits analysis. I assert that potential benefits to the participants outweighed risks
within this study. Participants could learn more about another discipline, become better
acquainted with colleagues, and establish new relationships that could lead to future cooperative
efforts. Participants could gain a deeper understanding of IL and develop knowledge that might
lead to improvements in their future activities be those study techniques or teaching practices.
They also could learn more about blended learning and CoI concepts.

136

Recruitment and potential participants. The university ethics review board approved
formal recruitment letters for the first exploratory phase which involved students, faculty
members and chairs of department. The office of the Vice President for Academics sent the letter
to university-wide faculty members and chairs. I recruited students through a personal oral
invitation extended to a class of junior undergraduate students in the social sciences department.
The department preselected the class due to its required status for all third-year students in the
discipline. All social sciences student and university-wide, faculty member participants in the
first phase focus groups signed a consent form before the focus group interviews began.
In the case of the FacLibCoI workshop which involved faculty members from the social
sciences department and librarians, the chairs of both departments introduced the study to their
teams in department meetings and/or by email. Each faculty member and librarian received a
letter of invitation. I did this to avoid coercion through personal contact. I provided faculty
members and librarians with a consent form and procured their signatures.
Freedom to withdraw. I informed participants of their right to withdraw at any time but
that I classified any artifacts produced as part of their participation as group products that could
not be withdrawn. I further informed participants that when they completed surveys they could
leave any question blank and they could terminate the activity or not submit the survey at any
time throughout the process. Once submitted however, the completed survey became part of the
study and could not be withdrawn.
Data identifiers. I separated identifying information from the data before I began data
analysis. This information was kept behind a password and separate from the data. This
information was destroyed once academic requirements related to the study were complete.

137

Data confidentiality and privacy. I informed participants both in writing and orally of
data collection procedures and how personal identifiers would be separated from the data using
anonymous identifier codes.
Data storage, retention and disposal. I did not share data with outside groups and do
not plan to use it in other studies external to this study. I collected and stored identifier and study
data in the United States until I completed the academic requirements associated with the study.
Summary
I attempted in this chapter to explain the mixed methods design for the study which is
based on social constructivist learning theory and the CoI Framework. I then explored in detail
the various methods used to collect the data. I explained the analysis and synthesis techniques
used. Finally, I presented a summary of the ethical considerations, limitations and delimitations
incorporated into the study.
I present the results of the preliminary research from phase one in chapter five. I used the
findings of phase one (chapter five) to inform the content of the FacLibCoI workshop, which I
designed in phase two. The unit and lesson plans resulting from this phase two design work are
provided in Appendix A. In phase three, I implemented the design (FacLibCoI Workshop
implementation) and analyzed my findings. I present the phase three results in chapter six.

138

Chapter Five: Phase One Findings--University Environmental Scan
Introduction
In chapter four, I presented the methods used for the phase one university environmental
scan, which I conducted to inform the phase two design of the FacLibCoI workshop. Also, in
chapter four, I explained the methods used to summarize and analyze focus group data.
Now in this chapter, I present the findings from the university environmental scan, which
included a literature review, review of university documents and pertinent national educational
standards, along with focus group interviews of university faculty and students.
Data Gathered in Phase One
In phase one, I performed a review of scholarly literature, a document review of internal
and professional standards documents, and I conducted exploratory focus groups among students
and faculty members as part of the university environmental scan where the study took place.
Figure 5.1 shows how these data collection points fit together in phase one.

Figure 5.1. Sub-figure From Figure 3.2 Representing Meso Cycle One.
139

Literature review. I reviewed literature related to Deweyan pragmatism to explain the
paradigmatic choice that guided this study. I also reviewed literature that related to the themes
that impact the study. One literature field that impacts this study is IL. My review included
official IL definitions, how IL theory and standards developed, current theoretical trends and
standards, and how IL is taught in HE as well as its challenges. I reviewed several collaborative
models of learning including the CoI Theoretical Framework, which I chose for the FacLibCoI
workshop that I designed in phase two and implemented in phase three. I examined CoI
development and theory and reviewed CoI literature that pertains to blended learning. From the
design perspective, I reviewed literature in DBR theory and models including the Generic Model
for Educational Design Research, which I chose for this study. The main literature review is
found in chapter two with paradigmatic and design literature provided within chapter three.
University and national standards documents. I studied the university’s unpublished
accreditation reports and late version drafts of a capital funding request. I reviewed library and
university strategic plans. Next, I reviewed the national standards used by the social sciences
department and library, the two departments that would participate in the phase three FacLibCoI
workshop. These standards formed part of the content for the FacLibCoI.
Focus groups. I engaged volunteer students and faculty members/librarians from across
the university as well as department chairs in focus groups to explore the university’s academic
research teaching and attitudes. I also interviewed the Vice President for Academic Affairs. A
summary of the participants who volunteered across all focus groups is presented in Table 5.1.

140

Table 5.1. Phase One: Focus Groups
University Group
Administrators
Faculty Members/
Librarians
Chairs and Deans
Students

Focus Groups
Interview (University Officer)
Focus Group 1 (Faculty Members)
Focus Group 2 (Faculty Members)
Focus Group 3 (C&D)
Focus Group 4 (Students)
Focus Group 5 (Students)

Number of Participants
1 participant
4 participants
6 participants
5 participants
6 participants
10 participants

Use of Data Collected
Information gleaned through the university environmental scan was used to prepare
themes (see Table 4.12) and a SWOT analysis (see Table 4.13) that informed the development of
the content for the phase three FacLibCoI workshop. For example, this excerpt from the lesson
plan for the first face-to-face session of the FacLibCoI workshop (found in Appendix A) shows
how the activities of the lesson were designed and mapped to some of the themes and the SWOT
analysis that came out of the findings:
Transitioning to Cognitive Presence—Facilitator Role (Facilitation and Direct
Instruction)
Identifying the Problem, We will be Working to Solve activity—Purpose. The group will
define the problem that the workshop will seek to address.
1. (CP1, CP2, CP3, CP7, TP1, TP2, SWOT5) Discussion Question—Think back to
college. Remember one experience doing research. Describe the activity as you
remember it and your feelings about it. (Take 5 minutes to write down notes that you
will share with the group). Each member has the chance to share—and the group has
the chance to ask questions
2. (CP1, CP2, TP2, IL1-4, SWOT2, SWOT5) Trigger--Presentation—What do
students need and what do they feel?
a. Presentation showing results from various studies and table with themes from
our student focus groups—
(Note: Codes Used above are from the themes identified in Phase One: CP1-7=Cognitive
Presence themes; TP1-2=Teaching Presence Themes, SWOT 2, 5=University
Environmental SWOT analysis, IL1-4=themes from focus groups)

141

In the rest of this chapter, I present the findings from the university documents and
national standards review as well as from the focus groups and administrator interview.
University Documents and National Standards: Findings
Several themes emerged from my review of university documents and relevant
educational standards that informed the design and implementation phases of the FacLibCoI.
These are presented below.
Community factored high at the university. Students listed Community as a reason for
enrolling and for staying. Both student and faculty member retention rates were strong.
Interestingly, the university used the metaphor of family in its proposed capital investment
campaign and coined terms such as home, living room, back yard, and living-learning spaces to
describe capital projects such as a student center or a sports facility. Community was also evident
in active student and alumni associations. Community identity emphasized personal and
collective health, balance, and wholeness. Expressed goals included respect for human dignity,
stewardship of the environment, and an intellectually-supported and faith-based spirit of service.
A teaching university. The university defined itself as a teaching university with a
foundation of scholarship. As such, teaching was its main function and its students-to-faculty
member ratio was low. The university supported faculty members in obtaining terminal degrees
where possible. Ranked faculty members held at least a master’s-level degree and four-fifths
held terminal degrees. Faculty members were encouraged through modest financial and
sabbatical support to engage in scholarship.
The programs offered were diverse for the size of the university. The university
offered degree programs in the liberal arts, social and professional sciences as well as in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Faculty members served as academic

142

advisors. Students could avail of tutoring through a Teaching Learning Center. The Library
granted access to information from anywhere at any time and librarians provided a variety of
individual and classroom teaching and reference consultation options.
The university’s attention to academics. Plans for academic excellence included a
comprehensive review of programs towards increased excellence in teaching and assessment,
advising, and scholarship. The university outlined a focus on innovative learning approaches and
financial investment in technology and collaboration spaces. Listed learning goals for students
included analysis, criticism and synthesis, symbolic interpretation of problems, creative problemsolving, and reflection upon solutions.
The university listed four core themes. Excellence in Thought represented the university’s
academic programs and services. Within this theme, objective two, Provide a Positive Learning
Environment, included the Library’s IL instruction program and specific assessment indicators,
which the library reported on for regional accreditation. The library’s IL plan was specifically
addressed in two of the university’s regional accreditation standards, one for faculty and the
other for students. In the first, faculty were tasked to partner with the library to ensure that
library resources and information were integrated into learning. In the second, the institution (i.e.
library) was tasked to provide teaching and support for the university’s populations (e.g. faculty,
students, etc.) to be able to use library resources for their learning needs. The library had its own
five-year strategic plan that addressed these standards. Library plans focused on faculty member
orientation, curricular discussions with faculty members, and innovative teaching tools, such as
video, online chat, and electronic library guides.
Similar standards exist for the social sciences department and the library. I reviewed
the professional standards that applied to the two departments represented in the FacLibCoI

143

workshop. Although the philosophies behind each set of standards were specific to each
discipline, underlying similarities emerged. For example, both sets of standards considered
that equal access to resources was linked to human rights and social justice. Both emphasized
ethical research and decision-making behavior within practice, and both specified critical
thinking and analysis as professional and scholarly goals.
Focus Groups: Findings
As part of the university environmental scan, I conducted focus groups with students
from the same social sciences department that I used to recruit faculty members to participate in
the phase three FacLibCoI workshop. I also held focus groups with university-wide faculty
members, librarians, and chairs and deans, and I interviewed the Vice President for Academic
Affairs. I used design and content themes (shown in Table 4.14) in the content of the FacLibCoI
workshop in Phase Three.
I asked questions that would help me understand the university’s culture toward research
and scholarship, which are often the driving forces for library-based literature search and use.
These are also areas in which faculty members and librarians might collaborate to teach IL.
Specifically, I asked faculty and department chairs to define research and scholarship, and to
explain what students should be able to do in these areas. I asked students to describe research
assignments and their experiences completing these assignments. Presented within Table 4.14,
nine specific themes emerged, which I have extracted in Table 5.2.
Comparing themes from preliminary and second review. These themes, along with
the themes taken from the CoI Theoretical Framework and the university SWOT analysis (see
Table 4.13) were used to design the FacLibCoI workshop in phase three. After the FacLibCoI
workshop had been implemented, I conducted iterative reflection and theory building. As part of

144

this process, I went back to phase one data and performed a more complete thematic analysis
upon the focus group data. I did this to test the accuracy of the preliminary IL themes (Table 5.2)
that had guided the design of the FacLibCoI workshop.
Table 5.2. Focus Groups—Themes
Information
Literacy

IL1:
IL2:
IL3:
IL4a:
IL4b:
IL4c:
IL4d:
IL4e:
IL4f:
IL5:
IL6:
IL7:
IL8:
IL9:

Undergraduates do not see real-world problem solving as research
Research expectations across campus are variable
Students use research as confirmatory rather than exploratory
Students find it difficult to determine the correct database to use
Students find it difficult to create quality search strategies
Students find it difficult to create and understand citations
Sloppy scholarship results in unwitting plagiarism
Students find it difficult to write in a scholarly manner
Students find it difficult to engage with a scholarly journal article
Faculty members and librarians share responsibility for teaching students
information literacy
Students should understand the research process (identify need, find, evaluate
and use)
Students should use information ethically and understand the value of
information
Students should recognize that research is about asking questions
Students should understand research as scholarly conversation informing
practice and vice versa

In Table 5.3, I present the seven, big-idea findings that resulted from this second, later
analysis of the focus group data. Then, in Table 5.4, I map these second-analysis, focus group
findings with those of the initial analysis (preliminary IL Themes) that I used to design the
FacLibCoI workshop. I do this comparison to see if the preliminary results hold up under the
second analysis.

145

Table 5.3. Phase One: Focus Groups—Major Findings
Major Findings in Second Analysis of Phase One Focus Group Data
Finding 1: Differences in research and scholarship were evident in cross-disciplinary dialogue among
the various faculty members from across the university who participated.
Finding 2: Students from the social sciences department enjoyed social interactions in academic and
community assignments and associated this with their professional identity.
2.1. Students sought out others whom they perceived could help them.
2.2. Students expressed contentment with group work experiences.
2.3. Students confirmed that they enjoyed working with clients.
Finding 3: Value of library collections, services, and roles are dependent upon perception
3.1. Some students expressed satisfaction with librarian reference consultations.
3.2. Students were critical of the library collections.
3.3. Faculty members had positive views of the library and how it has improved in recent years.
3.4. The library should play a greater facilitating role across the various disciplines.
Finding 4: Students from the social sciences department gained knowledge, but experienced mixed
feelings in writing-sequence courses
4.1. Students wished that the English professor would be more involved in their library-based
research.
4.2. Students found the live demonstration of library search tools boring but helpful.
4.3. Some students vocally expressed dislike for library-based assignments. Others indicated they
were helpful.
4.4. Students misunderstood the purpose of the library-based assignments.
4.5. Students wished for more opportunities to practice library search.
Finding 5: Research as discovery, research as academic assignments.
5.1. Research as discovery—research is about a spirit of inquiry and asking questions.
5.2. Research as academic assignments—research is about completing academic assignments.
Finding 6: What should students know, what do they know?
6.1. What faculty members from across the university said students should know.
6.2. What students from the social sciences department revealed about their knowledge.
Finding 7: Challenges to learning.
7.1. Knowledge gaps among students from the social sciences department led to misconceptions
and influenced student perceptions and actions.
7.2. Searching for confirmation, not discovery.
7.3. Rejection of processes they do not know or understand.
7.4. Misconceptions about processes and the library among students in the social sciences
department led to dysfunctional attitudes.
7.5. Students from the social sciences department attached their frustration to the learning process.
7.6. Students in the social sciences department felt that the search and writing process didn’t help
them to learn more about the topic.
7.7. Time constraints were a serious concern.

From this comparison between the preliminary and final analyses of focus group data, it
became clear that there were two additional findings (numbers 2 and 3 in Table 5.4) that were
not noted in the earlier findings. Interestingly, once these were noted, I was able to identify
146

similar reactions to social events (finding 2) among many of the faculty participants during my
analysis of the FacLibCoI workshop in phase three. For finding 3 below, it is clear from the fact
that I referenced it in a presentation that I gave during the phase three workshop, that I had
observed it but had not chosen to assign it as an IL theme in my first analysis. With those two
exceptions, the Table 5.4 comparison shows that the remainder of the preliminary themes were
confirmed in the second analysis. This double analysis provides an additional element of trust in
the content that was shared in the FacLibCoI workshop.
Table 5.4. Mapping Phase One Findings to FacLibCoI Preliminary IL Themes
Final Findings

Preliminary Findings
(IL Themes on p. 142)

1. Disciplinary differences in research and
scholarship evident in cross-disciplinary dialogue
2. Students enjoyed social interactions in academic
and community assignments and associated this
with their professional identity
3. Value of library collections, services, and roles are
dependent upon perception
4. Students gained knowledge, but experienced
mixed feelings in writing-sequence courses
5. Research as discovery, research as academic
assignments
6. What should students know, what do they know?
7. Challenges to learning

IL2.
No specific IL Theme.

No specific IL Theme.
IL5.
IL1, IL7, IL8, IL9.
IL4b, IL4c, IL4d, IL5, IL6, IL7, IL8, IL9.
IL3, IL4a, IL4b, IL4e, IL4f.

Findings. Through the remainder of this chapter, I present the major findings from the
phase one focus groups. As I review these findings, I present each using rich description. For
further discussion of these findings, consult chapter seven.
While we do know that the student participants came from a social sciences department,
faculty members, librarians and department chairs from across the university were promised
anonymity and I did not note down their departmental affiliation in the transcripts. They are
therefore, referred to here not by their departments but in more general terms. I made this

147

decision early in the study when I clarified that my goal for the focus groups was to better
understand the university culture around concepts such as research, scholarship, and IL, as
opposed to singling out individual faculty or their departments. As I describe the findings I will
use the term faculty member to indicate the faculty member, librarian or academic administrator
who participated in the focus groups.
Finding 1. Faculty members discussed research/scholarship in disciplinary ways.
When I asked for a definition of research, one faculty member responded, “we all have
[systematic] disciplinary responses to the question,” as if to say that each would have a different
answer. Faculty members from different disciplines defined the purpose of research differently.
Not all defined it as discovering something new. A professor from a STEM theoretical field
described the purpose as a search for elegance. “…Taking a proof from 200 pages…down to
50…will get notoriety,” he said, concluding that “…elegance is …breathtaking brevity.” An arts
professor asked, “where does creativity come in…[when] discovery and learning new things
isn’t the focus but creating something new, like a painter or novelist?” Faculty members also
used descriptive language that varied significantly. One recounted how she used a film to explain
different types of research to students. The film apparently compared literature-based research to
empirical research, where the retriever (dog) represented literature-based research and the bear
represented empirical research, “[golden] retrievers do literature reviews to answer questions and
analyze the data,” while “bears use literature but also use surveys, interviews, etc. to find new
information.” A professor from the hard sciences seemed confused (or perhaps bemused) by his
colleague’s lively use of non-scientific descriptors.
Finding 2. Students enjoyed and identified social tasks with professional identity.
Students expressed a level of enjoyment (or at least not dissatisfaction) with socially-oriented

148

assignments, such as mock group meetings, an “experience,” observation, or practicum. They
used words like, “enjoy” or “fun” to describe these. Students also indicated that they enjoyed
“ask[ing] questions face-to-face,” or “go[ing] to communities and…organizations.” One shared
that it was “nice to connect people to resources, better than [having your] nose in books.”
Another commented, “Fun, I’m a [specified profession] in my heart.”
Students also enjoyed social consultation when needing help with their research. They
confided, “For me, a lot of times I struggle to narrow my topic; I go to librarians;” while another
said, “I get help from the reference librarians…down in the lobby.” Other students shared that
they “find an expert in the field and talk to them about it.” Another said, “we…meet with the
professor who talks with you about your topic; …one-on-one meetings are really helpful.” Asked
what they do when facing challenges with other assignments, students listed professors. “For me,
if I’m confused and it doesn’t make sense, I can always call my teacher…they’re always there.”
Finding 3. Perceptions of library collections, services, and roles determine value.
Personal and group perceptions of the library are important when it comes to the library and its
collections and services. I describe several concrete examples wherein perception clearly assisted
or detracted from student ability to take full advantage of learning opportunities. Some of these
examples also show how one person’s perception influenced others.
In the first example, students who had taken advantage of one-on-one librarian
consultation in writing-sequence courses perceived librarians and other staff as friendly,
knowledgeable, and capable of helping them. One student recounted, “the library, my first year
here, I went to the reference desk and they helped me, motivated me; and they found a lot of
articles and journals on my topic.” Interestingly, this positive perception, when expressed
verbally, caused others to chime in, “yeah, they’re the best,” and “everyone’s really friendly.”

149

A second example illustrates how, at times, student perceptions did not match reality. In
these cases, perception held more sway. Students evaluated the physically-visible library
collection noting that, in some subject areas, the library had plenty of books while in others,
there were few or none. While there was some truth in this evaluation, students also
demonstrated a fundamental lack of knowledge about the full package of subject databases or the
millions of books in electronic or regional loan formats which were available to them and which
might have alleviated this concern.
Interestingly, perception is likely influenced by the perceiver’s level of expertise. While
students were quite critical of portions of the library collection, faculty members tended to view
the library positively, noting how much it had improved in recent years. One faculty member
commented, “in my mind, I went to [the] library and resources [and] I’ve seen definite additions
and amplifications at [the] library for students to collect information online and full-tech
resources; [also an] amplification of websites to make available…[with]in the last 2-3 years.”
Another faculty member commented on the new federated search engine, “... [there have been
improvements] even [in the] last few months.”
Finding 4. Students gained knowledge but expressed uncertainty. Students attained a
good knowledge level in the search and writing processes, but they also experienced increased
uncertainty at the time of implementing these new strategies. Student uncertainty quickly led to
frustration, misconceptions and attitudes that impacted learning. One example of a typical
misconception was the idea that in the writing sequence courses where librarians taught the first
module “that the teacher really didn’t help them in the first few weeks.” A student remarked,
“Didn’t get help from professors at the beginning—really detrimental.” I observed in my notes

150

that “perhaps the librarian taking sole charge of the module give[s] that impression…even
though teachers are meeting [one-on-one] with students and checking their sources.”
An example of how IL instruction helped students build knowledge but also led to
negative emotion is that of the librarian conducting live demonstrations of library resources. One
student observed, “It is obnoxious, but nice to see [it] explained up front;” “kindergarten boring,”
while another was more positive, “For us who have been here forever, we go through [the
writing-sequence classes]. They [librarians] come in and show us how to use it [library website,
databases]. They walk us through it.” One student referring to the content not the demonstration
style, said brightly, “…[the] most helpful thing…what rocked my world… [was] searching with
keywords, and another said, it “gives tricks [meaning logic terms] not taught in other places.”
Considering these alternate viewpoints, “obnoxious,” and “kindergarten boring,” versus “the
most helpful thing,” and “what rocked my world,” what made the difference between these
opposing emotional responses?
Graded library assignments in the writing-sequence courses also garnered mixed reviews.
The assignments were designed to help students find sources for their final bibliography. Each
library lesson carried with it an out-of-class assignment. One student complained that “library
assignments are heavily weighted, [and there’s] no assistance; going through it more would be
useful.” Other students called it “detrimental to the process,” and intimated that the assignments
led to superfluous sources. On the other hand, some students valued the assignments and the
learning opportunity these provided. As mentioned already, after one student expressed difficulty
navigating library resources, another student remarked, “For us who have been here forever, we
go through [writing-sequence courses] and we have library assignments that teach us how to
navigate.” But other students did not appear to understand that the assignments, carefully

151

completed, would help them to create their final bibliography, and one student voiced
dissatisfaction, “I’ve taken [second writing-sequence course] a few times because I didn’t do
well the first time. You get all this nonsense at the beginning….” Others felt that “library
assignments [were] too heavily weighted,” and indicated that they “need[ed] more practice.” In
my researcher notes, I asked, “how to get some sophomores to understand the value of the
learning so they do it the first time around?” and continued, “In [the writing-sequence classes]
they are taught library research methods all at once…[with] little time to practice.”
Finding 5. Defining research as discovery or as academic assignments. Faculty
members and students defined research differently. Faculty members saw research as “discovery,
adding to the corpus of knowledge.” One faculty member shared, “I do a literature search to see
if there are holes…I like to dive into holes.” Another described “a process of exploration and
discovery.” Still another spoke of “producing understanding both contrary and expected.” Some
faculty members noted a “personal component” that might not be academically-oriented, and one
described personal research outside of academic traditional search strategies, "I don’t set out to
do things in ‘research librarian’ ways.”
Faculty members spoke of seeking answers and the need to ask questions. They noted
that undergraduate students routinely ask questions and seek answers to personal problems but
are often unable to transfer this to academic work. A faculty member observed, “They do this but
not in an academic setting. [They] might do [it] when building a bicycle or creating [a] film, but
don’t attach [the behavior] to [a] scholarly setting.”
Faculty members described academic research that solved problems or expanded
understanding. They tied these to a field or discipline. One faculty participant described
academic research as “finding solutions to problems in your area.” Another placed it within a

152

“sphere of knowledge.” Faculty members also noted that purpose defines research and the
systematic approach used. One stated that “there are different kinds of research—research that
answers the question, research looking for what others have said, experimental research, setting
up a control group….”
By contrast, students defined research more narrowly, equating it with academic sources
and term papers, and specifically, with the research paper in their writing-sequence and research
methods classes. This is not surprising considering that both classes carry the term research
within their name. A student commented, “when I think of it [research], I think of a research
project; Is research on Google considered research?” On the other hand, when discussing data
collection during practicum, a student confided, “It’s not real research [emphasis added].” A
student colleague clarified practicum data collection as being about “who to call, finding and
familiarizing yourself with the needs…,” and “…community needs resources…has nothing to do
with library research” and another student added, “closer to Google….”
Finding 6. What should students know? What do students know?
Faculty members discussed what they wanted students to know about the research
process. Faculty members primarily wanted students to love learning, value the process, and “to
care, to know that it matters….” They wanted students to engage in discovery, to “analyze, tear
apart, see components and then bring [them] together again to create something new.”
Referencing a yearly public event at the university where undergraduate students present
research, one smiled, “so cool to see students presenting their work.”
Another research trait that faculty members valued for their students was humility.
Students needed to “learn to be humble and honest about their research.” One observed that you
need to recognize and admit when “you’ve gone down a rabbit hole,” while another suggested

153

that students need to be honest enough to “recognize [that] their findings can change their
thinking.”
“Nuanced” and “critical thinking” ranked high on the list of things faculty members
wished for students. One observed that “undergraduates [need to know that] it’s okay to think.”
Another said, “[students] don’t like the struggle…it takes time, thinking time.” One said that
students “prefer quick answers.” Along this line, one faculty member questioned, “how can we
prep them to see that research is not just a thing you do in a research class but a thing that
informs all the learning they do?” Another said, “in my discipline, students are concerned with
formulas…quite often [there is] no formula [but] a process. Don’t be afraid to step back [and]
ask follow-up questions.” Another said, “students like to jump the gun to the end and they don’t
want to do the process. They [want] answers before [they do] the research.”
Faculty members felt that students needed to know where and how to access scholarly
literature as well as be able to identify a scholarly article and judge its quality and value to their
own work. An academic administrator noted that “[medical schools] want to know if students
can read a medical journal article and critically evaluate it.” He said, “what sets you apart from
your peers will be your ability to critically evaluate peer-reviewed publications.” Several faculty
members noted that students should understand disciplinary literature and methodology, “what
does it mean to be a professional historian? What methods do you use?” Professors wanted
students to understand their discipline’s relationship with other disciplines. “I like to…show
students…how things dovetail and interface with other disciplines; as a student, we
compartmentalize learning….”
Finally, faculty members indicated that students had difficulty with basic research,
scholarship and support processes. They mentioned “craft[ing] a doable problem statement,” or

154

“record[ing] [and] keep[ing] track of what you find.” Another said students needed to learn how
to take careful notes because “sloppy work leads to plagiarism.” Other professors noted that
students struggled with pacing and time management. One faculty member shared that when he
asked students for a progress update on a major paper and they indicated they hadn’t yet started
it, he responded to them, “you are [either] going to die or give me junk.”
Students discussed their experiences with research-related assignments. Students were
able to identify various types of sources used in writing an academic paper. They also shared the
challenges and difficulties they experienced. They discussed library electronic resources,
referring to these collectively as the library website even when referring to library-provided
journal databases and electronic journals. Others could name specific databases that they had
used in the writing-sequence courses, as well as Google Scholar. Students were able to identify
features of databases that they found helpful (an indication that they used them). “With online
journals, I can use a timeline—I really like that” [many agree]. “Doesn’t get your hopes up.”
Some students appreciated the ability to get a formatted citation. And another praised the
helpfulness of abstracts. Students also identified other valid search techniques. One noted using
the bibliography of one paper or one author to lead to additional sources. Another commented, “I
notice I find an author I like from one project….”
Regarding search practices, students admitted that they primarily used Google. One
student confirmed heavy use when she said, “I’m a Googler…I never need the info from there
[library] if I’m being honest.” Others discussed using Google or Wikipedia to pick their topic or
to help them gain an overview of the topic, “brainstorm topics and then go to Wikipedia or
Google to find initial feedback.”

155

Most students were able to identify various writing processes they had learned. Together,
they created an inclusive list. Things like “brainstorm topics;” and “pick a topic” were listed as
early processes. One student said, “I like to find an expert in the field and talk to them about it.”
Others mentioned things like building an outline, when to write the introduction, the need for a
thesis statement, how to create the writing structure, and writing the conclusion. They discussed
formatting, “I think I figured how to cite…, but it was hard to find, and I don’t know if I put in
the right stuff.”
Students discussed challenges they faced when implementing search strategies, “[the]
biggest thing I struggle with is, when I go to a database and I have to type in keywords, they
never get me where I want to go.” A student tutor noted, “students don’t know how to use any of
those resources.”
Students indicated that they procrastinated and did not use the book loan consortium due
to the one-week delay in accessing books, “For me, it’s just motivation; we have sources, but if
you don’t do it on time…you can use [books from the consortium], but if you don’t prepare
yourself you’re screwed at the end.” This was not an isolated experience. Many students agreed
that they struggled with procrastination and scheduling. “I know this is my own problem. I
struggle to schedule my own projects. I should be able to plan…but they all come at once and I
feel blindsided. I should work in advance, but I don’t.”
Finding 7. Challenges to learning. Several challenges, such as knowledge gaps,
misconceptions, frustration and attitudes were highlighted. These seemed capable of derailing
the learning process for students. Students expressed frustration, for example, with the literature
review process, failing to understand its purpose. According to their own accounts, many
students did not interrogate their sources or even explore for the sake of discovery. Instead, they

156

sought confirmation of their ideas. Some students admitted to writing their paper and then
searching for sources to support it. “I know exactly what I’m going to say when I start writing; as
far as referencing, I find something about what I’m already talking about; I have my paper
mostly written [before I start using references];” Other students agreed. Various comments,
threaded together, create a clear image: “I don’t have time to read a full article;” “[I scroll to]
pick out a sentence;” or, “I find one or two sentences I can plug [in].” Perhaps the most colorful
image came from a student who reported searching for sources to “twist or maneuver.”
Other students searched broadly enough to ensure that there were enough sources to
support their paper, and these students tended to find good sources to cite. It was striking,
however, that no matter their process, no one mentioned interrogating the literature and perhaps
changing their views based on what they found. Instead, they described the frustration of trying
to locate sources that confirmed their ideas. “Finding what I’m going to cite [is] the most
frustrating (waves hand).” Students expressed disappointment that they didn’t gain as much
knowledge as they would have liked through the term-paper writing experience. The
misconception lies in the fact that they also revealed that generally they did not read the articles
they found when writing their papers.
For some students, a lack of knowledge about traditional academic search and writing
processes seemed to produce overconfidence and subsequent rejection of methods that might
help them. For example, when more knowledgeable students were discussing library resources,
another chimed in, “I’m a Googler. I never need the information from there [library] if I’m being
honest….” When students discussed the writing-sequence courses, another remarked wryly, “I
didn’t take writing here, listening to you, I’m glad I didn’t. It sounds like you go through an
awful process.” One student said, “I do things different, I’m supposed to tell honestly,” and when

157

another more knowledgeable student expressed difficulty citing websites because there was no
author, another student replied, “for me it’s the opposite…websites are easy.” One student selfassuredly described her alternate process, “[I] blurb out everything I’m going to write and then I
just do the paper.”
My findings showed that misconceptions can be as problematic as lack of knowledge.
One professor required recent sources from discipline-specific journals. She provided a list of
acceptable journals and allowed any journal that carried the name of the discipline in its title.
Students erroneously believed that they were only allowed to use the journals on the list, many of
which carried embargoes blocking full text access to recent issues. Although the library had
sufficient alternate titles, students went away convinced that the library lacked resources. In this
case, one small misconception about the assignment parameters triggered frustration and a
negative perception of library collections.
One final example, also with library collections, deserves mention. A student noted that
“it would be helpful to have different databases for different topics/disciplines,” and others
agreed. The library did, in fact, provide databases across the university’s disciplines, and the
student could have had access to these as well as to the most well-regarded database in his
discipline. A simple misconception like this could cause a student to miss out on using library
resources that would support learning. These examples illustrate the problematic reality that
student misconceptions represent their truth. Even when untrue, such misconceptions will likely
negatively impact the student’s learning.
Frustration seemed to be a significant learning barrier. Students exhibited frustration with
the search processes that they were expected to use and with the writing processes they had been
taught. While many students could discuss what should occur in the writing process, they used

158

words such as “struggle, wonder, hard thing, hardest part,” to describe their attempts to apply
this knowledge. One student shared, “For me, a lot of times I struggle to narrow my topic.”
Another said, “I struggle with the citing.” One remarked, “I start with the introduction. And
halfway through a paper, wonder how to finish.”
Students were also frustrated leveraging search tools and strategies, remarking, “when
writing a paper, [it’s] less ‘oh, what articles do I want to use?’ but more, ‘what ones partially
pertain to my project?’” A student expressed cognitive uncertainty, “Maybe [I’m] bad at
navigating [the] systems [but I] have to make [my paper] about what articles I find versus what I
wanted to write about.” Another student reported that the “biggest thing I struggle with is when I
go to a database and I have to type in keywords [but] they never get me where I want to go; it’s
some other article that has that word in it but it’s not the topic I’m looking for.”
Students did not recognize how much they had learned about library search and scholarly
writing. Furthermore, students perceived that they did not learn much about their chosen topic
when they wrote papers. One student wistfully said, “when [I] write [a] paper, I think I should
know something about it [when I’m done]. I don’t feel any more knowledgeable about my topic
[at the end]. It’s more about the grade, and [I] wonder how I found those sources and hope it
makes sense to the teachers.” Another student expressed frustration that teachers restricted her
sources to ones that were “after a certain year [published within five years], so I have to exclude
some,” while another remarked bitterly, “the restrictions are often stifling on my research.”
One final challenge was that of time management. Students expressed feeling stressed,
and desired more “time to actually read books. My research papers would be better if I read
books.” This conversation digressed into textbook readings. One student remarked that the “hard
part…is not only reading but also absorbing; many times, you have to skim…fast.” Students felt

159

they needed to compromise quality due to time constraints. One said, “the quality of work I have
to put out, it makes the process more difficult; I have to throw something [together] that I’m
okay with…but I need to maintain quality for grad school [so I] can’t be okay with it.” Another
remarked, “I have SEVEN [classes],” and mimicked shooting herself in the head. Still another
admitted being in therapy and noted how many college students have mental breakdowns.
Summary
This exploratory phase of the research study was analyzed, and the results were used to
inform the content of the FacLibCoI workshop. Findings showed that students not only enjoyed
social interactions but associated this aspect of their personality with their professional identity.
Student responses also indicated that they experienced information literacy in affective ways and
that confusion and stress caused negative emotions towards IL. This was important because
student perceptions and misconceptions influenced their attitudes towards library and research.
Meanwhile faculty members confirmed that there are disciplinary differences in
systematic approaches to research. The language they used to describe research in their
disciplines revealed diverse styles. When asked what students needed to know about research,
faculty members confirmed that they desired students to see research as discovery and to learn to
apply critical thinking to their research.
This chapter and the next, chapter six, present the findings for the study. This chapter
presented findings from the phase one university environmental scan. Chapter six, contains the
findings from phase three, the implementation and analysis of the FacLibCoI workshop. Phase
two does not contain a separate chapter because it was the design phase that tied the two research
phases together. Once the findings are presented (this chapter and chapter six), discussion and
recommendations follow in chapter seven.

160

Chapter Six: Findings from Phases Three—Blended CoI Workshop
Introduction
In this chapter, I present the findings derived from the FacLibCoI workshop, or phase
three of the study, in which 14 participants (made up of librarians and faculty members from one
of the social sciences departments of the university) worked through the topic of IL. The
overarching research questions that I sought to answer in this study were:
Research questions. To what extent might collaborative learning within a design-based
blended community of inquiry (CoI), hereafter referred to as the FacLibCoI, provide an efficient
and sustainable way for faculty members from a single discipline and librarians to construct
shared understanding of IL?
1. How might inquiry-based learning methods within a design-based FacLibCoI
facilitate shared understanding of IL between faculty members and librarians?
2. How might collaborative learning within the FacLibCoI foster shared understanding
and collaborative approaches to IL within the discipline?
3. To what extent might a blended, technology-enhanced learning environment (TELE)
support efficiency within a FacLibCoI while maintaining the social, teaching, and
cognitive presences of the CoI Framework?
To help answer the overarching question, the following additional question guided the
quantitative descriptive summarization and supporting qualitative examples:
1. Based on descriptive summary of participant perceptions and qualitative evidence,
which of the CoI theoretical framework presences and shared metacognition were
evident in the FacLibCoI workshop and how did they develop over time?

161

Workshop design. The workshop took place over two months and included four face-toface sessions (each session was projected to last two hours). In addition, participants were
divided into small groups of four or five and were provided with questions to consider between
sessions within an online, asynchronous discussion forum. Readings and other materials that
supported the workshop were stored on the library’s electronic library guides platform and
asynchronous forum spaces for each small group were set up on the university’s course
management system.
Because the presentation of the findings is sometimes a bit detailed, it is easy to get lost
in the process. Figure 6.1, therefore, presents an overview of the workshop as implemented.

Figure 6.1. The Actual CoI Process (based on curricular design but which evolved)

162

Data collected. Various types of data were collected:
•

Pre- and post-interviews were conducted with each participant to be able to gauge
changes in understanding and perceptions around key concepts that were covered
within the FacLibCoI workshop. Interviews lasted approximately one-half hour.
All participants completed the pre-interview and all but one, the post interview.

•

Participants completed questionnaires after each face-to-face session. These were
used to identify social presence, teaching presence, cognitive presence, and
metacognition (for a complete description of the questionnaire, see chapter four;
the questionnaire may be found in Appendix B). There was one item in the
questionnaire that specifically addressed the online portion of the design. Other
items surveyed the participants’ perceptions of their experience, in general.

•

Research Assistants recorded observations, not dialogue. These were not used for
data analysis but to confirm basic information related to the workshop sessions.

•

The group agreed to and facilitated the use of audio recordings of face-to-face
sessions (entire group and small groups). We missed recording the second half of
the second session. Recorded sessions were transcribed.

•

As part of the collaborative learning, participants produced artifacts that
represented their group effort towards understanding and promoting IL.

Data analysis. Data was analyzed using deductive methods and was triangulated with
results from other data types. Results of the questionnaires, for example, were summarized using
descriptive statistics. This summarization was contrasted and compared with relevant segments
of participant dialogue. Asynchronous work was summarized using descriptive statistics and then
the qualitative data was further examined to provide additional explanation. Themes were

163

extracted from the transcripts and interviews. Finally, artifacts produced by the participants
served as outcomes for the workshop and were included as evidence of shared understanding. A
summary of the various forms of data and how they were used in analysis is given in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1. Data Used to Explore the CoI Workshop Design Implementation
Pre and
Session
Online
CoI
Post CoI
Face-toProduced
Discussion
Surveys Workshop
face
Artifacts
Transcripts
Interviews
Transcripts
CoI Presences
Online Component of CoI Design
Emotional Responses
Shared Understanding Developed
Around IL and Collaborative,
Inquiry Learning
Participant Evaluation of their
Experience
Note: Primary Data

; Secondary Data

Questionnaire used. As seen in the research questions, one of the major purposes of the
workshop design was to test whether it could support a CoI and in the process lead to shared
understanding around IL between faculty from a social sciences department and librarians. I
administered a Likert-scale questionnaire after each face-to-face workshop session, which was
adapted from the CoI and Shared Metacognition scales from Arbaugh et al. (2008) and Garrison
and Akyol (2015). I made non-substantive changes to the items to fit them to the workshop (e.g.
substituted teacher and class with facilitator and workshop). I added a few of my own nonpiloted questions (which I have not summarized here) to allow me to identify areas within
transcripts that I might have wanted to analyze deductively. I also applied a 4-point forced choice
response scale in which 1 equaled Strong Disagreement, 4 represented Strong Agreement, and
there was no neutral choice. A later work (Garrison, 2017) included both the CoI questionnaire
and the Shared Metacognition questionnaire and these used a 5-point response scale with a

164

neutral choice. The questionnaire, which is found in Appendix B included scales for each of the
CoI presences and for social metacognition. Table 6.2 lists the scales. I chose to use these scales
because they were specifically designed to measure CoI presences and have been rigorously
validated over many studies. For this reason I considered quantitative methods to be the best way
to measure CoI presences and shared metacognition.
Table 6.2. Scales and Number of Items in the Questionnaire
Likert Scale
Social Presence

Cognitive Presence

Teaching Presence
Shared Metacognition

Likert Sub-Scale
Affective Expression
Open Communication
Group Cohesion
Triggering Event
Exploration
Integration
Resolution
Design and Organization
Facilitation
Direct Instruction
Self-Regulation
Co-Regulation

# of
Items
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
6
3
13
13

Findings Related to CoI Presences
I used descriptive statistics to summarize the data from the questionnaires. At the higher
level of the CoI presences, this quickly showed that the design had worked to create and sustain a
CoI. I summarized the data for each category within each CoI presence for further analysis.
Data summarization. I summarized the responses for each session of the workshop
using Mean (M) and Standard Deviation (SD). Summaries were done for (a) each presence and
shared metacognition, (b) for each of their subcategories, and (c) for each item. The overall
descriptive summary for each session is provided in Table 6.3.
One item within the questionnaire related specifically to the online component of the
workshop. But because the questionnaire was administered after each face-to-face session, it is
165

reasonable to assume that participants answered the questionnaire (except for the one item about
online) from the perspective of the face-to-face session they had just completed. I have therefore
analyzed the online component of the design separately in a later section of this chapter.
Table 6.3. Summarized Results: Indicators that the Design Achieved a CoI

Community of
Inquiry Elements

Face-to-face
Session 1
n=9 (64%)
M
SD

Face-to-face
Session 2
n=14 (100%)
SD
M

Face-to-face
Session 3
n=7 (50%)
SD
M

Face-to-face
Session 4
n=11 (79%)
SD
M

Social Presence
3.4
.70
3.5
.67
3.6
.74
3.6
.77
Cognitive Presence
2.9
.81
3.3
.71
3.3
.72
3.3
.94
Teaching Presence
3.4
.75
3.7
.54
3.6
.62
3.7
.53
Shared
Metacognition
2.7
.92
3.4
.75
3.3
.75
3.2
.88
Total
3.0
.88
3.5
.70
3.4
.73
3.4
.84
Notes.
• The questionnaire utilized a 4-point ordered scale
• Scale: 1=Strongly Disagree, 2=Disagree, 3=Agree, 4=Strongly Agree
• All questionnaires that were at least partially completed were included. Missing data within
these was replaced with the average for the item across all questionnaires. Missing data as
percentage of total data per session: Session 1=.018, Session = .065, Session 3=no missing
data, Session 4=.001.

Careful review of the summarization where a score of 3.0 on a 1.0-4.0 scale indicates
agreement, the mean scores show that all CoI Presences grew over time and were present as
early as the second session. The variation in responses for each presence were within one SD
indicating that scores were within a normal variability spread.
A few of the SD’s are close to 1.0. In these cases, summarization at a more granular level
revealed that these items had a core group of similar scores but also had a limited number of
outlier scores which were what pushed SD close to the 1.0 mark. For example, cognitive
presence, which was made up of 12 items, had an SD of 0.94 for the fourth session. Examining
each item showed that there was one outlier that had an SD of 1.17. The next closest outlier had

166

an SD of 1.04. And in session 1, shared metacognition had an SD of 0.92 (not as close to 1.0 but
still within the 0.90-0.99 range). Only one score within that scale had a 1.0 SD.
Data by categories clarified anomalies. This more granular summarization is shown in
Table 6.4 and allowed me to target areas for qualitative analysis.
Table 6.4. Forced Choice Likert Scale Questionnaire Including Presence Categories
Community of
Inquiry Elements
and Categories

Face-to-face
Session 1
n=9 (64%)
M
SD

Face-to-face
Session 2
n=14 (100%)
M
SD

Face-to-face
Session 3
n=7 (50%)
M
SD

Face-to-face
Session 4
n=11 (79%)

M
SD
SOCIAL
PRESENCE
3.4
.70
3.5
.67
3.6
.74
3.6
.77
1.00
Affective Expression
2.8
.62
3.3
.77
3.2
.94
3.4
.76
Open Communication
3.7
.54
3.6
.59
3.8
.54
3.5
.42
Group Cohesion
3.6
.58
3.6
.58
3.7
.58
3.8
COGNITIVE
PRESENCE
2.9
.81
3.3
.71
3.3
.72
3.3
.94
.97
Triggering Event
3.3
.67
3.2
.8
3.7
.58
3.2
.93
Exploration
2.8
.86
3.4
.71
3.2
.87
3.1
.88
Integration
3.1
.78
3.5
.59
3.3
.56
3.3
1.00
Resolution
2.5
.74
3.1
.68
3.2
.75
3.4
TEACHING
PRESENCE
3.4
.75
3.7
.54
3.6
.62
3.7
.53
Design and
Organization
3.8
.42
3.8
.38
3.7
.58
3.7
.54
.47
Facilitation
3.4
.60
3.7
.47
3.6
.58
3.7
.61
Direct Instruction
2.9
1.05
3.5
.75
3.4
.74
3.6
SHARED
METACOGNITION
2.7
.92
3.4
.75
3.3
.75
3.2
.88
.84
Self-Regulation
2.7
.90
3.4
.70
3.2
.78
3.2
.92
Co-Regulation
2.8
.94
3.5
.79
3.3
.72
3.1
TOTAL FOR
3
SESSION
3.0
.88
3.5
.7
3.4
.73
3.4
.84
Notes.
• The questionnaire utilized a 4-point ordered scale
• Scale: 1=Strongly Disagree, 2=Disagree, 3=Agree, 4=Strongly Agree
• All questionnaires that were at least partially completed were included. Missing data
within these was replaced with the average for the item across all questionnaires.
Missing data as percentage of total data per session: Session 1=.018, Session = .065,
Session 3=no missing data, Session 4=.001.

167

In session one, several of the presence category means fell below 3.0 indicating some
level of disagreement. A few of the category SD’s across the various sessions were close to 1.0.
Some of these are easily explained by circumstances. Within Teaching Presence, for example,
the Direct Instruction category showed an overall mean of 2.9. But at the item level, two showed
means of 2.2 and 2.9. These items referred to the facilitator providing adequate feedback, which
was not relevant for earlier sessions where work had not yet been accomplished. These scores are
therefore more likely attributable to the forced answer format of the instrument, which did not
present a not applicable (NA) possibility.
Other mean scores below 3.0 in session one can be explained by the typical way in which
the three presences develop over time. Resolution (Cognitive Presence), for example, showed a
mean of 2.5 for the first session but increased in later sessions and ended with a mean of 3.4 in
session four. The SD for this mean was 1.0, but further exploration showed extreme scores from
two of the 11 participants. Based on the majority of participants, the mean is generally
representative and confirms the trend within a CoI where cognitive presence (of which resolution
is the final stage) increases over time as the CoI progresses (Garrison, 2017, p. 30).
Another example of normal progression towards the development of a CoI is that of the
Triggering Event (Cognitive Presence) for session four, which had a mean of 3.2 (agreement) but
showed the highest variance within the Presence with a SD of .97. Of the three items within this
category, one had a mean of 2.8 (disagreement) and an SD of 1.17. The lower mean score of 2.8
for this item, “I felt motivated to explore content-related questions,” makes sense as this was the
wrap-up session where exploration of content would no longer have been relevant. Again, this
points to the problematic nature of excluding an NA option on the instrument’s response scale.

168

For co-regulation, four items out of 13 scored below the 3.0-3.9 mean range. Two of
these items used the word, “challenged,” (I challenged the perspective of others; I challenged the
strategies of others). I propose that this term is problematic in a setting where librarians are
working with faculty members. My experience as a librarian makes me suspect that librarians
would never consider that they were challenging faculty members. Instead, they view their role
as facilitating the work of the professor. These two items had lower means across all four
sessions and their highest mean was only 3.0 in session three.
The design supported development of CoI presences. CoI presences increased after the
first session and remained stable throughout the workshop. Summarized means within Table 6.3
show that two of the three CoI presences (i.e. social, teaching) were firmly visible in the first
session. This coincides with the design (See Appendix A), where session one was purposefully
filled with activities designed to build social presence that would help to carry the workshop as it
developed (i.e. participants sharing about their university background, about their personality
type, about how they experienced the library as undergraduates). Session one was also designed
with significant direct instruction, which is part of the Teaching Presence (introducing the
workshop, presenting the student findings from phase one of the study) to help establish the
purpose of the workshop as well as introduce the problem and stimulate cognitive presence.
One activity was specifically designed as a transition activity into the presentation on
student findings. In that activity, participants were asked to reflect and share how they “felt” as
undergraduates doing research or using the library at their university and then to share. This
helped them to identify with each other and to begin to identify with their students.

169

Cognitive presence in the first session was borderline, as would be expected where social
presence was the primary focus. The first session, which involved a significant amount of direct
instruction would not naturally generate social metacognition and that was borne out.
The trend across the four sessions show that the various presences progressed in similar
lines with the content design. Social presence and teaching presence were strong in the first
session where activities were specifically designed to engender social presence. Cognitive
presence became established in the second session where participants constructed their own IL
Model, and it remained strong throughout. In the design, the facilitator began to drop the
teaching role as participants took it up. Participants began to take on the teaching role, explaining
how their curriculum worked, how students behaved, what was expected of students in their
fieldwork, or how students searched a database. Teaching presence thus remained strong. Also,
for this reason, shared metacognition was present from the second session on and declined as
would be expected by the fourth session when the design called for the participants to reach
resolution by developing an action plan going forward, which would finish up the workshop.
Collaboration of summarized results. Using the transcripts of the face-to-face sessions, I
identified dialogue sequences that illustrated the three CoI presences in action and provided
evidence of developing self- and co-metacognitive regulation. These are discussed in the
following sub-sections, which include illustrative dialogue sequences. These were identified
using definitions and examples of the presences provided in Garrison (2017). I assign numbers
(e.g. librarian 1 or social sciences participant 2) to distinguish speakers within a dialogue
segment. These numbers do not represent the same participants across all dialogue segments.
Summary data showed that social presence was strong and increased over time.
Examples of dialogue also confirm this. Humor is an example of the personal/affective category

170

of social presence, and it appeared throughout but was especially strong in the earlier sessions,
where facilitation questions and activities were designed to elicit emotive connection with each
other and with the content. In this example, an exchange between a social sciences faculty
member and a librarian, which might have been interpreted by an outsider as being critical of
libraries, actually elicited laughter and good-natured ribbing back and forth between the two
participants. The exchange occurred after participants had been asked to share a memory from
when they used a university library as a college student. The exercise was meant to help them
think back and identify with their own students and how they might feel the first time they are
asked to engage in academic work requiring the library. A couple of faculty members had
described feelings of fear and unease when they first encountered libraries in their student years.
As a librarian was seeking to recall, another faculty member made an off-handed comment in a
teasing voice about the scary librarians of his own past. While he was, in one sense, expressing
real feeling, he also masked it in a form of teasing. The librarian took the veiled criticism in
stride and gave back with some dry humor of his own. In this case, humor allowed both
participants to acknowledge each other’s feelings and move beyond them into collaborative
dialogue. The group accepted the banter, laughed easily, and collegiality was established:
Facilitator: Can you attach feelings to that? What do you feel when you think back?
Librarian: Honestly, I can't. I apologize but I can't re... I wouldn't be able to remember.
Social sciences participant: …that's because when we were growing up, librarians were
mean [said in a joking way, and everyone laughed].
Librarian: [Tone of good humor] So, by implication, you're saying that now they're not?
Social sciences participant: Junior high and high school, you didn't talk to the librarian
because she would rake you over the coals for talking out loud. [But then] in

171

college you were supposed to talk to the librarian and they were supposed to be
helpful? [this time reflecting personal experience, but said in a teasing tone]
Librarian: [Dry humor] The session on the 17th will be on stereotypes.
[The exchange ended with much laughter throughout the group]
Librarian 2: Stereotypes? That would be fun [more laughter].
Another example of social presence, this time from a later session, reveals how much
group cohesion (another category within social presence) had grown. Group cohesion grew
because of small groups working together to reach consensus and construct shared meaning. This
is an important design feature that must be handled thoughtfully. For example, although small
groups were part of the design, during the first session, when I divided the group, I did not do so
deliberately but simply by counting off around the group. And I did not keep those groups in the
first asynchronous session. This turned out to be detrimental to the online design as the
beginnings of trust and cohesion that had built during the first session were lost in the online
format. After that, I chose to keep the same small groups throughout the remainder of the
workshop, which proved to be a wise decision. That critical choice led to a growing sense of
community. Dialogue between two social science participants and the facilitator revealed this:
Social sciences participant 1: I think, too, …one success is that it's created community
between your unit and our unit.
Social sciences participant 2: Yeah.
Social science participant 3: Absolutely.
Social sciences participant 1: Before, I knew you guys by sight…more or less. We
worked on a committee together. Some of you I knew more than others. But…
Social sciences participant 3: Yeah, the sense of being colleagues…is different, for sure.

172

Open communication, which includes acknowledging and approving contributions of
colleagues, is another category within social presence, and there was evidence of its existence.
Participants frequently used typical “yeah,” “um-hmmm,” “exactly,” or “I agree” responses to
others’ comments. One longer example of approval occurred during session two between a social
sciences participant and a librarian:
Librarian participant: …there were several of these things that were suggesting… taking
the skill and applying it to practice…I grouped them under evaluation, but that
could potentially be its own thing of almost application.
Social sciences participant: I think that…actually…is a good one. Application to
whatever your field is.
Librarian participant: Yeah, to realize, basically.
Social sciences participant: Yeah, I like that. I like that.
Librarian participant: Yeah, so that when you're going out, you know how to take the
skills you've learned and apply them in real life.
Social sciences participant: Okay, so application to discipline.
Librarian participant: Real world context, yeah.
By sessions three and four there was clear indication of people engaging with the content
and task at hand. During these sessions, forms of agreement were evident but abbreviated…often
only one word, “yeah,” “exactly,” or “yes:”
Cognitive Presence grew between session one and two and then remained stable
throughout. Cognitive presence is made up of triggering events, exploration, integration, and
resolution. Triggering events were primarily initiated by the facilitator as part of the design to
stimulate curiosity and help participants engage (i.e. how did you feel? This is what your

173

students said…). Exploration and integration quickly took over as participants as a group
interacted with the content of the workshop. All were experienced academicians, and they
naturally began brainstorming, asking others for input, and volunteering ideas and experiences.
An example of exploratory dialogue occurred in a small group during session 2, where
participants shared concepts and experiences:
Social sciences participant 1: So, under resources there's access, there's knowledge…
Librarian participant 1: Yeah.
Social sciences participant 2: Yeah, and this one here, struck me, understanding libraries,
public libraries. One of the things that we do in policy is teach them how to use the
domains that are out there, like [redacted].gov to look at laws or bills…
Librarian participant 1: I was glad to read that, because we just cancelled [database] for
next year and that was the only other place that we would have access to …that sort of
thing, so yeah, nice to know that you're teaching…other resources, yeah.
Social sciences participant 2: And in practice, when they get out in practice, those are the
ones they're more likely to use, quite frankly.
After exploration, participants worked at constructing new ideas from the information
and experiences they had shared. During this stage of integration, they provided explanation for
expressed views, consolidated their ideas, and offered solutions. These are all typical behaviors
within cognitive presence. I believe that integration occurred because, based on the design,
participants had a task set before them. In each session, participants were presented with clear
goals towards which their groups were supposed to work. These took on various forms, from a
probing question to be answered or an assignment to consolidate or synthesize data. An example

174

of integration dialogue, which occurred within a small group as part of session three, shows
participants building meaning for a learning goal:
Social sciences participant 1: Because they hopefully learn to access resources that they
have available through a library whether it's here on campus or whether they
graduated, and they have some sort of online where they can go to a public library.
Librarian participant 1: Or it might not necessarily be just a library.
Social sciences participant 2: It could be just the web.
Librarian participant 1: It might be just learning what journals, what resources.
Social sciences participant 2: What journals, what books….
Librarian participant 1: I mean, I think something that is important is that obviously we
love to be involved when we can, but it isn't always just about…
Social sciences participant 2: …How they're utilizing information.
Librarian participant 1: …How we're coming into [class], it's how they're utilizing it.
Social sciences participant 2: …Information, yeah.
Librarian participant 1: …bigger picture…they have to be able to walk out and…do that.
The last category within cognitive presence is resolution. In this study, application of
what was produced in the workshop would normally occur at the point where social sciences
faculty members and librarians began to interact with students back in the library and the
classroom. That stage fell outside the remit of the workshop. Only small examples of resolution
around the production of the workshop artifacts could be anticipated. As participants completed
their work, evidence of resolution emerged. For example, in one of the small groups in session
three, where participants were asked to consolidate the learning goals that everyone was working

175

on, the group did a fair bit of wordsmithing on one learning goal and found resolution when the
meaning became clear.
Teaching Presence on the part of the facilitator was strongest in session one but
participants took on other teaching presence roles as the workshop progressed. I purposely took
on the teaching presence role in the beginning of the workshop to help establish design and
organization, introduce the workshop, the problem, and the plans moving forward. Beginning
with session two, however, my direct instruction became more limited to facilitating the topics
with which participants engaged within their small groups. Participants took on the task of direct
instruction as they shared their knowledge (based on their discipline) with those of the other
discipline. Experiential sharing turned out to be the preferred way to share knowledge about
one’s own discipline. Participants also occasionally resorted to explaining pieces of their
curriculum or services. For example, in one of the small groups that took place during session
two, a librarian explained how the library’s new federated search engine worked and why
databases would still be more useful to the social sciences graduate students.
Participants also began to facilitate their own discussions, interjecting faciliatory
questions to their colleagues such as, “Do you think that…?” or “Does anyone else have…?”,
which helped to keep the discussion moving forward. Design and organization dialogue, another
category within teaching presence, was scarce but did occur when the small groups organized
themselves (i.e. one becoming the note-taker, another managing the discussion).
Shared Metacognition, both self- and co-regulation, could not be identified in actual
dialogue because participants were fully engaged in active learning not verbally reflecting upon
that learning. Co-regulation includes monitoring the ideas and learning of others and managing
this. Some dialogue indicated that social metacognition, especially co-regulation, was occurring

176

although the speaker was not explicitly identifying it as such. For example, in his post-interview,
one participant commented about the IL Model that was one of the artifacts to come out of the
group’s work. His comment showed that he was observing and considering the work of others, “I
was not in the group that really came up with the model, so I was kind of like in awe going,
‘Wow, these folks came up with this really cool thing, you know.’"
Findings Related to the Asynchronous, Online Portion of the Workshop
The blended portion of the workshop consisted of asynchronous group discussion forums
that occurred during the time between each face-to-face session. Since face-to-face sessions took
place with at least two weeks in between, and sometimes longer, the asynchronous sessions were
designed to maintain participant engagement. The topics for the sessions came out of the face-toface sessions and consisted of a question or an activity in preparation for the next session.
Asynchronous participation did not inspire, but it holds promise. This was the most
problematic portion of the workshop from the perspective of maintaining participation. While 11
(79%) of the 14 participants willingly began an asynchronous thread or responded to one or more
threads, there was little sustained participation. After two asynchronous topics and minimal
participation, the facilitator held a discussion with the group during a face-to-face session and
together everyone decided to end asynchronous group discussions. We then regrouped and
agreed to add an additional face-to-face session, instead. This decision also led to further
conversation between the facilitator and the participants at the end of the workshop. The results
presented here are from the first two topic discussions.
Figure 6.2 shows that there was a total of 11 discussion threads within two topics, which
had been defined by the facilitator. These topics were drawn from the assigned readings.
Participants were asked to share ideas on how IL might relate to the social sciences department

177

and how librarians and social sciences faculty members might collaborate to provide IL
opportunities to social sciences students. The hope was that these topics would stimulate ideas
that could be fleshed out in face-to-face work.
In Figure 6.2, each pair of bars represents one thread. The dark bar represents the number
of participants within the thread and the light bar shows the number of posts for that thread.
Thread 10 showed more discussion than the other threads. It was the first thread that began to
resemble an ongoing discussion between four participants (including the facilitator), as opposed
to a set of one-off independent responses to an original post.

8
7

Total Posters and Posts

6
5
4
3
2
1
Posters
0

Posts
1

2

3

4

5

6

Topic: IL Related to the Discipline

7

8

9

10

11

Topic: IL Collaboration

Discussion Threads

Figure 6.2. Total Asynchronous Discussions. This figure shows Number of
Participants Who Posted and Number of Posts within each Thread. (Facilitator
Participation is Included in these Figures)
Table 6.5 provides a summary of the average number of participants and posts per thread.
The facilitator was counted among the participants within a given thread, which means that many
178

of the threads were an attempt at compliance but received no uptake from group colleagues.
Including facilitator posts, the average number (Mean) of posts per thread were 3.0 and 3.8.
Table 6.5. Averages of Number of Participants and Posts
Topic
IL Related to the Discipline (7 threads)
IL Collaboration (4 threads)

No. of Participants
for Threads by Topic
M
2.7
2.8

No. of Posts
Within Threads by Topic
M
3.0
3.8

The standard deviation for participants per thread was 0.79 and for the number of posts
across all threads, 1.62. This higher level of variability is illustrated in Figure 6.2, which shows
moderate engagement within a few threads while other threads received little to no engagement
apart from that of the original poster and the facilitator.
Those who did participate showed similar evidence of thoughtful engagement with the
topic as was evident in face-to-face discussions. For example, when discussing how they saw IL
relating to the discipline, one faculty member participant focused on how to evaluate and
synthesize sources and applied it to the field. She asked reflectively,
“What factors may lead to five studies looking at the same topic—i.e. what are
the outcomes of exposure to trauma, or how helpful are antidepressants—and to
be able to make sense of (or at least process thoughtfully) why different studies
may lead to vastly different conclusions.”
One area that showed promise (albeit in nascent form) within the asynchronous portion of
the workshop was that of the CoI presences, which were in evidence even in infrequent posts and
low interaction. Instances where participants demonstrated various behaviors associated with one
or more of the CoI Presences are shown in Table 6.6, along with examples of each.

179

Table 6.6. Evidence of CoI Presences within Asynchronous, Online Postings
Associated
Presence(s)

Social Presence

Cognitive Presence

Cognitive Presence

No. of
Instances

5

3

2

Behavior

Example from Raw Data

•
Affirms another •
or agrees with •
another
•

“Article was really interesting.”
“Your list is really comprehensive.”
“Good comments going on here.”
“[Named the poster], I like your idea of having a
librarian on site…”
“Collaboration would need to be intentional and
focused since students can center the model at
any point…”
“We could develop an online training module for
the IL Model.”
“How do these issues fit within the 3rd world?”
When one person views the model in linear
fashion another responds, “The model is circular,
not linear.”
“I agree that this is an issue…however, in
teaching policy for our advanced graduate
students…we try to make sure…”
[Defines various terms for the other discipline
from IL perspective] “Mezzo would be the
library and professor collaborate over course
requirements.”
Provided an additional article to the group and
asked for comment.
“I am a linear thinker…”
“I tend to be a rule-governed, direction-following
sort of person, at least in this (named discipline)
…”

•
Offers
observations or
question(s) in
•
response to a
post
•
•
Challenges the
assertion of
•
another
•

Teaching Presence

Metacognition

2

2

Takes on the
teaching role

Expresses
opinion about
their way of
thinking

•
•
•

The asynchronous, online portion of the blended design was not sustainable. Nevertheless, from
the perspective of exhibiting promise for future iterations, participants who did engage online
exhibited similar types of interaction as they did in the face-to-face setting. Evidence, no matter
how small, of open communication, thoughtful engagement with the topic, willingness to explain
or to challenge another, and verbalizing self-regulated assessment was present.
Findings Related to Participant Emotional Responses
Emotional reactions seemed important to outcomes and even external to the CoI.
While it is true that social presence includes a personal/affective component that interacts with
180

the other presences, it is internal to the process model and involves building group identity and
trust through affective relationships (Garrison, 2017). Some of the emotional responses that I
observed, however, seemed to have little to do with social presence. Rather, they seemed more
tied to personality types and learning preferences or to factors external to the CoI. These
emotional responses seemed to affect how the participants perceived the workshop.
Time and excessively busy schedules were external factors that caused stress to some
participants and may have exerted some negativity upon social and cognitive presence within the
CoI. Two participants reflected, for example, their feelings of frustration. One said, “at the time,
I grumped, ‘Oh, I’m a busy person today…’” Another’s response indicated that her feelings
impacted others in the group. She shared her “own private grumblings to…family as well as [in]
some of the hallway conversations that we [fellow participants] had.” Another example involved
an emotional response to the schedule of the CoI workshop. The participant indicated in her postworkshop interview that she had gained value from the experience. Yet she expressed a level of
frustration that the workshop scheduling was personally inconvenient, “And to be honest, it was
like…you know, kind of a hassle because I was coming on Friday, which I don't normally do.”
Participants defined themselves very clearly as having strong extrovert or introvert
tendency. This personality trait affected their initial emotional responses to collaboration. In the
case of extroverts, their enthusiasm for collaboration helped to build social and cognitive
presence within the CoI. One self-declared extrovert admitted, “I get energized with
collaborating.” Another described the collaborative synergy within the CoI workshop as “really
exciting to see that interaction between us and the willingness to work together.” This strong
extrovert component among the participants may also have negatively affected their perceptions
of the online component as they seemed to need or prefer face-to-face interaction, at least in the

181

beginning, to sustain personal buy-in. Meanwhile, when self-declared introvert participants were
asked how they felt about collaboration, one responded emphatically, “Yuck!” Another used
humor but the underlying emotional response was evident when he said, “collaboration is
fantastic when other people do it.” In his post interview, this same participant explained that the
collaboration ended up being “mostly fine.” Even so, he described his initial thoughts in the
beginning as, “Oh no! You may have to talk to these people.”
Strong emotions were also evident in the personal realm. Some participants revealed
personal learning preferences in emotional ways. One described herself as pragmatic as she
negatively described the third session where discussion focused on defining the learning goals.
The session had become quite detailed and stretched beyond the allotted time. She described the
experience in exasperated tone, “too many angels dancing on the head of a pin.” This participant
also described the initial readings, which outlined the standards with which each department
aligned, as “really tedious, boring stuff.” Another participant revealed both her emotional and
epistemological stance when she enthusiastically shared, “I love collaboration. I mean, I'm a
person who really believes that the best learning is embedded within the social construct.”
Changeability of emotional responses. Finally, emotional reactions to the CoI did seem
to be changeable, although it would be too much to claim that one experience such as this
workshop would change a participant’s natural inclination and bias for or against collaboration
or group work. But for the workshop, itself, it was heartening to see that participants’ attitudes
towards collaboration did change, at least within the workshop itself. I interpreted the data by
setting up a continuum with negative response to collaboration on one end and positive response
on the other (see Figure 6.3). I then placed participant pre- and post-workshop responses towards
collaboration on the continuum. What I found was that across the trajectory of the FacLibCoI

182

workshop, participants in the group moved towards the right and a more positive response on the
continuum.

Left

Right

Figure 6.3. Continuum for Feelings Towards Collaboration
Two participants who had negative responses to collaboration at the beginning of the CoI
workshop moved to mixed negative by the end. Two participants who started out as mixed
negative moved along the continuum to mixed positive. And two participants who began at the
mixed positive point moved across to positive. To summarize, after participating in the CoI
workshop, all six of the participants who had declared themselves as introverts moved one step
towards the right on the continuum from where they had begun. These are shown in Figure 6.3.

Left

Right

Figure 6.4. Changes in Emotional Response to Collaboration
One participant who started at the negative end admitted that she could understand the
purpose of collaboration where people commit to working and can be trusted to accomplish a
task. But her response to collaboration was “Yuck, I am a confirmed introvert.” After the
workshop, she shared that when the group was working on concrete tasks she “had no problem
183

with collaboration.” Thus, her personal preference did not change but her view of the
collaboration she experienced fit within her definition of good collaboration and she handled it.
The two participants who started with mixed feelings about collaboration ended feeling
more positive, but with mixed thoughts about the merits of collaboration. At the beginning one
participant said that she viewed collaboration as positive when she could participate in smaller
groups. She added that, “if I’m forced into it with people I don’t know very well or there’s no
trust structure…then [I] just get quiet…and I’m…just allowing the world to pass around me.” At
the end of the workshop, she found it “very useful…within the realms of even [what] an introvert
can handle…You…got to know the participants and [it] was very helpful. It was a good format.”
Findings Related to Shared Understanding around IL
Shared understanding emerged through collaborative, inquiry learning. Together,
participants within the FacLibCoI workshop produced a series of three outcome artifacts. The
first artifact was a social sciences IL Model, which participants then used to inform everything
else that they did. The second was a series of learning goals mapped to the standards to which
the social sciences department and the library adhered. The third artifact was a shared action plan
for future collaboration between the two departments around IL. These artifacts represent the
shared understanding around IL that developed within the group. Additionally, there is
corroborative evidence of shared understanding from transcripts of post-workshop interviews.
Artifacts as evidence of shared understanding. To help build shared understanding,
participants read a few articles about IL along with the IL standards to which the library adhered.
They also read the educational standards that applied to the social sciences department. They
then submitted what they believed to be important research capabilities for social sciences
students. As the facilitator, I compiled these into a list of approximately 25 capabilities. In the

184

second face-to-face workshop session, in which all participants were in attendance, participants
worked in their small groups to review the list, clarify concepts, consolidate where possible, and
in some cases, rank the items. One of the small groups began by grouping the capabilities into
four categories:
Social Sciences Participant 1: So, then what we have to have is ...she wants us to to bring
these down. I mean, we've consolidated them...
Librarian Participant: Into four instead of seven.
Social Sciences Participant 1: Into four words, but what you know. I don't know if we
even need seven...
Librarian participant: Those four areas are really nice, and you can put a lot of these into
one of those. Like choosing access to databases, locating, retrieving appropriate
and relevant professional and scholarly sources, that is, that's the resources. And
access discovery tools, that's all resources. Those those, the second, third, and
fourth one, are kind of the resources one.
Social Sciences Participant 1: So under resources there's access, there's knowledge of,
Social Sciences Participant 2: Yeah, and this one here, struck me, understanding
libraries, public libraries. One of the things that we do in policy is teach them how
to use the domains that are out there, like [redacted].gov to look at laws or bills
and follow those bills and learn how to do that. And, for our graduate students,
particularly, that's a really new experience, and they come away from that
thinking, "Yeah, I could do this. If I was really [excited?] about a law, a problem
that's now being addressed, cause we were looking at sex trafficking and things
like that, and the students were really interested in that. ..

185

Social Sciences Participant 3: There is one dimension we left out, actually, based on this
list at least. Understanding that [IL] is human right, understand that it's an open
and tolerant environment, requires open and tolerant environment, keep an open
mind, be able to adapt and be flexible while researching. So it means some sort of
an awareness piece, as well. Awareness, tolerance, attitude piece.
Social Sciences Participant 1: Almost precursory to...
Social Sciences Participant 3: Resources ...
Librarian Participant: Yeah, [as if asking the student] why are you doing this? Why are
you doing this?
Social Sciences Participants 1 and 2: Yeah/right.
As the group continued, they reached a moment in their discussion where these concepts
began to take on a cyclical process path and the social science IL Model emerged:
Social Sciences Participant 3: If you want to make this a circle, this would be an outer...
Social Sciences Participant 1: Yeah, yeah.
Librarian Participant: Hmmm.
Social Sciences Participant 1: So what would we label that? How would we...
Social Sciences Participant 3: Attitudes?
Librarian Participant: Values?
Social Sciences Participant 3: Open attitudes...Open values. Open values, yes.
Social Sciences Participant 2: Then you're valuing, you're valuing the human right.
Cause they said, "understand that literacy is a human right" and that leads to
responsibility. In other words, if you're literate, then having had that opportunity,

186

what responsibility follows? Which comes with that social justice piece that's so
important in the profession.
Social Sciences Participant 3: So, the value of the information literacy,
Social Sciences Participant 2: Yeah, something like that.
Librarian Participant: Yeah. That would be at the value...
By the end, the group realized that they had gone beyond the instructions given.
Social Sciences Participant 1 to group: This is the result of putting together four
conceptual thinkers and asking them to do something linear [all laugh].
Back together, each group presented their consolidated list. When this group’s turn came,
they explained their IL Model. The full group compared it with their lists and ultimately agreed
to adopt the model as their own. Together, they revised the IL Model to incorporate the other
small groups’ ideas. The social sciences IL Model is the first of the major outcomes produced,
and participants felt good about it and referred to it often throughout the rest of the workshop,
using it as the benchmark for all new work. The IL Model is found in Figure 6.5.
The IL Model explained. Participants envisioned critical thinking at the center of the
research process with the various aspects of IL making up a circular literacy flow that could be
applied to any type of research or evidence-based practice. Enveloping the IL process were two
pieces, attitudes and values and ethical responsibility, which participants felt were necessary for
literacy. Participants perceived the IL processes in circular form, which allows students to enter
the process at any point and engage with any aspect of IL (i.e. accessing sources, information
synthesis, analysis, or evaluation). When I asked one participant (who was not part of the initial

187

Figure 6.5. Artifact One: IL Model Developed by the Study’s Participants
group that came up with the model) where he saw research and IL intersecting, he corrected my
use of the term intersect by describing the model to me:
“Using that term, intersect, that would seem to me as though there's one place
where, when you hit that part of the research process... it's like a side street coming
in. [But] what we kind of ended up with in our model, you know, maybe not a line
laid on top of each other, but one circle laid on top of the other, you know, because
it keeps coming back around and then, arguably, it starts back over again...”
The circular, enter-at-any-point process within the model necessarily required that
IL be integrated across the curriculum so that students could participate in the model any
time critical thinking or research was introduced. This led participants to the realization
that the IL Model and what it required was bigger than what either the librarian or the

188

faculty member could do on their own. One of the social sciences faculty members
shared, “it helped me to understand that I don't know all the stuff there is to know.” A
librarian’s comment shows how much bigger interdisciplinary collaboration became once
the IL Model was in place:
“We had…this model and we had this idea that we came up with and then we had
to actually apply that to well, what is happening either within the framework of
the [social science] department’s accreditation and assessment or within the
framework of what's possible for faculty and staffing levels within the library, that
kind of thing. So, it's kind of saying, okay well here's our model. How do we
actually make...how does it match up against what we already know and have and
how do we make it apply…?”
Developing the second artifact. In the third face-to-face session, I presented the
participants with a compiled list of the proposed student competencies that the group had drawn
up previously. I had done a draft mapping of these competencies to a list of the social sciences
and IL learning standards. Participants worked in small groups with this list to review and make
changes and additions to the document. They mapped the competencies to the various elements
of their IL Model. As a larger group, and with me as facilitator and recording secretary, they
consolidated their lists into one. Nine of the 14 members were present and participated in this
revision. The process took longer than expected. Differences in philosophy emerged between
members which needed to be discussed and understood. The group voluntarily decided to stay
for an additional hour. A couple of participants left beforehand, but the remainder stayed.
The document that the group produced was a list of learning goals subdivided into six
overarching categories: Attitudes/Values, Ethics, Values and Responsibility, Access Resources,

189

Information Synthesis, Application, and Evaluation. By the end of session three, the participants
had agreed upon a list of learning goals and had mapped them to the library and social sciences
standards to which the departments subscribed. The Attitudes/Values section of the document is
shown here in Table 6.7. The complete document may be found in Appendix C.
Table 6.7. Group-defined Learning Objectives Linked to IL Model and EP/IL Frameworks
Model
Element

Attitudes/
Values

Learning Objective
Demonstrate commitment to
remain current on treatment
modalities, social policies,
practice context, and new
themes within the profession
Demonstrate open-mindedness
to new concepts and ideas
presented in the literature
Seek new research
environments, discovery tools,
and help from librarian,
researchers, and professionals
Demonstrate persistence in
their research efforts even
when they bump up against
challenges
*Critically analyze one's own
learning and thinking (whether
hypothesis is confirmed by
literature review/reflective)-reflexivity--do they see
themselves as part of the
process?

Standards

Gen/
Adv

Where in
Curriculum

How
Measured

EP1; IL1

EP2; IL4

EP2, 6;
IL1, 4, 6

EP1, 4;
IL4, 6;

EP1; IL1

Developing the third artifact. In the second asynchronous discussion (between face-toface sessions two and three), participants were asked to contribute ideas on how the department
and library could collaborate around IL for students. Four threads with posts from seven of the
participants made up this discussion and contributed ideas or interpretations of collaboration. For
example, one participant suggested developing an online tutorial together to explain the newly
developed IL Model to students. Another suggested that collaboration “would need to be
190

intentional and focused” since students could potentially “enter the model almost anywhere on
the wheel.” One librarian proposed that the librarians and faculty members work together to
create “a list of core attitudes/values and responsibility practices that we believe are important
[and] then have both library and …faculty intentionally promote those values as they work
together in other areas.” A social sciences faculty member proposed having a librarian attending
in the department during times when students were in between classes so that students could
consult about assignments. Another suggested a 24/7 live librarian chat service on the library
home page. One suggested asking students to find out what they thought would be helpful.
In the fourth session, we again had most of the participants present and I led them in a
group discussion about the pathway forward. Together the group developed an action plan,
Artifact 3 was based on the collaboration ideas that they had proposed in their second online,
asynchronous discussion (described above). The group then assigned themselves to each of the
action items. The action plan is also found in Appendix C, but I include a small portion by way
of example in Table 6.8.
Table 6.8. Artifact Three: Action Plan
Persons Responsible
(Descriptors shown
rather than names)
2 Faculty Participants

Tasks
•
•
•
•

Way to catch transfer students/graduate students
Consistent assignments in all sections of a class (Named participant is
willing to pilot in the fall)
Pre/post assessment of IL/APA skills from library
1st year students—assignment linking them to library and its resources
and to librarians

All three artifacts were produced collaboratively. To summarize, the IL Model, the
mapped list of learning goals, and the action plan, were all done through group collaboration

191

(albeit with significant facilitation on the part of the facilitator). These artifacts represent time
spent reading about IL and about each other’s standards along with approximately
ten hours of group engagement to develop shared understanding of IL to improve the education
of the students within the social sciences department. Although, the artifacts are a powerful
indication of shared understanding around IL, further evidence from post-workshop interviews is
now presented to validate these outcomes.
Themes of shared understanding extracted from post-workshop participant interviews.
In addition to the artifacts, post-workshop interviews revealed themes around which the
participants shared understanding. Themes were determined through initial coding and data
chunking. Given that all participants were present for the second session where the IL Model was
developed, and most were present for the last session where the action plan was drafted, I felt
comfortable that everyone had enough insight into the direction of the group that their expressed
views represented understanding of and affiliation with the direction laid out by the whole group.
With 13 usable interview transcripts, I therefore defined some level of shared understanding to
have occurred when at least 7 participants (of 13) commented on a theme that had emerged
through analysis. With this threshold in place, I dropped one identified theme, which only
garnered four participant comments. The remaining themes self-grouped with three themes
receiving comments from 10-13 participants and two themes drawing comments from 7-8
participants. These themes are listed in Table 6.9 and further explored through dialogue.

192

Table 6.9. Shared Understanding: Post Interview Themes that Participants Shared
Shared Understandings
1. By understanding each other’s discipline (library and social sciences department)
and engaging in interdisciplinary collaboration, we can work as a team to better
support student learning.
2. IL is bigger than just finding resources. Students must learn to apply critical
thinking and IL to their practice in ways that enable them to access and evaluate
resources, to apply these to best practice, and to stay current in their field.
3. Collaborative inquiry learning is a process whereby people who are willing can
create a synergy that allows them to ask questions and to engage in critical
thinking towards discovering new concepts and solutions. The IL Model is the
key product and participants took ownership of it.
4. Critical thinking undergirds and infuses every aspect of IL and the research
process. Because students may enter this process at any point, it is important to
build IL into a critical thinking piece that is incorporated across the curriculum.
5. It was helpful to get to know each other and build trust across the two
departments. This will help future interdisciplinary collaboration between the two.

No. of
Participants
11

11

10

8

7

Theme 1. By understanding each other’s disciplinary area and engaging in
interdisciplinary collaboration, we can work as a team to better support student learning.
During the post-workshop interviews with each participant, 11 participants spoke to the value of
learning about each other’s discipline and expressed the belief that as an interdisciplinary team,
they could better support student learning. Furthermore, these 11 participants represented a cross
section of faculty from the social sciences department and librarians. This theme includes four
complementary sub-themes. The first was the shared feeling of being a team. Next, they
recognized areas within their own teaching that could or did benefit from working together.
Third, the participants felt that they gained valuable knowledge from the other department that
would help in the future. And last, they were able to generate ideas for collaboration.
In the first sub-theme of identifying with each other, participants described the
relationship that had developed between their departments. One social sciences department
faculty member said, “We’re all on the same team with the outcome that students become more

193

competent and literate.” Another said, “it feels like we’re allied.” A librarian observed, “Oh, we
actually cross over much more than we necessarily realize.”
Social sciences faculty members seemingly learned and acknowledged that the librarians
had something to contribute, saying things like, “we’re not fully realizing the objectives within
courses because of our preconceived ideas about information,” and “we’ve proved that…we
don’t always…give the best kinds of resources to our students…, so working with a party who
could…enlighten us on searches [and] how [to] structure…an assignment to get some better
scholarship is helpful.” And librarians expressed similar affinity towards working with the social
sciences department faculty members. One librarian was able to move beyond thinking about
teaching IL tools to considering how librarians might help students learn to apply the tools in
ways that would enhance their practice in the field, “…there's a general sort of knowledge of
information literacy and tools and so forth, but then how does that influence what they're
[students] going to be doing in practice? So that part, which, you know, is sort of taking it a step
beyond the tool.”
In the third sub-theme, both social sciences department faculty members and librarians
felt that they had gained valuable knowledge from the other department. A librarian expressed
that he had gained, “better understanding just simply of the curriculum and the framework and
structure of what …the [social sciences] program does.” Another librarian expressed similar
views, “I feel like I have a better understanding of various places where like [the social sciences]
department might need IL types of things.” She continued, “…it was helpful for both
departments, but… it certainly gave me a better understanding of some of the concerns within
the [social sciences] department.” One social sciences professor said that “having library people
here as well, not just [us] made a lot of it more meaningful.”

194

Finally, in the fourth sub-theme, participants shared ideas for how to continue to build a
collaborative relationship that would support the social sciences students. One said, “it helped
me to start thinking about [interdisciplinary] collaboration in the sense of library being an
integral part of the program and curriculum and how it all fits.” Another said, “what we were
talking about is more as a librarian…being more of a resource for every class, any class, not just
research.” Another was more specific, “we talked about embedding [librarians] like in this office
for students…and having maybe open chat hours or something….” A librarian, on the other
hand, considered the potential difficulties for the library, which was tasked with supporting all
departments across the university with limited personnel. Nevertheless, she and her other library
participants showed willingness to explore further collaboration. She remarked, “we had…this
model and we had this idea that we came up with and then we had to actually apply that to well,
…what's possible for faculty and staffing levels within the library, that kind of thing.”
Theme 2. IL is bigger than just finding resources. Students must learn to apply critical
thinking and IL to their practice in ways that enable them to access and evaluate resources, to
apply these to best practice, and to stay current in the field. Several participants expressed their
surprise that IL was a broader concept than they had imagined. Interestingly, this even applied to
the librarians for which IL is part of their subject expertise. One librarian said that “[the
experience of the workshop] broadened my look at information literacy and helped me to go
from what the library needs to do, just from what our perspective is, to help me see it from the
department’s point of view.” A social sciences department faculty member expressed, “…the
model keeps coming back and informing. It’s bigger than just, ‘I need help with the lit review,
tell me how to do a search.’” Another echoed this sentiment, “I think the definition of literacy,
library literacy, is much broader than I would have thought it was.” A librarian backed away

195

from the term, “global perspective,” but then went ahead and used it anyway, stating that “how
[IL] intersects with disciplines and finding those points [is] extremely important.” Participants
linked IL to critical thinking in ways that they had not previously considered. One social sciences
department faculty member said, “I now see critical thinking in the information literacy context,
as well.” They also saw IL as reaching beyond the narrow confines of research-based
assignments in college to be a necessary ability once out in the profession. One social sciences
department faculty member pointed out that students “need to know how to critically evaluate
those sources…and how to synthesize different sources of data to be able to put together a good
treatment plan…or a good program.”
Theme 3. Collaborative inquiry learning is a process whereby people who are willing can
create a synergy that allows them to ask questions and to engage in critical thinking towards
discovering new concepts and solutions. The IL Model is the key product and participants took
ownership of it. Participants integrated the concepts of collaboration, inquiry learning and
critical thinking around IL in their descriptions of what they experienced in the workshop. One
called the experience “the path of inquiry…where the richness of learning can happen.” Another
said that “critical thinking collaboratively…was much more dynamic than just me sitting
down…with a piece of literature or information or whatever and analyzing it, right?” Another
participant conceptualized critical thinking because of the collaborative inquiry learning process.
He concluded that “people were not just trying to give flip, easy answers. They were trying to
put two and two together and come up with…” [presumably, a solution]. One of the librarians
linked collaboration and inquiry as “building off…each other’s knowledge and expertise,” and
“question[ing]…how to do something or how to learn something or whatever and trying to make
it happen.” One declared that collaboration led to “the whole becom[ing] more than the sum of

196

its parts, so we came up with ideas we very super likely would not have come up with
individually.” She went on to say that she experienced “people…generating ideas and learning
about what this information literacy thing is and how to actually use it in our curriculum.”
Theme 4. Critical thinking undergirds and infuses every aspect of IL and the research
process; since students may enter the process at any point, it is important to build IL into a
critical thinking piece that is integrated across the curriculum. Critical thinking was an
important learning concept for the social sciences department and they were happy to know that
it is also an important component within IL. Participants conceptualized this link between critical
thinking and IL within the model they developed. One of the librarians described it this way,
“And I think [that in] the model that we…designed as a group, critical thinking
was an important piece in most of the areas, you know as you went around the
model, critical thinking was a key piece…I think we put that in the middle. So
that was the key piece. So, whatever you're doing, whether you're doing the
literature search…, when you're evaluating the information in those sources, when
you're evaluating how well you wrote the paper…it was a continuum.”
Once the social sciences IL Model was in place, faculty members from the social
sciences department began thinking programmatically about how to integrate the model into their
curriculum. One commented, “Yeah, that model was fabulous. And I just have thought about
that several times; …a student could be anywhere on that model continuum and jump in and we
should have some kind of idea on how they would use [the] library at that point. Or how they
would...or we as teachers could interact.” Others considered how they would build curricular
changes into specific courses and how these would fit with what others in the department were
doing. One reflected, “sequentially…, for sophomores and transfer students in the fall…we're

197

gonna catch people there. And then also at the graduate level, it's for first-year students. So, this
is going to be the basic or the generalist level that we discussed.” The research professor opined,
“I don't really expect students to be able to do that [synthesis], but if we did implement it as part
of the program that comes before the research class is taught, then it would be super...super,
super, super helpful.” While librarians fell back into more of an observant role during these
discussions, one expressed support and understanding, “we [librarians] have a stronger feel for
what things will help meet their needs. And so, it's a win all around for everybody… Critical
thinking is the foundation….”
Theme 5. It was helpful to get to know each other and to build trust across the two
departments. This will help future interdisciplinary collaboration between the two. A social
sciences department faculty member observed gratefully, “I think I clearly know who the
research librarians are now and I'm not sure that I did before….” Another confirmed, “we
developed some rapport and some knowledge of one another's disciplines that I think is
extremely valuable to both of us, so, ...and it feels like we're allied.” He continued, “just the act
of collaborating with you folks from the library was, to me that was huge, because it was an
opportunity to build a sense of trust and knowledge of your capabilities and your strengths in
ways that would not have happened otherwise.” One librarian remarked, “I became acquainted
with some people, obviously, that I didn't know at all and I just have a better idea of who is in the
social sciences department. And kind of how they react to different things.” Another commented
on how beneficial it was to gain a better understanding of the department for planning, “I do feel
like I actually got a better understanding of that department and maybe have some ideas to
approach some things…”

198

Findings Related to How Participants Evaluated the Workshop
During their post interview, each participant was asked how they felt about the workshop
experience, what went well, and what could have been improved. Responses were
overwhelmingly positive towards the collaborative outcomes. One posited,
“not that I think I ever would have thought I wasted my time, but the outcome was not
something I would have predicted in terms of something that really, I think, an event that
moved the collaborative process between the library and our department well down the
road in a way that I don't know that anything else could have.”
Several commented about the IL Model, which was probably what the previous comment
referred to, “I think with the model that we came up with…I thought that was really the best
thing that came out of this.” One commented specifically about the last session where the action
plan was developed, “like the last session, I loved the last session. If it's practical, if I can see
how it's useful.” For that participant, the previous session where the learning goals were mapped
to standards, was too detail-oriented, “too many angels dancing on the head of a pin,” according
to her. But others felt the mapping was a useful process. One commented, “the classroom
activities, they were really good, and I thought, especially this one time when we stayed over...
that one was, I felt, very informative and I felt the group spirit developing and a lot of ideas
being exchanged and people really getting into the discussion.” One observed, “I understood
collaboration before and this was just a really nice example of it being put into practice as to how
people could collaborate in the best possible way...so we came up with ideas we very…likely
would not have come up with individually.”
Participants commented positively about the knowledge they gained from each other,
student needs, and conceptual understanding of collaborative inquiry, and IL. Referring to gains

199

in knowledge, another participant said, “we discovered a new concept together… information
literacy, because we had sort of discovered it ourselves, what it means, and what we think about
it, and hopefully we came close to the sequence of that concept in literature.” Another stated that
“the workshop was a really nice example as to how to put it [IL] into practice in terms of again,
people going together, generating ideas and learning about what this information literacy thing is
and how to actually use it in our curriculum.” Several redefined collaborative learning based on
what had happened in the workshop, “Yeah, I mean kind of what we were doing was I would see
as being collaborative learning, that building off of each other's knowledge and expertise.”
Participants also enjoyed and were surprised by how well the collaborative learning
experience had functioned. In her post-interview, a participant described an interaction:
“one of the faculty who was complaining the loudest…came to me this week and
said, ‘you should have been at our last meeting…I loved it, and we ended in a
really good place;’ so, at least for that person who was really uncomfortable from
the very beginning, it came all the way…full circle.”
One participant said, “I just saw more active synergy going on than I expected.” Another,
speaking of a relationship within her small group, said, we didn't butt heads on anything. We just
sort of fed on each other's like stuff, you know, and it was like, ‘Oh, this is weird. I like this.’
And B--- was going, ‘Yeah, that's really good.’" Another expanded,
"I liked the fact that, in collaborating, we would do it in smaller groups…we were
collaborating on a particular topic that we were given, and we had the chance to discuss it
in the small group and then bring it to the larger group, and everybody shared and then
we all bought into [it]… And people felt very free…back and forth to each other…”

200

In addition to accolades, participants also offered constructive criticism. For example,
they overwhelmingly disliked the use of the course management system, preferring the time
when, midstream, I allowed them to submit their ideas via email. One commented on the specific
platform, the course management system, that was chosen for online, asynchronous chat, “I feel
like with faculty, the [course management system] really doesn’t work; [it] requires tremendous
dedication; …and I tried, but obviously I wasn’t dedicated enough.” Only one participant
expressed contentment at the use of an online platform to post information, saying that he liked
“the collaboration online, um, which I did appreciate, because I can go back and kind of refer to
it, instead of, ‘Oh what did we say back then last week?’” In general, participant feelings about
the online experience were problematic. One concluded that, “the face-to-face aspects were
much more valuable than the online one.”
In the final session, I asked participants to reflect on why they felt the online component
had not worked. Some indicated that they could see online collaboration working (via email)
much better when they moved into the next stage of collaboration where they planned to work
together in smaller groups to design course assignments and other integrating mechanisms to
bring IL into their curriculum. One proposed that my research design could perhaps be revised to
incorporate an implementation stage where faculty members and librarians would work together
to operationalize within the curriculum what they had thus far done. She went on to suggest that
the online portion might work best in this second phase and should not be judged as having
failed but as having been placed too early in the collaborative process.
Finally, a few participants spoke to issues of process. One confirmed that facilitator
communication via email with the participants in between sessions for organizational and
encouragement purposes were clear, but too long. She shared that when she needed to write long

201

emails to the faculty members in her department she sometimes included a sentence midway
through that they should come to her office to pick up a chocolate candy bar. When some
received chocolate and others didn’t and complained, she pointed them to the correspondence.
In terms of content, a few participants said they felt uncomfortable in the beginning
because I did not explain to them where I was hoping we would end up. One suggested that, in
future, I should explain that, for the integrity of the research, I could not tell them where I hoped
they would end up but that I was confident that it would be a good place and that I was asking
them to trust me as they worked through the ambiguity. One also said she appreciated what she
had learned from the presentations early in the workshop. Another commented on the usefulness
of the readings, while another complained about the technical nature of them.
Finally, there was strong criticism of the time commitment needed to complete the
workshop. At least four participants said that they had not realized how much time it would take,
although this was pointed out to them when they agreed to participate. One specifically and
graphically stated, “And it felt sort of like…you get your foot in the door and all of a sudden,
[the researcher] owns our entire spring quarter of Fridays, and so forth (laughs).” Others found
scheduling during the last term of the year or the first or last month of the term problematic.
Participant experience is shown in Table 6.10 and is divided between positivity and
constructive suggestions. These will inform recommendations in the final chapter of this study.
Two librarian and two social sciences department faculty member participants thought
that the model could be used to start similar conversations with other departments on campus. A
few of the participants suggested that if this were to roll out to other departments, we could ask
for volunteers from their faculties to join the team to publish interdisciplinary research.

202

Table 6.10. Summary of Participant Evaluation of the Workshop
Things Participants Liked
The collaboration was “fluid,” there was
“synergy,” they “fed” off one another’s ideas;
there was no discord
The experience helped to develop
collaboration between departments that
couldn’t have happened in other ways
Participants were pleasantly surprised that the
process sustained willing participation
Participants gained better understanding of
each other and of student needs
Collaborative inquiry learning through group
work was a good format
Processes and guidance were clear;
presentations were good

Suggestions for Improvement
Face-to-face was more important than the
online component to build synergy, while the
online component seemed like duplication
Technical formats were difficult to use.
Participants preferred technologies that they
regularly used (email, social media)
The online component, if using familiar
technology, might work better in the next
stage, which fell outside of the research study
The workshop fell at a busy time during the
last term of the school year
Expected time commitment was not well
understood up front
Some felt uncomfortable with the ambiguity
of what was happening early in the process

Summary
Data sources included interviews, questionnaires, transcripts of sessions, and artifacts
produced by the participants. Findings were derived deductively from these sources. Evidence of
CoI presences and metacognition were found, along with a shared understanding of IL.
Outcomes of the asynchronous and face-to-face components were discussed as were emotional
responses. These findings and those of the exploratory focus groups’ findings in chapter five are
discussed in chapter seven. I also propose design and theoretical advances in chapter seven,
when I draw conclusions and present recommendations.

203

Chapter Seven: Discussion, Conclusions and Recommendations
Introduction
To situate the discussion, this design-based study had two points of data collection, as
shown in Figure 7.1. The first point of data collection occurred during phase one with the overall
exploration of the problem and of the university learning environment where the design was to
be implemented. The second was during the implementation of the learning environment design
(the FacLibCoI workshop) in phase three, which had been designed in phase two.

Figure 7.1. Diagram of Study Highlighting Data Collection Points
During the phase one exploratory data collection, I conducted focus groups, which were
drawn from among faculty members/librarians and department chairs across the entire university
and from students who were enrolled in the social sciences department that participated in the
FacLibCoI. In the FacLibCoI workshop (phase three of this study), participants were university
faculty members from a social sciences department and university librarians.
Findings from phase one exploration were reported in chapter five. Chapter six included
findings from the phase three implementation of the FacLibCoI workshop. In this final chapter, I
204

discuss these findings and present the conclusions and recommendations for each.
Recommendations fall into three categories, design refinement, knowledge advancement, and
professional application, and are thus indicated in each instance.
Phase One Focus Groups: Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Findings from the exploratory focus groups with students from the social sciences
department and faculty members from across the university informed the content and discussions
of the FacLibCoI workshop. I present a summary of these exploratory findings in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1. Summarized Findings of Exploratory Focus Groups
1. Disciplinary differences in how faculty members and chairs across the university defined research
and scholarship were evident in cross-disciplinary dialogue. In some disciplines, research was
defined as discovery, while in others it was defined as elegant presentation of theory or creative
production of something beautiful or useful.
2. Students enjoyed social interactions in academic and community assignments and associated this
with their professional identity; this trait needs to be considered when teaching IL to students from
this discipline.
3. The value of library collections, services, and roles are dependent upon perception; students who
perceived the library to have nothing of value chose not to use it even if it did have valuable
resources that pertained to their research topics.
4. Students gained knowledge, but experienced mixed feelings about information discovery and use in
their writing-sequence courses, often considering it as boring and not helping them to locate
confirmatory sources for their writing assignments. They did not understand the point of a literature
search being to discover new information and perhaps inform their perspective.
5. Research was perceived differently by students and faculty members and chairs. Faculty members
and chairs viewed it broadly as discovery, students as completing academic assignments.
6. There was a gap between what it was assumed students should know and what they did know about
IL. Those who had gone through the university’s writing-sequence courses had an intellectual
knowledge of how to conduct literature search and evaluation, but they possessed novice skills.
Students who had not taken the writing-sequence courses had little intellectual knowledge about IL
and even fewer skills.
7. Challenges to learning included misconceptions about the purpose of research, the availability and
quality of sources, and about their search capabilities. These easily derailed students in their research
process as did frustration when they attempted to use the search techniques that had been
demonstrated to them to find confirmatory sources.

205

Four themes emerged from these exploratory focus group findings. First, research is
defined within disciplinary spaces (Findings 1, 5). Second, there is need for a cohesive transition
for IL learning between the undergraduate writing-sequence courses and the upper division
disciplinary courses (Findings 5, 6, 7). Third, learning experience is as important as process
(Findings 2, 3, 4, 7). And fourth, student misconceptions lead to negative attitudes and should be
addressed early in the learning process (Findings 5,7). These are discussed in the following
section, and conclusions and recommendations are presented for each.
Research is defined within disciplinary spaces (Findings 1, 5). Focus group data
revealed a contextual component to research and the IL processes. This fits Lloyd’s (2011)
contention that IL is contextually-based. Specifically, when asked to define research and
scholarship, faculty members and chairs defined and discussed research and scholarship as well
as student knowledge needs broadly as discovery but then in terms that were unique to their
disciplines. Meanwhile, student comments about the processes experienced conducting
literature-based research revealed that they experienced basic discipline-related knowledge gaps
because they had not yet enrolled in disciplinary classes. Unfortunately, findings also showed
that even when students had gained some disciplinary knowledge once enrolled in upper-division
courses, the misconceptions that had originally occurred due to the gaps in knowledge did not
disappear. This may have contributed to student difficulties in transferring the IL knowledge they
had gained in their writing-sequence courses to their disciplinary work.
Another problem was that some students seemed unaware of the disciplinary databases
available to them. Even if they were aware that they had choices in databases, they found it hard
“to identify the best search engine [meaning database].” One student confessed, “I tend to use

206

[interdisciplinary databases she had used in general education courses]. It’s hard to decipher
which one I need to search in.”
Conclusion. If research is tied to context and research and IL concepts are best learned
within the contextualized setting (Julien, 2016; Lloyd, 2011), one would want to consider how to
better scaffold and transition students more quickly into discipline-based IL work.
Recommendations towards professional application. The recommendations for this
finding are related to active and situated learning:
1. Consider introducing active learning strategies (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1985;
Collins & Kapur, 2014; Garrison, 2016; Lu et al., 2014) such as problem-based
learning, cognitive apprenticeship or collaborative inquiry from learning sciences
research into the writing-sequence IL modules to encourage the formation of
knowledge connections.
2. Place more emphasis on disciplinary resources in the writing sequence courses.
These recommendations would require liaising with writing-sequence faculty and
redesigning the IL modules. Given that the current program has not seen major revision for a few
years, it would be a reasonable proposal to the English Department and could probably be
redesigned in time for implementation the following year.
General studies and discipline IL lack a transitional piece (Findings 5, 6, 7). This
problem is two-fold. First, transfer students coming into the university at the point of
incorporating into discipline-level courses are disadvantaged because they are not familiar with
the library or the research and writing processes expected of them. One student admitted, “This
is the first time tonight [that] I’ve been in the library since I’ve been here; it’s the way it goes;
best information is here, but I’m not very familiar with it.” Additionally, transfer students who

207

had not taken the writing-sequence course equivalents at their previous school seemed to have
less basic knowledge of library resources, search strategies, and appropriate writing processes.
Meanwhile, students who had taken the writing-sequence courses indicated that they
wished they had had more opportunity to practice the skills they were learning in these classes.
Their comments showed that they brought feelings of uncertainty from the writing-sequence
courses into their discipline. This, along with misconceptions such as confirmation bias or
confusion when identifying appropriate resources and search strategies, may have caused them
difficulty at the time of applying their novice skills in disciplinary settings.
Feelings of anxiety and cognitive uncertainty are normal parts of the exploration phase,
according to Kuhlthau (2013). Thus, student-expressed feelings of uncertainty might be traceable
to the natural disparity between a good foundational knowledge of how literature review and
scholarly writing should occur and the novice skills that students were trying to bring to the
process. Kuhlthau (2008) noted that it is important to help students move beyond this unresolved
stage before they get frustrated and choose to exit the learning situation. This is the “zone of
intervention,” (2008) wherein the teacher (and/or librarian) would scaffold students through the
uncertainty and on to resolution.
Conclusion. Students seemed to have difficulty incorporating IL knowledge into their
discipline courses due in part to lack of IL knowledge (in the case of transfer students) or
feelings of uncertainty (in the case of students who had completed IL instruction in the writingsequence courses). A joint librarian-disciplinary department approach could be the link between
what students learn in their lower-level courses and how they transition into their discipline
areas. During this stage of exploratory research, I wrote in my research notes, “What would

208

cooperative efforts between faculty and librarians need to look like to solve these problems? The
first iteration of the FacLibCoI workshop is a good start towards answering that question.
Recommendations towards professional application. Two recommendations are
provided to help scaffold students in IL as they transition to their disciplinary courses:
1. Librarians and disciplinary faculty should find ways to build a strong IL transition
piece at the disciplinary level.
2. Consider an online crash course in IL for transfer students that could be provided to
them during their department acceptance or orientation process.
It might be possible for the library to expand its subject electronic LibGuides, in
consultation with various departments and then make these available to the departments for
inclusion within an identified disciplinary course that students take early in their programs. An
equivalent electronic guide for transfer students could also be devised. This would require liaison
work with disciplines and subsequent design. With the drafting of an action plan that
incorporated a timeline and assignments for reaching out in a systematic manner to the various
disciplines across the university campus the plan is doable and scalable as it takes advantage of
existing library software tools and existing liaison assignments.
Learning Experience is as important as process (Findings 2, 3, 4, 7). Quite apart from
the knowledge that students gained in their writing-sequence courses, which corresponded quite
well to Kuhlthau’s (2013) ISP Framework, certain knowledge gaps led to misconceptions that
impacted student attitudes and learning. Students felt that they didn’t experience success in their
search strategies during their writing-sequence courses and beyond. “[The] biggest thing I
struggle with [emphasis added] is when I go to a database and I have to type in keywords, they
never get me where I want to …it’s hard [emphasis added] to find good keywords to find the

209

articles that I know are there,” and “it came up with like 2,000 results. It was random and dumb
[emphasis added].” These feelings of uncertainty also extended to their writing even a year
beyond their writing-sequence courses. Students passionately discussed current difficulties in
determining how to build paragraphs, write an introduction or thesis statement or cite sources.
Conclusion. Students seemed to be stuck, as it were, in an unresolved state of
anxiousness that likely began in their writing-sequence courses and carried over into their current
research and writing experiences. Although the librarian and professor provided opportunity for
one-on-one assistance in the writing-sequence courses, this did not, in all cases, successfully
provide a zone of intervention (Kuhlthau, 2008) and did not help students move through
cognitive uncertainty to resolution.
Recommendation towards professional application. Consider ways in which to
incorporate a zone of intervention when teaching IL. Various ways come to mind, such as the
librarian shedding the sage on the stage role for that of a learning partner. Covering only the
most necessary IL content (and saving the rest for later points of contact within disciplinary
classes) would allow for more guided hands-on practice time. Perhaps a buddy system could be
implemented within the class among students from similar disciplines so that they could learn the
appropriate databases and practice disciplinary search strategies together. A few brainstorming
sessions among the librarians and the writing professors could flesh out the most viable options.
Student misconceptions lead to negative attitudes (Findings 5, 7). Often, students
never grasped that the purpose of a research paper was exploration and discovery. They did not
understand, even when already enrolled within their discipline area, that a literature search is an
opportunity to engage with experts on a topic through those experts’ writings. They didn’t seem
to understand the importance of interrogating the literature, comparing it with their point of view,

210

and constructing greater understanding. Instead, students seemed to believe that they could write
down their thoughts (in other words, write their paper first) and then go to the literature to find
quotes “to twist and maneuver.” Some students did, at least, engage in a literature search while
actively writing their paper, but did so to find confirmatory articles that supported their ideas.
Either way, a fundamental misunderstanding of the reason for a literature review led to
frustrating learning experiences for them.
A fundamental problem with general education courses as practiced in many American
universities (and where information literacy is typically introduced) is this artificial separation
wherein students are expected to learn the standards and processes of inquiry in higher education
in isolation from their discipline and its fundamental philosophical underpinnings. One faculty
member in the university environmental scan focus groups observed that students do not learn to
love learning, to value the process, or “to care [and] to know that it matters….”
Because many students have come to view these types of introductory classes as “fluff,”
or as something disconnected from anything important, they may also view IL in similar light.
Teaching students the mechanics of literature search and academic writing before their
disciplinary professors help them to construct their own philosophical understanding of research
as systematic discovery within their discipline can set them up for frustration at various levels.
Students misunderstand the purpose of the literature search and what they should expect from
their search results. This study shows that under these conditions, students may develop negative
attitudes towards the process which will further handicap them as they engage in information
literacy in the future. Data from the student focus groups shows that librarians and faculty
members must be concerned for the way that students FIRST experience IL and research at the

211

college level. Misconceptions arise easily, can lead to frustration and poor outcomes, and can
make it hard to re-establish trust in the process.
Given that the university system separates general education and disciplinary courses,
librarians must find ways to engage faculty members in combatting student disenchantment in
these lower levels and within the discipline area. Elmborg (2010) asserted that critical IL within
a constructivist learning approach might be a better way to engage adult students as it could
provide them with reasons for caring and for personal engagement. He also proposed that
librarians fill the role of a “co-learner,” who poses problems and engages in inquiry together with
students to solve the problems through the use of information (Elmborg, 2012). This coincides
with the work of other IL theorists who view IL as being socioculturally-constructed (Lloyd,
2007; Wang et al., 2011), and is supported by constructs such as communities of practice or
communities of inquiry developed within learning sciences (Garrison, 2016; Wenger, 2010).
Dewey’s organism-environment transactional approach to education comes to mind when
considering a social constructivist solution (see references to Dewey and socioconstructivism in
Swan & Ice, 2010) as is Vygotsky’s social constructivist ideas including the zone of proximal
development (Confrey, 2006).
Conclusion. Both Kuhlthau’s (1991) ISP Framework, which helps to make visible a
student’s experience (thoughts, feelings, action) across information search stages and Bruce &
Hughes’ (2010) Informed Learning construct, which highlights a learner’s experience with
information processes, may shed light on how librarians could address student experience and
alleviate cognitive insecurities and negative feelings. Properly applied, these constructs could
also go some way towards helping to dissipate high levels of stress that students expressed. I
posit that when we teach IL and general education, we need to address the affective side of

212

learning, not just the academic processes. Ultimately, the goal is to troubleshoot situations
related to IL and research that lead to negative attitudes and that might potentially interfere with
future trust in the library and an appreciation for systematic, disciplinary discovery.
Recommendation towards professional application. Conduct an IL and learning sciences
literature review on how to engage students in active exploration and discovery as opposed to
teaching IL as a series of tools and strategies. Invite general studies faculty and librarians to
attend a symposium where these issues are presented and discussed. Based on feedback from the
symposium, consider what solutions might be implemented across general studies courses.
Phase Three FacLibCoI Workshop
In this section, I build upon the findings that were derived from the implementation of the
FacLibCoI workshop between social sciences department faculty members and librarians. Data
was collected through pre- and post-interviews with each participant through a Likert-scale CoI
and Shared Metacognition questionnaire and through session transcripts. Evidence of shared
understanding through participant-produced artifacts rounded out the data collection. Findings
from this phase three data were presented in chapter six and are summarized in Table 7.2.
These major themes will be discussed in the remainder of this section and conclusions drawn.
CoI presences and metacognition developed in the workshop design. A summary of
mean and standard deviation scores from the analysis of the questionnaire responses showed
clearly that all three CoI presences and social metacognition were established through the CoI
workshop. Specifically, social, cognitive, and teaching presence grew and remained stable over
time. Social metacognition grew strongly between sessions 1 and 2 and then declined slightly
across the remainder of the workshop. By the end of the workshop, all presences and

213

Table 7.2. Summarized Findings from the CoI Blended Workshop
1. A CoI was established. All presences (teaching, social and cognitive) as well as shared
metacognition were achieved.
2. Shared understanding around IL emerged as participants engaged in collaborative inquiry learning.
This shared understanding enabled them to create a pathway for collaboration around IL.
Participant evaluation of the workshop revealed that participants learned more about each other and
about their students, they experienced synergy through collaborative learning that sustained willing
participation in the face-to-face component of the workshop, and they identified how IL and critical
thinking within their discipline went hand-in-glove.
3. Asynchronous participation was not sustainable throughout the four sessions of the workshop.
Participants disliked the electronic platforms used, and time was a negative factor for them.
4. Emotional reactions of some participants were important to the way they experienced the outcomes
and some of these emotional reactions seemed unrelated to the workshop experience, itself.
5. In addition to the shared understanding that participants gained, several design issues were
identified that may lead to building changes into future iterations. These included (a) face-to-face
sessions supported synergy but online ones did not; (b) technical formats were difficult to use; (c)
familiar technologies might work better, (d) the workshop coincided with busy times in the school
year; (e) participants did not understand the time commitment needed; (f) ambiguity of learning
goals early on made some uncomfortable.

metacognition remained within the 3.2 to 3.6 mean range, where 3.0 to 3.9 indicated agreement.
Standard deviations for all presences and metacognition stayed within one standard deviation
throughout the workshop.
The means for the various presences in this study showed that the presences developed
together over time, although a relationship could not be concluded. Nevertheless, results show
growth of cognitive presence from a mean of 2.9 to 3.3 while social presence was strong in the
beginning and continued to strengthen over time (means ranging from 3.4 to 3.6). This aligns
with findings that show Cognitive Presence advancing when social presence is demonstrated
(Garrison, 2017).
Literature also shows that teaching presence drives social and cognitive presence (2017).
My results show that means for teaching presence were equal to or higher than those of social
presence and higher than cognitive presence. This is worth further study to better clarify the

214

relationship between teaching presence and the other two presences within this type of
implementation.
In the case of social presence, Garrison (2017) noted that it typically decreases over time
as other presences increase. In this study, social presence rose gradually and stabilized (session
one had a social presence mean of 3.4; in sessions two and three, it rose to 3.5 and then 3.6
where it remained in session four). This gradual rise and stabilization does not coincide with
predictions. However, analysis of participant dialogue showed that, in line with Garrison (2017),
social presence shifted from interpersonal relationships to interaction focused around cognitive
work, which is the desired outcome.
The shared metacognition construct of the CoI theoretical framework includes monitoring
and managing activities for self and the collaborative learning group. In this study, dialogue and
comments indicated higher levels of shared metacognition than what the mean scores showed in
the instrument. While scores increased overall, they remained the lowest of all the means at 3.2.
Qualitative data seems to indicate that participants were engaging in metacognitive thought
processes but that these processes may not have been explicitly visible to them when they
answered the questionnaire. It also appears that a few of the items in the Shared Metacognition
Questionnaire (Garrison, 2017) use language that goes against the philosophy and culture of
librarians and a few might not seem appropriate to faculty in the context of faculty peers (e.g. I
challenge the perspectives of others; I monitor the learning of others). This perhaps caused the
slightly lower mean scores.
When I chose to use the CoI and Metacognition scales, I based it in the scale published in
Arbaugh et al. (2008). I applied a four-point forced response scale, where 1=Strongly Disagree
and 4=Strongly Agree. The response scale did not include a Not Applicable (NA) option. When I

215

summarized data at an item-by-item level by presences and by presence categories, it became
clear that means on some outlier items dropped below 3.0 (the point on the scale that indicated
agreement), which brought down the overall mean. Likewise, as expected, standard deviations
rose towards 1.0 for some categories or presences when individual items rose above 1.0. In some
of these instances, lower means would be considered normal. CoI presences and metacognition,
for example, develop over time and would not be as visible in the first session of the workshop.
In other cases, however, it seems likely that anomalous scores were influenced by the lack of an
NA option on the response scale of the survey. Some participants added written notes to their
surveys indicating as much.
Conclusions. Five conclusions have been drawn from this finding:
1. The FacLibCoI workshop design and the CoI Theoretical Framework upon which it
was based supported the development of social, cognitive, and teaching presence as
well as shared metacognition. It also broadly maintained the presences throughout the
workshop.
2. The four-point response scale of the questionnaire instrument was problematic and
may have led to confusing results.
3. Some of the terminology used in the shared metacognition items might have been
confusing and consideration should be given to address this.
4. The questionnaire was too long. By combining the CoI and Shared Metacognition
scales and adding a few questions of my own, the survey became too long, and some
participants complained, especially since they were asked to fill it out multiple times.

216

5. With one possible exception, results reveal characteristics that should be studied for
correlative relationships in future iterations because relationships have been shown in
the literature as referenced by Garrison (2017).
Recommendations towards knowledge advancement. The recommendations for this item
refer to the survey instrument and how it is administered.
1. In future design iterations, the researcher should apply the current published versions
of the CoI and Shared Metacognition Questionnaires, including the published
response scale instead of the 4-point, forced choice scale used.
2. Add an NA option to the response scale if the questionnaires are to be administered at
points in the CoI where certain presences are unlikely to be visible.
3. To avoid participant survey fatigue, consider implementing only certain presence
scales at one time, typically the ones under study at a particular time during the CoI
(for example, administer only social presence scale after first session).
4. Refrain from administering the shared metacognition scale until later in the
implementation, when it has had time to develop.
These changes would be incorporated in a subsequent iteration and would be part of the
normal design revision. As such, they could be accomplished in due course without needing to
involve anyone other than the research team.
Collaborative inquiry learning led to shared understanding around IL. The goal of
this study was to see whether a blended CoI design could help faculty members and librarians
forge a shared understanding around IL. Shared understanding is a key goal of a CoI. Garrison
(2016) explains that personal meaning and shared understanding develop within a learning
environment of inquiry and collaborative discourse. However, most of the CoI literature views

217

shared understanding from the perspective of ultimately contributing toward individual learning.
In this study, while the goal of reaching shared understanding was necessarily based on
individual learning, its focus remained firmly in collectively built and shared knowledge. In this
sense, this study highlights the potential power of a CoI to establish group-based learning as well
as individual learning and adds a new focus on shared understanding as the desired outcome.
The study also adds to the few CoI studies conducted among faculty members.
This study showed that the CoI with its collaborative inquiry-based approaches can
support the development of shared understanding around IL among faculty members and
librarians. Participants were able to tap into their disciplinary philosophies, culture, and
knowledge, share these with each other, and explore IL together while building a new, more
expansive understanding of IL that they mutually shared. This shared understanding allowed
them to create a learning pathway for their students that was based on a disciplinary IL Model,
which they created together. Further, participants were able to determine and map student
learning goals to IL and disciplinary standards and develop an action plan to integrate IL within
the departmental curriculum.
The social sciences IL Model was considered by participants as the crowning act of their
effort because it grew out of their shared discourse around IL, research, and critical thinking. The
outcomes did require strong facilitation, and it helped that I as the researcher was a subject
expert in one of the discipline areas [in my case, library science]. Nevertheless, the faculty
members and librarians were the ones working together.
Individually, participant understanding of information literacy expanded (even for the
librarians for which information literacy is their disciplinary strength). Additionally, as a
cohesive group formed across the two disciplines (librarians and social sciences department

218

faculty members), participants created a pathway forward towards integrated IL within the social
sciences discipline. This is congruent with the literature, where Garrison (2016) acknowledges
that collaboration can lead to “collective” knowledge (p. 4).
The CoI workshop spanned two months. In that respect, it spanned a relatively short time
compared to other faculty member communities of inquiry (or communities of practice) that
have been reported in the literature and which typically span a full semester or even an academic
year (Paskevicius & Bortolin, 2016; Vaughan & Garrison, 2006). Given that in this short time
shared understanding between librarians and a group of social sciences faculty members
developed is promising from the point of view of scaling the FacLibCoI across the university.
Even more promising is that this collaborative inquiry led to the collective realization that
IL is an integral part of the disciplinary knowledge that students need and that it can be diffused
across the discipline’s curriculum. The collective knowledge (and collective will) that developed
to integrate information literacy within the curriculum of the department (as opposed to the
typical one-shot invitations into individual classes) is an outcome which, if rolled out across
other departments, has the potential to move faculty members and librarians to a place of
collectively helping students engage with information.
This finding aligns with Bereiter and Scardamalia’s (2014) work on knowledge building
where they point to its “product,” which is “the creation of intellectual property or something
analogous to it” and is different from “what people individually know” (p. 41). Dr. D. Randy
Garrison (personal communication, April 17, 2018) confirmed that this is congruent with the CoI
theoretical framework if one remembers that the personal and shared worlds cannot be separated
since individual learning is necessarily tied into discourse and therefore part of shared
understanding. Bereiter and Scardamalia (2014) further explain that co-generated products (in

219

the case of this study, the IL Model, mapped learning goals, action plan) add to the group’s
ability to make further knowledge advances and to further develop solutions.
Enyedy and Stevens (2014) divide literature on collaboration within learning sciences
into four groups. The fourth, collaboration-as-learning, has a collective unit of activity focus
rather than an individual one. Functioning as a unit of activity consisting of collectivelydeveloped knowledge and systems produces advances in knowledge and activity that are greater
than what the individual members could have learned or produced on their own. This synergistic
effect was noted by participants in this FacLibCoI workshop. Further, this synergistic energy
seemed to help participants self-identify as a collaborative group that shared a knowledge
uniquely their own (Barab & Duffy, 2000). Collaborative design-thinking allowed them to devise
contextualized ways in which to integrate information literacy across their disciplinary
curriculum.
In design thinking, for example, creativity is often considered a collaborative experience
rather than an individual one, and the process of creation involves an iterative style of back-andforth exchanges (Halverson & Sheridan, 2014). Changing perspective is encouraged through
critique, and ultimately leads to a “collective state of knowledge” (Bereiter & Scardamalia,
2014, p. 41; Halverson & Sheridan, 2014), which in turn supports collective action.
In the FacLibCoI workshop, the CoI design seemed to produce a synergy that led to
contextualized, shared knowledge about IL within the social sciences discipline. The IL Model
that resulted was bigger than the understanding that either librarians or faculty members had of
IL on their own. This is congruent with the CoI framework’s shared world within the Practical
Inquiry Model (again, confirmed with Dr. D. Randy Garrison through personal communication,
April 17, 2018). In my mind, the arrival at shared understanding that is greater than the

220

understanding that either side could contribute represents resolution, a category within the CoI’s
cognitive presence that can sometimes be difficult to achieve.
Conclusion. Co-developed artifacts such as a social sciences IL Model, mapped learning
goals, and an action plan for implementation across the social sciences department are evidence
of co-constructed, shared understanding of IL that developed among the participants. This shared
understanding, which resulted in a potentially-public piece of intellectual property, represents a
form of collective knowledge, which was new, and which was greater than the summation of the
individual participants’ knowledge. The CoI framework clearly supported collaborative learning.
Recommendations towards design refinement. The recommendations leverage the work
done in this first iteration to reach out to other faculty groups:
1. Use the artifacts, especially the IL Model to engage other departments on the campus
and perhaps consider how they might participate towards refining the model.
2. Present opportunities for cross-disciplinary research and possible publication
afterwards.
These recommendations were unimaginable before the implementation of the FacLibCoI. Yet,
they were suggestions that came from the participants themselves, and therefore stand a higher
chance of successful implementation with the proper planning.
Asynchronous blended participation could not be sustained. During a group
discussion and in their one-on-one, post-workshop interviews, several of the participants
expressed their dissatisfaction with the online component. The online component was designed
as the piece that would help to maintain collaboration between the face-to-face sessions. The
electronic, asynchronous discussions were meant to provide a means to stimulate follow-up

221

discussion from the previous face-to-face session and to help prepare the groundwork for the
next session.
Participants shared that they tried to comply in the beginning but found the technological
platforms unfamiliar. The platforms were selected because they were used by the two
departments. The social sciences department used the university’s course management system
(CMS) for online classes, but it seems that most of the faculty member participants had never
actually tried to use it from a student’s role nor had they utilized the discussion board. The
platform used to store documents was the library guide software used by librarians. Again, it
seems that this was not a typical place for librarians to store or access documents although they
used it for publishing answers to patron questions. Several suggested that had more typical
platforms been used (email, Google Docs, blogging software, social media), they would have
found it easier to engage.
This result is not unusual. Other faculty member CoI studies that used an electronic
discussion element also showed lower uptake in the electronic discussion piece as compared with
face-to-face discussion. Paskevicius and Bortolin (2016) conducted a nine-month faculty
development CoI which had less online participation than face-to-face participation.
Additionally, participation slowed as implementation progressed. According to their results, less
than a third of participants could be considered as high participators in the online portion and
more than one third did not meaningfully participate at all. Their participants reported that they
saw the online portion as less important and did not feel that it added value. One of the
participants in this study commented the same.
Back in early faculty CoI studies, Vaughan and Garrison (2005) reported that their
faculty participants did not attach the same value to online as to face-to-face, and their assigning

222

of codes to face-to-face and online discussions revealed far fewer codes for online discussion.
Further, they reported that participants admitted that it was harder to commit to the online
component than to the face-to-face discussions.
It also seemed that in this study, time limitations that were external to the FacLibCoI
workshop elicited negative emotions, but these were only marginally directed towards the faceto-face sessions and primarily towards the online component. External factors included things
like the time of the academic year, the time of the academic term, and busy schedules. This type
of complaint seems to be a typical issue for faculty members. Latz & Rediger (2015) for
example, found that community college faculty members reported that during busy times of year
and job types of transitions things were less manageable, overall. Paskevicius & Bortolin (2016)
reported that faculty members in an online professional development setting found it hard to
participate due to time factors. Meanwhile, in a study by Sanford & Kinch (2015), faculty
development professionals listed the ability to adapt to increased work obligations among four
important topics for faculty professional development initiatives.
The literature on blended learning highlights various types of technology and designs that
have been used successfully to engage participants in collaborative inquiry learning as opposed
to asynchronous, online discussion. Bereiter and Scardamalia (2014), for example, developed a
knowledge-building software called Knowledge Forum that allowed a collaborating group to
build graphics, add notes and links, and facilitate collaborative knowledge building, critical
thinking, and synthesis. Others used video-creation solutions that allowed groups to document
problem-solving techniques and experiences of others to share examples or to engage in
mentoring activities (Cohn, Stewart, Harwood Theisen, & Comins, 2016; Hoffman & Leafstedt,
2014; Stevens, 2007). Still others used blogs and group wikis with mixed success to assist in

223

collaborative endeavors (Hoffman & Leafstedt, 2014; Sullivan et al., 2014) as well as
technologies that allowed for mash-up content creation (content that can be easily repurposed
and shared in different ways).
While participants in this study indicated that online discussion via email or some other
form of social media with which they were familiar would more likely succeed if they were to
engage in planning for implementation of IL in their classes, I believe that a redesign that
provides faculty members and librarians the opportunity to experiment with and select various
support technologies to help their collaborative learning processes and which they might then
leverage for use with their students in their own classes might stand a chance of succeeding. Had
the group had knowledge-building software available, they might have been able to draw their
discipline IL Model directly into the software rather than on a paper flipchart that needed to be
photographed to be disseminated and which cannot be edited or manipulated. The use of
technology would need to be carefully designed and support would need to be built for those
who are not eager adopters. But it could serve as a motivator… “come and gain a technology you
could use with your students.”
Conclusion. The collaborative, asynchronous online component as designed did not work
well. The failure was traced, at least in part, to the use of technology that was unfamiliar to the
participants. Another factor was that the online element did not seem to add value in the minds of
the participants.
Recommendations towards knowledge advancement—add to theory of CoI
implementation with faculty. Recommendations included:
1. Consider other forms of integrative technologies that might add more perceived value
and could easily fit within a blended design.

224

2. Negotiate with participants the technologies to be used (from a select group of
options that were previously identified through focus group interviews with
university-wide faculty members).
In a future design iteration, it would be helpful to take the necessary time to liaise with
technology experts and investigate the various learning technology options that are available.
Proper planning would need to include a more nuanced understanding of faculty member
knowledge gaps related to technology.
Participant emotions affected how they experienced the FacLibCoI workshop. Some
participants experienced strong individual emotional response to an element of the FacLibCoI
workshop design (specifically online dialogue) or to unrelated factors or experiences that then
affected their emotional response to the workshop. For example, prior commitments unrelated to
the FacLibCoI caused negative reaction to the time commitment even when participants had
been fully informed in advance of the projected time required. Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
(2012) noted the strong influence that emotion had within the online environment upon
participant thought processes. This was so much the case that Cleveland-Innes and Campbell
(2012) proposed the addition of an emotional presence to the CoI theoretical framework.
Garrison (2017) addresses this challenge to the three-presence CoI theoretical framework by
arguing that an emotional presence adds additional complexity to a model that has been
rigorously confirmed. Further, it risks splitting the model unnecessarily since emotion is already
accommodated within the existing social presence.
Given my own findings that show emotional responses may emanate from outside of
social presence, I consulted with Dr. D. Randy Garrison (personal communication, March 27,
2018) who confirmed that the emotional or “entering variable” would be more of a design issue

225

and could be addressed at that level. He also pointed out that emotion is a pervasive influence
that is an important part of social presence but that needs to be considered across all the
presences.
Conclusion. Emotional responses to the FacLibCoI workshop, itself, as well as to
external factors are important and must be considered both in design and implementation stages.
Recommendation towards design refinement. To remove potential obstacles to learning
and shared understanding, several recommendations are made:
1. Build a participatory brainstorming time into a face-to-face session so that
participants take more of a driving role in their own learning goals.
2. Redesign the CoI implementation to be more participatory. For example, negotiate
time commitment and schedule with the participants in the beginning.
3. Redesign, so that the CoI becomes a collaborative research project, not a class.
4. Conduct a review of literature on factors that motivate faculty members and
librarians; potentially redesign for participation and engagement.
This level of redesign requires careful thought as it would give participants a greater role in the
design. While empowering, this could increase the time factor, which was already a problem.
Several design issues were identified to build out changes in future iterations. Most of
the items under this category have been discussed within the other findings above. One important
item remains, however. A few of the participants indicated after the workshop ended that they
felt uncomfortable with the ambiguity of early processes. I addressed this question with the
social sciences department chair and she indicated that it would be a fairly easy thing to hold a
brief discussion with the group at the very beginning to explain that so as not to condition them
towards predetermined outcomes, I could not reveal up front exactly what we were going to be

226

attempting to do, but that I had a plan in mind and that I was asking them to trust me. She felt
that would be adequate to reassure nervous participants that they weren’t wasting their time and
it would also stimulate curiosity that might help to move them through the stage of ambiguity.
On the other hand, a more participatory focus would not hurt and might help the design in
other ways. In such a case, it would be part of the design to share with the group the expectations
going into the study, so that they could more actively consider and tweak the design for
themselves as the FacLibCoI progressed. Further, I do not think it would harm the results to
expect the group to participate in selecting the types of technology that they wished to use
throughout and to set up a system for monitoring how well it was working and to collaboratively
readdress and manage their choices if these proved to be problematic.
Blessinger and Carfora (2014) point out that inquiry-based learning benefits from
participatory learning environments that require authentic problem solving. Vaughan and
Garrison (2006) in their own experimental study of a blended CoI for faculty development
described how direct instruction, which is a part of the CoI’s teaching presence, began to occur
among participants around the technology. That is, as time progressed, some of the faculty
participants began assisting others in the use of the technology. This type of collaboration early
in the workshop could help to foster group cohesion, which is part of social presence and crucial
to group identity (Garrison, 2017).
Conclusion. Some faculty members expressed feelings of ambiguity that will need to be
addressed in future designs and there are various ways of addressing this.
Recommendations towards design refinement. Recommendations include:
1. One recommendation would be for the facilitator to share with the participants the
goals of the workshop to build a participatory partnership with them.

227

2. Along those lines, another would be to include faculty as participatory members in
some of the design decisions.
3. Provide scaffolding and support for new concepts and skills that are introduced into the
FacLibCoI design. Things that come to mind are technology support or learning
sciences concepts (CoI presences, collaborative inquiry, research, critical thinking)
A more participatory design is possible within a CoI, and this might be a direction to explore in
the next iteration.
Additional to the findings, two overarching recommendations stand on their own.
Both relate to professional application. Both would require significant effort up front but might
result in increased scalability.
Recommendation towards design refinement. Build a sustainable model that can be
implemented and scaled up across the university. Include an implementation phase where faculty
members and librarians complete the action plan that they develop in the workshop. As part of
this new phase, build an assessment of the implementation stage within the design. For
sustainability, consider the possibility of conducting future CoI implementations with broader
disciplinary groups instead of individual departments (e.g. combined group of social work,
sociology, education, psychology faculty members rather than just one of the departments).
Recommendation towards design refinement. Build a research team to encourage
sustainable advancement in design and potential scaling up of the FacLibCoI. This could foster
cross-disciplinary faculty member research capacity across the university. The team might
include faculty members with expertise in statistical analysis and learning technology design and
implementation. The team could also include select former participants of previous FacLibCoI
iterations. Set an initial agenda for the research team to:

228

•

Study related theory, such as situated IL, IL and disciplinary critical thinking, faculty
member motivation, or CoI presences.

•

Build an online site for access to free or university-provided technologies that could be
used by participants in FacLibCoI’s to create knowledge as well as share it with others.

•

Consider how the IL Model already developed in this study might be introduced to other
discipline departments to stimulate their shared understanding of IL.

•

Begin to standardize data collection and analysis methods for future iterations.

•

Solicit support from the university’s academic administration and obtain ethics
permission for all future iterations on campus so that any future publishing of later
iterations may proceed unimpeded (Vaughan & Garrison, 2006).
Recommendations for the CoI theoretical framework and for DBR. This study was

exploratory in nature and used the CoI theoretical framework to specifically engender shared
understanding around the concept of IL. This is new. Although most online or blended classroom
studies that have sought to implement a CoI have used collaborative inquiry to help students
learn through the sharing of ideas, ultimately, personal meaning-making or learning was the goal.
In this study, the goal was to develop an entirely new body of knowledge, that of shared
understanding, which transcends and is greater than the sum of individual learning within the
community. As such, I propose that the CoI theoretical framework can be used for much more
than is currently suggested by the many course-based studies found in the literature. Further, I
encourage other researchers to test the limits of the CoI in the realm of learning. Garrison (2017)
supports this view when he states that within CoI research, “there needs to be more research
associated with learning” (p. 67).

229

Second, some CoI studies suggested the need for an emotional presence (Cleveland-Innes
& Campbell, 2012) or to re-examine social presence for an affective dimension (Shea et al.,
2010). In this study, I found that emotional or affective reactions of my participants, sometimes
to things external to the FacLibCoI, affected their interaction with the CoI. Taken together, these
studies may indicate a need in the CoI literature to consider the external, environmental forces
including the learner’s affective or emotional state. The most recent diagram of the CoI
framework (Garrison, 2017, p. 25) draws a circle around the exterior of the model to represent
various environmental influences. More research attention should be given to how a learner’s
emotional state coming into the CoI affects her own and the group’s collaborative inquiry.
When considering how the implementation of DBR worked in this study, I have two
observations. First, the Generic Model, which I used, places implementation within the
evaluation and reflection phase. I found this to be problematic because it was too much to
consider all at once. In my mind, viewing implementation as its own phase with a smaller,
internal analysis and reflection iterative loop throughout the intervention would have better fit
the actual process as it unfolded in my study. Viewing implementation on its own would leave a
larger analysis and reflection phase at the end of the overall iteration, the sole purpose of which
would be to inform the next iteration.
Finally, from the perspective of doing a DBR study for a professional doctorate, I would
advise a tight design; that is, the student should keep the design simple and not try to accomplish
more than is possible in a relatively short time frame and as a lone researcher. Later, there will be
time for future iterations where a design and research team can be assembled and scaling up may
occur.

230

In Closing
Because research is defined within disciplinary spaces, there is need for a cohesive
transition between writing-sequence courses and student experiences with finding and using
library resources in their discipline area. The FacLibCoI workshop revealed that the library and
the discipline departments can collaborate to build shared understanding of IL.
Regardless of where and how IL occurs, it is worth remembering that learning experience
is as important as process. It is also important to address misconceptions before negative
attitudes develop which tend to persist over time even when misconceptions are shown to be
incorrect. Collaboration between faculty members and librarians should be sought when
attempting to teach IL at the general studies level and within a student’s discipline.
This study adds to the body of learning sciences literature specifically by applying the
CoI Theoretical Framework to interdisciplinary groups of faculty. It provides an example of how
the CoI framework can support both individual learning and a collective knowledge output. It
also provides an example of a design-based, mixed methods approach to test the CoI framework.
In technology-enhanced learning environments, it adds to the knowledge of faculty member
opinions towards online discussion and suggests considering forms of technology other than
discussion forums, specifically knowledge-building technologies.
These findings also contribute to the body of IL literature. The CoI is a viable theoretical
framework for addressing collaboration and shared understanding between faculty members and
librarians around IL. Design-based research is also viable, if time-consuming. It can be used by a
knowledgeable library researcher to mentor research capacity among practitioners in the library
profession by including them in the research team. Third, this study provides an example of how

231

faculty members and librarians in a collaborative group might choose to implement IL within a
disciplinary curriculum and across the university.
Overall, it is my hope that this study may help IL practitioners and researchers to
consider faculty-librarian collaboration around IL beyond the one-shot session. It is an example
of how shared understanding between librarians and disciplinary faculty might lead to situating
IL within a student’s discipline in contextualized and powerful ways.