Networked Stakeholders and Long-Term Recovery:
Communication and Organizing in Coastal New Jersey after Hurricane Sandy

By: JOHN LAMONT HARRIS JR.

Dissertation Director
Dr. Marya L. Doerfel

This dissertation addresses post-disaster long-term recovery as a communication
and organizing process reliant upon networked stakeholder relationships and
collaborative communication. Findings from a multiyear field study are used to propose a
relational model of stakeholder theory and a theory of collaborative communication as a
web of social and organizational relationships within a community or region solving
complex problems of mutual concern. Stakeholder theory is reconceptualized as a
framework for understanding community survivability rather than firm or organizational
survivability. Advancing Nordic models of stakeholder theory, the dissertation argues
that networked stakeholder relationships and collaborative communication are mutually
dependent as twin concepts of collective problem-solving and relationship management.
Communication practices such as meetings and face-to-face encounters are used by
networked stakeholders to connect with one another and build trust, share information,
allocate resources, and manage conflict. Networked stakeholder relationships take shape
over time and include a mix of existing, emergent, and pre-planned organizations active
within a physical community or an organizational field such as disaster recovery. The
ii

complex problem of long-term recovery after disaster is used to generate empirical
evidence from a geographically bounded region in coastal New Jersey severely impacted
by Hurricane Sandy on October 29, 2012. This 5-year field study covers the period from
October 30, 2012, to December 31, 2017, and includes active participant observation as a
resident and organizational leader in the impacted region, ethnographic observations, and
interviews as well as archival data that combine organizational documents with academic,
nonprofit, and government reports. A combination of social constructivist grounded
theory, abductive analysis, and social network analysis are used to analyze data.
Processes, timelines, and networks of recovery in this coastal region are uncovered from
the data and used to construct the models of networked stakeholder relationships and
collaborative communication proposed by this study. Finally, policy implications are
presented that address specific concepts for improving the processes of long-term
recovery after natural disaster.

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
"I wanted to tell them what was coming, but I just couldn't," he said. "I wanted to
tell them the hurricane is the easy part. That their lives were going to miserable,
pure hell for the next 5 years. That 'recovery' is like slow and grinding . . . it's like
watching a car crash in slow motion, over and over again." (Doug Quinn, Star
Ledger, September 21, 2017)

Long-term recovery is an under-studied social and organizational phenomenon
that is becoming increasingly important as the size, frequency, and intensity of storms
increase. Long-term recovery is under-studied in both the academic and professional
literatures and is often lumped together with emergency response and the whole
community framework of disaster recovery overseen by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). Five years of field research in coastal New Jersey have
uncovered a timeline of long-term recovery and an evolving set of relationships that
sequences the organizational activities of long-term recovery over time. These evolving
relationships, organizational activities, and multiyear timeline are core parts of a process
of long-term recovery and shape the organizational landscape of disaster-impacted
communities.
This study uses a framework of networked stakeholder relationships to develop a
theory of collaborative communication during long-term recovery in disaster-impacted
communities. Collaborative communication is a communication and organizing process
in which information is shared, resources exchanged, goals set, and decisions made
concerning organizational assistance in Sandy-impacted communities. It is a networked
communication practice in which organizational relationships become the prime driver of
long-term recovery and in which problems are identified and solved jointly. These

2

organizational relationships may be emergent or planned and, in some cases, serve as the
underlying set of community relationships that address critical issues such as housing,
community development, social services, and mental health. The study highlights the
organizational landscape and organizational sequencing of activities present in processes
of long-term recovery to develop a framework of networked stakeholder relationships
that informs multi-stakeholder collaboration. Using classic and contemporary theories of
stakeholder relationships, processes of long-term recovery are developed that include
timelines of recovery and organizational activities. These networked stakeholder
relationships comprise an organizational landscape within coastal New Jersey, a region
heavily impacted by Hurricane Sandy. Networked stakeholder relationships themselves
are embedded within the larger set of community and social relationships which comprise
the coastal New Jersey community.
The research site encompasses the broad set of counties and towns that range
from the Raritan Bay in the northeast to the Delaware Bay in the southeast. The New
Jersey tradition of home rule (Karcher, 1998), which has resulted in a large number of
municipalities and other taxing districts, makes it difficult to locate enough organizations
in each specific community to conduct a town-by-town comparison of organizational
relationships, long-term recovery activities, and the role of social capital in recovery. In
fact, in many other states, these independent municipalities grappling with recovery from
Hurricane Sandy would be neighborhoods or communities within larger cities or
metropolitan regions rather than self-governed entities. To address this constraint, the
region was bounded geographically and treated as a single community. As a resident of
one of these impacted communities active in both emergency response and long-term

3

recovery, the immersive, reflexive fieldwork that generated observations, interviews, and
documents was the primary research method employed within this study.
Similar to studies conducted by Small (2009a, 2009b), this is an epistemologically
pluralistic study that employs multiple types of data and uses different methods of
analysis for different types of data. Following good mixed method and qualitative
network analysis procedures, this study uses multiple methods to triangulate multiple
sources of data to develop the organizational landscape of long-term recovery in coastal
New Jersey (Creswell & Clark Plano, 2011; Hollstein, 2014). However, rather than a
classic mixed methods study in which research design, data collection, methods, and
analysis are integrated at the inception of the study (Creswell & Clark Plano, 2011), this
study uses a social constructionist grounded theory framework (Charmaz, 2014) and
relies on abductive theorizing (Charmaz, 2016; Swedberg, 2016; Timmermans & Tavory,
2012) to generate empirical findings and a theory of long-term recovery as a function of
networked stakeholder relationships established through collaborative communication.
Abductive theorizing using social constructionist grounded theory lends itself to a
reflexive fieldwork study in which the researcher is immersed within the research site,
not only as a researcher, but also as a resident, community leader, and a participant in the
recovery of the community.
Like Small’s (2009b) study of networked inequalities in New York City childcare
centers, this study also began with a hunch. Small’s analysis of the role of organizational
embeddedness in connecting parents of children in neighborhood childcare centers with a
broad range of resources began with fieldwork in an unrelated city. Small was tasked
with developing an overview of urban conditions by connecting with local institutions.

4

As Small entered a neighborhood childcare center, Small observed that the childcare
center was providing services well beyond childcare to the parents. These observations of
social and organizational interactions in combination with interviews of social workers
led Small to begin thinking through the role of organizations in social and organizational
relationships in urban neighborhoods and the ways in which organizations—rather than
people—may build social capital (Small, 2009b, pp. 201–204).
On October 30, 2012, I entered the middle school in my Sandy-impacted town to
charge my phone while my girlfriend, now wife, went to check in face-to-face (because
communication systems were overloaded) to see if disaster response crisis counselors
(DRCCs) were needed. A volunteer approached me while I was charging my phone and
asked what kind of work I did. I mumbled something about strategic communications,
consulting, and teaching. She asked what skills I had, and I mentioned communication
and some project management. After a pause, I joked and said I was a Boy Scout a long
time ago. She said, “Perfect! Come with me.” Within 24 hours, I was recruiting
additional volunteers to help staff the microshelter, handling communication with the
press and with the Red Cross’ media relations and volunteer liaisons, coordinating food
runs to a local supermarket, and unloading vans from the county park system with a local
Boy Scout troop, while in the microshelter, emergent activities became visible and
planned activities rapidly changed. New organizations were created to fill in the gaps in
recovery in the small New Jersey communities impacted by Hurricane Sandy, and larger
patterns of organizational emergence across the region became visible as our community
began to connect with other communities in the days and weeks after landfall of
Hurricane Sandy.

5

As my response and recovery activities expanded from days to weeks, months,
and years and I took on leadership roles in community organizations active in disaster
recovery and planning, the emergence and change of stakeholder relationships at different
points in time became visible. Organizations and volunteers became less active as months
turned into years. I began to suspect that the recovery process had distinct rhythms, that
seemingly finite deadlines were movable, and that the end state of long-term recovery
was elusive and undefined. While FEMA (2008, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2016) has a
commonly used framework of four phases of disaster response—mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery—which are cyclical, a recovery framework that
accounted for organizational interactions and the sequencing of organizational activities
and capabilities over a multiyear period of long-term recovery was not evident. What is
missing in analysis of long-term recovery is the change in organizational roles and tasks
over time and the collaborative mechanisms by which organizations solve problems of
long-term recovery in impacted communities together.
Digging into the literature on long-term recovery revealed a relatively sparse body
of literature. Observations, field notes, interviews, and organizational documents were
used to begin to frame the ideas of timelines, processes, and networks of long-term
recovery. This study employs participant observation, observations, conversations, semistructured interviews, and network analysis to develop a framework of networked
stakeholder relationships created through a sequence of communication and organizing
activities over time. What this study elicits from the data is a process of long-term
recovery, an understanding of the timelines of recovery based upon organizational

6

activities conducted in the coastal New Jersey region between 2012 and 2017, and a
preliminary framework of the networks of recovery identified in the region.
Using a model of stakeholder theory that moves beyond the classic AngloAmerican models of primary and secondary stakeholders (Strand & Freeman, 2015), this
study frames stakeholders as part of a relational process in which organizational
partnering decisions are driven by the specific needs of communities and residents
engaged in long-term recovery. Stakeholder theory is a useful framework for analyzing
long-term recovery because it provides multiple models from which to analyze the
communication and organizing processes of long-term recovery. In addition to the
primary and secondary stakeholder models initially articulated by R. E. Freeman (1984)
and others (R. E. Freeman, Harr, son, Wicks, Parmer, & de Colle, 2010; R. E. Freeman,
Wicks, & Parmar, 2004; Strand & Freeman, 2015), different countries and regions may
also frame stakeholders as political citizenship (Byrkjeflot, 2003) or as cooperative
relationships that build consensus (Byrkjeflot, 2003; G. Jackson, 2005). Natural resources
management uses stakeholder frameworks to identify those impacted by particular public
policy, planning, and land use decisions, especially those who may be sidelined in the
decision-making process or otherwise underrepresented (Reed et al., 2009; Scott &
Oelofse, 2005).
Ultimately though, stakeholder relationships are about communication—which, in
turn, is ultimately about norms of shared decision making and negotiation. Whereas
stakeholder theory may often be associated with value, for instance, how do stakeholders
create shared value together (M. E. Porter & Kramer, 2011), Deetz (1992, 1995, 2017)
argued for a stakeholder framework that moves beyond value chains and strategic

7

alliances to a focus on collaborative communication across sectors, with each stakeholder
considering the interrelated set of organizational issues, interorganizational relationships,
and social concerns on which each stakeholder is focused. Stakeholders engage each
other through a network of communication practices including meetings, digital
communication, and face-to-face encounters. These communication practices, in turn,
initiate connections or relationships among stakeholders with different sets of skills,
expertise, competencies, information, or material resources (Monge & Contractor, 2003).
Network theory is important for understanding the complex set of interrelationships
among organizations that occur during disaster response and recovery. Every community
has some version of a civic network that emerges from the social and organizational
relationships within that community (Diani, 2015; Galaskiewicz, 1979, 2016). These
existing civic networks play an important role in long-term recovery. Stakeholders active
in existing civic networks may already have knowledge of each other’s expertise,
resources, and working styles. They may also be aware of gaps in the resources or knowhow of their community that require outside organizations to fill in the gaps. These
outside organizations may be either regional or national disaster relief organizations or
even new organizations that “pop up” in neighborhoods and communities to address local
needs that are not being addressed by larger government or nonprofit disaster response
agencies.
This study develops a framework of networked stakeholders that serve as core
social and organizational resources for communities recovering from disaster. While not
a stakeholder network that can be measured and defined using the traditional tools of
network analysis, the networked stakeholders framework does three things: (a) redefines

8

stakeholders as multiple interrelated relationships rather than one-to-one relationships
between primary and secondary stakeholders, (b) applies stakeholder theory to the
problem of long-term recovery after disaster, and (c) highlights the role of collaborative
communication as a key communication and organizing process for networked
stakeholders active in long-term recovery after disaster. Long-term recovery is a
multifaceted, multiyear process and requires a multiple-method, multi-theoretical
framework for understanding the communication and organizing processes that underlay
processes of long-term recovery from a natural disaster such as Hurricane Sandy.

9

CHAPTER 2
STAKEHOLDERS AND LONG-TERM RECOVERY
Stakeholder relationships provide a way of thinking about the interconnected
nature of economic and social life and the patterns of organizational relationships that
influence organizational action. Stakeholder theory wrestles with questions of
representation and value within market environments and with processes of collaborative
governance and collaborative communication within the broader socioeconomic
environment. More specifically, within processes of disaster response and long-term
recovery, networked stakeholder relationships are increasingly used to supplement the
more institutional responses from government agencies and formally chartered
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) such as the American Red Cross. Processes of
long-term recovery after disaster can be analyzed as networked stakeholder relationships
specific to a community or region.
Within the organizational field of disaster relief and recovery organizations, there
are a variety of organizational logics at play that represent a wide spectrum of
organizational missions, service delivery models, and organizational relationships active
in the disaster zone (Doerfel, Lai, & Chewning, 2010; Harris, Carestia, & Fedorova 2017;
Majchrzak, Jarvenpaa, & Hollingshead, 2007). While nonprofit organizations tend to
dominate the disaster relief and recovery field both nationally and internationally, publicand private sector organizations play a major role in emergency response and long-term
recovery. Disaster relief and recovery organizations include public agencies such as
FEMA, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Small Business
Administration, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development ([HUD] 2013)

10

at the federal level (Anderson, 2002). At the state level, these public agencies may
include Offices of Emergency Management, the Department of Community Affairs,
Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of Environmental
Protection (Kapucu, Arslan, & Collins, 2010; State of New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, n.d.). Locally, Offices of Emergency Management, mayors’ offices,
business administrators, and town clerks are key players in disaster relief and recovery
(Harris & Doerfel, 2016). However, the key players in long-term recovery are often
rooted in the plural sector and comprised mainly of nonprofits and faith-based
organizations ([FBOs] Harris & Doerfel, 2016, 2017; Lai, Tao, & Cheng, 2017).
Nonprofits involved in disaster relief and recovery range from large congressionally
chartered organizations such as the American Red Cross (Kosar, 2006) to FBOs such as
the United Methodist Relief Organization (UMCORE), Catholic Charities, Episcopal
Relief and Development, and Lutheran Disaster Response (DHS, 2011, 2013). Private
sector organizations active in disaster relief and recovery may include complex
consumer-facing organizations with sophisticated supply chains, such as Home Depot,
Lowes, and Walmart, as well as firms specializing in consulting and grant management
such as ICF International, Halliburton, Hammerman and Gainer, KBR Associates, and
The Shaw Group, all of which bring a market-driven approach toward disaster relief and
recovery (Adams, 2013; Browne, 2015).
Stakeholder theory provides an opportunity to better understand the
organizational relationships that underpin long-term recovery. Traditionally, stakeholder
models have provided a way of understanding economic and social organization and the
connections between organizations seeking to solve similar problems or that share similar

11

organizational missions or operating logics. Applying stakeholder theory to an
understanding of long-term recovery after disaster provides an analytical model for the
development of a framework that accounts for the organizational relationships and
sequencing of organizational activities required for multiyear processes of long-term
recovery. Stakeholder theory, however, rests upon certain assumptions of economic and
social theory that vary by country or region. Using traditional models of Anglo-American
stakeholder theory misses key elements of communication, coordination, and embedded
social relationships that are critical to understanding how long-term recovery processes
depend upon networked stakeholders to identify problems, define solutions, and connect
communities and residents with resources in a disaster-impacted area such as coastal New
Jersey.
Models of Stakeholder Relations Across Countries and Regions
Differences in stakeholder models across countries and regions reflect differences
in economic and social organization (G. Jackson & Deeg, 2008). These differences
reflect how capital was organized during the emergence of industrial processes and the
rise of big business in the 19th and 20th centuries (Perrow, 2014; Sklar, 1988; Wiebe,
1967), and led to differences in institutional arrangements of work, management,
community, government relations, employment, and professional or managerial
associations. The ways in which institutions are arranged reflect the organization of
society and the political philosophies underpinning the development of markets and
contracts, and the rules governing work and social interactions (Aoki, 2001; de
Tocqueville, 2000; Goffman, 1983; P. A. Hall & Thelen, 2008; Sklar, 1988). Institutional
arrangements, in turn, shape how organizational activities such as goal setting, division of

12

tasks, roles, or functions, problem solving, decision making, communication, and
coordination are conducted within and across organizations.
Within the United States, the function of the executive was given early
prominence as managerial capitalism developed to coordinate communication and
workflows, allocate resources, and manage employee relations among increasingly large,
increasingly differentiated industrial organizations (Barnard, 1938; Perrow, 2014).
Lately, this tradition of professional management has been challenged as owners of
capital seek to control their firms directly and place greater emphasis on financial knowhow than on managerial know-how (Davis, 2009; Fama & Jensen, 1983). The AngloAmerican model of organizing differs from European models, in which technical knowhow and paternalistic management (German) and communicative and management skills
(Nordic) place an emphasis on social relations and governance processes, in addition to
economic ownership and financial performance (Byrkjeflot, 2003). These different
configurations of social, economic, and institutional arrangements shape communication
practices and the underlying social and communication processes by which organizations
operate.
Nordic models of capitalism reflect the social democratic trends of Nordic nations
and a “middle way” tradition that sought to build an industrial society that emphasized
labor-management cooperation rather than the worker/management conflict that marked
the American and British transitions to industrialism (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Rhenman, 1968).
Within Nordic social democracies, the role of management is to build trust and to
negotiate among the competing demands and interests of business owners, workers,
farmers, intellectuals, and managers themselves. Rather than focus on collective

13

bargaining and grievance procedures or the outright control of capital over workers and
workplace dynamics, as is often the case in the United States, the achievement of
consensus among conflicting groups lies at the heart of constitutional management in
Nordic nations (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Strand & Freeman, 2015). Constitutional, or
communicative, management reflects the broader inclusion of social governance and
political rights within industrialism and in the development of markets in these northern
European countries. This process of communicative management underlies the traditions
of participatory management and processes of industrial democracy prevalent in these
countries.
Consensus, communication, and collaboration are important parts of the longterm recovery process, as well as principles of participatory democracy and management.
Multiple organizations are required to work with one another to achieve the goals of a
long-term recovery process. Specific recovery goals may vary by region or community,
but all long-term recovery requires processes that (a) distribute financial assistance; (b)
enable reconstruction and rebuilding; (c) provide emotional, spiritual, and social support;
and (d) coordinate among multiple programs, organizations, and agencies active in the
recovery process.
Institutional failures and the inability of institutions to solve critical social and
economic problems are a result of an overreliance upon private organizations and marketdriven models and an imbalance between the private, public, and plural sectors
(Mintzberg, 2015; Mintzberg & Azevedo, 2012) and has been reflected in some of the
key failures of post-disaster recovery over the last decade (Adams, 2013; Browne, 2015).
Successful long-term recovery requires cross-sector relationships operating on an equal

14

footing among the private, public, and plural sectors. Traditionally thought of as the
nonprofit or third sector, the plural sector is that broad range of organizations that are
neither privately owned nor are they public organizations enacted via a constitution,
legislation, statute, rulemaking, or regulation. Plural sector organizations include
traditional nonprofits, consumer and producer cooperatives, foundations and
philanthropic organizations, labor unions, and social enterprises (Mintzberg, 2015). In
disaster-impacted communities, emergent or pop-up organizations addressing
neighborhood or community disaster recovery issues are primarily plural sector
organizations and may be either formally or informally organized. Communication,
coordination, and collaboration across all these sectors and organizations is crucial for the
establishment of effective long-term recovery in disaster-impacted communities.
The development of constitutional management and the idea of consensus forged
through communication about economic life in the Nordic nations was enacted through
conflict between people and organizations in multiple social and industrial sectors, and
not just out of a democratic ideal (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Rhenman, 1968). Farmers, laborers,
skilled craftspeople, managers, and business owners all competed over resources and
governance arrangements during the Nordic industrialization period. Although
communicative management, or management through communication, is now a norm
within these countries, it is a negotiated norm that mediates conflicting social and
economic interests among different classes and occupations over power and resources.
Negotiated norms of communication and consensus are critically important for effective
stakeholder relationships in long-term recovery. However, tension and conflict may mark
stakeholder relations in disaster-impacted communities when organizations jockey for

15

position as the focal organization or primary stakeholder serving the impacted
community. Such jockeying is often found among non-local organizations with national
or international scope that enter disaster-impacted communities with certain expertise or
resources. Such jockeying among externally oriented stakeholders may often ignore the
underlying expertise or resources of existing local stakeholders who are part of the
embedded civic network in a disaster-impacted region or community (Ansell, 2003;
Diani, 2015; Harris & Doerfel, 2016).
As a negotiated norm, communicative management is a communication practice
that can be designed as a way to forge consensus around joint interests while mitigating
or downplaying overt conflicts over power or resources. Communicative management
requires an understanding of organizations and interorganizational relationships as part of
a larger community and the integration of market forces within this broader community.
Communicative management is a communication practice that is necessary for effective
long-term recovery processes. Communicative management requires communication,
coordination, and collaboration among diverse sets of stakeholders in disaster-impacted
communities to enact the stakeholder relationships necessary to provide financial and
material assistance, coordinate the complex set of tasks associated with rebuilding and
reconstruction, and ensure that adequate emotional, spiritual, and social support is
provided.
Nordic Models of Stakeholder Relationships
What differentiates Nordic models of stakeholder engagement from AngloAmerican, or traditional, models of stakeholder management are the erosion or
elimination of the distinction between primary and secondary stakeholders and an

16

emphasis on collaborative communication. Organizational theory in Scandinavia rests
upon a foundation of political citizenship in which the primary units of association “were
primarily voluntary associations, unions, local governments, and political parties”
(Brykjeflot 2003, p. 13). Private enterprise, or the for-profit firm, was embedded within
these relationships and leadership rested upon the ability of an individual or organization
to negotiate and mediate among conflicting social, economic, political, and
organizational governance models. Brykjeflot (2003) framed this approach as
“constitutional management” (pp. 21–23), which had as its primary goal the moderation
of market forces and their potential negative impacts on workers and communities.
Nordic models of organization theory hold that political, social, and economic
citizenship are intertwined (Byrkjeflot, 2003). Political citizenship rests upon a
foundation of political parties and social movements that mobilize non-elite citizens such
as workers and farmers, providing them with equal voice in the political process. Social
citizenship rests upon a foundation of social benefits provided through a social welfare
state in which human development needs are met through state rather than employer or
individual responsibility for health care, daycare, family leave, educational access, and
retirement. Economic citizenship represents both the rights of workers and the rights of
management, and these relationships have typically been mediated through processes of
participative management and industrial democracy (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Rhenman, 1968).
These processes are similar to the processes of long-term recovery in which social,
political, and economic or organizational relationships provide the foundation through
which networked stakeholders are able to mutually identify problems, develop potential

17

solutions, divide tasks, and coordinate the resources needed for individual and
community rebuilding and recovery.
Participative management within this framework involves participation in the
processes of decision making. These processes of decision making include problem
identification, goal setting, norms of participation and boundary setting, problem solving,
and formal decision making—the act of choosing an outcome or solution out of a range
of possible outcomes or solutions (Rhenman, 1968, pp. 60–66). The emergence of global
models of communication, consumption, and investment have begun to erode some of the
more traditional models of Scandinavian participatory management and industrial
democracy as cross-border mergers and acquisitions of Scandinavian firms have created
blended multinational organizations with different norms rooted in different governance
models (Wieland, 2011). The blending of more traditional models of Scandinavian
models of management and governance with globalized organizational and economic
norms has created new sources of conflict over resources, power, and governance that
have an impact on social and organizational relationships among workers, citizens,
consumers, and leadership at both local and global levels.
Similar to Deetz (1995), Rhenman’s (1968) processes of decision making blended
notions of ownership and appropriate stakeholder representation. One of the key
challenges in contemporary society, according to Deetz, is the identification of these
representative interests within processes of decision making. The notion of ownership
and the sites of decision making have become increasingly contested as the lines between
public and private decision making have blurred and public functions and resources have
been offloaded to the private and plural sectors (Milward & Provan, 2000). The

18

challenge, Deetz argued, is the role of private capital and economically oriented
management processes within complex decision-making processes. Within AngloAmerican models, financial reward and economic outcome are viewed as the main
measures of success and failure. Instead, a stewardship model of decision making, Deetz
argued, would be more likely to move organizational leaders toward consideration of the
complex web of relationships that connect private and public stakeholders. However,
such a stewardship model requires both formal and informal authority to be granted or
delegated to managers and other key decision makers. It is only through the broadly
participative delegation of formal and informal authority among key decision makers or
stakeholders that a more equal approach to communication and negotiation can take
place.
Authority itself can be based on either power or shared goals. However,
acceptance of shared goals is often predicated upon one of two parties having superior
knowledge or know-how over the other. Rhenman (1968) defined authority as a social
relationship between two parties in which one party responds to and implements
directions from the other. Two or more parties may agree that they share certain goals or
desired outcomes, but one party defers to the other because it perceives the other as
having superior information or know-how, rather than a particular place in the hierarchy
or a certain social status. Authority based on power derives from the ability of one party
to sanction or reward the other party. In the Nordic stakeholder model, status and prestige
may also play a role in perceived and actual authority in decision making and
participative management. Distinctions may be made between status based on the role a
stakeholder plays and the prestige of a particular person or type of role, but in general, the

19

authority of roles and positions may depend as much upon status as it does upon power or
shared goals (Rhenman, 1968, pp. 67–70).
Positionality and role are important aspects of stakeholder relationships and shape
the communication activities and work practices of networked stakeholders.
Communication networks are a set of interdependent relationships that mediate
informational, financial, and communication flows and provide an opportunity for or
constraint on possible communication and work practices in an interorganizational
relationship (Monge & Contractor, 2003). Within Nordic models of stakeholder
relationships, power, information, resources, and influence flow between workers,
management, the community, and a larger set of social institutions that include unions,
employer associations, regulatory agencies, multilateral financial institutions (e.g., The
World Bank), and third-party certifiers (e.g., the World Fair Trade Organization). Within
these relationships, authority is derived from knowledge (about an industry, certain
sustainability practices, worker health and safety, financial performance, competitive
threats, and so on) and role (e.g., manager, worker, government official, regulator,
community member, representative of a nongovernmental organization). Status and
prestige may also play a role in perceived and actual authority within these stakeholder
networks. Highly educated managers from a multinational forest products company may
be perceived as having a certain level of prestige and status in addition to technical knowhow in a Himalayan mountain village, whereas a locally based agriculture specialist may
be seen as having only technical know-how related to a specific region. The number of
possible permutations in roles and positions within a stakeholder relationship requires
participative, decentralized, and transparent governance. These extended relationships

20

and roles are similar to the extended set of relationships and roles necessary to execute
long-term recovery in disaster-impacted communities (DHS, 2011; Rubin, 2009; U.S.
Government Accountability Office [GAO], 2016).
Contemporary Nordic stakeholder models reflect a decentralized model of
embedded relationships often organized around notions of collaborative and participatory
governance. Within these embedded sets of relationships, organizational and community
interests are often entwined. Over a 40-year period, Novo Nordisk evolved its model of
stakeholder relationships from one of firm-centricity, under which Novo Nordisk
operated within a hub and spoke model of primary and secondary stakeholders (Strand &
Freeman, 2015), to one of an extended web. In the model of firm-centricity, Novo
Nordisk specifically managed the individual relationships between the firm, employees,
customers, suppliers, and investors. Novo Nordisk evolved this classic model of
stakeholder relationships toward a model in which the company locates its operations and
relationships within a diverse web of interorganizational relationships embedded in
multiple social and cultural contexts across the globe.
The evolution of organization at Novo Nordisk simultaneously supports and
refutes Byrkjeflot’s (2003) contention that Nordic models of management began to
dissolve in the 1980s and 1990s as global capitalism began increasingly to reshape the
social and cultural contexts in which firms and organizations operate. The rise of global
capital and borderless organizations also gave rise to a form of communicative
management based upon compromise, negotiation, and democratic-participative modes of
social interaction that supported the increasingly important role that knowledge- and
service-based industries were playing in national and global economies. This model also

21

takes into account the increased numbers of cultures and social contexts in which
organizations are operating. Operating as a set of networked stakeholders within
particular countries and cultures creates opportunities for shared expertise, local
knowledge, and joint problem solving to become norms of participation and stakeholder
engagement.
However, media management play important roles in this contemporary
stakeholder environment as the management of meaning begins to displace the social
interaction of citizens as a principal organizing process within organizational, social, and
political life (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Deetz, 1992, 1995). This increased role of media and
meaning management in contemporary stakeholder management is reflected in the
emphasis of the American Red Cross on media, marketing, and public affairs, even
during the emergency response phase of disasters. During the response to Hurricane
Sandy, residents of New Jersey shore communities, current and former Red Cross
volunteers, and local officials reported that the American Red Cross was using its
transportation fleet for public relations efforts rather than service delivery of needed
resources to residents and communities affected by the event (J. Elliot & Eisinger, 2014).
Leadership at the American Red Cross uses a market-driven approach and emphasizes the
role of marketing, media, and public relations in connecting an organization with larger
publics and in setting the parameters of public debate and participation in
interorganizational relationships (Briones, Kuch, Liu, & Jin, 2011; J. Elliott, 2015;
McGovern, Court, Quelch, & Crawford, 2004). As the only congressionally chartered
disaster relief agency in the United States (Kosar, 2006), the American Red Cross uses

22

communicative management to define its position as the primary federal partner in
disaster response and its role as the primary provider of expertise and know-how.
Communicative management is used to establish and reinforce the position of the
American Red Cross as the focal organization within a hub and spoke stakeholder model
of nonprofit disaster response, rather than as a partner within an embedded community or
regional disaster response network (Ambinder et al., 2013; DHS, 2008, 2013; J. Elliott &
Eisinger, 2014). However, during disasters of the magnitude of Sandy, Katrina, Harvey,
and Maria, stakeholder networks that blur the distinction between primary and secondary
stakeholders emerge as crucial conduits of information, supplies, financial assistance, and
social support (Harris & Doerfel, 2016), and a wide variety of organizations may play
brokerage roles in which they connect multiple stakeholders and coordinate the
movement of resources and expertise to communities impacted by disasters (Lind,
Tirado, Butts, & Petrescu-Prahova, 2008). In these circumstances, the meaning and media
management practices of the American Red Cross come into conflict with the broader
needs of the community and on-the-ground, real-time partnering efforts between the
different organizations responding to the initial disaster and then enacting long-term
recovery efforts. Management of conflict between the American Red Cross and
community stakeholders, as well as across the broader nonprofit community, thus
becomes a defining feature of stakeholder networks operating in communities impacted
by disaster (Ambinder et al., 2013; J. Elliot & Eisinger, 2014; Harris & Doerfel, 2017).
Collaboration and Communication Among Networked Stakeholders
Within Nordic models of stakeholder relationships jointness of interests,
cooperative strategic postures, and a broader economic view of the firm and society

23

(Strand & Freeman, 2015) are the foundational pillars of stakeholder engagement. This
model prioritizes cross-sector relationships built around collaborative communication
(Deetz, 2017) and collaborative governance (Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015). Collaborative
governance places communication and management in the hands of the stakeholder, with
each networked stakeholder responsible for healthy and effective processes of
communication and coordination (Deetz, 2017; Koschmann, 2013; Koschmann, Kuhn, &
Pfarrer, 2012).
Communication is designed through networked stakeholders who collectively
decide upon the communication activities and work practices that support the issues at
hand, such as long-term recovery after disaster. These activities and practices are
designed not only to meet the stated goals and desired outcomes of funding organizations
and public agencies with rulemaking and regulatory responsibilities, but also to meet the
needs of the communities and people served by the stakeholder network (Aakhus &
Bzdak, 2015; Barbour & Gill, 2014; Koschmann, 2013). Stakeholder theory, then, rests
upon a foundation of multiparty collaborative communication (Deetz, 1992, 1995, 2017).
Like collaborative governance (Ansell, 2003), collaborative communication proceeds
from the assumption that social, economic, and environmental problems are entwined and
that stakeholders and their associated organizational and interorganizational networks are
embedded within these broader social, economic, and environmental contexts.
Communication design. Communication design places the problems and
practices of communication front and center in social and organizational life (Aakhus,
2007; Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015; S. Jackson & Aakhus, 2014). Communication design is a
way of making visible the potential outcomes and processes of communication activities

24

that shape the organizing processes of communities and organizations. In some ways,
communication design can be understood as a type of reverse engineering in which we
look at particular outcomes of communication practices and processes and work
backward to identify areas of communication breakdown and areas for potential
improvement (Aakhus, 2007, 2015). Combined with a social constructionist grounded
theory approach, communication design enables the creation of communication
interventions that may strengthen interorganizational collaborations and relationships by
creating possibilities for collaborative communication. Long-term recovery after disaster
rests upon a foundation of meetings, case management processes, phone calls, and emails through which information about residents impacted by disaster or recovery, the
unmet needs of residents, available funds, municipal permitting processes, new or
extended assistance programs, state and federal documentation, and organizational
capacity is shared among organizations engaged in long-term recovery. In long-term
recovery, communication practices shape the organizing processes necessary for restoring
some sense of normalcy through a rebuilding and reconstruction process. Understanding
organizational competencies and capacity, organizational activities, and how
organizational competencies are sequenced over time is critically important for
developing the knowledge to intervene and build stronger communication practices that
strengthen stakeholder networks and the processes of long-term recovery.
Communication practices. Communication practices are the organizational
forms in which language and interaction occur within an interorganizational
collaboration. By employing communication practices, responding agencies organize and
connect thoughts, activities, goals, and outcomes within communities and organizations

25

seeking to rebuild after disaster (Goffman, 1983; Orlikowski, 2002; Stigliani & Ravasi,
2012). Organizational and communication activities engage and empower networked
stakeholder relationships as part of long-recovery processes. These organizational
practices help shape the interorganizational relationships that compose the social
infrastructure of a community and contribute to social resilience.
Communication practices are the enactment of speech-oriented communication
processes into a coherent set of activities that make use of encapsulated technologies,
tools, or gatherings that communicate ideas, interpretations, or shared meanings among
people seeking shared goals and outcomes. Communication practices are typically
constructed through the comprehensive application of organizational communication that
includes the memo, presentation software, spreadsheet software, statistical tools, mapping
software, databases, e-mail and social media, public commenting, public testimony, and
rulemaking (Kaplan, 2011; Sprain & Boromisza-Habashi, 2012; Yates & Orlikowski,
1992). Understanding communication practices in this way allows us to attend to the
larger communication patterns and processes that compose the collaborative
communication of networked stakeholders. Communication practices provide insights
into the ways in which networked stakeholder relationships are formed and maintained
within communities. As such, by identifying the communication practices used during
processes of long-term recovery, we can identify the ways in which networked
stakeholders come together and begin to build an understanding of the organizational
activities that shape the organizational landscape of disaster-impacted communities. This
understanding of organizational activities defines multi-stakeholder models of

26

collaboration as a communication practice that builds networked stakeholder
relationships over time.
Non-Nordic Models of Stakeholder Relationships
To fully understand the implications of communication-based Nordic models of
stakeholder relationships, there is a need to consider the non-Nordic models of
stakeholder relationships. The following sections address Anglo-American models,
German-Swiss models, and natural resources management approaches to stakeholder
relationships. Assessing different cultural and disciplinary approaches to stakeholder
theory provides a stronger framework for moving stakeholder theory toward a process of
networked stakeholder relationships organized around collaborative communication.
Anglo-American models of stakeholder relationships. Anglo-American models
of stakeholder relationships are oriented toward the shareholder rather than the
stakeholder and focus on value creation rather than collaborative communication. These
approaches are also the traditional models thought of in stakeholder theory and analysis
(R. E. Freeman et al., 2010; Laplume, Sonpar, & Litz, 2008). Within the traditional
model of Anglo-American stakeholder relationships, stakeholders are treated as
constituent parts of an organization to be managed, rather than as autonomous entities
with their own set of relationships (R. E. Freeman, 1984; R. E. Freeman et al., 2010;
Miles, 2015). These relationships tend to be transactional rather than relational and orient
the interorganizational relationships in Anglo-American stakeholder models toward
exchanges of financial, informational, material, and reputational resources rather than
participatory models of social and organizational interaction in which joint problem
identification, problem solving, and decision making take precedence.

27

Distinctions between primary and secondary stakeholders and between social
issues and stakeholder issues are most pronounced in Anglo-American models.
Appropriate stakeholder issues are defined as the organization itself, employees,
shareholders, customers, employees, and suppliers. Public stakeholder issues are defined
as health, energy, environmental issues and public policies, community relations, and
social investments (Clarkson, 1995). In this formulation, public stakeholder issues are
stakeholder issues only insofar as they directly affect the organization. Broader business
and social issues are managed at the organizational level as part of a corporate social
responsibility strategy. R. E. Freeman (1984) and R. E. Freeman et al. (2010) broke down
stakeholders into internally and externally focused shareholders, with owners, customers,
employees, and suppliers comprising one set of stakeholders and the government or
public agencies, competitors, consumer and environmental advocates, the media, and
various associations and special interest groups comprising a second, externally oriented
set of stakeholders. Granted, R. E. Freeman (1984) and R. E. Freeman et al. (2010)
moved toward a more holistic conception of stakeholder relationships in revisiting
Scandinavian organization theory and stakeholder models (Strand & Freeman, 2015), but
these formative Anglo-American models as articulated originally by R. E. Freeman
(1984) still tend to be contractually based, with executed contracts taking precedence
over social and employment rights (Mesure, 2005).
The contractual nature of Anglo-American models is what orients these models
toward transaction-based strategic initiatives and away from models of collaborative
communication. Concepts of shared values supersede concepts of collaborative
communication because the logic of shared value aligns more directly with contractual

28

obligations and shareholder-oriented conceptions of the firm (Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015; M.
E. Porter & Kramer, 2011). In this model, shared value represents an economic
framework that emphasizes profitability as a joint function of corporate and social
interests. The profit motive remains central in this framework, and market-driven
governance is the primary organizing mechanism of both business and society (Aakhus &
Bzdak, 2015; pp. 192–193). This dichotomy makes it difficult to move toward a principal
of jointness of interests and collaborative communication because Anglo-American
models are organized at the individual and organizational levels rather than as a set of
social relations and obligations. Further compounding these issues are the contractual
nature of Anglo-American stakeholder relationships in which contracts are executed as
two-party or multiparty transactions among individuals and organizations, rather than
being embedded within a broader set of governance models and social norms that
prioritize cooperation over economically determined value.
Cooperation as governance: German-Swiss stakeholder models. German
models of stakeholder relationships are organized around cooperative principals
governing management/labor relations that are enshrined in German law (Byrkjeflot,
2003; G. Jackson, 2005). German-Swiss social and economic arrangements have been
referred to as a Rhine or Rhinish model characterized by social consensus, egalitarian
values, community-based employment and organizational ecosystems, long-term
strategic approaches to capital investment and finance, social rather than employment
benefits, and a limited role for religion in economic and social life (Peck & Theodore,
2007). In Albert’s (1993) original formulation, the Rhinish model also included the

29

Netherlands, parts of Scandinavia, and was even extended to include Japan—all countries
that emphasize organizational models built around consensus and employee inclusion.
The Rhinish model of stakeholder relationships emphasizes the formal
organization of workers, managers, and state institutions into cooperative arrangements in
which decisions related to employment rights, allocation of resources, deployment of
capital, and strategy formation are worked out cooperatively and decisions often made
jointly. Unlike Nordic models of stakeholder management, according to the Rhinish
model, cooperative governance at organizational and institutional levels is institutionally
configured and a matter of law in Germanic countries. Although this approach does result
in employee participation and consensus building, the need for highly developed models
of collaborative communication is less pressing than in the Nordic nations because of the
institutional frameworks that shape interorganizational relationships and interactions in
Germanic countries. However, unlike the Anglo-American model, German-Swiss
stakeholder relationships are predicated upon an embedded web of social and
organizational relationships that erode distinctions between primary and secondary
stakeholders. Within these European models of stakeholder relations, participation and
consensus building throughout the problem-solving and decision-making phases are
critical parts of stakeholder engagement.
Models of stakeholder relationships in natural resources management. While
literature on communication, management, and strategy focus on the organizational and
interorganizational dimensions of stakeholder relationships, scholars and practitioners in
natural resources management, policy studies, and international development
conceptualize stakeholder relationships as a way of identifying those sidelined or ignored

30

in decision making processes and bringing them into processes of decision making and
governance (Reed et al., 2009; D. Scott & Oelofse, 2005). The emphasis on stakeholder
relationships as people rather than organizations (see also Taylor & Doerfel, 2011) or
interorganizational relationships (see also Taylor & Doerfel, 2011) tends to align
stakeholder engagement within the natural resources community with contemporary
models of Nordic stakeholder engagement in which democratic participation,
collaborative communication, and a view of stakeholder relationships as embedded
within communities prevails (Strand & Freeman, 2015). Authors of the natural resources
literature still struggle with the same problems of scope, inclusion, and boundaries within
stakeholder analysis that management and communication literatures traditionally have.
Although the focus on participation and inclusion is paramount for stakeholder
engagement within the natural resources community, issues of power and manipulation
may still arise and have an adverse impact on the inclusion and attention paid to certain
groups of stakeholders (Reed et al., 2009, pp. 1934–1935).
Issues of hazardous waste siting in urban environments are prime examples of
conflicts among different groups of stakeholders in a community. Hazardous waste siting
often tests notions of participatory decision making and reinforces traditional power
structures within communities. Participation may be constrained by the embedded
sociohistorical framework in which participatory activities take place. These embedded
sociohistorical frameworks could constrain the ability of marginalized populations to
shape their community and built environments in a way that minimizes the location of
noxious and hazardous facilities (Pellow, 2000; Sze, 2007; Szasz, 1994). Low land
values, existing approaches to managing toxic, hazardous, and noxious waste disposal,

31

and lack of organized community stakeholder opposition usually results in the replication
of existing decision-making practices and land use policies that disproportionately harm
communities of color, vulnerable populations, and low-income communities.
The introduction of recycling and waste management plants into South Side
Chicago as part of a move from garbage disposal to “green technologies” was part of a
multi-stakeholder process influenced by political and industry stakeholders in greater
Chicago. Rather than being an exercise in deliberative democracy, neighborhood
participation, or participatory planning, this stakeholder process was heavily influenced
by corporate and political demands and marked by a lack of participation by organized
labor and workers. This imbalance resulted in a South Side Chicago recycling facility
operating in ways that proved dangerous to workers at the plant, the siting of which was
in the midst of communities of color that already bore a disproportionate share of the
waste disposal and hazardous industries of the city. This multi-stakeholder process, while
ostensibly collaborative, resulted in South Side communities and workers bearing the
brunt of the environmental hazards associated with the operation of a recycling facility,
while the broader Chicagoland community benefitted from the perceived advantages of a
green technology to replace existing land use, air quality, and transportation challenges
associated with traditional solid waste disposal and garbage hauling practices (Pellow
2000).
Stakeholder engagement in natural resources management is not solely about
giving voice to the voiceless and including the dispossessed in those governance
processes related to land and natural resources. Stakeholder engagement can also be used
as a tool for decision makers and power brokers to gain buy-in to policies and plans and

32

to overcome obstacles and local opposition. These instrumental approaches tend to
privilege technical problem solving, organizational leadership, and elite agenda setting
over a bottoms-up approach to information gathering, problem definition, stakeholder
identification and stakeholder inclusion. These problems mirror the issues of power and
authority within the processes of decision making in industrial democracies raised by
Rhenman (1968), and the issues of representation and control identified by Deetz (1992,
1995, 2017) as obstacles to consensus building in complex governance issues that cross
public/private boundaries. When stakeholder engagement is conducted in such an
instrumental way, community members may feel the participatory dimension of the
stakeholder engagement process missing or may feel they lack the knowledge needed to
participate and make meaningful contributions to solving complex problems facing their
communities.
Traditional Models of Stakeholder Relationships
Stakeholder theory provides a framework for understanding the purpose of an
organization and the multilayered social and organizational relationships that comprise
the internal operations and external environment of an organization (R. E. Freeman,
1984; R. E. Freeman et al., 2004). Traditionally developed as a model of corporate
relationships within the external environment of an organization, stakeholder models
have been expanded to include stakeholder networks, management of natural resources,
and the embedded nature of organizational and community relationships (Granovetter,
1985; Reed et al., 2009; Rowley, 1997; Strand & Freeman, 2015). Stakeholder
relationships require an understanding of which organizations constitute the stakeholders
of the firm—those organizations that have a stake in the issue, organization, or

33

community at hand—and a definition of the particular stake at hand. Traditionally, firm
has referred to for-profit organizations engaged in economic transactions. Firms can be
organizations, but the term firm refers to a much broader set of organizations active
across the private, plural, and public sectors and comprising a variety of economic and
operating models (Coase, 1937; Mintzberg, 2015) that guide the mission, purpose, and
relationships of the organization.
Traditionally, stakeholder theory defined stakes along two different dimensions.
The first dimension focused on the different types of organizations holding different
types of stakes within an organization or that are related to an organizational outcome. By
tradition, these stakes include equity (ownership), market (customers and suppliers), and
government (influence or persuasion). The second dimension of stakeholder relationships
emphasizes power, or the application of resources to create a desired outcome. Power in
classic stakeholder theory is defined as economic power (price, switching ability, supply,
investment), voting power (ability of owners to vote for preferred directors, managers, or
stock market activity), and political power (legislative, regulatory, or legal activities; R.
E. Freeman, 1984).
Contemporary stakeholder theory emerged from strategic management
approaches to corporate strategy. Classic strategic management focused on the
management of the core assets of the company, which were usually defined as plants,
properties, people, and equipment. Strategic management was designed to understand the
operation of the whole firm and to provide a focused disciplinary background for
emerging general managers from leading business schools to engage in the management
of increasingly complex, increasingly global organizations (Kiechel, 2010).

34

Strategic management approaches to stakeholder theory place more emphasis on
cooperative relationships than traditional competitive strategy models, which primarily
emphasize competitive advantage and shared value creation over a model of cooperation
rooted in shared social and organizational identities and environments (Aakhus & Bzdak,
2015; R. E. Freeman et al., 2004; M. E. Porter, 1980). Stakeholder theory stands in
marked contrast to shareholder-driven, free-market models of corporate strategy, the aim
of which is to maximize profit and financial returns to shareholders (Fama & Jensen,
1983; Williamson, 1973) regardless of impact to employees, the community, or local
ecologies. Ethics and economics are not separate in stakeholder theory; rather, they are
interrelated. This concern with values and purpose, rather than a strict accounting of
value creation and investment return, advances an idea of corporate and organizational
life in which social relations, democratic practices of management and decision making,
joint problem solving, and interorganizational collaboration become salient to the
operation of the firm and to the execution of the strategy of the firm (Deetz, 1992, 1995;
Deetz, Tracy, & Simpson, 2000).
Contemporary corporate strategy is typically focused on financial questions and
shareholder wealth within a framework where shareholder concerns and shareholder
rights predominate organizational decision making (Davis, 2009; Fama & Jensen, 1983;
Ott, 2011; Posner, 1974). In contrast, traditional theories of stakeholder relationships
view the business environment as a set of cooperative relationships in which businesses
manage their organizational relationships as a symbiotic relationship between the
business, investors, employees, customers, suppliers, media, and community and
environmental organizations representing specific social and environmental issues.

35
Stakes in Interorganizational Relationships
Classic stakeholder theory defines stakeholders—those with a stake—as groups or
people who are mutually dependent upon one another and who are able to make an
impact on the achievement of individual or organizational goals (R. E. Freeman, 1984;
Rhenman, 1968). Within R. E. Freeman’s (1984) stakeholder framework, stakeholders
are organizations, groups, or individuals without whose support the firm would seek to
exist. In their review of stakeholder theory, Strand and Freeman (2015) highlighted the
expansion of stakeholder interests among Scandinavian companies to include child labor,
human rights, long-term, stable investments in communities where the business
operations of global companies are located, and broad sustainability practices related to
forestry and agriculture.
Traditionally, stakeholder theory is concerned with organizational survivability
and may serve as both a social theory of the firm and an action theory of the firm (Strand,
2015, p. 91). As a social theory of the firm, stakeholder theories embed economic
transactions and relationships within social relations. It is this view, articulated by Näsi
(as cited in Strand, 2015), that entwines stakeholder theory with notions of political
citizenship in which organizations are both an actor that “cements” community
relationships (Diani, 2015) and a focal organization, or primary stakeholder, that has
stakes in other organizations, which in turn have stakes in the focal organization
(Clarkson, 1995; R. E. Freeman, 1984; Rowley, 1997). An action theory of the firm
frames stakeholder relationships as a series of interactions among organizations with
similar goals and motives (Strand 2015). Both these articulations place collaborative
communication as the core process of stakeholder relationships and follow Deetz’s

36

articulation of communication as the means of improving both organizational and civic
life (Deetz, 1992, 1995, 2017; Deetz et al., 2000). The interaction among stakeholders
and the mediation of their conflicting interests are the processes that contribute to
organizational survivability. Stakeholder interactions, then, are the key to the
maintenance of the organizational model and operations of the firm. In long-term
recovery, interactions among stakeholders make the operation of recovery efforts and the
survivability of the community possible.
Rhenman’s (1968) initial stakeholder framework included the community as a key
stakeholder because of the mutual dependence between state and society in enacting the
economic, organizational, and social processes that shape communication practices,
collaboration, and governance. The tension between stakes as economic interdependence
among employers, employees, suppliers, customers, competitors, public agencies, and
stakes as a broader set of relations between organizations and their external environments
pervades the history and literature of stakeholder theory. However, framing stakeholder
governance primarily as a mutually dependent exchange of resources necessary to
organizational survival reduces stakeholder complexity to a coldly rational calculation of
economic costs and benefits (Deetz, 1992, 1995). Such an approach ignores human
complexities and the web of interdependent relationships that compose the communities
in which stakeholder relations take place and decisions are made. Stakeholder
relationships may be goal dependent—that is, organizations have both independent and
interdependent goals, which contribute to their maintenance, and survivability over time
(Strand 2015).

37

Stakes as Contributions and Rewards
At its heart, stakeholder theory is about the claims that different organizations
have upon one another. As part of an understanding of long-term recovery processes,
stakeholder theory can be extended to interrogate the claims that communities have upon
organizations and the claims that organizations have upon both (a) the communities in
which the organizations are actively engaged in recovery efforts; and (b) the
organizational partners with which they engage through long-term recovery groups, state
and local VOADs, and similar coordinating entities. In contrast to Anglo-American
models of stakeholder theory that emphasize interests, shares, or economic and political
power, traditional Scandinavian stakeholder models emphasize contribution and reward
as the key interactive mechanism among stakeholders (Strand 2015). Stakeholders
contribute to these interdependent relationship in some way that is unique to their
organizational, mission, goals, or resources and are then rewarded by other organizational
contributors who offer their own unique set of organizational competencies to the
endeavor.
Traditional stakeholder contributions and rewards include financial, material, and
informational goods, as well as power, status, and prestige (Strand 2015; Strand &
Freeman, 2015). This framework has strong parallels with the symbiotic sustainability
model (Shumate, Hsieh, & O’Connor, 2016; Shumate & O’Connor, 2010) in which
nonprofits and businesses partners exchange needed resources, information, reputation,
and identity as a way of influencing outcomes in their niches and meeting their
organizational goals. The symbiotic sustainability model emphasizes cross-sector
alliances between for-profit and nonprofit firms, but its framework may have utility for

38

understanding communication and organizing practices involved in interdependent
processes such as long-term recovery after disaster.
Stakes, Joint Interests, and Problem Solving
Stakes are joint interests that connect members of a community who share a
common goal. Within a community framework of networked stakeholders, a stake can be
defined more specifically as shared interests in problem solving related to specific
economic, social, or environmental issue(s) that have an impact in the community. Stakes
represent the mutual or symbiotic relationships and claims that different organizations
and communities have upon one another, the contributions that different organizations
bring to community and interorganizational relationships, and the rewards that accrue
from participation as a networked stakeholder in a community or organizational
ecosystem. Organizations make claims upon each other and upon the communities with
and within which they interact to increase their chances of survival, especially in
turbulent or disrupted environments. The same holds true for communities. Communities
make claims upon the organizations with which they interact to provide revenues, jobs,
technical know-how, and expertise. Organizations expect a stable environment in which
to operate in. During times of disruption or turbulence, these claims and the mutual
dependence of communities and organizations upon each other become magnified.
Compromise, negotiation, and collaboration become increasingly important to allow all
stakeholders to jointly define goals, solve problems, and manage conflicts over
leadership, role(s), power, and resources.

39

The Multiple Stakeholder Model
While stakeholder models, by definition, always include multiple stakeholders,
Deetz (1995) argued for a multiple stakeholder model that moved beyond the narrow set
of stakeholders typically associated with the value chain or interorganizational
relationships of for-profit firms and away from the traditional emphasis on the
organization at the center of a stakeholder universe. The multiple stakeholder model
moves from the local to the global and focuses on processes of shared decision making
and negotiated meanings among a broad range of organizational and community actors,
rather than on exchanges of resources and profit-seeking motives among firms. The
multiple stakeholder model encompasses the private, public, and plural sectors, with each
sector considering organizational issues, interorganizational relationships, and social
concerns as part of their decision-making and partnering processes (Harris & Doerfel,
2016; Mintzberg, 2015; Mintzberg & Azevedo, 2012).
Similar to R. E. Freeman’s (1984) stakeholder model, Deetz’s (1995) multiple
stakeholder model includes “consumers, workers, investors, suppliers, host communities,
the general society, and the world ecological community” (p. 50). Whereas R. E.
Freeman focused on the role of stakeholders in processes of strategic management in
which stakeholders have a 1:1 relationship with a focal organization, the multiple
stakeholder model represents a model of “pluralistic interdependence” (Deetz, 2017) in
which organizations may have separate identities, missions, and goals, but are
interconnected with each other and with the broader set of social relationships within
which they are embedded. This model of multiple stakeholders has strong parallels in
contemporary Nordic stakeholder management, in particular the Novo Nordisk model of

40

both their stakeholder relationships and responsibilities (Strand & Freeman, 2015). Figure
1 depicts the Novo Nordisk (n.d.) stakeholder model as a set of complex relationships
with no one organization at the center. Within the Nordic models, for-profit firms
managing stakeholder engagements, corporate responsibility initiatives, or sustainability
programs do not conceptualize their organizations as the center of the stakeholder
universe. Instead, they see their organizations as embedded within a broader set of
organizational and community relationships.
Networked stakeholders are a set of multilayered social and organizational ties
that connect partnering organizations and communities. These social and organizational
relationships combine to create a web of social influences in which stakeholders interact
with one another to make joint decisions, enact shared goals, or influence one another
towards a desired outcome (Rowley, 1997). Networked stakeholders emerge from a web
of social and organizational relationships. These networked stakeholder relationships
have multiple layers that extend from formally enacted relationships between partnering
organizations to the interpersonal interactions that organizational members use to enact
organizational partnering and collaborative communication. Relationships between
organizations foster not only the development of trust between organizations, but also
may act as a hedge against unethical or criminal behavior such as fraud or deception
(Granovetter, 1985; Mizruchi & Fein, 1999; Uzzi, 1997).
The Symbiotic Sustainability Model: Modeling Corporate/NGO Stakeholder
Alliances
The symbiotic sustainability model (SSM) is an extension of the multiple
stakeholder model. It is an evolutionary link between a theory of private sector

41

relationships designed to make strategic management more effective and a networked
model of cross-sector relationships. In this evolved model, private and plural sector
organizations build alliances that leverage one another’s social capital to solve particular
social, organizational, and interorganizational problems.
SSM is an interorganizational communication framework that models alliances
between nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and corporations. These alliances are
designed to mobilize economic, social, cultural, and political capital on behalf of an
NGO/corporate alliance. Partnering organizations seek out one another to provide,
receive, or strengthen the strategic, operational, or reputational resources necessary for
the operation and survival of their own organizations. Because corporations and NGOs
are typically not in direct competition with one another, they are able to build symbiotic
relationships that leverage each other’s competencies to strengthen the economic,
operational, and reputational capacities of each organization (Shumate & O’Connor,
2010).
Corporations and NGOs typically inhabit different resource and identity niches
within an organizational landscape. Resource niches are the demands of time, money, and
materials placed on an organization by employees, customers, and volunteers, while
identity niches describe the various services that organizations provide or the different
operating logics and business models in use by different organizations (H. E. Aldrich &
Ruef, 2006; Shumate & O’Connor, 2010). Applying these two conceptual frameworks
reveals the different roles organizations play and the positions they may hold within an
organizational ecosystem comprising multiple organizational populations. The SSM is of
particular value for understanding interactions across the public, private, and plural

42

sectors. Organizations in each of these sectors have mission statements, goals, and
institutional logics that tend to be separate from one another and define each organization
in unique ways, even though organizations may be working closely together to solve a
particular problem or interact regularly within an interorganizational relationship.
The SSM describes the ways in which nonprofits and businesses partner to
mobilize economic, social, or political capital through the creation and maintenance of
interorganizational relationships to leverage the core strategic, operational, and
reputational resources of each organization for capital mobilization. Within the SSM,
stakeholders of each partner organization ratify the meaning and value of these alliances.
Ratification is both formal and informal and relies on assessments of the value and
meaning of these alliances to the partnering organization by concerned or interested
stakeholders. Assessments are made by considering the reasons for having formed the
alliance and the nature of the overall partnership identity being communicated from
partner organizations to their stakeholders. The partner organizations determine what is
appropriate based upon the needs of each of the partner organizations, the ability of the
partnership to increase capital, and the potential positive and negative benefits that will
accrue form the organizational partnerships.
Organizations will usually partner with similar organizations—those with similar
missions, objectives, and charters—but organizations already in a partnering relationship
may also evaluate a third organization for suitability as a partner. In a study of social
service delivery networks in Africa, researchers found that international NGOs were
more likely to partner with another NGO than with local organizations, while local NGOs
were more likely to partner with other local NGOs than with local organizations not

43

affiliated with the government. These partnering decisions were also driven by
organizational evaluations of the suitability, capabilities, and competencies of other
organizations (Atouba & Shumate, 2010, 2015). Social ties, communication patterns, and
information flows provide the foundation for these collaborative partnerships and enable
the service delivery, problem solving, and decision making necessary for these
organizations to meet their goals and fulfill their missions. Partnering operates at multiple
levels, from simple exchanges of information or resources between two similar
organizations to complex interrelationships in which suitability to partner is determined
by an array of factors including geographic proximity, organizational type or attributes,
organizational age and any specific or unusual circumstances related to the founding,
existing interorganizational relationships, and funding sources and relationships (Atouba
& Shumate, 2010; Flanagin, Monge, & Fulk, 2001; Monge & Contractor, 2003).
Although the symbiotic sustainability model is based upon corporate/nonprofit
stakeholder relationships, it has utility for understanding plural sector-focused networked
stakeholder relationships in long-term recovery. Cross-sector relationships in disasterimpacted communities are sometimes burdened by external events (i.e., the disruption of
physical, social, and organizational infrastructure); they use organizational partnering to
develop or strengthen relationships to replace or restore organizational roles and solve
problems of mutual interest to the community and its stakeholders. These partnering
activities involve nonprofits with different service missions, such as housing, food, and
mental health services, collaborating to help solve problems of long-term recovery.
Organizational partnering activities may also include cross-sector relationships between
local and regional or national nonprofits that enter into a disaster-impacted community to

44

supplement or replace local organizations active in disaster response and recovery
(Bosworth & Kreps, 1986; Butts et al., 2012; Harris & Doerfel, 2016)
In a study of nation-building in Croatia after the collapse of Yugoslavia and the
end of the subsequent civil war, Doerfel and Taylor identified the central role of founding
nonprofits within the nonprofit networks formed to rebuild democracy and establish fair
elections (Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Taylor & Doerfel, 2003). While nonprofit networks
can be formed and interorganizational relationships cultivated among nonprofits, in an
environment characterized by rebuilding after disruption, state institutions (public
agencies) and media institutions play important roles in the development and
maintenance of these networks as civil society is rebuilt and governing mechanisms
reconstructed. Funding and donor relationships also play important roles in the
development and maintenance of these nonprofit networks, particularly those that
integrate national and international nongovernmental organizations, public agencies, and
media institutions (Flanagin et al., 2001; Taylor & Doerfel, 2011). These funding
relationships may also provide donors a means of guiding organizations toward
partnerships or other forms of collaboration by expressing interest in the collaborative
activities of potential recipients of grants from grant-making organizations and
foundations (Doerfel, Atouba, & Harris, 2017).
The SSM serves as a bridge between models of multi-stakeholder and embedded
stakeholder relationships. It also serves as a path toward a more expansive framework of
networked stakeholder relationships. Networked stakeholders comprise a web of direct
and indirect connections among different sets of stakeholders with different resources,
capabilities, and capacities. These organizations are connected with each other by the

45

stake that each stakeholder has in the performance or reputation of the other, and with the
community within which they operate.
What is a Stake in an Interorganizational Relationship?
Classic stakeholder theory defines stakeholders as groups or people who are
mutually dependent upon one another and who are able to effect the achievement of
individual or organizational goals (R. E. Freeman, 1984; Rhenman, 1968). In R. E.
Freeman’s (1984) stakeholder framework, organizations, groups, or individuals are also
stakeholders; without their support, the firm would not exist. Rhenman’s (1986) initial
stakeholder framework included the community as a stakeholder because of the mutual
dependence between state and society. There exists a tension between stakes in the form
of economic interdependence among and between employers, employees, suppliers,
customers, competitors, public agencies, and the stakes themselves. This tension reflects
a broader set of relations between organizations and their external environments,
documented throughout the history and literature of stakeholder theory. Framing
stakeholder governance as a mutually dependent exchange of resources necessary to
organizational survival reduces stakeholder complexity to a coldly rational calculation of
economic costs and benefits (Deetz, 1992, 1995). Such an approach ignores human
complexities and the web of interdependent relationships that compose the communities
in which stakeholder relations take place and decisions are made.
In their review of stakeholder theory, Strand and Freeman (2015), highlighted the
expansion of stakeholder interests among Scandinavian companies to include (a) child
labor; (b) human rights; (c) long-term, stable investments in communities where business
operations are located; and (d) broad sustainability practices related to forestry and

46

agriculture. In this context, stakes are joint interests that connect members of a
community who share a common goal. Within a community framework of networked
stakeholders, a stake can be defined more specifically as shared interests in problem
solving related to a specific economic, social, or environmental issue that has an impact
on the community.
Reconceptualizing Stakeholder Theory Through the Practices and Processes of
Long-Term Recovery
Analyzing the processes of long-term recovery provides an opportunity to
reconceptualize stakeholder theory as a model for understanding stakes as joint interests
in solving economic, social, or environmental issues of mutual concern. Within processes
of long-term recovery, solving physical, social, and economic issues in a disasterimpacted community or region is critical for rebuilding and community recovery.
Redefining stakes outside of the organizational environment places communication at the
center of stakeholder relationships and connects organizations not only to each other, but
also to the community of which they are a part.
A key critique of stakeholder theory is that there are myriad ways of defining both
stakes and stakeholders, and there is a lack of agreement on what specific functions
stakeholder relationships perform (Miles, 2012, 2015). At a basic level, definitions of
stakeholder are dependent on whether the analysis is focused on organizations or on
broader public issues related to natural resources management, policy and planning,
development, or systems of human services delivery. Public issues within communities
tend to be multilayered and complex, involving organizations, organizational
relationships, the natural and built environment, and the communication networks by

47

which information is gathered and exchanged, messages framed, and collaboration
enacted. Effective processes of long-term recovery address these multilayered issues and
use organizational relationships to solve problems of rebuilding, financial assistance,
social support, health and wellness, and overall community recovery.
The struggle within organizational theory to define stakeholder theory in the
context of a community as a set of networked relationships arises from the interdependent
nature of stakeholders. Stakeholders are not discrete entities. Instead, they are part of a
web of social and organizational relationships embedded within a community, region, or
nation. The complexity of these interdependent relationships is compounded by their
embeddedness in particular organizational fields, sectors, industries, or communities.
Within the context of natural resources management, struggles to define stakeholder sets
and the proper role of stakeholder analysis reflect the messy, complex nature of many
social and environmental problems.
To move beyond these issues of conceptual framing and analysis, a new
framework for stakeholder theory is proposed. This framework defines networked
stakeholder relationships as relationships between organizations, communities, and
citizens with joint interests in solving particular problems having an impact on the
organizations, interorganizational relationships, and the communities in which these
organizations are located. This expanded definition places stakeholder theory firmly
within “the collaborative turn” (Deetz, 2017) and orients organizations internal practices
and external relationships toward specific social problems.
Social problems may be related to environmental governance, social resilience,
citizen participation, workplace democracy, wages and inequality, and so forth, but they

48

all require joint problem solving and shared decision making, as well as robust
organizational, interorganizational, and community capacities for solving complex
problems. In particular, long-term recovery after disaster requires robust
interorganizational relationships, organizational capacities, and the use of collaborative
communication for joint problem solving and shared decision making. This integrated
approach toward stakeholder theory explicitly recognizes that organizational and
interorganizational capabilities are interdependent and embedded within a broader set of
social processes and political economies. Stakeholder relationships, then, are a network
of social and organizational relationships embedded within a social and historical context.
These social and historical contexts are what define and shape the opportunities and
constraints of organizational fields, place-based or occupational communities, and the
geographic regions in which social and environmental problem solving takes place.

49

CHAPTER 3
NETWORKED STAKEHOLDERS AND CIVIC NETWORKS
Networked stakeholders are fundamental to the ability of a community to solve
problems, manage social risks, make sense of an event, and rebound from social or
environmental disruption (Doerfel & Harris, 2017; Kapucu et al., 2010). Since the 1980s,
much has been written about the role of interorganizational relationships in strategic
alliances and innovation in the private sector. With few exceptions (Atouba & Shumate,
2010; Diani, 2015; Shumate & O’Connor, 2010; Taylor & Doerfel, 2011), research on
interorganizational relationships and cross-sector partnerships in the plural sector has not
developed as quickly as research on the role of interorganizational relationships in the
private sector. Despite the hollowing out of the public sector (Milward & Provan, 2000)
and the offloading of public services to the private and public sectors over the last 30
years, academic research has not kept pace with the nonprofit networks that have
increasingly replaced public sector resources and management, especially in challenging
public policy areas such as long-term recovery from disaster.
Long-term recovery following natural disaster is an interdependent activity that
requires effective civic networks to coordinate resources, deliver services, and make
sense of the changing circumstances in which communities and organizations are
operating following a disaster. Within these civic networks, nonprofits and other plural
sector organizations are activated through the implementation of emergency response
plans, the creation of long-term recovery groups under the auspices of a third-party fiscal
agent, pop-up organizations, spontaneous volunteers, and social innovation. However, in
many communities impacted by natural disaster, existing civic networks in place before

50

the disaster occurred play fundamental roles. During the initial phases of a disaster,
existing nonprofits and the community may become stressed or overwhelmed, opening
the door for new organizations to enter the network. Integrating these nonprofit networks
with new organizations that enter the disaster-impacted community and with new funding
streams from grant makers and foundations that offer support in the wake of a natural
disaster is a key coordinating challenge during processes of long-term recovery.
Effective civic networks use communication practices to connect stakeholders.
Civic networks are networks of exchange that underlie the patterns of communication and
social relationships that shape communities, political action, and governance (Diani,
2015; Galaskiewicz, 1979, 1985). Power dynamics, resource dependency, advocacy
efforts, trust, conflict, and organizational legitimacy (Galaskiewicz, 1985) are common
features that mark interorganizational relationships and animate connections among
networked stakeholders.
Civic networks emerge from the social and organizational relationships within a
community through communication activities that link organizations together in stable
patterns of relationships over time (Diani, 2015; Monge & Contractor, 2003). The social
and organizational relationships that compose civic networks are a series of
communication practices and organizational activities comprised of multiple levels of
social and organizational interactions. These interactions are relational (Emirbayer, 1997;
Mische, 2011) and occur across multiple levels of social and organizational structures,
which in turn constitute patterns of interorganizational relationships that give rise to
networked stakeholder relationships (Monge & Contractor, 2003; Van de Ven, 1976; Van
de Ven & Walker, 1984). These networked stakeholder relationships are embedded

51

within the communities and organizational fields in which they operate (Ansell, 2003;
Strand & Freeman, 2015; Uzzi, 1997). Communication networks link organizational
partners and provide the means by which information, ideas, resources, and identities are
communicated over time among stakeholders (Koschmann et al., 2012; Mische, 2008;
Monge & Contractor, 2003).
Communication networks and social structure are not simply fixed patterns of
relationships and social interaction; they are dynamic, configurable, and can be
redesigned to address emerging community needs, social interaction, and organizational
relations. While civic networks and the social structure of a community tend to be
relatively stable over time, shock events such as a natural or man-made disaster can also
disrupt or reorder community social structures and the traditional organizing processes of
existing civic networks (Kendra & Wachtendorf, 2016; Kreps & Bosworth, 1993;
Quarantelli & Dynes, 1977). Following the terror attacks on September 11, 2001, ferry
operators in New York Harbor rapidly created new patterns of communication and
connection with each other and first responders to facilitate the evacuation of large
numbers of people from Manhattan Island.
Social—or community—structure is often misinterpreted as fixed patterns of
relationships rather than as dynamic patterns of exchange in which social and
organizational relations are created and re-created overtime in response to exogenous
events, changes in resource flows, and shifts in power dynamics (Mische, 2011; Monge
& Contractor, 2003). Organizations will often choose to (a) partner with other
organizations with similar perspectives or desired outcomes; (b) partner with
organizations with similar organizational characteristics; or (c) exert power in the

52

network through superior resources, reputation, or position (Atouba & Shumate, 2015;
Castells, 2011; McPherson & Smith-Lovin, 1987). Partnering activities using superior
resources, reputation, or position to influence civic networks enable organizations to
control the external environment in which they operate to minimize uncertainty or
mitigate risk to the organization or community (Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978). This emphasis
on control of the external environment of an organization is fundamental to classic
Anglo-American models of stakeholder engagement that emphasize primary stakeholders
as a hub or focal organization with a series of direct one-to-one relationships with other
organizations. However, using a framework of networked stakeholder relationships
reveals the roles, tasks, expertise, position, power, and authority of different
organizations active in a particular community or interorganizational relationship.
As stakeholder analysis progresses from classic hub-and-spoke models of
stakeholder relationships to networked models, the position and roles of specific
organizations within these relationships becomes more apparent. In classic hub-andspoke models, one organization occupies the center of these relationships by virtue of its
role, position, resources, or social capital. Focal organization may be in a position to
broker new relationships that will, in turn, create new patterns of communication and
organizational relations. Although central organizations may perceive themselves as the
dominant player in a stakeholder relationship, other organizations may be providing
expertise, communication, and coordination or emerging to fulfill specific tasks or rolls.
In a recent study of post-Sandy emergency response in a small coastal
community, Harris and Doerfel (2017) found that two different organizations—one
institutional and one emergent—were more central to the civic network than traditional

53

disaster relief organizations, with each organization addressing different parts of the
emergency response network. In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, the New Jersey Office of
Emergency Management connected public agencies and first responders while emergent
volunteer activities connected the nonprofits and local businesses that provided direct
assistance to Sandy-impacted residents in the community. In this case, both sub-networks
were part of a larger community response network where local, rather than regional or
national, organizations took the lead in organizing response. Often, however, the
American Red Cross seeks to assume a central role in a disaster response network. The
congressional charter of the American Red Cross (Kosar, 2006) and the vast numbers of
disasters to which the organization has responded over time serves as an imprimatur of
expertise and historical authority that allows the American Red Cross to enter a disasterimpacted community as a federal partner and assume a dominant position among
stakeholders as a central actor.
Regardless of its reputation, the conditions on the ground, timeline of response,
and the capabilities and capacity of the American Red Cross itself may all create
opportunities for new stakeholder relationships to be redesigned by participants. Local or
regional organizations with pre-storm relationships may act as brokers for responding
organizations to enter into the community for the first time. These local or regional
organizations may have positional authority because of their role in an incident command
system (ICS) or as part of the national response framework and can help coordinate the
inflow of organizations and resources, directing them to the areas of greatest need relative
to their local knowledge and connections in the community. Other times, emergent
organizations such as Occupy Sandy (Ambinder et al., 2013; Elliott & Eisinger, 2014;

54

Feuer, 2012) or Sea Bright Rising (Angermiller, 2012; Burton, 2016; Timm, 2013) may
arise and perform similar disaster response and recovery functions as they integrate
within specific communities and neighborhoods
FEMA publishes a disaster response framework (DHS, 2011, 2013) that frames a
“whole community” approach to disaster response and recovery. This whole community
approach represents a framework of cross-sector stakeholder relationships that engage
private businesses, public agencies, and nonprofits in emergency response and recovery.
These cross-sector relationships can more accurately be characterized as members of the
private, public, and plural sectors (Mintzberg, 2015) that are active within stakeholder
relationships or communities. In Mintzberg’s (2015) framework, private sector
organizations are just that—private businesses that usually operate in market
environments. Public sector organizations are local, state, and federal agencies, as well as
institutions such as the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. Traditionally, the
plural sector has been defined as the voluntary or third sector and thought of primarily as
nonprofit organizations. However, the plural sector includes a much broader range of
organizations: not only nonprofits, but also social enterprises, cooperatives, and labor
unions. Understanding the FEMA whole community framework and the larger processes
of emergency response and long-term recovery requires an understanding of the crosssector relationships within a disaster-impacted community.
These cross-sector relationships comprise the civic networks of a community. It is
the regional or community civic networks that represent the whole community of
stakeholders that federal disaster planning seeks to mobilize in response and recovery.
Stakeholders in these response and recovery network may (a) be existing organizations

55

active in pre-disaster civic networks; (b) part of planned emergency response protocols
and procedures, (c) identified in pre-disaster operations plans or frameworks such as the
whole community framework; or (d) be emergent, that is, a new organization that “pops
up” in disaster-impacted communities to solve a problem, meet unmet needs, or serve
underserved neighborhoods, populations, or communities (Drabek & McEntire, 2003;
Kreps & Bosworth, 1993; Majchrzak et al., 2007; Stallings & Quarantelli, 1985).
Emergency response networks are usually temporary in nature; they respond to events
during natural disaster and provide assistance in the immediate aftermath of the disaster
and during a short-term recovery period that may last from a few days to a few months
(DHS, 2013; Kapucu et al., 2010). In contrast to short-term recovery, long-term recovery
is a multiyear process that relies heavily upon organizations active in pre-disaster civic
networks in the impacted community, new or emergent organizations created after the
disaster, and experienced disaster relief organizations that may have prior experience
working with one another in previous disasters.
Civic Networks
The analysis of community—or civic—networks has a rich sociological history
(Diani, 2015; Galaskiewicz, 1979, 1997; Laumann, Galaskiewicz, & Marsden, 1978),
where community networks are understood as interorganizational relationships defined
by resource exchange, power dynamics, and participation in shared events within the
community. In turn, civic networks comprise the social infrastructure of a community.
Social infrastructure is the organizational landscape of a community and provides the
foundation from which information, resources, and services flow. Social infrastructure is
a set of relational ties that connect organizations within a geographically defined region,

56

such as a local community or nation-state (Diani, 2015; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Taylor
& Doerfel, 2003, 2011). Social infrastructure provides the “cement of civil society”
(Diani, 2015, p. xvii) and comprises funding relationships, social services delivery, policy
networks, advocacy and advocacy coalitions, local governance activities, voluntary
associations, and assorted nonprofits and social enterprises engaged in community
building and direct services efforts. Social infrastructure is “cemented” through
engagement in public events as well as through resource exchange and planned
interorganizational coordination (Galaskiewicz, 1979, 1997; Schermerhorn, 1975; Van de
Ven & Walker, 1984). Social infrastructure provides a level of stability within the
community over time, sometimes allowing differences in power, status, and social capital
to be revealed (D. P. Aldrich, 2012). However, this stability is not rooted in individual
culture and identity; rather, it is rooted in organizational relationships that are role- and
position-based and emerge through repeated interactions over time (Galaskiewicz, 1979).
Like social structure, social infrastructure is created through social and
organizational interactions that manifest themselves as patterns of communication,
coordination, and resource exchange (Diani, 2015; Monge & Contractor, 2003). These
relationships are developed over time, but shocks to the system such as national
rebuilding efforts following civil war (Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Taylor & Doerfel, 2003),
natural or man-made disasters (Chewning, Lai, & Doerfel, 2013; Kendra & Wachtendorf,
2003, 2016), and financial crisis (Davis, 2009) can create new patterns of interaction as
new social and organizational relationships are formed and new organizations enter the
community. As such, social infrastructure is a relational organizing process that can be
designed to accomplish civic goals, foster enactment of new roles and goals in response

57

to external shocks, or provide a measure of stability, connection, and coordination to a
community, region, or nation over a longer period of time. In long-term recovery,
networked stakeholder relationships provide the social infrastructure of a disasterimpacted community through a mix of existing community organizations, traditional
disaster relief agencies active in the community, and emergent organizations formed after
the disaster to meet specific needs within the community.
Unlike social capital, social infrastructure relies on a mix of organizations with
different histories, capabilities, resources, and identities to create a web of community
relationships. Not all organizations will have the same degree of social capital, and each
organization will not have equal access to other organizations and resources. Rather, the
web of relationships and the pre- and post-storm civic networks of a disaster-impacted
community provide the social and organizational equivalent to the physical infrastructure
of the physical buildings, roads, bridges, electrical, water, and wastewater grids and
pipelines of a community. In short, social infrastructure provides the underlying
framework of civil society. This web of community relationships is based upon
“pluralistic interdependence” (Deetz, 2017) in which organizations represent a variety of
interests or needs and have varying levels of dependence upon one another, despite
differences in culture, identity, organizational mission, or operating logics. Both conflict
and collaboration are present in these webs of relationships, with access to sources of
funding often the most prevalent source of conflict among plural sector organizations.
Interdependence Among Networked Stakeholders
Resource dependency theory explores organizations connections to their external
environment (H. E. Aldrich, 1976; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978) and provides a framework

58

through which to assess interorganizational partnerships as a process of exchange in
which information, knowledge, capital, and material goods flow between different
organizations. Understanding linkages between an organization and its external
environment has developed as a critical part of organizational theory over the last 40
years (H. E. Aldrich, 1976; Perrow, 2014) as organizations seek to either buffer
themselves from external events or seek new out connections to funding resources,
employees, volunteers, customers, information, and material supplies. Organizations may
be either highly dependent upon one another or have minimal interdependence with one
another (Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978), and this range of interdependence has an impact on
the possibilities of trust, collaboration, governance, and exchange. Funding issues are
often a key driver of interorganizational relationships (Benson, 1975; Galaskiewicz,
1997; Van de Ven & Walker, 1984) as well as a major source of collaboration among
plural sector organizations. Funding models may also influence the development of
networked stakeholder relationships and the provision of services to clients and
communities (Garrow, 2014; Lu, 2015).
Social Capital and Networked Stakeholders
Social capital has gained increasing salience as an explanatory mechanism for
recovery from natural or technological disaster (D. P. Aldrich, 2012; D. P. Aldrich &
Meyer, 2015; Doerfel et al., 2010). Social capital is defined in multiple ways, as
individual or family attributes, access to different types of resources located in a
particular social network, and the habits, customs, and behaviors in which individual,
community, and organizational activities take place (Lin, 1999; R. D. Putnam, 2000).
Different communities, organizations, and organizational fields access social capital

59

differently, and social capital may have multiple meanings, depending upon the
theoretical frame being used to explain social capital (Lin, 1999).
Social capital can be analyzed at both the individual and group level, and can be
framed from a cultural or economic perspective. In Lin’s (1999) framework, cultural
capital involves the reproduction of dominant values typically expressed through
language, educational, and cultural institutions, while social capital reproduces group
norms and values. Not every member of a community may have access to cultural and
social capital, though. A networked perspective on social capital holds that resources
(e.g., economic, educational, cultural, reputational) are embedded within social and
organizational networks and that it is the overall set of relationships that individuals,
communities, and organizations have with one another that creates social capital. In
emergency response and long-term recovery, not everyone in an impacted community
may have access to the social and organizational relationships needed for speedy and
effective recovery. Civic networks and the networked stakeholder relationships created as
part of long-term recovery processes may help to address some of these imbalances of
social and cultural capital in impacted regions. One of the key challenges facing theories
of social capital is the tension between the notion of social capital as an individual or
collective resource. The ongoing controversy in the social capital literature is whether the
benefits and resources of social capital accrue at the individual level or the group level
(Lin, 2001, pp. 7–9) and the processes through which benefits and resources may become
aggregated within families, groups, or institutions.
Social capital may best be understood as organizational capital in which
individual social capital accrues through individual relationships with those organizations

60

that best provide connections to other organizations. These organizational connections
are what may enable an individual or family to access the resources necessary to increase
its social and cultural capital (Small, 2009b). Social capital, then, is “organizationally
embedded” within the social infrastructure of a community as part of the networked
stakeholder relationships active in a community or long-term recovery process. The
networks of inequality to which Small (2009b) referred relative to the role of New York
childcare centers in building social capital occur when parents interact with childcare
centers or executives of centers that lack connections to other organizations with social
and cultural capital.
It is the lack of capital by the organization, not the individual’s own lack of social
relationships that impedes access to information, resources, and power. Within long-term
recovery, organizational capital may be the salient factor in successful community and
individual recovery. If organizations are part of strong networked stakeholder
relationships, they may have wider access to important sources of information resources,
and the power needed for timely and successful recovery. To date, though, the general
consensus across the family of social capital theories is that social capital revolves around
social interaction (Lin, 2001) and that it is networked processes of social interaction
across time through which individuals, families, institutions, and communities accrue
social capital. Social capital can be viewed, then, as a mainly relational asset (Lin, 2001,
p. 8) in which resources and benefits are properties of the network as a whole, rather than
as properties of particular individuals, families, institutions, and communities.
Lin (2001) further defined social capital as embedded resources that can be
accessed to create a particular outcome (p. 12). In classic social capital theory, these

61

resources may be related to job hunting (Granovetter, 1973), career advancement
(Gargiulo & Benassi, 2000), status, or authority. Social capital may also be defined by the
place in the network occupied by the individual, the family, the institution, or the
community (Lin, 2001). These two dimensions—embedded network resources and
network location—serve as the primary framework for Lin’s definition of social capital
as “resources embedded in a social structure which are accessed and/or mobilized in
purposive actions” (Lin, 2001, p. 12). Resources within a network are a set of social or
organizational ties that facilitate access to information or material goods such as food,
water, or shelter. These embedded social and organizational resources may, in turn,
influence key decision makers or other leaders to take or not take certain actions, serve as
validation of one’s membership, skills, education, or identity, or serve as an interpersonal
or interorganizational verification of “social credentials” (Lin, 2001 p. 7), and reinforce
one’s identity and membership in the family, group, organization, or community.
As a relational asset, social capital is a function of network relationships and
represents the embedded resources of a community. Social capital can be both inclusive
and exclusive. In other words, it can be transparent, open, and democratic, allowing ease
of access to a wide range of individuals and organizations, or it can be exclusive,
excluding others based on language, education, cultural competencies, knowledge, and
expertise.
Types of Social Capital in Disaster Response and Recovery
Three primary types of social capital have salience in networks of recovery:
bridging capital, bonding capital, and linking capital.

62

Bridging capital connects together disparate parts of a social organizational or
network. Bridging capital, often accessed or provided by the gatekeepers or brokers
within the system, allows individuals, families, groups, organizations, or communities to
reach out beyond their immediate set of personal and organizational connections.
Through these new and extended connections, individuals, families, groups,
organizations, and communities can tie together different parts of the same community
network or connect new networks of people, organizations, and resources into their
existing network (D. P. Aldrich & Meyer, 2015; Doerfel et al., 2010; Harris & Doerfel,
2016).
Bonding capital “cements” together communities and may be a source of social
cohesion and resilience (D. P. Aldrich, 2012; D. P. Aldrich & Meyer, 2015; Diani, 2015)
that enables communities to take public action such as rebuilding after disaster, providing
emotional and spiritual support, and policy advocacy. Communities with high degrees of
bonding social capital may have access to churches and voluntary associations, as well as
locally owned and operated businesses within their neighborhoods and communities that
serve as focal points for community and neighbors to bond. Bonding capital may also be
prevalent through social ties with strong or “sticky” ties cementing together families,
neighborhoods, and communities with similar racial, ethnic, economic, employment, and
educational profiles over generations.
Linking capital connects sources of power—institutional, political, and
economic—to individuals, groups, families, organizations, neighborhoods, and
communities (D. P. Aldrich, 2012; D. P. Aldrich & Meyer, 2015; Knoke, 1990).
Brokerage ties may play an important role in social and organizational networks that are

63

able to transcend their boundaries and connect to leaders, decision makers, and resource
owners operating in different parts of their own network or in separate networks
altogether.
Activation of Social Capital in Emergency Response and Long-Term Recovery
Bonding, bridging, and linking social capital may each be activated at different
times throughout the disaster life cycle. The deep cultural and historical ties of bonding
capital may be most salient during the lead-up to disaster, during the time of impact, and
immediately afterwards during emergency response and short-term recovery. Bridging
capital—the ability of individuals, families, neighborhoods, or communities to reach out
to and connect with resources beyond their immediate boundaries—may play be most
salient during processes of long-term recovery. Bonding capital, or the capital that
cements together the social relationships and civic networks within communities,
reinforces existing social and organizational ties as well as identity (Chamlee-Wright &
Storr, 2009; Fussell, 2015; Kroll-Smith, Baxter, & Jenkins, 2015). As such, bonding
capital may play a role in enabling communities to survive initial impacts and the
immediate aftermaths of a natural or technological disaster. However, these close ties and
dense connections between members of a community may also be obstacles during
processes of short- and long-term recovery when the ability to marshal together far-flung
sources of information, power, and resources is limited because of displacement from
homes, disrupted social and physical environments, and a lack of connections to other
neighborhoods, communities, or organizations outside of the immediate social and
physical environment.

64

Research in post-Katrina New Orleans points to the possibility that specific
cohesive neighborhoods such as the Lower Ninth Ward may have been impeded in their
recovery by overreliance on friends, family, and neighbors for collective problem solving
and rebuilding (D. P. Aldrich, 2012; D. P. Aldrich & Meyer, 2015). Linking capital—the
bonds or connections between individuals and sources of power such as formal
institutions or elected officials—may also play a role long-term recovery, more
specifically as a resource or process that activates links between formal and informal
patterns of communication in neighborhoods, communities, and organizations. These
links, in turn, may connect neighborhoods, communities, and organizations to the
resources and information necessary for long-term recovery to occur.
Networked Stakeholders and Trust
Trust networks are interpersonal or interorganizational networks that buffer
participants from the external environment and potential exogenous shocks. Developed
through kinship, shared religion, and trading relationships, trust networks depend on
strong ties, shared values, and common social norms that buffer members of these
networks against the actions of existing, usually dominant, political and social actors
(Tilly, 2005). The interplay between trust networks and larger systems of governance,
what Tilly (2005, p. 4) termed “trust and rule,” is a crucial part of understanding politics
and governance. Trust networks are embedded within the plural or private sectors, and
their social and organizational relationships with the public sector may become
“contentious” after a long period of steady-state interactions (McAdam, Tarrow, & Tilly,
2001, p. xvii). Tilly (2005) and McAdam et al. (2001) examined trust networks and
contentious politics with a focus on larger processes of institutional and social change;

65

social movements, revolution, strikes, labor activism, and broad movements of
democratization. The twin frameworks of trust networks and contentious politics may
prove useful for understanding issues of resource dependence, power, collaboration, and
conflict within networks of recovery after disaster.
Long-term conflict over recovery in post-Katrina New Orleans illuminates the
erosion of trust between the community and the institutions responsible for recovery.
Katrina is one of the most significant natural disasters to have occurred in U.S. history.
The population of New Orleans declined from 484,674 residents in April 2000 to 386,617
in July 2015. In July 2006, nearly 1 year after the storm, the population in New Orleans
was only 230,172. During and in the aftermath of Katrina, approximately 80% of the city
was flooded and more than 1 million people were displaced throughout the Gulf States
impacted by Katrina. Depths of flood waters in New Orleans ranged from 1 to 10 feet
throughout town. Nearly 70% of all occupied residences (134,000) in New Orleans
suffered damage, and there was an estimated $135 billion dollars in damage from
Katrina. Approximately $120.5 billion was spent on relief and recovery efforts, with
approximately $75 billion dollars flowing to emergency response, leaving only $45
billion dollars, or 38% of recovery funding, for rebuilding efforts (Plyer, 2016).
New Orleans is a city of neighborhoods, families, and tradition. It is one of the
oldest cities in the United States, both historically and culturally. Generations of families
are rooted deep within neighborhoods. These neighborhoods provided places of refuge
for many marginalized populations (Chamlee-Wright & Storr, 2009; Piazza, 2005). New
Orleans is a state of mind, firmly established in a specific place in which the past is
present and the present is past. This unique profile results in strong, tight networks of

66

family and business ties built on trust as ubiquitous as the mists, bayous, enslavement,
diasporas, migrations, and violence that shaped the city. Despite deep divisions of race
and class (Hartman & Squires, 2006; Wailoo, O’Neill, Dowd, & Anglin, 2010), New
Orleans is a tightly knit city and one in which trust networks of kin, religion, and
commerce predominate (Airriess, Li, Leong, Chen, & Keith, 2008).
The large-scale disruption of neighborhoods, social clubs, krewes (private social
organizations), corner bars, and local grocery stores caused by Hurricane Katrina eroded
already fragile connections between existing trust networks and the city, state, and federal
government. The disruption of trust networks and the erosion of connections between
trust networks and the political networks of municipal and state government in the
aftermath of Katrina complicated efforts at recovery and may have been used as a
political strategy to remake the city in the image of elites. Rather than being rebuilt as a
“Chocolate city” (Nagin, 2006) New Orleans stands in danger of being re-created as a
Disneyland South, where the old customs and habits of trust networks are on display
without the social relations and communication networks that made possible the myriad
trust networks of old New Orleans. Trust among networked stakeholders becomes a
critical part of long-term recovery processes after disaster.
Networked Stakeholder Relationships and Long-Term Recovery
The idea of stakeholders as networked relationships is decidedly underdeveloped
in stakeholder theory, and there has been little empirical research conducted on the role
of stakeholder networks within and across communities (Doerfel & Taylor, 2004;
Rowley, 1997; Taylor & Doerfel, 2003, 2011). Although R. E. Freeman (1984) took a
more embedded view of stakeholder relationships (Strand & Freeman, 2015), most

67

perspectives on stakeholder relationships still identify specific organizations and roles as
primary and secondary stakeholders (R. E. Freeman et al., 2010) and as a process to be
managed rather than engaged (Clarkson, 1995; Mesure, 2005). While the natural
resources literature does address some of these issues as part of stakeholder engagement
strategies (Fliaster & Kolloch, 2017; Grimble & Wellard, 1997; Prell, Hubacek, & Reed,
2009; Reed et al., 2009; Scott & Oelofse, 2005), the role of networked stakeholder
relationships as a space for problem solving and as a mode of coordination remains
underdeveloped in the communication and organizational studies literature. Analyzing
processes of long-term recovery as communication and organizing problems provides an
opportunity to develop empirical evidence on networked stakeholder relationships and
the role of collaborative communication in building strong communities.

68

CHAPTER 4
LONG-TERM RECOVERY AFTER DISASTER
While a natural disaster would seem, at first glance, to pit people against the
elements, natural disasters are not merely metrological events that disrupt and devastate
communities. Natural disasters are a result of social processes enacted long before a
triggering event such as a hurricane, earthquake, or tornado occurs (Tierney, 2014).
Although the focus of this study is on one single natural disaster—Hurricane Sandy—the
fundamental roots of catastrophic events in social processes hold true for technological
and economic events as well (Perrow, 2011; Tierney, 2014).
Like disaster, long-term recovery has an impact on individuals, families, groups,
neighborhoods, and communities in different ways. The multiple levels at which disaster,
response, and recovery unfold make it difficult to generalize about effects and outcomes.
This multilevel context also hampers efforts to design policy that builds from our
collective experiences of disaster, response, and recovery and addresses the long-term
needs of communities and individuals impacted by these events. Processes of long-term
recovery are little understood, and the connections between long-term recovery, risk, and
resilience even less understood (Rubin, 2009; Tierney, 2014; Union of Concerned
Scientists, 2013). One area that may enable a better understanding of these connections
and the overall processes of long-term recovery is the organizational landscape of
disaster-impacted communities and the networks of recovery enacted to help individuals,
neighborhoods, and communities to move forward toward a new normalcy.

69
Long-Term Recovery Processes After Disaster
Long-term recovery after natural disasters is an under-studied social and
organizational phenomenon. While there is abundant literature on emergency response
after disaster (Brooks, Bodeau, & Fedorowicz, 2013; Carlson, Poole, Lambert, &
Lammers, 2016; Comfort, Oh, Ertan, & Haase, 2013; Kapucu et al., 2010; Kapucu &
Garayev, 2014; Kapucu & Hu, 2014; Lai et al., 2017; Nowell & Steelman, 2015), the
processes of long-term recovery are an understudied area of disaster response and
recovery (GAO, 2016; Rubin, 1985, 2009; Yezer & Rubin, 1987). Disaster response and
recovery is widely understood as a phased process (DHS, 2008, 2013; Doerfel et al.,
2010; Harris & Doerfel, 2016) that proceeds from an initial point of impact in a particular
place at a particular time to the restoration of some sort of normalcy and the completion
of community, resident, and business recovery at some indeterminate point in the future
(Chamlee-Wright & Storr, 2009; Friesema, Caporaso, Goldstein, Lineberry, & McCleary,
1979; L. A. Johnson & Olshansky, 2017; Wright, Rossi, Wright, & Weber-Burdin, 1979).
Long-term recovery is a discrete social and organizing process (Bosworth & Kreps, 1986;
Kreps & Bosworth, 1993; Rubin, 1985) that needs to be understood as a distinct phase of
disaster response and recovery (Rubin, 1985, 2009; Smith & Wenger, 2007) that is more
intimately connected to the underlying civic, political, and trust networks of a community
(Diani, 2015; Knoke, 1990; Laumann et al., 1978; Tilly, 2005) than it is to the rapid
collective mobilization required to immediately assist and secure a disaster-impacted
community (Dynes & Tierney, 1994). Long-term recovery is best understood as an
organizational sequencing of specific activities over time to meet the needs of impacted

70
communities and residents. Figure 2 shows Rubin’s (2009) phases of emergency response
and recovery from Day 0 through Week 500 (Year 10).
Although increased attention has recently been paid to the processes and effects of
long-term recovery on individuals and communities (Adams, 2013; Browne, 2015;
Chamlee-Wright, 2010; DHS, 2011; Rubin, 2009), a comprehensive understanding of
long-term recovery from an interdisciplinary perspective that makes visible the
organizational landscape of recovery continues to elude policy practitioners and
academics alike. Long-term recovery is a “neglected component of emergency
management” (Rubin, 2009, p.1) and has traditionally focused on the disbursement and
management of federal assistance programs for rebuilding rather than assessment of
community social structures and governance processes (Rubin 2009; Smith & Wenger,
2007) and the inclusion of community needs, wants, and ideas into the rebuilding and
recovery process. When community-level action is included in recovery processes, the
focus is often on intergovernmental relations and processes among formal public
agencies, rather than the expansive networks of relationships that underpin communities
and civil society (Diani, 2015; Laumann et al., 1978; Mische, 2009). Rubin’s (2009)
assessment of long-term recovery also falls into this trap with a focus on connections and
conflicts among local, state, and federal agencies and officials rather than a discussion of
cross-sector private, plural, and public sector relations.
While community needs and wants are depicted in Rubin’s (2009) three-step
model (see Figure 3), the focus of Rubin’s discussion is on problems with
intergovernmental relations rather than on cross-sector stakeholder relationships across
all three sectors. Local knowledge and culture continues to be a black box and is often

71

overlooked by emergency management planners and disaster response and recovery
specialists (Browne, 2015; Perrow, 2011). That is not to say that the community
component of response and recovery is missing, as evidenced by the FEMA community
approach to national response planning (DHS, 2013) and the deployment of FEMA
volunteer agency liaisons to disaster-impacted communities. Rather, it is to look at the
long history of disaster research and emergency management planning and the limited
policy and academic literature on the processes of long-term recovery.
Some recent scholarship on long-term recovery has emerged from the Katrina
experience over the last few years, as the 10th anniversary of Katrina was marked in
2015. However, the majority of research on long-term recovery to date after Katrina
emphasizes individual and neighborhood impacts rather than the organizational and
community relationships underpinning long-term recovery. Recent long-term recovery
scholarship in Katrina-impacted areas has focused on an 8-year process of recovery for a
large, historically rooted African American family in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana
(Browne, 2015), conflict between two recovering New Orleans neighborhoods and local
New Orleans municipal government (Kroll-Smith et al., 2015), a 7-year study of children
and teens during recovery from Katrina (Fothergill & Peek, 2015), and a critique of the
use of market-driven governance to solve problems of long-term recovery after Katrina
(Adams, 2013). Although these studies are important and engaging and they occasionally
provide a peek into the organizational connections and disconnections underlying longterm recovery, these studies typically fail to account for the stakeholder networks and
social infrastructure necessary for community recovery from disaster.

72

To fully understand how long-term recovery unfolds, it is important to consider
the social and organizational dynamics of the impacted communities and the relational
ties between different organizations managing different aspects of the recovery process.
Stakeholder theory and networked theories of communication and organizing (Doerfel,
2016; R. E. Freeman, 1984; Monge & Contractor, 2003; Powell, 1990; Strand &
Freeman, 2015; Thompson, 2003) provide the intellectual foundations for developing an
understanding of long-term recovery. With few exceptions, authors of network analyses
of disaster response and recovery have focused primarily on emergency response phases
and eschewed larger processual and longitudinal questions of organizational and
community relationships during the recovery phases following a natural disaster (Carlson
et al., 2016; Kapucu et al., 2010; Kapucu & Hu, 2014). Emergency response is not only
sexier than long-term recovery, but also provides a more specifically bounded geographic
or organizational space from which to capture organizational relationships. In the days
and weeks after disaster, it is easy to identify which organizations are doing what tasks
simply by connecting with an emergency operations center or physically going to
impacted areas and witnessing the people and organizations active in public safety,
sheltering, feeding, muck-outs, and debris removal. Long-term recovery is a much more
diffuse set of processes that take place over multiple years. Without access to
coordinating bodies such as long-term recovery groups, community organizations, case
management service organizations, or nonprofit builders’ tables, it is difficult to identify
which organizations are active at any given time and the services in which they are
engaged.

73

Long-term recovery is not simply a third or fourth phase of a disaster response
cycle (though it is that); rather, it is part of the broader life-course of a community. Longterm recovery needs to be understood as an interconnection of community stakeholders,
disaster assistance and recovery organizations, and public agencies. Some of these
organizational relationships may have existed prior to the disaster, while others may have
been formed during the aftermath of the emergency response and short-term recovery
phases. Still others may develop as organizations gain experience working with one
another during the multiyear process of recovery.
Browne (2015) detailed some of the language and cultural barriers that the St.
Bernard Parish family in her study encountered in its collective recovery processes,
Browne she described as a “bureaucratic tin ear” (pp. 91–96), impervious to the sounds,
speech, and rhythms of St. Bernard Parish. Institutional failures, communication
breakdown, existing formal and informal work practices, and communication patterns are
all present in Browne’s account of the long-term recovery processes impacting this St.
Bernard Parish family. One of the most noticeable accounts is of how family members,
all of whom were skilled workers and laborers before the storm with deep knowledge of
the physical infrastructure, geography, and culture of the parish were continually passed
over for FEMA and road/home construction, transport, and debris removal business
contracts despite their knowledge of the community and its needs. Family members had
even invested in new trucks and equipment to haul FEMA trailers into St. Bernard Parish
and debris out of the parish in anticipation of new work associated with the recovery.
Most were not able to recoup the cost of their investments. This vivid example of gaps

74

between family, community, and larger institutional processes of recovery highlights
flaws in existing federal models of whole community recovery after disaster.
The organizing processes and communication practices of long-term recovery are
siloed between the public, plural, and private sectors. For the public sector, the problem is
one of rebuilding public infrastructure and public assistance for impacted residents and
communities. For the plural sector, the problem is one of rebuilding homes, case
management for individuals and families, financial assistance, communication flows, and
information management. The private sector sees disaster response and recovery simply
as a supply chain problem or as part of a broader corporate social responsibility strategy.
The Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force (HUD, 2013) included only elected leaders
on the task force, even though plural sector organizations had boots on the ground,
extensive experience in short- and long-term recovery, and were tasked with providing
case management services to the most vulnerable populations in the region. A long-term
recovery assessment report prepared by the New Jersey Voluntary Organizations Active
in Disaster ([NJVOAD] 2016) detailed the role New Jersey nonprofit organizations
played in long-term recovery, but focused only on relational ties with funders from the
philanthropic community rather than relational ties with public agencies and private
sector providers of building materials and home goods. From the ground, it can often
appear as though organizations are operating independently of one another, especially if
they are operating in different organizational sectors or different regions.
Phases of Recovery
Problems related to the organizational sequencing activities, post-disaster
coordination, and collaboration among stakeholders may be compounded by the phased

75

nature of recovery in which there is overlap and blurred boundaries between the phases of
emergency response, short-term recovery, and long-term recovery. Disasters are phased
processes in which different communication practices and organizing processes are
enacted at different points in time (DHS, 2008, 2013; Doerfel et al., 2010; Kreps, 1984;
Kreps & Bosworth, 1993; Lai et al., 2017). These different phases, roles, and
responsibilities are not always clearly differentiated on the ground and can often bleed
from one phase into the next. Compounding these issues, there are no clearly defined
phases that demark the different organizational rhythms and activities that are commonly
accepted among disaster professionals, emergency management, policy makers, and
academics. The most widely accepted model is the FEMA model containing four phases
of emergency management: preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation (see Figure
4).
Recovery is assumed to be a function of emergency management, which puts
recovery into the purview of emergency managers and first responders rather than
planners, case managers, social workers, and engineers. Recovery, as traditionally
defined, is as an outcome of emergency response, especially when analyzed under the
FEMA four phases model, rather than a distinct phase of its own. What is most
interesting about FEMA disaster response and recovery models is that they do emphasize
a “whole community” response to disaster (DHS, 2008, Rubin, 2009), which originated
in the early 2000s before Hurricane Katrina (Browne, 2015) forced a wholesale
reevaluation of response and recovery in the United States. However, in practice, shortterm recovery—and in many instances, long-term recovery as well—continues to operate
under an incident command system, with significant attempts to organize and order

76

recovery activities through vertical channels of communication and hierarchal rather than
horizontal systems (Ambinder et al., 2013; Kapucu et al., 2010; Stallings & Quarantelli,
1985).
One net effect of this perspective is to sideline emergent local organizations in
favor of larger, more established nonprofit organizations and NGOs. After disaster,
emergent organizations will often pop-up in specific neighborhoods and communities as
a response to unmet needs and gaps in the response and recovery systems. Within this
vertical framework, municipal leadership is privileged over nonprofit or grassroots
community leadership in national and interagency task forces designed to incorporate
local information and perspectives into the recovery process. This approach creates a
series of filters as one sector’s perspective is privileged over other sectors' perspectives,
and crucial information at the neighborhood and community level may be lost in
translation.
Historical Perspective
Long-term recovery after disaster is an understudied social phenomenon with
which planners, emergency managers, and elected officials have historically struggled
(Friesema et al., 1979; Nigg, 1995; Rubin, 2009). Long-term recovery is distinct from
emergency response and even short-term recovery, but it is often treated as simply
another phase of emergency response and recovery. Long-term recovery is a governance
problem and draws from existing civic networks and the resources embedded within a
disaster-impacted community. While outside and emergent organizations play important
roles in the civic networks engaged in long-term recovery, it is the existing social and
organizational relations of impacted communities that shape the degree and extent to

77

which outside organizations interact with and influence decisions within a disasterimpacted community. Emergency response and crisis management make the headlines
and garner researcher attention after every disaster. The tortuous slog of long-term
recovery is usually overlooked by media, public officials, and private citizens alike.
Literature on long-term recovery is scarce and there is no established community
of scholars and practitioners, making an assessment of recovery practices difficult at best
(C. B. Rubin, personal communication, August 23, 2017). Over the last decade, recovery
has been conflated with community resilience, community revival, and social
entrepreneurship in disaster-impacted communities (Ride & Bretherton, 2011; Storr,
Haeffele-Balch, & Grube, 2015), and real estate and municipal interests may take actions
that increase the value of land and housing stock in coastal communities where the cost
of rebuilding for long-time residents has become prohibitive (Adams, 2013; Andrews,
2016; Slachetka, 2014). Resilience activities such as increasing housing code standards,
redeveloping certain neighborhoods and communities to meet 100- or 500-year flood or
hurricane standards, or hardening utilities may detract from recovery processes (C. B.
Rubin, personal communication, August 23, 2017). These administrative matters often
incorporate activities not directly related to residential recovery and are unsupported by
federal enabling legislation, regulatory authority, or funding mechanisms such as
community development block grants (CDBG).
However, grassroots community resilience efforts and social entrepreneurship in
disaster-impacted communities may actually reflect the activation of civic networks
seeking to fill in the gaps between federal and national response efforts and community
needs. The tension between structures enacted through the federal response and recovery

78

frameworks (DHS, 2008, 2011, 2013) and the local communities to which they respond
make long-term recovery a contested and under-resourced social process. Tensions
between local and federal response structures, and between community and institutional
responses may be either exacerbated or mediated by local social, economic, and
environmental conditions within the disaster-impacted community or region. Power
imbalances between organizations, social inequalities, and highly vulnerable populations
may serve as obstacles to effective and equitable recovery. In contrast, public
involvement across all populations and neighborhoods, equitable distribution of power
and resources, and pre-disaster planning are all key elements of sustainable community
recovery frameworks (Smith & Wenger, 2007). In practice, however, sustainable
community recovery frameworks are difficult to implement and may exclude certain
populations, neighborhoods, or communities. Language barriers and lack of or inability to
access social capital, income, and assets may all impede equitable participation in the
processes and outcomes of recovery. Exclusion was particularly relevant in post-Katrina
New Orleans during the area recovery processes (J. R. Elliot & Pais, 2006; Fussell, 2015;
Kroll-Smith et al., 2015).
Smith and Wenger (2007) defined disaster recovery as “the differential process of
restoring, rebuilding, and reshaping the physical, social, and economic environment
through pre-event planning and post-event actions” (p. 237). Recovery is as much a
social process as a physical rebuilding process; it is non-linear, and it impacts different
types of institutions, social groups, and communities differently. Context matters in longterm recovery, with size, scope speed, and frequency of the disaster, socioeconomic
characteristics of impacted communities, strength of community civic networks, and

79

organizational characteristics and capacity of community stakeholders all playing a major
role in how long-term recovery may unfold.
Mileti (1999) posited that there are six elements to successful long-term recovery.
These include (a) stakeholder engagement (community involvement), (b) information, (c)
organizations and organizational capacity, (d) procedures that enable rapid-fire problem
solving and decision making, (e) damage evaluation, and (f) finances. Mileti’s framework
incorporates the DHS (2011, 2013) “whole community” approach in which a broad array
of stakeholders from across the public, plural, and private sectors are integrated into the
community recovery process (Harris & Doerfel, 2016).
Disaster recovery was not even in the national lexicon until the experiences of
Katrina made visible the flaws and systemic failures of response and recovery in the
United States. The National Disaster Recovery Act was enacted in 2006 and designed to
serve as a parallel organizing framework to the national response framework (DHS, 2008,
2013). Like the national response framework, the national disaster recovery framework
takes a whole community approach in which organizations across the public, plural, and
private sectors are mobilized and community stakeholder networks interact with the
larger national networks of recovery. The national disaster recovery framework (DHS,
2011) focuses on organizational capacity building inside FEMA and larger processes of
interagency and interorganizational coordination.
Each of the 10 FEMA regional agencies has a designated federal disaster recovery
coordinator (FDRC) with the responsibility to establish recovery support functions and
work with states to establish and implement state pre-disaster recovery plans to be
executed in the event of a disaster. Under the national disaster recovery framework,

80
disaster recovery is a state function and the FDRC’s main role is to coordinate disaster
planning at local, state, and federal levels. Post-disaster, the FDRC serves as the locus of
coordination for federal recovery efforts and is responsible for enacting the six federal
recovery support functions. Recovery support functions are responsible for problemsolving, resource access, facilitating effective use of funds flowing into a disasterimpacted community from across the public, private, and plural sectors, and to facilitate
coordination across all responding organizations in their region. There are six recovery
support functions established by the national disaster recovery framework: community
planning and capacity building, economic recovery, health and social services, housing,
infrastructure systems, and natural and cultural resources. Figure 5 provides an overview
of the interorganizational structure of the FEMA recovery support function.
It was not until 2011 that the first national disaster recovery plan was released
(DHS, 2011) and almost immediately put to the test following Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
By 2016, however, it was clear that the national framework for recovery was not playing
a primary role in post-Sandy recovery and that very few communities had put these
recommendations into place (GAO, 2016). The GAO (2016) reported that only two of the
five states reviewed by the GAO had put pre-disaster recovery plans in place, as was
recommended in the framework. In New Jersey, recovery leadership continued at the
municipal and residential level, with the state focused on administering various federal
grant programs from FEMA and HUD.
Economic and Social Impacts
Authors of the earliest studies on long-term recovery argued that there were no
lasting economic and social impacts from large-scale disaster (Haas, Kates, & Bowden,

81

1977; Wright et al., 1979), but research since the 1970s has shown that the social and
economic impacts of large-scale disaster can linger for years and reshape the physical and
socioeconomic character of a community (Adams, 2013; Browne, 2015; Chamlee-Wright
& Storr, 2009; Rubin, 2009; Storr et al., 2015; Yezer & Rubin, 1987). These changes in
the social and physical landscape of a community both shape and are reshaped by local
governance and civic networks and may cause conflict within the civic networks
wrestling with recovery. Organizations engaged in disaster relief and recovery may
diverge from one another or come into conflict with one another over resources,
organizational capabilities and capacity, divergent missions, and populations served. This
conflict may impede collaboration at first, but may also provide opportunities for new
organizations to emerge and communication practices to be put into place.
Race, Class, and Recovery
The literature on race and class in recovery is even more sparse than that of longterm recovery, despite the economic and social changes that large-scale disaster have
upon a community or region. Although there has been some attention paid to race and
class in emergency response after the experiences of Hurricane Katrina (J. R. Elliot &
Pais, 2006; Hartman & Squires, 2006; Wailoo et al., 2010), no systematic study of how
race and class affect access to resources, connections with recovery organizations, and
recovery status in the social processes of long-term recovery has been conducted.
Existing literature on the class, race, and socioeconomic characteristics of disaster is
sparse and includes Geipel’s (1982) study on the northern Italian earthquake of 1976 in
which class inequalities actually deepened while recovery was underway.

82

The Bureaucratic Tin Ear
Browne’s (2015) study of family recovery in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, comes
closest to addressing these issues. Browne highlighted issues of local versus institutional
recovery and conflicting communication practices in St. Bernard Parish after Hurricane
Katrina. The large African American family whose long-term recovery Browne
documented had roots in the area dating back to the 19th century and family members
with long-term jobs in parish government. Despite deep parish roots, working
relationships, and the social capital this engenders, many members of “the Peachy Gang”
struggled with the communication practices and organizational procedures of the larger
state and federal institutional recovery frameworks. Browne (2015) referred to this
condition as the “bureaucratic tin ear” (p. 94) and detailed the way in which
communication breakdowns occurred. The bureaucratic tin ear includes not only
mismatches between institutional language and the language of the “the Black bayou”
(Browne, 2015, pp. 91–93), but also distantiated bureaucratic processes that manifested
through phone interviews and forms instead of field work and boots-on-the-ground case
management, which would be more reflective of the face-to-face communication that
marked traditional parish and community life. Despite the move by FEMA toward a
whole community approach to recovery, local hires for recovery work were made
through a temporary agency, often of people not from St. Bernard Parish or New Orleans
and unfamiliar both with FEMA processes and the localities of the people they were
trying to help.
Despite six generations of experience in St. Bernard Parish, and jobs as
supervisors on the parish road crews and in parish offices, local community members

83

were often passed over for recovery and rebuilding jobs. One family member, Buffy, a
road crew supervisor, stayed in the parish during the Hurricane to keep facilities safe and
roads clear and eventually had to be rescued off the roof of a parish building (Browne,
2015). Despite deep local knowledge and heroic actions during the storm, Buffy and
other family members were ignored by FEMA and state recovery authorities when
contracts for debris removal and other rebuilding activities were signed, despite new
investments in trucks and trailers by parish families based on federal and state assurances
to survivors that local hires would be given priority.
The lack of attention to local language, local knowledge, and local networks
continued with the establishment of a parish long-term recovery group (LTRG). LTRGs
represent an attempt by FEMA to engage local service providers after disaster and to
implement what later became the whole community approach to disaster response and
recovery. In St. Bernard Parish, local family and community members were unaware of
the LTRG, despite deep roots in the parish and ties to local parish government. Local
parish residents were not included on the LTRG, and the stakeholder groups included
parish and school board officials, the port, commercial fisheries, oil companies, chambers
of commerce, and Kiwanis clubs (Browne, 2015, p. 103). Browne (2015) reported that a
full-time salaried FEMA employee informed her that long-term recovery groups are not
necessarily local. They tend to be nonprofits, FBOs, and similar groups that may provide
services and have a physical location in St. Bernard Parish, but their employees and
officers live in other places (pp. 102–103).

84
Hurricane Sandy
Hurricane Sandy was the second costliest hurricane in U.S. history (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Association/Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological
Laboratory, Hurricane Research Division, 2017; K. M. O’Neill & Van Abs, 2016). The
effects of Sandy were compounded by the merger of the tropical characteristics of the
storm with those of a winter storm (Blake, Kimberlain, Berg, Cangialosi, & Beven, 2013;
“Hurricane Sandy,” n.d.). Winter storms in the Northeast typically cause the most
damage to beaches and barrier islands, and strong offshore winds can cause water to back
up in bays, rivers, and estuaries (T. M. Hall & Sobel, 2013; McCallum et al., 2013).
Hurricane Sandy combined elements of a winter nor’easter and hurricane to particularly
devastating effect.
The New Jersey coastline is one of the most heavily developed coastlines in the
nation and stretches 137 miles from Cape May and the Delaware Bay to Hudson and
Bergen counties and their Hudson River shorelines. The Delaware Bay shore adds an
additional 107 miles of open-water coastline. Bounded on three sides by water, New
Jersey provides major estuarine and marshland capacities for New York Harbor and the
Delaware Bay. Because of the size and density of the built environment of New Jersey,
the scale and scope of the impact of Sandy was unprecedented, even though the coastal
communities were neither flattened as Miami area communities were after Hurricane
Andrew nor flooded to the extent of New Orleans after Katrina.
Sandy’s 13-foot storm surge opened inlets along barrier beaches from
Mantoloking to Long Branch. The Atlantic Ocean met Barnegat Bay in the middle of
Mantoloking, a wealthy community full of summer homes. Seasonal homes, many of

85

which had been in the same family for generations in Brick and Lavallette, were heavily
damaged or destroyed, while Ortley Beach, a traditionally middle-class community that is
part of suburban Toms River Township, saw a significant number of homes destroyed
and people displaced. Especially hard-hit in Ortley Beach were senior citizens and
retirees who lost their homes and, in many cases, their mementos and lives (FEMA,
2013; New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 2015; Star-Ledger Staff,
2013). Sea Bright, a Monmouth County community on the northernmost New Jersey
barrier beach, experienced a displacement of its entire population before, during, and
after the storm. In addition to storm surge and riverine flooding, up to 6 feet of sand from
the beaches and ocean was deposited throughout Sea Bright. "I felt like I was back in
Iraq," reported one New Jersey National Guard NCO after returning to Oceanport from a
mission to evacuate special needs patients in Sea Bright (personal communication,
October 30, 2012).
The naturally occurring affordable housing of New Jersey’s northern bay shore
communities lining the south shore of Raritan and Sandy Hook bays was decimated after
the storm. Coastal urban communities such as Atlantic City, Long Branch, and Asbury
Park were impacted economically, physically, and socially. Small businesses and
commerce were impacted in these towns, and many residents dependent upon minimumwage jobs in the service economy of the area were out of work for weeks and, in some
cases, months (FEMA, 2013; Slachetka, 2014; Star-Ledger Staff, n.d.). Anecdotal
information and discussions at general meetings of the Monmouth Coalition of
Organizations Active in Disaster (MNCOAD) in 2016 and 2017 indicated that the
Spanish- and Creole-speaking populations in the area were drastically underserved in

86

both the disaster response and broader long-term recovery activities by the response and
recovery agencies active in the region.
Storms have psychological impacts as well as impacts to the physical
environment and the economy of the region (Bonanno, Galea, Bucciarelli, & Vlahov,
2007). Marginal, declining, or transitioning industries may face accelerating social and
economic change, and long-term recovery after disasters is notorious for introducing or
increasing gentrification to impacted communities. Sandy’s landfall and the recovery
processes enacted by stakeholders increased social and economic changes already
underway throughout coastal New Jersey and swept more neighborhoods and
communities into the change processes already underway.
Region of Impact
Sandy made landfall at 8 p.m. on October 29 in Brigantine, New Jersey, just north
of Atlantic City (Star-Ledger Continuous News Desk, 2012). The most extensive storm
impacts, however, were much further north in the New York Harbor complex and within
the broader Hudson River estuary, which includes Raritan Bay, Sandy Hook Bay, and the
Navesink and Shrewsbury Rivers. Before the tide gauge at Sandy Hook stopped working,
an 8.57-foot tide was measured. Some unofficial estimates from county and local Office
of Emergency Management (OEM) officials put the storm surge as much as 13 feet above
mean high tide level at Sandy Hook. Tide gauges at multiple points along the Navesink
and Hudson rivers broke during the height of the storm. High tides and flooding were
exacerbated by the full moon under which Sandy struck. As the tidal surge crested across
Sandy Hook and the south shore of Staten Island, inundating the working-class
communities lining Raritan Bay, barrier beaches were breaching from Sea Bright to

87

Island Beach with inlets opening in Long Branch, Spring Lake, and Mantoloking (T. M.
Hall & Sobel, 2013; McCallum et al., 2013).
In understanding the parameters of a natural disaster, it is important to mark the
geographic and ecological boundaries of impact to recognize the scale and scope of a
disaster and the recovery needs of the impacted region. The New Jersey coastal region is
a “hazardous environment” (Harris, 2012; Mauriello, 2012), and visitors and residents
alike often ignore the marine and estuarine conditions of the New Jersey shore. Sandy
impacted a wide range of New Jersey, exacerbating preexisting social conditions,
hastening industry and residential transformations that were already underway, and
complicating an already complicated governance structure in New Jersey.
Boundaries of the Study
The study is bounded geographically, and contains communities and counties
stretching from the south shore of Staten Island to Cape May, and ranges from Raritan
Bay to Cape May. Included within these boundaries are Monmouth, Ocean, Atlantic,
Cape May, and parts of Middlesex and Cumberland counties. These six New Jersey
counties include 135 total separate municipalities, not including school and fire districts,
which have their own taxing authority and administrative apparatus in New Jersey.
Ecological boundaries are important to understand because they are factors in
shaping the social environments in which communities and organizational networks are
able to operate. All human settlements exist within specific watersheds that serve as both
a source of water supply and a pattern of drainage that moves water away from
communities and toward rivers and oceans. Understanding the parameters of specific
watersheds has become an important part of environmental protections for rivers, oceans,

88

and bays such as Barnegat Bay, the Delaware River and Bay, and even much larger
entities such as the Chesapeake Bay, which drains a large portion of the mid-Atlantic
states in the United States. Urbanization often obscures or covers up the contours and
boundaries of specific watersheds, but in a destructive natural event such as Hurricane
Sandy, the marshes, creeks, back bays, and rivers of these watersheds can back up as
water from wind, tides, and the storm surges.
During Hurricane Sandy, storm surges pushed into Raritan Bay, New York
Harbor, and the Hudson River estuary, inundating urban communities and working-class
neighborhoods throughout the region and overwhelming the compromised natural tidal
marsh and barrier beach system of the region. Further south, full-moon influenced tides,
storm surges, and northeasterly winds wreaked havoc and breached barrier beaches in
Mantoloking and washed across Holgate on the southern tip of Long Beach Island,
resulting in extensive damage to bayside towns in Stafford, Eagleswood, and Little Egg
Harbor townships in Ocean County.
Large, sprawling townships that straddled both the barrier beaches and the
bayside such as Berkeley, Brick, and Toms River townships received a double whammy
as beach towns and bayside towns simultaneously went under water and wind and waves
knocked homes off foundations and into residential streets. These three large townships
were particularly hard hit as they contended with response, repair, and recovery for yearround residents. Among the year-round residents were senior citizens who had retired to
low-lying barrier islands as well as secondary homeowners who owned vacation
residences or rental properties, and small businesses whose owners contribute to the tax
base of these communities.

89

These barrier beaches and bays provide vast ecological services but are also a
major part of the built environment of the Boston/Washington, D.C., megalopolis that
stretches along both sides of the I-95 corridor. Homes and businesses in coastal New
Jersey sit on some of the most expensive land in the Unites States, and Hurricane Sandy
was the second most expensive hurricane in U.S. history, costing almost $70 billion
dollars in damages. New Jersey alone had $30 billion dollars in damages, and one New
Jersey coastal county alone accounted for 25% of all national flood insurance policy
claims (Andrews, 2016; FEMA, 2013, 2015).
The complexity of the interaction between the built environment and the coastal
ecology of the region complicates issues of long-term recovery and social resilience, and
makes clear the relevant boundaries of analysis for this study. The urban environments
such as Hoboken, Lower Manhattan, Brooklyn, the Rockaways, and the entirety of Staten
Island make for compelling recovery stories and complex analysis. That said, the mix of
urban communities, working-class coastal communities and neighborhoods, commuter
towns and neighborhoods, retiree clusters, enclaves of wealth, tourist destinations, and
the clusters of working poor and poverty stretching from the south shore of Staten Island
to the tip of Cape May County in New Jersey, provides a much richer social and
ecological landscape from which to analyze long-term recovery and social resilience in
the face of complex environmental change.

90

CHAPTER 5
PROPOSITIONS AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Expanding stakeholder theory to understand disaster recovery and response
provides a framework from which to understand the communication and organizing
processes necessary for communities to bounce back from disaster and restore some
sense of normalcy. Defining specifically what long-term recovery in communities
impacted by natural disaster is has been a challenge for academics, policy experts, and
disaster responders alike. Standard protocol divides emergency response and recovery
into three distinct phases (DHS, 2008, 2011; GAO, 2016), while recent scholarship has
defined post-disaster transitional phases and spaces (Chewning & Doerfel, 2013; Doerfel,
Chewning, & Lai, 2013), personal, professional, and emergency phases of business
recovery (Doerfel et al., 2010), and crisis and adaptive phases of leadership (Heifetz,
Grashow, & Linsky, 2009). Each of these phases fit into the typology of institutional
response in which four distinct organizational phases come into play (Bosworth & Kreps,
1986; Kreps & Bosworth, 1993).
A Type 1 response involves first responders and emergency response activities,
including providers of social and physical infrastructure such as hospitals and utilities.
Traditional disaster relief agencies such as the American Red Cross and Salvation Army
expand their roles and their scope of activities in Type 2 responses, while community and
social organizations engage in new and different roles in a Type 3 response. Emergent
roles and activities are characterized as a Type 4 response. A Type 4 response most likely
matches to the unique aspects of a particular natural disaster, community, or region.
Organizational responses across all four institutional types and across different temporal

91

phases are necessary for emergency response and long-term recovery. Organizations
active in long-term recovery may be part of an existing civic network, part of prior
emergency response planning, or new organizations that emerge after disaster to address
community needs. This coverage still leaves the question, however, of what precisely is
long-term recovery and what networked stakeholder relationships are necessary for a
community to rebuild, recover, and restore a sense of normalcy after disaster?
Activities of long-term recovery in the years after disaster are markedly different
than the activities of emergency response in the days and weeks after disaster (Browne,
2015; DHS, 2011; GAO, 2016). Whereas emergency response usually involves activities
related to safety, security, and immediate shelter from the storm, long-term recovery
activities often revolve around rebuilding and restoration of a resident’s home or a
community infrastructure, temporary housing assistance while rebuilding and restoration
is underway, income support and food assistance, and advice, support, and assistance in
navigating labyrinthine private insurance rules, state and federal grant and loan programs,
and municipal regulations and guidance concerning rebuilding. These support services
represent distinct communication and organizing activities and problems of coordination,
resource allocation, and task differentiation among organizations involved in emergency
response and long-term recovery.
Several propositions are made in conducting this study.
Proposition 1: Long-term recovery is a specific communication and organizing
process following natural disaster that is separate from emergency response and shortterm recovery.

92

These distinct phases of recovery require unique stakeholders willing to engage
with one another to solve problems of mutual concern. Problems of mutual concern may
be the overall challenges of long-term recovery from disaster as well as distinct problems
associated with discrete parts of the recovery process.
Proposition 2: Stakeholders are networked organizations with joint interests, are
embedded within an organizational field, social sector, or community, and collaborate to
solve social or environmental problems of mutual concern.
Networked stakeholder relationships use collaborative communication to solve
problems of mutual concern, divide tasks among different organizations, exchange
information, and allocate resources.
Proposition 3: Networked stakeholders use collaborative communication to enact
joint problem solving, coordinate activities, differentiate tasks, exchange information,
and allocate resources.
Collaborating over joint concerns and solving problems of mutual interest over a
long period of time requires persistent, stable relationships among organization. These
relationships need to be adaptive to changes in the social and economic environment of
the community, resource allocation, and policy changes as long-term recovery unfolds
over many years.
Proposition 4: Long-term recovery is based upon networked stakeholder
relationships that are formed over time through collaborative communication practices.
Long-term recovery is a communication and organizing process shaped through
the activities of networked stakeholders active in a disaster-impacted community.
Collaborative communication enables access to resources and social or organizational

93

capital and relies upon trust between the interacting organizations. Specific
communication practices such as meetings, regular face-to-face encounters, and
information exchange via e-mail, phone, or text are employed to collaborate.
While emergency response is well documented in the communication and policy
literature, long-term recovery tends to be overlooked. When considered, long-term
recovery is often lumped together with mitigation and planning activities, the emphasis of
which is on activities and coordination related to the impacted communities physical
infrastructure (DHS, 2011; Haas et al., 1977). Long-term recovery may also simply be
viewed as a continuation of the short-term recovery efforts that emerge out of emergency
response (Harris & Doerfel, 2016).
What is often overlooked is the cultural and historical context of the community
and the social and organizing processes that enable impacted residents and communities
to bounce back (Buzzanell, 2010; Doerfel & Harris, 2017) and rebuild their lives as well
as their homes (Browne, 2015; Chamlee-Wright, 2010; Chamlee-Wright & Storr, 2009;
Kroll-Smith et al., 2015). Ultimately, long-term recovery is a separate communication
and organizing process that requires its own set of networked stakeholder relationships
separate from the stakeholder responses of emergency response and short-term recovery.
This study addresses the following nine research questions.
RQ1: What are the key functions of long-term recovery processes after natural
disaster?
RQ2: What communication and organizing processes underlie long-term recovery
from disaster?

94

RQ3: How are networked stakeholder relationships generated from the formal
and informal communication activities and organizing processes within communities
solving a joint problem of long-term recovery after natural disaster?
RQ4: What are the most effective communication practices for connecting local,
neighborhood, and grassroots organizations with public agencies and larger nonprofits in
communities impacted by natural disaster?
RQ5: How do networked stakeholder relationships enact long-term recovery after
disaster?

95

CHAPTER 6
METHODOLOGY
Reflexive Fieldwork
Reflexive fieldwork is a quasi-ethnographic methodology in which the field
researcher is immersed within the social and historical context of the phenomenon being
studied. Although reflexive fieldwork is primarily qualitative in nature, it can support
robust data collection techniques to power both mixed method (Creswell, 2014) and
social network (Hollstein, 2011) analyses. Reflexive methodology is a “methodology-astechnique” (Hammersley, 2010, p. 20) in which specific types of knowledge, techniques,
skills, procedures and approaches are needed to uncover social patterns and structures.
Hammersley (2010, p. 20) made clear distinctions between research procedures that are
rule-based and proceed step by step (“methodology-as-technique”) and those that are
autobiographical and self-reflexive in nature (“methodology-as-craft”). Reflexive
fieldwork combines both technique and craft into a process of empirical research in
which the researcher’s individual position in the field and among study participants is
fully accounted for. Reflexive fieldwork is driven by the researcher’s immersion (Doerfel
& Gibbs, 2014) within the community or organization under study.
Often, a researcher will be part of the community or organization which he or she
is studying. This presence poses problems of entrance and exit because the researcher
never really leaves the community or organization and is immersed within the social and
historical context of the research site throughout the study. Conversely, entrance into the
research site is often accomplished through the researcher’s existing relationships with
community or organizational members in the field site, which eases access and

96

contributes to relationship building. These relationships could call into question the
researcher’s objectivity and impact replicability because access to some sources and
informants may be predicated upon these existing relationships. However, by developing
certain techniques of field research based on sound, vetted research methodologies and
methods, the researcher can independently identify and verify existing and emergent
patterns of social and organizational interaction while remaining true to the lived
experiences of the community. Self-awareness of the researcher’s position, perspective,
and interpretations are critical parts of reflexive fieldwork and require constant review of
data, questions, and research design to ensure that the study findings yield insights
beyond the common, shared perspectives of the researcher and research site. Socially
constructed grounded theory approaches (Charmaz, 2014, 2016; Corbin & Strauss, 1998;
Craig & Tracey, 1995; Glaser & Strauss, 2009) are used as the “technique” to move from
existing community experiences and relationships to empirical evidence in reflexive
fieldwork.
Reflexive fieldwork draws from participatory action research (Laska & Peterson,
2011; Voinov & Gaddis, 2008) and active participant-observer research (J. C. Johnson,
Avenarius, & Weatherford, 2006) and provides an opportunity to contribute to public
scholarship (Peters, Jordan, Alter, & Bridger, 2003). Reflexive fieldwork helps to build
an in-depth understanding of community or organizational problems through the use of
participants perspectives to help shape the research questions and interpretation of both
quantitative and qualitative results. Reflexive fieldwork ensures that participants’ lived
experiences are counted, regardless of the methods used to analyze the community
problem or social phenomenon of concern to the researcher. In reflexive fieldwork, the

97

researcher often encounters the same problems and relationships as are informants and
participants. The researcher’s presence in the moment of encounter allows him or her to
better shape the subsequent research questions and connect with potential participants
and informants. Understanding the everyday actions, experiences, and perspectives of
organizational and community participants ensures that the research questions bear
fidelity to the actual organizational and community problems under examination rather
than reflecting the a priori assumptions of a researcher or particular academic
community. Reflexive fieldwork also accounts for the social and temporal patterns of a
given community.
As a member of the community under study, researcher activities often mimic the
patterns, activities, and flows of the community. There may be gaps between research
waves that correspond to events in the life of the community and in the researcher’s
personal life, as well as periods of intense engagement. Instead of entering a research site
and capturing a moment or moments in time, reflexive fieldwork captures the richness,
temporal, and processual aspects of community and organizational life resulting in thick
descriptions (Geertz, 1973) of multiyear communication and organizing processes.
Reflexive fieldwork is particularly valuable for network researchers working in
disaster research because it allows for clearer understanding of the social and
organizational networks the researcher seeks to reconstruct. By being immersed in the
field, the researcher is able to actively triangulate and validate network data (Wald, 2014)
as they emerge through the field research. This strategy provides for multiple levels of
validation throughout the research and an iterative approach to network reconstruction.
Reflexive fieldwork provides a way for the researcher to set network boundaries in

98
multiple methods of social research because of the researcher’s familiarity with the
community, organization, or stakeholder relationships being analyzed. More accurate
geographic and organizational boundaries of a disrupted community or region can be set
around the network based on the researcher’s familiarity with the social and historical
environment.
Reflexive fieldwork eschews sharp epistemological and ontological divisions over
interpretative, social constructivist, and positivist or post-positivist ways of knowing.
Rather, it seeks a middle way through social constructionist and post-positivist
assumptions about the nature of social worlds and the appropriate analytical techniques
needed to analyze different social worlds. Reflexive fieldwork relies on clearly defined
qualitative criteria (Tracy, 2010) for engagement with the community and the research
process. Clearly defined qualitative criteria enables the researcher’s audience to more
quickly establish the face validity of the study and provide rationale for policy makers
and elected officials to utilize qualitative research in policy and decision making (Tracy,
2010, pp. 838–839). Qualitative inquiry should investigate an important topic for
theoretical or practical reasons, employ “rich rigor” (Tracy, 2010, p. 838), be ethical and
sincere, credible, employ a coherent methodology and theoretical framework, resonate
with an academic or public audience, and make a major contribution to academic or
professional knowledge.
This study meets Tracy’s (2010) criteria in the following ways: (a) it explores the
under-studied phenomenon of long-term recovery from disaster using stakeholder and
networked organizational theory to establish a framework of collaborative
communication and networked stakeholder relationships as key mechanisms of long-term

99

recovery; (b) frames the techniques and procedures of the study methods within a
framework of reflexive fieldwork that uses participant observation, observations,
encounters, semi-structured interviews, and network analysis to generate empirical data;
(c) is approved by the Rutgers Institutional Review Board; (d) accounts for the
multilayered impact of disaster by being sensitive to participating community and
organizational leaders who may have been personally impacted by disaster; and (d)
contributes both academic and practical knowledge to our understanding of long-term
recovery from disaster.
Reflexive Methodology
Reflexive methodology (Alvesson & Sköldberg, 2009) aligns with Tracy’s (2010,
p. 838) emphasis on “big tent” criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of qualitative
research. The goal of these two approaches is to provide a strong set of evaluative criteria
for understanding “good” qualitative research rather than specific procedural approaches
to qualitative inquiry. Reflexive methodology seeks to position itself as a third way
between qualitative and quantitative inquiry through a process of self-reflection and
review at each step of the research process. Combined with Tracy’s big tent criteria,
reflexive methodology provides the scaffolding for constructing a process of reflexive
fieldwork in which the researcher is immersed within the research site under study as a
resident or member living or working within the community or organization.
Reflexive methodology relies on multiple levels of interpretation and provides a
framework for the integration of different theories and literatures in an analysis of
empirical evidence collected from a research site, archive, library, digital sources,
cultural artifacts, or text objects. Reflexive methodology does not emphasize a plurality

100

of viewpoints, perspectives, and findings for their own sake (Alvesson & Sköldberg,
2009, p. 305). Rather, reflexive methodology is evaluative and requires the researcher to
consider the fit of the empirical evidence with the interpretation(s) being advanced.
Reflexive methodology holds that some evidence and interpretations may be more
valuable or accurate than others because they may be more likely to advance researchers’
and participants’ understanding of the problem or phenomenon being analyzed (Alvesson
& Sköldberg, 2009, p. 305). Table 1 compares the idea of reflexive fieldwork to Tracy’s
big tent criteria and Alvesson and Sköldberg’s reflexive methodology.
Understanding and reporting multiple levels of interpretation lends itself to the
techniques of pragmatic qualitative research (Bergman, 2008; Charmaz, 2016; Craig,
2007; Mihas, 2016) in which multiple levels of coding and analytical memo writing are
used to arrive at broader categories of social or organizational phenomenona, and
ultimately a theoretical understanding of the social or organizational problem at hand
(Charmaz, 2014; Glaser & Strauss, 2009; Timmermans & Tavory, 2012). At first glance,
Alvesson and Sköldberg’s (2009) concept of reflexive methodology would seem to
occupy a different position than Hammersley (2010; 2012), but like Hammersley,
Alvesson and Sköldberg sought to find a middle way through the conflicting perspectives
that abound in social science research, rather than advocating for a particular technique or
interpretative approach.
At the simplest level, Alvesson and Sköldberg (2009) called for a rigorous
process whereby there is constant attention paid to data, analysis, and interpretative
processes, as well as to the specific social and historical contexts in which the research
was conducted. By adopting an iterative, reflexive approach toward method, theory,

101

analysis, and interpretation, Alvesson and Sköldberg (2009) argued rich research can
emerge that addresses key problems of social and organizational life. This point is where
Alvesson and Sköldberg departed from Hammersley’s (2010) critique of social science
methodology. For Alvesson and Sköldberg, the careful attention to the social context in
which research is conducted leads to groundbreaking insights. It is not enough to simply
focus on the empirical data and rigorous, methodical, and well-documented analyses and
interpretations, Alvesson and Sköldberg argued; it is the engagement with the sites of
interest and the social context in which the research takes place that generates valid
analyses and interpretations.
One of the challenges of reflexive methodology is that it may be perceived as
denying that any real objectivity or reality can be observed and analyzed (J.C. Johnson,
personal communication, June 15, 2017). However, by emphasizing the integration of
data, analysis, and interpretation, reflexive methodology provides a framework in which
inductive and abductive reasoning are utilized at multiple levels of review and
interpretation and in which the social and historical context of both the researcher and
research site are considered crucial parts of the analysis.
Reflexive methodology shares strong similarities with historical analysis. The
goal of historical analysis is to elucidate time and space and the structures and processes
in which “The Landscape of History” unfolds through multiple methods, multiple lenses,
and multiple sources that include narrative and metaphor (Gaddis, 2002). Historical
analysis has a long tradition of use in organization studies and is an important method for
understanding the role and structure of organizations and interorganizational connections
within historical and social contexts (Rowlinson, Hassard, & Decker, 2014; Wadhwani &

102

Bucheli, 2014; Yates, 2014). As such, it has utility for not only understanding
“organizations in time” (Bucheli & Wadhwani, 2014, p. 16), but also for disaster
research.
Field Research in Organizational Communication
Field research in organizational communication has a rich history dating back to
the field experiments of Hawthorne and Mayo (Doerfel & Gibbs, 2014; Tracy & GeistMartin, 2014). Similar to classic sociological approaches (Matthews, 1977; Morris,
2015), field research has been the place where important understandings of networked
social and organizational phenomena emerge (Benson, 1975; Du Bois & Eaton, 1899;
Galaskiewicz, 2016; Provan & Milward, 1995; Starbuck, 2015). Field research ranges
along a continuum of “fieldness.” Similar to reflexive methodology, field research
integrates both social scientific and humanistic approaches to social inquiry while
seeking a middle way through qualitative and quantitative inquiry and the sharp
epistemological divides between positivists and social constructivists (Doerfel & Gibbs
2014, pp. 224–225). Fieldness describes a range of research techniques and different
levels of immersion in field sites (Doerfel & Gibbs, 2014).
At the high end of field research in communication are immersive studies that
range from more formal ethnographies to longitudinal and multilevel studies. What these
approaches and techniques have in common are their dependence upon organizational,
social, and historical contexts, and the entanglement of communication and organizing
processes within the organization, network, or interorganizational relationships under
study. It is the researcher’s job to make sense of these entanglements and to detail the
symbiotic relationships between communication and organizing. This immersive

103
methodology allows for an empirical exploration of Goffman’s (1983) interaction order
in which larger processes of organizing and social life arise from face-to-face encounters
and from the social attributes associated with markers such as race, gender, class,
schooling, associations, and affiliations. Both face-to-face encounters and social
attributes tend to influence the interactional encounters that occur in daily and
organizational life. Processes of organizing, communication, and social attribution
ultimately impact the governing conventions guiding the patterns of interaction within
social and organizational processes and are thickly entangled with one another.
Untangling this web requires using a multiplicity of methods in the field to understand
the interpersonal and interorganizational relationships that shape social and
organizational interaction within the research site (Alvesson & Ashcraft, 2009;
Koschmann, Isbell, & Sanders, 2015; Lewis, 2005; Lewis, Isbell, & Koschmann, 2010;
Milward & Provan, 2000).
Field research in organizational communication can also take place across
multiple sites and represent a “middle-ground” approach in which researchers may enter
the field, but only for a limited period of time in which to collect specific types of data or
to conduct pilot tests and gather information prior to the launch of a study. The lowest
range of the fieldness continuum represents purely observational data such as those
derived from surveys that measure communication flows, message exchange, and
communication practices. Studies on the low range of fieldness tend to combine
observable, measurable approaches with summary descriptions of the organization or
organizational context in which the research is taking place (Doerfel & Gibbs, 2014),
rather than detailed, thick descriptions of the research site.

104

Between 2001 and 2011, 57% of articles published in communication journals
were based on field research, ranging from a high of 77.8% of articles in the Journal of
Applied Communication Research to a low of 37.5% in the Journal of Communication
(Doerfel & Gibbs, 2014). There are a wide range of topics and contexts studied using
qualitative techniques in organizational communication field research: participant voices
(40 studies published between 1996 and 2011), health care and social assistance (40
studies published between 1996 and 2011), community nonprofits (22 studies between
1996 and 2011), and public service (13 studies published between 1996 and 2011; Tracy
& Geist-Martin, 2014). With few exceptions (Carlson et al., 2016; Doerfel et al., 2013;
Doerfel et al., 2010; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Harris & Doerfel, 2016, 2017; Koschmann,
2013; Koschmann et al., 2015; Lewis et al., 2010), there are few field studies of
interorganizational relationships within the organizational communication literature.
Qualitative Network Analysis
Qualitative network analysis (Hollstein, 2011) provides opportunities to explore
the role of networks in communities while also affording insight into the functioning of
networks and the mechanisms by which communication practices in interorganizational
relationships are created over time and in response to specific social circumstances and
community problems or crises. Qualitative network analysis is a mixed method
(Hollstein, 2014) that makes possible analysis of the embedded social and organizational
relationships in which communication and organizing processes operate. It is a relational
approach (Mische, 2009, 2011) to understanding social and organizational worlds and
makes possible analysis at multiple levels of social and organizational phenomena using
multiple theories and methods (Monge & Contractor, 2003).

105

Qualitative network analysis embraces a number of different research designs and
techniques (Hollstein, 2011), including observations, interviews, and documents and
archival data (pp. 410–412). Uzzi’s (1997) classic study of entrepreneurs’ ties in the New
York textile industry used ethnographic approaches to uncover the embedded nature of
personal and organizational ties within a specific industry. Similarly, Mische (2009)
immersed herself within Brazilian youth politics to detail the overlapping networks of
personal, family, religious, education, and associational identities that drove youth
politics and reform in Brazil in the 1990s. Small (2009b) analyzed the organizational
embeddedness of child care centers in an urban community to understand the role of
organizational social capital and organizational capacities in connecting mothers with
social and economic resources. Small combined qualitative research and quantitative data
to understand social and organizational ties and their impact on personal, organizational,
and interorganizational relationships.
Within organizational communication, Taylor and Doerfel (2003) and Doerfel and
Taylor (2004) used interviews, observations, and surveys to understand the network
dynamics of the Croatian civil society network during elections following the breakup of
Yugoslavia and the subsequent civil war. Scholars also used mixed methods fieldwork to
uncover the communication relationships constituting small business recovery in postKatrina New Orleans (Chewning et al., 2013; Doerfel et al., 2013; Doerfel et al., 2010).
Lai et al. (2017) used a combination of face-to-face and online surveys to examine the
symbiotic evolution of neighborhoods and disaster response agencies after a technical
disaster in a community in Taiwan. However, a substantial amount of network analysis in
organizational communication operates at the low end of the fieldness continuum using

106

observational data such as surveys, social media feeds, and archival data to operationalize
civil society networks (Atouba, 2010; Atouba & Shumate, 2015; Cooper & Shumate,
2012; Lai, She, & Ye, 2015), rather than immersive field studies in which organizations,
organizational characteristics, and relational ties are extracted from the field data
themselves.
Research in disaster-impacted communities is different than traditional field
research in organizational communication. Social and organizational relationships are
disrupted, individuals and organizations are time constrained, and circumstances quickly
change. Much of the data in disaster-impacted communities are perishable, that is, they
must be collected quickly as events happen or new relationships are formed. In this study,
by the time systematic collection of organizational records from long-term recovery
groups was begun in 2016, many organizations had already ceased operation and the
records were difficult to locate or missing. Although some financial records were
available through fiscal agents, many organizational records were missing, even from
well-organized individuals and organizations. This problem was also encountered when
data collection of grassroots organizations began in 2016 in Atlantic and Cape May
counties. The perishable nature of data in disaster research makes the use of reflexive
fieldwork as a mode of qualitative inquiry an important research tool. Organizational
records and documents were collected through participation in different organizational
meetings and by the researcher’s dual role as both a community leader and a researcher.
All organizations with which the researcher came into contact were aware of this dual
role, and verbal or written consent was obtained from other organizational leaders before
documents and data were obtained and/or used in analysis.

107

CHAPTER 7
METHODS
This multiyear study of recovery from Hurricane Sandy in coastal New Jersey
involved multimethods field research and qualitative network analysis to understand
processes of long-term recovery and the networked stakeholders active in recovery in the
coastal New Jersey region. This research builds on researcher activities as a community
leader in response and recovery for 1 year prior to beginning a formal research project at
Rutgers. The project also builds on research of small business recovery in coastal New
Jersey as part of a study in winter and spring 2013, as well as a summer 2014 analysis of
post-Sandy information ecosystems in New York City commissioned by Internews and
led by Napoli (2014). Permission was granted by principal investigators and
organizational leaders to use information from this time period. Organizational leaders
and members of these organizations in the fieldwork region were informed of my dual
roles as a community leader and Rutgers researcher on multiple occasions.
Relational ties among organizations active in long-term recovery were extracted
from both field research and organizational records, notes, and archives. Stakeholder
definitions were drawn directly from participant interviews. Research is based upon three
foundations: immersion as a participant observer from October 29, 2012, to the present,
team research on small business recovery in coastal New Jersey in winter and early
spring 2012–2013, and interviews and network surveys of nonprofit and municipal
leaders in coastal New Jersey in 2016 and 2017.

108
Research Sites and Participants
Ethnographic observation, participant observation, semi-structured interviews, a
network survey, and archival data were used to identify and collect data about the
interorganizational networks involved in response and recovery to Hurricane Sandy in
coastal New Jersey. Data collection took place from October 2012 to September 2017.
Participant observer data were collected in coastal New Jersey from October 30, 2012, to
December 31, 2017, during the emergency response and long-term recovery phases of the
disaster. The author lives in a coastal New Jersey community heavily impacted by
Hurricane Sandy and has been active in Hurricane Sandy response and recovery activities
as a volunteer leader at the community and regional level. See Appendix A for a list of
these activities and see Appendix B for a list of sources utilized in the study.
A network analysis of emergent organizing activities was conducted in this
community (Harris & Doerfel, 2016). Participant observation consisted of active
participation in emergent response and long-term-recovery in Oceanport, New Jersey,
with the Monmouth County Long-Term Recovery Committee (MCLTRG), and with the
MNCOAD, where the author serves as secretary and is a member of the executive
committee. The author also attended community emergency response team (CERT)
trainings in 2013 in New Jersey and a New York State citizen disaster preparedness
workshop in 2014.
The majority of the research took place in coastal New Jersey in Monmouth and
Ocean counties, although the study was bounded by Raritan Bay in Monmouth County
and the Delaware Bay in Cape May County. Parts of Monmouth County sit within the
New York Harbor complex and several of its riverine estuaries. Impacted communities in

109

Ocean County mostly adjoined Barnegat Bay and its associated estuaries. Impacted
communities were subject to wave and wind damage, tidal flooding, and back bay
flooding during and after the storm. Communities in Great Egg Harbor and Great Bay in
Atlantic County, including Atlantic City, Brigantine, and Ventnor, also were hard hit by
the storm with similar impacts and effects to those in Ocean County. The most robust
interorganizational data exist from these two counties, given the researcher’s connections
within and proximity to these communities.
Sampling
Both sequential interviewing and archival research were used to identify
organizations and municipalities for interviews. In sequential interviewing (Small,
2009a,b), each organization or municipality interviewed equals one case or incident
rather than a variable or participant within a sample of a specific population,
organizations, or region. Similar to purposive or snowball sampling (Creswell, 2014;
Hollstein, 2011), sequential interviewing uses participant and informant knowledge to
guide the development of the data set for analysis and focuses on reaching theoretical
saturation rather than the development of a randomized sampling frame (Small, 2007,
2009a). Theoretical saturation is the point in a project at which data collection reaches
diminishing returns and ongoing research reveals no or limited new concepts or ideas
relevant to the theories emerging from the data (Charmaz, 2014, p. 345). For Small
(2009a, b), the achievement of saturation on particular issues raised in the interview
process allows new and/or deeper issues that emerge to be explored in subsequent
interviews.

110

In this study of long-term recovery, issues related to the allocation and sequencing
of funding, organizational entrance and exit, conflict over case management processes,
and specific types of organizational relationships were raised in earlier participant
observer activities and interviews. These earlier findings were used to guide the final
round of interviews in 2017. Sequential interviewing and theoretical saturation focus on
particular issues, ideas, or conceptual frameworks identified in the field, rather than the
imposition of a random sampling frame that may not reflect the scope of activities or
capture the salience of particular participant behaviors that may be small in scope, but
profound in implication (Small, 2009b). In this way, sequential interviewing provides a
way to develop the face validity of the study, which is an important criterion for good
organizational communication research (L. L. Putnam & Mumby, 2013). Face validity
simply asks, “Does the findings and insights from this study comport with what we know
about the organization or community from members, the media, and our own experiences
and interactions with them?”.
Sequential interviewing is a form of case logic (Small, 2009b, p. 227) in which
the actual number of interviews needed is unknown until the end of the study. Sequential
interviewing is a way for unknown social and organizing processes to emerge from the
data throughout the study rather than describing specific characteristics or behaviors
using predefined random samples. Also, sequential interviewing is a way of avoiding
false inferences from sampling designs that may restrict the boundaries of a study and not
be truly representative of the population or community being analyzed. Avoiding this
problem is particularly salient for studies of disasters or other disruptive events where
local culture, history, and knowledge is important for understanding organizational and

111

social relationships and the dynamics of recovery, displacement, or migration. Sequential
interviewing is a way of directly connecting participants’ experiences, perspectives, and
knowledge to the emerging theories that are generated from the empirical data. It
provides a type of validity that ensures that what is actually occurring in the research
site(s) is represented in the study itself. Finally, sequential interviewing connects with
core approaches used in qualitative network analysis, such as purposive and snowball
sampling, which are used to generate names and relationships from participants in the
study (Hollstein, 2011, 2014).
Rather than simply choosing the next organization to interview based on mentions
by previous interviewees or a predefined sampling frame, in sequential interviewing,
subsequent interview participants are chosen based on their ability to provide new
perspectives or information, provide a different geographic perspective, or deepen
knowledge related to a particular concept or theory. This approach also provides an
opportunity to ensure that the organizations and relationships identified are truly
meaningful to the community partnerships and to extract information about the types of
relationships in which organizations engage with one another. Sequential interviewing
represents a middle way between case and sampling logics. Interviews are conducted as
sequentially linked incidents addressing the specific social phenomenon under study
(Small, 2009a), with each incident equaling one case. Sequential interviewing is a way to
achieve theoretical saturation through logical inference (Small, 2009a) and uses each
interview to both refine subsequent interview questions and to identify additional
organizations and municipalities for further research.

112

Rather than the use of sampling frames to sample a population that meets specific
preset criteria, sequential interviewing is a method that complements socially constructed
grounded theory techniques (Charmaz, 2014) because it allows for logic and theory to
emerge through the interview process itself and directs the interviewer toward new
incidents (in this study, organizations) that enable the researcher to answer certain
questions or provide new perspectives. Knowledge is defined and developed throughout
the interview process, and each interview should provide new supporting evidence about
the processes and phenomena identified in previous interviews. Unlike sampling logic,
the case logic employed in sequential interviewing allows for the researcher to build on
past questions in subsequent interviews. If new information or data emerge in an
interview, sequential interviewing provides a path by which new organizations can be
identified that may add to, confirm, or deny the new assertions raised in the previous
interview(s). Thus, the new organization interviewed becomes a new case (incident) from
which to explore new perspectives, processes, mechanisms, and data uncovered in the
previous interview. As such, sequential interviewing provides a strong complement to
reflexive fieldwork in which participant and quasi-ethnographic observations were used
to obtain data and understand the relationships and rhythms of long-term recovery.
As part of this process, organizational leaders were asked to identify organizations
with which they interacted during long-term recovery and to suggest additional
organizations to include in this project. Both interviews and information obtained from
volunteer meetings and activities were used to guide each subsequent set of interviews to
develop a broader picture of organizations operating at different levels within the
research site. Organizations were also identified from rosters, meeting minutes and

113

agendas, as well as participation in meetings and workshops. Documents utilized
included a binder of organizational materials from a key fiscal agent involved in the
recovery, personal and organizational notebooks from the lead organizer for a networked
grassroots organization with regional and national reach, agendas, rosters, and meeting
minutes from different organizations interviewed, and communication and marketing
collateral collected at different events attended.
Geographic Bounding of the Study
The study is geographically bounded. Geographic bounding rather than a
sampling frame was used to bound the study. Geographic bounding was used for two
reasons. As a study of an organizational process associated with a process of complex
environmental change, geographic bounding situates the study within the region
undergoing complex environmental change itself and provides a way of linking salient
communication, organizing, and geographic phenomena with impacted communities,
organizations, and residents. This type of bounding is especially important when it comes
to suburban, exurban, and rural regions in which organizational density is much lower
than what would be found in more densely populated areas impacted by disaster
(Browne, 2015; Doerfel et al., 2013; Doerfel et al., 2010).
The tradition of home rule in New Jersey (Karcher, 1998) requires geographic
bounding of disaster research and other topics related to complex environmental change.
New Jersey has a tradition of strong and fierce local control, with several hundred
municipalities, school districts, fire districts, and utility authorities dotting the landscape
of one of the smallest states in the United States. Each of these districts and authorities
have separate taxing jurisdictions and authorities. Each municipality has different zoning

114

regulations and building codes, and often their own police, fire, and ambulance services.
Municipalities in the impacted area range in size from a few hundred people and homes
to almost 100,000 people and more than 500,000 homes in any given community.
The numerous overlapping jurisdictions and discrepancies in size, scale, and
scope of Sandy-impacted communities make a traditional New Jersey community
unsuited as a basic unit of analysis for a study of networked stakeholder relationships.
Instead, defining a coastal region of communities with shared characteristics and culture
(broadly defined) provides an opportunity to include a wider range of organizations and
municipalities as participants in the networks of recovery enacted in the months and years
after Hurricane Sandy. The study area includes New Jersey coastal counties between the
Raritan Bay in the north and the Delaware Bay in the southwest, and includes 137 miles
of Atlantic Ocean coastline and 107 miles of Delaware Bay coastline.
Procedures
Participant and Ethnographic Observations
Participant and ethnographic observation took place at a community microshelter,
through the communication and organizing activities involved in helping to incorporate a
local community organization active in disaster (COAD), attending volunteer committee
meetings of the MCLTRG, helping to launch the MNCOAD and serving on its executive
committee, providing tours of impacted communities to an international creative arts
nonprofit, conducting site visits to hard hit areas, and attending various picnics,
fundraisers, and softball games organized by grassroots organizations active in longterm-recovery.

115

Semi-structured Interviews
Two rounds of interviews were conducted in the coastal New Jersey region, the
first between March and June 2013, and the second between January and September
2017. Questions related to media and information use and sources of assistance for shortand long-term recovery in Staten Island, New York. These were interviews and analyses
used primarily for the Internews study (Napoli, 2014) in information ecosystems after
Hurricane Sandy in New York City. However, some key grassroots communication and
organizing processes emerged in these interviews that were similar to communication and
organizing processes that had emerged in coastal New Jersey. The concepts and themes
that emerged on hyperlocal organizing from these interviews helped shape subsequent
observations, interviews, and analysis.
A total of 38 interviews were conducted in coastal New Jersey in two rounds of
interviews and 1,855.43 minutes of audio were recorded (M = 51.5, SD = 25.8).
Community and organizational leaders were interviewed throughout the study. Most
interviews were one-on-one interviews, with some interviews including up to five
participants. Most multiparticipant interviews typically involved two or three participants
in addition to the researcher.
First-wave interviews. Questions related to emergency response and short-term
recovery after Sandy. These included interviews with businesses and Chamber of
Commerce leaders in Asbury Park, New Jersey, and southern Ocean County. A total of
567 minutes of audio was recorded (n = 16, M = 35.4, SD = 18.8). After this first wave of
interviews, subsequent interviews took place mostly within the plural and public sectors
as a result of participant observations, snowball sampling, and sequential interviewing.

116

Second-wave interviews. These questions related to organizational relationships,
communication practices, and processes of long-term recovery within the plural and
public sectors. A total of 1,288 minutes of interviews was recorded (n = 22, M = 64.4, SD
= 23.3). The first set of second-wave interviews took place in 2016 with two alternative
disaster relief organizations. Questions asked related to relationships between
municipalities and alternative disaster relief organizations.
Archival Data
Archival data consisted of agendas, rosters, meeting minutes, organizational files.
notebooks, organizational reports, media reports, and website information collected from
organizations engaged in long-term recovery in the coastal New Jersey region. These
archival data provided information about organizations active in the stakeholder network,
as well as information about the timing and operation of various long-term recovery
activities in which the different organizations active in long-term recovery from 2013 to
2017 engaged.
Data Analysis
Abductive analysis was performed throughout data collection and analysis on
both the interview and archival data as interorganizational relationships and social
interactions became observable through the field research and interviews (Charmaz,
2014, 2016; Timmermans & Tavory, 2012). Abductive analysis and sequential
interviewing are complementary techniques; they allow the researcher to focus on
theoretical saturation and logical inference during the research process itself. Abductive
analysis is a method that supports theorizing and generating new ideas and concepts from
observable empirical data. This style of concept generation differs from more traditional

117

forms of grounded theory through its emphasis on developing insights from empirical
phenomena as part of a “context of discovery,” which prioritizes theorizing from the
evidence at hand as it emerges in the study.
As Timmermans and Tavory (2012) explained, abductive analysis emphasizes a
sort of theoretical agnosticism in which neither adherence to a set of communication or
social theories nor a casting aside of all theoretical and epistemological frameworks
frame the analysis. Instead, abductive analysis acts as a means of sensitizing the
researcher’s interaction with the empirical data and the object of study through the
researcher’s positional perspectives gained through socialization processes in the research
site, as well as the researcher’s familiarity with a range of theories that may provide
theoretical insight gained through educational processes (Timmermans & Tavoy, 2012,
pp. 172–173). Unlike theory-free grounded theory, abductive analysis requires a broad
range of theory from which to generate new theories from the collected empirical data.
Bringing theoretical frameworks to bear does not mean testing certain concepts using a
priori assumptions; rather, it means understanding the communication phenomena
analyzed from the empirical data through a broad lens of theory and practice.
Abductive analysis prioritizes positionality and the social context and
relationship(s) of the researcher and phenomena to generate new insights into the data
(Charmaz, 2016; Swedberg, 2012; Timmermans & Tavory, 2012). As such, abductive
analysis complements reflexive methodology (Alvesson & Sköldberg, 2009) in which the
researcher engages in multiple levels of interpretation (or analysis) throughout the
process of research and data analysis. Alvesson and Sköldberg’s (2009) reflexive
methodology frames four levels of interpretation ranging from Calvinist models of

118

grounded theory, obscurest models of hermeneutics and text interpretation, critical
challenges to authority and power, and the tightly bound worlds of postmodernism (pp.
263–264). They argued that reflexive interpretation is a way of engaging with all four
levels of analysis during the course of a research project and that these levels are
reflected back toward one another throughout the process of discovery and research
(Alvesson & Sköldberg, 2009, p. 271). Table 2 defines Alvesson and Sköldberg’s levels
of interpretation.
A clearly defined framework allows the researcher to analyze empirical data
collected from field research and archival work. Such a framework provides clarity as to
how key concepts are transformed into operational measures and procedures selected to
analyze these operational levels. This framework is used to analyze both the research
process and the empirical data and provides the framework for the Methods, Findings,
and Discussion chapters. Table 3 uses the Alvesson and Sköldberg (2009) framework to
highlight the data analysis process of this study.
Interview notes were taken during each audio-recorded interview and field notes
developed from observations, jottings, and conversations in the field. Initial impressions
were captured in summary paragraphs, along with key in vivo phrases or concepts that
emerged during interviews with participants. Tables, figures, and drawings of
organizational relationships and possible organizing processes were developed and
captured in the field journals throughout the data collection, data analysis, and writing
phases. Field journals consisting of five softcover moleskin notebooks were kept.
Summary notes of Staten Island focus groups from the Internews study (Napoli,
2014) were conducted and used to inform both subsequent interviews in Staten Island and

119

theorize about phenomena of hyperlocal organizations that the first author was
witnessing. In vivo coding, process coding, and abductive analysis were used to analyze
the interview notes, field notes, and analytic memos generated from the fieldwork and to
theorize about the emergent behaviors and processes observed during fieldwork.
Coding
First-cycle coding. First-cycle coding of transcripts involved conducting in vivo
and process coding (Charmaz, 2014, 2015; Saldaña, 2016) to generate key processes of
long-term recovery and identify organizational relationships. When conducting in vivo
coding, the researcher simply takes the participants’ own language and uses this language
as a code or descriptor to identify key actions, ideas, and processes that the participants
disclose to the researcher. With in vivo coding, codes are drawn directly from the
empirical data themselves and represents the language used by the participants and/or the
vernacular of the research site under study (Charmaz, 2014, p. 243). In vivo coding is a
key function of grounded theory approaches (Charmaz, 2014; Saldaña, 2016) and
provides a specific process and technique through which to generate empirical data from
qualitative research (Charmaz, 2015; Corbin & Strauss, 1998; Glaser & Strauss, 2009).
Rather than splitting transcripts through line-by-line coding, I chose to code as a
“lumper” (Saldaña, 2014, pp. 23–24), which is appropriate for identifying particular
phenomena. In this study, the phenomena were the processes of long-term recovery and
the organizational relationships that underlie these processes. In practice, what this
approach means is that rather than following a strict coding schema that assigned a
descriptive code to every line of data in the transcript, as would be done in a classic
grounded theory study (Corbin & Strauss, 1998; Glaser & Strauss, 2009), single or

120

multiple codes were generated for passages of transcript data that provided information
about particular concepts, processes, or activities associated with long-term recovery.
Process codes using gerunds were assigned during first-cycle coding along with in vivo
coding. Process codes make visible the actions in which people or organizations engage
to communicate with one another, accomplish a task, or define and grapple with a
problem. Process codes may also help to highlight how actions in which people or
organizations engage may emerge over time (Saldaña, 2014, pp. 110–115). Table 6
provides examples of process codes from the transcripts categorized by municipal leaders
and nonprofit leaders.
A three-column table in Microsoft Word was created for each typed transcript.
The first column contained the actual transcript language itself, arranged in rows. The
second column was used for in vivo codes and the third column for process codes.
Organizations named by interview participants were highlighted in yellow and extracted
for use in network analysis. Organization names were then stored in a Microsoft Excel
spreadsheet for future network analysis. Following Charmaz (2014, p. 120), the initial
coding using in vivo and process codes was open (as opposed to focused on predefined
categories or terms, such as meeting or collaboration), focused on simple phrases using
gerunds to describe actions and activities, compared emerging codes within the same
interview transcript with one another, and moved quickly through the data.
In vivo codes are identified by the use of quotation marks around the language
drawn directly from interview data or archival documents. Process codes are actionoriented and use gerunds (e.g., planning, meeting with, and so on). Names of
organizations were highlighted in yellow for later extraction of organizational ties, and

121

communication practices were lighted in blue for later extraction and analysis. The
stakeholder definitions of the 2017 interview participants were extracted from the
transcript data and copied into the in vivo coding column and highlighted in red.
Participant stakeholder definitions were copied whole, regardless of length of quote or
discussion.
A table was created of stakeholder definitions matched to the type of leader and
organization interviews. Pseudonyms were developed that matched the developing
concepts and positions from the line-by-line coding and analytic memos (e.g., Beach
Town, Grassroots Organization, FBO, Mayor, Executive Director). In vivo and process
coding were among the techniques used to develop analytic memos to shape a framework
of emerging concepts and activities. Theoretical memos on in vivo stakeholder
definitions were constructed to account for definitions emerging from the empirical data
from the field vis á vis traditional stakeholder theory.
Second-cycle coding. Second-cycle coding used analytic memos and
diagramming to make sense of emerging codes, categories, and themes (Saldaña, 2016).
Emphasis was on the development of a thematic understanding of the events, landscape,
organizational activities, organizational sequencing, and organizational relationships
emerging from the corpus of interviews, participant observation, organizational reports,
organizational manuals, and documents, agendas, attendance sheets, rosters, government
data, websites, and media sources that composed this study. Again, following Charmaz
(2014), open coding was followed and axial coding was eschewed in favor of analytic
memos and broad categories of theoretical import that led to the development of
theoretical constructs supported by the empirical evidence generated from the study.

122

The abductive analysis described above was combined with second-cycle coding
as a path from coding to theory building (Charmaz, 2015, 2016; Timmermans & Tavory,
2012). While traditional grounded theory approaches emphasize axial coding within
second-cycle coding, axial coding is not a required step in social constructivist grounded
theory and, in fact, may impede the path from initial to theoretical coding (Charmaz,
2014; Saldaña, 2016). Although codes and coding schemes make visible the actions,
events, ideas, and themes that emerge from the empirical evidence generated from field
research, theory construction requires creativity, synthesis and the ability to see patterns
and connections within and across sources. Memos, margin notes, sketching ideas about
timelines, processes, and relationships were all used to develop themes and to begin to
construct theoretical constructs. A focus on abductive analysis (Timmermans & Tavory,
2012) during second-cycle coding aligns with the sequential interview and case logic
approach (Small, 2009a) employed during field research. This analysis, in turn, provides
a method that is focused on theory-building throughout data collection and analysis.
Memo Writing
The development of analytic, reflexive, and theoretical memos informed the
development of research and analysis throughout the study. Memo writing during the
interview and data analysis phases allows the researcher to crystallize thoughts and
develop concepts while remaining close to the data. Memo writing helps in developing a
framework for the findings while keeping the researcher engaged with the data
throughout the research process. Most memo writing for this project took place during the
final 18 months of research and analysis. A field journal was maintained throughout the
study, but was not kept consistently throughout the 5-year period of the study.

123

Memo writing is an important part of focused coding (Charmaz, 2014; Mihas,
2016; Saldaña, 2016). It allows for the development and refinement of conceptual
categories to inform and guide interview data and to capture emerging ideas and insights
that may not at first fit into the larger research framework (Charmaz, 2014; Mihas, 2016).
When used in conjunction with sequential interviewing (Small, 2009a), initial coding,
and focused coding, memos can help the researcher to identify gaps in the research and
provides a way of knowing when theoretical saturation has been reached.
Methods. Methods memos captured issues relating to data analysis and choices
made in analysis, such as the decision to code network categories in a certain way, and
the choice of network measurements for the stakeholder relationships identified in the
data.
Theoretical. Theoretical memos captured important emerging themes that may
have impact on key findings. Examples include the concept “hidden pockets” to describe
the nature of Sandy damage compared to other storms such as Hurricane Katrina (and
later confirmed with the initial experiences of hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria as this
project was drawing to a close) or “beachside” and “bayside” to capture the decidedly
different experiences of beach, bay, and river towns impacted by Sandy. The concept of
“hyperlocal organizations” emerged through a series of memos and one-page papers
written in a sociology of organizations class in spring 2015; data were analyzed by this
researcher from the Internews information ecosystems project conducted by Napoli
(2014) in summer 2014 to develop a theme of hyperlocal organizing.
Positionality. Positionality memos are a way to operationalize reflexivity and
understand the researcher’s relationship to the data, research site, community, or

124

population analyzed. Positionality memos are an important part of reflexive research
because they place the background and experiences of the researcher and the researcher’s
race, ethnicity, gender, and class into conversation with the data (Mihas, 2016) and may
provide insights into how data analysis was conducted and why certain findings emerged
as key concepts rather than other possible findings. At times, positionality memos were
dictated into a recorder on a phone or audio recorder after an interview or site visit as a
way of quickly capturing thoughts and feelings related to the previous event.
Memo writing and field notes were an important part of beginning to understand
the different types of networks present in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in New
Jersey. These “networks of recovery” were identified as patterns that emerged from the
interviews with nonprofit leaders, mayors, and business administrators/town clerks.
These interview data supported earlier observations that municipalities and nonprofits
were operating in the same region with the same goal, but were engaged in quite different
work practices and organizing processes than the nonprofits.
Organizational Network Analysis
A total of 178 organizations active in long-term recovery in New Jersey between
2012 and 2016 were identified through interviews, organizational records, websites, and
field notes, based on observations of meetings and recovery efforts. Although 247
organizations were reported as in attendance at the first long-term recovery meeting in
Monmouth County in December 2012 and over 200 at the initial long-term recovery
meeting in November 2012 in Ocean County, only 178 organizations could be identified.
Network boundaries. Network boundaries include the coastal New Jersey region
consisting of all of Monmouth, Ocean, Atlantic, and Cape May counties and parts of

125

Middlesex and Cumberland counties. This region ranges from the Raritan Bay in the
northeast to the Delaware Bay in the southwest. Organizations involved in long-term
recovery were often active in more than one county. Some local foundations were created
after the hurricane to serve specific communities such as northern Bayshore or Two
Rivers communities in Monmouth County. Local family and business foundations
supported long-term recovery groups in Ocean and Atlantic counties. Because these
foundations were active only with specific communities or organizations, their
importance within the recovery may be underreported in the network analysis. The
network is also missing grassroots organizations from the barrier beach towns of Atlantic
and Cape May counties. Data on pop-up organizations and their activities are often
perishable. By the time the study was able to begin assessing these communities in late
2016 and 2017, many of these organizations and their records were no longer accessible.
Organizations active in Monmouth and Ocean counties may be overrepresented.
Timeline. This network represents the network of recovery active in coastal New
Jersey from 2012 through 2016. As of 2017, only four organizations remained active in
long-term recovery within the entire region. Although organizations active in 2016 in the
formation of the MNCOAD—an outcome of Monmouth County long-term recovery
processes—were included, 2017 data on MNCOAD organizations were excluded because
of material differences in organizational activities and purpose. In 2016, there was still
overlap between MNCOAD and long-term recovery group activities. By 2017,
MNCOAD activities had shifted to disaster planning and preparation activities.
Network analysis. A network matrix was created in Microsoft Excel of the 178
active, identified organizations. The network is undirected and consists of the presence or

126

absence of ties between organizations with a 1 assigned for presence of and a 0 (zero)
assigned for absence of ties. Strength of ties was not measured. UCINET (Borgatti &
Freeman, 2002) was used to analyze degree centrality and density within the network.
Degree centrality. This measure provides a measure of how well connected any
one organization in the network is to any other organization. The more direct and indirect
ties an organization has within the network, the more prominent the organization is
within the network and the more likely an organization is to be able to broker
relationships, information, and resources among different organizations (L. C. Freeman,
1979; Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). Centrality also provides an understanding of how well
communication, information, or resources may flow within a network (Borgatti, 2005).
Network density. Network density provides a measure of all possible direct and
indirect ties within the network and a proxy of how well connected a network is
(Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2013; Hanneman & Riddle, 2005). Essentially, density
provides a way of understanding the likelihood of one organization in the network being
familiar with another organization. In a process of long-term recovery, density becomes
important for assessing the possibility that any one organization may become aware of
the information or resources that another organization may have. In sparse networks,
there is a low likelihood that organizations will be aware of one another and be able to
access each other’s knowledge, status, power, or resources easily. Generally, the larger a
network is, the less dense it will be, and the smaller a network is, the higher density it
will have.
Interview notes. Interview notes were also used to construct a conceptual model
of multiple networks of recovery (3). Because data were skewed by sector with a low

127

number of municipal organizations represented in the public sector dataset collected
through interviews and observations, formal network analysis may have been misleading.
Findings from these interviews and a preliminary framework are discussed in the Results
chapter.

128

CHAPTER 8
RESULTS
The Current Landscape of Recovery

New Jersey has been a different recovery for [LongTermRebuildOrg] in that, in
the past, and really since then we've partnered with a local grassroots organization
that sprouted up after the disaster and focused on one community and how that
one community has recovered. New Jersey is just different. You know, there's lots
of towns who [sic] were affected. And they're spread across hundreds of miles of
terrain. And just recovering one community is very different than it is in Joplin,
Missouri, or New Orleans, for that matter. So there was need beyond just Sea
Bright. So we kind of, I think, tried to mirror the need of the community. So we
moved into Monmouth. And then we did some investigation of Ocean and found
that Ocean County, the need was as great or greater than Monmouth and income
is a little bit lower than Monmouth. It seemed like there was a lot of data that
supported our moving to Ocean County as well. (Regional Director, National
Disaster Recovery Organization 3)
In December 2017 (5+ years post-Sandy), at an executive committee meeting of
the MNCOAD, executive committee members active in long-term recovery reported that
approximately 575 residents had not completed rebuilding and home elevation through
the New Jersey Residential, Reconstruction, Elevation, and Mitigation (RREM) program.
The RREM program was the primary residential assistance program for Sandy-impacted
homeowners in New Jersey and is funded through HUD CDBG programs.
Reconstruction completion is usually demonstrated through a certificate of occupancy
from the municipality. Certificates of occupancy mean that homes meet current municipal
building codes and are suitable for habitation.
If these residents did not complete rebuilding in 2018, the State of New Jersey
would have to return approximately $500 million from Sandy reconstruction grants to
HUD. The committee members stated that they were not certain if the newly elected
governor and his staff were aware of this potential hit to the New Jersey budget if post-

129

Sandy reconstruction and rebuilding funded by the RREM program was not completed.
These incomplete rebuilds represent approximately 5.9% of the less than 10,000 New
Jersey residents enrolled in the RREM program. While the RREM program is often cited
by official government agencies and sources as a key metric of recovery, participants in
the program reflect only a small fraction of the homeowners and renters impacted by
Hurricane Sandy.
Between 2011 and 2017, Toms River, the largest municipality impacted by
Hurricane Sandy, saw its tax base decline from $16.9 billion to $12.8 billion. The
adjacent municipality of Brick Township, the second largest municipality impacted, had
only a decline of 4% as ratables decreased from $10.6 billion to $10.2 billion over the
same period of time. Ratables are the total property values of the residential and business
tax base of a community. Estimates from 2017 interviews and meeting participants (n =
22, n = 8, respectively) put residential recovery at 65–85% of those impacted in the
coastal New Jersey Region, leaving 25–35% of impacted residents still unrecovered. An
October 2017 report by the New Jersey Organizing Project estimated 22% of New Jersey
residents were still not recovered from Hurricane Sandy (Devecka-Rinear, Limbacher,
Marshall, Ryan Murray, Ochsner, and Zourhour 2017).
The New Jersey Nonprofit Long-Term Recovery Assessment Report published by
NJVOAD in October 2016 reported that nonprofits served 29,598 people, distributed
more than $116 million in aid, completed 3,060 reconstruction and rebuilding projects,
and oversaw 352,335 volunteers between 2012 and 2016. The Community FoodBank of
New Jersey increased its distribution from 40 million pounds of food on 2011 to 48
million pounds of food distributed to more than 1,000 community partners in New Jersey.

130

As late as Christmas 2017, FoodBank demand was still high in Atlantic County, with 10
million pounds of food distributed to 300 partner agencies in the Atlantic County coastal
region in 2017 alone. Managers at the South Jersey warehouse reported a 236% increase
in food bank assistance between July and December 2017. This increase in food bank
activity appears to correspond with the expiration of state and federal assistance
programs, a dwindling of funds available through private, public, and plural sources, and
only four remaining organizations left participating in long-term recovery from Hurricane
Sandy. Increases could also have been impacted by the continuing decline in the Atlantic
City casino industry, which has had a severe impact on employment in the region.
Food banks played an important role in networked stakeholder relationships after
Hurricane Sandy. Within 10 days of the storm, The Community FoodBank of New Jersey
distributed 5.2 million pounds of food and supplies. The FoodBank of Monmouth and
Ocean Counties established 150 temporary distribution points in Monmouth and Ocean
counties in that same time period. Food banks often have expertise in logistics,
warehouse management, and volunteer management that many other organizations active
in disaster response and recovery do not have.
The Elusive Data on Post-Sandy Recovery in New Jersey
“Unfortunately, the state never centralized the data.” (Long-Term Recovery
Group Executive)
“There are no statewide figures measuring how many people were displaced from
their homes following Hurricane Sandy’s arrival.” (Fair Share Housing Center,
State of Sandy Recovery, February 2015, p. 20)

Although data and information related to organizational activities, organizations,
and organizational partnerships are attainable through interviews, observations,

131

participation, organizational documents, reports, websites, and media sources, specific
data measuring or analyzing the effectiveness of post-Sandy recovery in New Jersey are
decentralized, difficult to locate, and, in some cases, elusive. New Jersey is a home rule
state with 565 municipalities, 678 school districts, and 176 independent fire districts
across the state. With home rule, municipalities have high levels of control over property
taxes, permitting, ratables development, public safety, and schools within their borders
(Karcher, 1998). Each municipality has different building and rebuilding rules, and
different methods for collecting, storing, and distributing information related to storm
impacts and post-storm recovery. This information was not collected or centralized at
either the county or state level, making comprehensive metrics-driven assessment of
long-term recovery effectiveness in New Jersey elusive.1 Table 5 provides a brief
comparative example of post-Sandy data management using data from the New Jersey
Temporary Housing Relief Program.
The Rutgers University data librarian serves on the state data council and made
multiple requests on the author’s behalf to the data council to locate comparative
municipal data on storm impact and recovery at the state level. Data on severely impacted
homes by municipality (required for FEMA public assistance and reimbursement) were
obtained from the New Jersey Association of Flood Plain Managers—a scanned single
worksheet Excel document, and 5 years of construction permitting—was obtained from
the township administrators of the largest Sandy-impacted municipality in coastal New
Jersey. Tax roll data were obtained from the New Jersey State Department of Treasury
for the impacted region. Throughout summer 2017, the author wrote a community
research grant for the Ocean County Long-Term Recovery Group (OCLTRG) to hire

132

researchers to collect municipal-level data for assessment purposes. OCLTRG was
awarded $6,000 by the New Jersey Natural Gas Foundation. OCLTRG was a participant
in this study, as well as a partner in a final attempt to collect municipal-level data. The
undergraduate researchers were employed by the OCLTRG.
The undergraduate researchers ran into similar problems as the Rutgers data
librarian and I, finding incomplete data, lack of centralized information at the state level,
and widely varying data collection and storage practices. This situation was compounded
by issues of access, with many municipalities ignoring requests for information or
meetings. Open public records requests (OPRA) were not filed at the municipal, county,
or state levels due to time and scope of project considerations. Although details on the
effectiveness of post-Sandy long-term recovery in New Jersey would be helpful to assess
the effectiveness of the organizational landscape and timelines of recovery detailed in this
study, program evaluation is beyond the scope of this study. The following is an
exchange about recovery data from an interview with a local municipal official:
Q: I've actually been looking to see if there's a central repository; has anybody
been tracking the number of homes that were destroyed or damaged?
A: She has.
Q: At the county or state level, do you know?
A: I would assume that that's probably at each construction office.
Q: Wow, okay.
A: If that [sic] data's around, it's [sic] at the [municipal] construction offices.
(Bayside OEM Director)

Stakeholder Relations as Community Relationships
“How do you not have a stake in the situation, in the recovery, if you’re part of
the community?” (Grassroots Organizer 1)

133

Interviews conducted as part of the field research revealed stakeholder definitions
encompassing a much broader array of actors than those organizations typically thought
of as stakeholders in standard management theory. Participant definitions have much
more in common with the whole community framework utilized by FEMA than the
traditional models of stakeholder relationships and engagement found in Anglo-American
management literature. Organizational leaders across impacted coastal regions of New
Jersey defined stakeholders broadly to include homeowners, businesses, seasonal
residents, and tourists. One group that was often overlooked in these definitions,
however, were renters. Some stakeholders’ comments are summarized in Table 4.
Stakeholder Exclusion in the Region
Renters were not eligible for the same residential reconstruction programs as
homeowners were, making the tracking of initial storm impacts, displacement, recovery,
and return on renters even more tenuous then that of homeowners. Renters were excluded
from the same short-term housing assistance that homeowners were for short-term needs
such as rental assistance to move to short-term housing while repairs to homes were
being made, assistance with utilities, and furnace repairs to restore heat. The Hurricane
Sandy Rebuilding Strategy Report from the HUD Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task
Force (2013) reported that 43% of those that registered for FEMA assistance were
renters.
The October 2013 report, Hurricane Sandy Housing: Needs One Year Later, from
Enterprise Community Partners reported that 50% of all renters across Sandy-impacted
areas in New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut suffered building damage after
Hurricane Sandy and that 32% reported wanting to move after Sandy but could not move

134

because of the terms of their lease. Enterprise Community Partners is a nonprofit that
builds affordable housing in low- and moderate-income areas. They commissioned a
survey using representative samples to assess Sandy’s impact on housing across these
three states. Enterprise reported that the overall impact to housing was greatest in New
Jersey, with 27% of households reporting damage, compared to 14% in New York State
and 9% of homes in Connecticut. A report published by the New Jersey Fair Share
Housing Center in February 2015 revealed that 60% of homes owned directly by
homeowners and 40% of renters’ homes were significantly impacted by the storm.
While New Jersey state programs such as RREM and Pathways captured only a
fraction of impacted homeowners in the state, similar programs for renters operated at an
even smaller scale. In February 2015, the Fair Share Housing Center reported that only
51 of 5,400 planned rehabilitations of multifamily buildings were complete. As of
January 2015, only 33% of Sandy assistance was allocated for renters, according to the
Fair Share Housing Center, with 67% of the funds flowing to homeowners. This figure
represents an increase from 25% of funds allocated to renters and 75% allocated to
homeowners in January 2014. Temporary housing programs for displaced residents were
in place for only up to 24 months following the storm. Renters were dependent upon
landlords’ and developers’ rebuilding decisions for their timely return to the
communities.
Compounding these issues of stakeholder exclusion were political ones. State
assistance for multifamily rebuilding was directed to Belleville in northern New Jersey
and New Brunswick in central New Jersey; neither community received much impact
from Sandy. New Brunswick, in fact, housed displaced residents from the New Jersey

135

coastal regions in gyms and student centers at Rutgers University, the New Jersey public
land grant university, during the height of the storm. A lack of information in Spanish
compounded these issues of rebuilding and returning home for Latino residents, resulting
in a lawsuit by the Fair Share Housing Center, Latino Action Center, and NJ NAACP
(Walsh, 2014) to compel the state to ensure that information and resources were being
distributed to Latino and African American communities impacted by the storm. The Fair
Share Housing Center also reported that the State of New Jersey refused, on multiple
occasions, to turn over requested monitoring reports and other documents. Information in
a February 2015 report from the Fair Share Housing Center corresponds with statements
from a high-level informant in the New Jersey Office of Legislative Services that state
agencies often refused to turn over program and budget documents to the state legislature
for review during the annual budget process over the 5-year period of this study.
The issue of lost renters as missing stakeholders in these stakeholder discussions
is compounded by the loss of naturally occurring affordable housing along the northern
bayshore of Monmouth County, and along the western edge of Barnegat Bay in Ocean
County. Barrier island communities with high numbers of retirees living in family or
seasonal homes bought or built decades before Sandy were also heavily impacted and
displaced by the storm. Although these losses are not readily quantifiable, organizational
leaders in housing, social services, and economic development often brought up the loss
of these homes as complicating factors in post-Sandy recovery.
Stakeholder Relationships at the Community Level
In disaster response and recovery, federally chartered organizations such as the
American Red Cross are initially viewed as the central or focal stakeholder within the

136

networks of organizations responding, which is in line with traditional Anglo-American
stakeholder models that use a framework of primary and secondary stakeholders to
identify the core organization within a stakeholder relationship. However, community
leaders in coastal New Jersey reported not being “impressed” with the Red Cross
response: “When we brought the Red Cross in, I was not impressed,” reported a
municipal leader in a bayside community. This municipal leader also emphasized the role
of local volunteers and community organizations in local-level emergency response and
recovery:
“Know what groups are active in your community, because those are the
volunteer groups that you’re really going to rely upon, because they do know your
community better than anybody else.” (Municipal Administrator 2 Bay Town)

Findings from the field indicate that stakeholder relationships consist of a mix of
relationships between existing disaster relief organizations, existing community
organizations, and new or emergent organizations usually engaged at the neighborhood or
community level. Organizations may have been active in disaster response and recovery
before, or they may have become engaged in response and recovery due to specific
community needs that were going unmet. Some grant makers active in long-term
recovery have a specific focus; in the case of the Robin Hood Foundation, a major postSandy grant maker, anti-poverty initiatives in New York City are a core focus. A singular
focus may direct a grant maker’s attention and resources toward specific initiatives,
organizations, and programs consistent with the grant maker’s focus. Although this
approach may cause conflict among networked stakeholders active in the long-term
recovery, it may also provide opportunities to create new connections among
stakeholders.

137

The Robin Hood Foundation initially focused its assistance efforts on the
beachside community of Sea Bright, even though the foundation funded a number of
different organizations throughout New Jersey, such as the Ocean County Long-Term
Recovery Group (recovery processes and case management), 180 Turning Lives Around
(serving storm-impacted clients who were victims of prestorm domestic violence, and
often economic hardships as well), and various organizations and churches along the
hard-hit northern bay shore. However, the Robin Hood Foundation would not directly
fund recovery efforts in the small bayside community of Oceanport, located across the
river from Sea Bright, because the overall socioeconomic status of the community was
too high, despite a high number of seniors living in the community for 40, 50, 60, or
more years and a number of single parents with limited incomes, assets, and equity.
These residents’ assets were mainly bound to their homes. By reaching out directly to
SBP, the rebranded nonprofit organization originally known as the St. Bernard Project
that seeks to expedite disaster recovery and rebuilding efforts, to see if the organization
would cover individual cases in Oceanport, a newly formed community organization was
able to help connect impacted individual residents with SBP on a case-by-case basis to
help with housing reconstruction and other rebuilding tasks.
Processes of Long-Term Recovery After Disaster
Field research uncovered a process of long-term recovery that occurs in phases
over time. There are distinct organizational activities that occur after disaster, as well as
specific types of organizations with specific competencies and capabilities that become
engaged in the recovery at specific points in time. An overview of these timelines,
activities, and organizations is included in Tables 6, 7, and 8. It is the organizational

138

sequencing of activities over time that builds relationships between organizations and
embeds these relationships within communities. In the case of local organizations, some
of these relationships may be built prior to the natural disaster or social disruption.
Organizational partnering becomes a function of response and recovery activities over
time. FEMA terms this approach to response and recovery, “a whole community
response,” components of which are reflected in Table 10.
Organizational Activities After Disaster: The Organizational Landscape of Disaster
Organizational response begins with shelter in place and/or evacuation warnings
as the impacts of a natural disaster begin. Primary organizational activities at this point in
time included active rescues, meeting the needs of special needs populations, ensuring the
safety and security of a community, and enacting command and control through the ICS.
During the Sandy landfall, sheltering in place lasted from 24 to 36 hours, depending on
the part of the coast in which residents lived. During the first 72 hours after Sandy made
landfall, local communities were the primary locus of emergency response activities.
Emergency response activities included continuing rescue activities by local police and
fire departments, offices of emergency management, and the New Jersey National Guard.
As emergency response evolves into short-term recovery, debris removal, food,
and shelter become paramount needs in impacted communities. After 10–12 days, the
extent of needs for temporary housing and rental assistance, clothing, income
replacement, social, emotional and spiritual support, and assistance with insurance claims
and federal assistance processes becomes clear. A mix of local, county, state, and
national organizations began to administer the emerging disaster recovery processes.
These disaster recovery processes take place over multiple years.

139

At the conclusion of this 5-year research study, only four organizations were still
active in rebuilding and recovery activities. In contrast, in November and December
2012, when the long-term recovery groups were formed in Monmouth and Ocean
counties, more than 200 organizations attended the initial meetings where these long-term
recovery groups were formed. Multiple informants and study participants reported being
cynical and that the reason for the initial high attendance was “a money grab.” As
resources were channeled to a smaller and smaller number of organizations over time and
long-term recovery processes became institutionalized within the long-term recovery
groups and through the requirements of the state and federal assistance programs,
organizations began to exit the process.
“Long-term recovery begins when the adrenaline rush is over and the paperwork
begins.” (Executive Director, County Long-Term Recovery Group 2)
Timelines of Recovery
Distinct organizational actions in response to individual and community needs
unfold over time as the different phases of a recovery transition from the initial actions of
emergency response to short-term recovery and then into the multiyear, long-term
recovery. Tables 8 and 9 detail a timeline of organizational response by individual needs
and a timeline of organizational response by type of organization, respectively.
Emergency Response
Emergency response activities involve public safety functions to ensure that
residents are safe in their homes or have access to secure shelters. Rescue, attending to
residents’ special needs, communication, and, where necessary, evacuations, are all

140

activities typically executed by local public safety and community organizations within
the first 3 days after a natural disaster occurs.
Short-Term Recovery
Short-term recovery ranges from 3 weeks to 3 months, depending upon the
severity of impact in a community or region. Once people and residences are secured,
organizational activities shift toward debris removal and the restoration of utilities and
communication infrastructures. During this period, emergency shelter and feeding
activities will transition into temporary housing assistance and expanded food bank
operations. Short-term recovery activities can last up to 3 months before activities
become organized around processes of long-term recovery.
Long-Term Recovery
Long-term recovery is a multiyear process of rebuilding, case management,
financial assistance, emotional and spiritual support, and meeting the unmet needs of
residents. The process requires coordinated activities of organizations across the public,
private, and plural sectors. Long-term recovery activities may include the continuation of
temporary housing assistance, rebuilding and reconstruction activities, expanded use of
food banks in the impacted region, financial assistance from state and federal agencies,
payouts from insurance companies, and services from nonprofits and FBOs to meet
unmet needs or problems navigating the maze of financial assistance programs. Shortfalls
in insurance payments and state and federal assistance to residents are often filled by
nonprofits and FBOs. Nonprofit organizations and FBOs take on responsibility for
“unmet needs” and first run weekly and then monthly meetings that review cases of
impacted residents for assistance. Other long-term recovery activities may include the

141

provision of mental health services, grassroots organizing to ensure that the needs of the
community and residents are not overlooked, policy analysis, and lobbying to fix
problems in disaster response policy and assistance programs.
Case management is an organizational activity that requires effective
organizational partnering, yet is often contested and a source of conflict among
interorganizational partners involved in post-Sandy recovery. All long-term recovery
groups interviewed (n = 5) had case management committees, and two of the long-term
recovery groups had their own robust case management function. Case management is
the provision of integrated services to disaster-impacted residents; these services include
financial assistance, construction management, and counseling. Case managers will often
help their clients navigate the complexities of state and federal disaster assistance
programs. The case management contract for post-Sandy recovery was awarded to
Catholic Charities, a large FBO with prior experience in providing social service
functions and mental health activities in New Jersey. However, multiple organizations
employed case managers, creating tension over not only workflow and case management,
but also resources allocated for unmet needs cases.
I think that was my biggest—when I got into this recovery, I think that that was
the biggest reaction that I had—was how much tension there was. And the lack of
collaboration, I think, just really blew me out of the water. And again, I do think
that personalities and values do play a big role in it for some reason. And I don't
want to disparage any individuals at all. But I do think that, like you said, you've
got a group of teachers and nurses and social workers that kind of sprouted up and
had the same values. And they've been able to work together to create a unified
mission. (Regional Director, National Disaster Recovery Organization 3)

The long-term recovery groups in coastal New Jersey held weekly meetings or
“tables” during which they focused on the toughest cases in recovery and rebuilding. It

142

appeared to some organizational executives that some organizations sought to supplement
funding for their own organizations by shifting clients off to the unmet needs tables to
both gain additional resources and close out the case. Case closures were an important
indicator of the effectiveness of an organization, regardless of how successful the
recovery process was for clients. Unmet needs often emerge from these processes as
unexpected expenses, inadequate funding from private, state, and federal sources, and the
drawing down of personal resources such as savings accounts, retirement accounts, and
other financial assets. Residents may find that after the construction process, they are not
able to afford household furnishings or other household goods, or that the contractor
failed to budget for flood vents or stairs on newly elevated homes designed to meet the
requirements for flood insurance.
Disaster Response and Recovery Organizations
The stakes are very high in disaster recovery. I mean, if you’re an organization—
even if you have the best intentions, if you are not able to recover a family
completely and if something goes wrong, which invariably it will—if your
organization is not able to make it right, you can really cause a lot of damage. For
instance, there are times where we—especially now, you know, we'll build an
estimate for the homeowner. And we do our best to be as comprehensive as
possible. We get actual bids around the site. But in construction, especially in
rehab, as you start to tear down walls and start to discover more, there's structural
damage to houses, there's mold that we can uncover, and their budget can go up
$20,000–$40,000. And that can bury a small nonprofit. And you can be in a
position where you go in, you open a house, you can't finish the work, and now
you've stranded a family, ruined their equity and their safety and their security. So
the stakes are high. So I think that long-term recovery groups should create
standards that other groups need to abide by. They need to be clear. There needs
to be clear rules. They shouldn't be dictating depending on their whim. I think that
there should be clear rules that instill the standard that other non-profits need to
meet in order to be part of that collaboration. There's some balance there.
(Regional Director, National Disaster Recovery Organization 3)
Multiple types of organizations were present during long-term recovery in coastal
New Jersey. These organizations included long-term recovery groups, FBOs, the

143

federally chartered American Red Cross, social enterprises, and national and state
VOADS and COADs. Although community organizations were also actively involved in
disaster response and recovery, disaster response and recovery organizations were the
most prominent organizations to surface during interviews and observations. Community
organizations are discussed in the Foundations and Hyperlocal Organizing sections
below. The disaster response and recovery organizations discussed in this section were
present in coastal New Jersey and Staten Island and uncovered through observations,
interviews, and organizational documents.
Long-Term Recovery Groups
Long-term recovery groups are common features of a post-disaster environment
and are documented in both FEMA response and recovery plans and in guidance offered
by the national voluntary organizations active in disaster (NVOAD). Figures 6 and 7
provide a general overview of the process and organizational structure of long-term
recovery groups. In New Jersey, at least 10 long-term recovery groups were established,
with five of those established in the coastal region, which is the focus of this study. Longterm recovery groups are defined by the national VOAD and FEMA as a local program
usually established through local organizations and supported by outside resources and
organizations. In practice, however, national disaster assistance organizations, many
associated with the national VOAD, either directly or through their state chapter, played
major roles in the day-to-day operations of county long-term recovery groups. Local
United Way chapters played a major role in long-term recovery group formation,
especially in Monmouth and Ocean counties, serving as fiscal agent, arranging for the use
of facilities at their corporate partners, and serving on long-term recovery group boards.

144

VOADs and COADs
The national VOAD is a national coalition of organizations involved in disaster
relief and recovery in all 50 states. New Jersey has a state VOAD that connected
organizations active in post-Sandy recovery in New Jersey. Although not all
organizations that were active in post-Sandy recovery in New Jersey were members of
the state VOAD, formally constituted disaster relief organizations such as the Salvation
Army, American Red Cross, Team Rubicon, and FBOs such as Episcopal Relief and
Development, Lutheran Social Ministries, The United Methodist Church (A Future with
Hope, which served as a newly created disaster relief organization for the Methodist
Church in post-Sandy New Jersey and played roles in both the state VOAD and county
long-term recovery groups), Catholic Charities, and the Saint Vincent DePaul Society
were all members of NJVOAD. The Food Bank of New Jersey is also a member of the
state VOAD and played a major role in enabling coordination of food stocks and
distribution among the many pop-up food pantries and food banks that emerged in the
aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey. Other organizations with specific skills
such as the Mental Health Association of New Jersey, and Volunteer Lawyers for Justice
are also members of NJVOAD. NJVOAD served as a higher level coordinating body in
which information was exchanged and different organizations were made aware of the
resources that existed across the state. A number of community organizations active in
disaster (COADs) emerged in response to Hurricane Sandy.
NJVOAD worked closely with NJ211, which was the official state portal for
access to information and services for residents impacted by Hurricane Sandy. NJ211 is
overseen by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, is subsidiary of United Way and

145

has existed since at least 2002. Access is offered via telephone—both landline and
cellular—and through the web. The main role of NJ211 is to provide information about
or access to resources such as energy assistance, access to health care, foreclosure
assistance, warming centers, tax assistance, and access to addiction services. It serves as
an all-in-one, one-stop shop for a broad array of services. After Hurricane Sandy, NJ211
was promoted as a prime resource for impacted residents to access information about
hurricane assistance and rebuilding programs such as the Pathways programs and the
RREM program.
Although NJVOAD and NJ211 featured prominently in interviews and in
interactions within the nonprofit sector, municipal officials I interviewed did not have
much interaction with either organization, and they did not feature in interviews as
sources of assistance for municipal officials. The one exception was the municipal
administrator of a large bayside town who had previous experience in the nonprofit
world. This administrator mentioned how both NJVOAD and NJ211 often directed
residents to a Catholic Charities case management office located near their municipal
offices.
Faith-Based Organizations
Faith-based organizations were highly present across all sources used for this
study, including in interviews, participant observation, organizational documents, and
media or news stories. FBOs were active in long-term recovery groups, the NJVOAD,
and as part of the Nonprofit Organization Builders Table (see Nonprofit Organization
Builders Table, below). Catholic Charities held the case management contract for New
Jersey and served as the lead agency for case management, despite the wide range of

146

other organizations employing case managers and providing case management services.
A Future with Hope, the disaster relief arm of the Trenton Diocese of the United
Methodist Church, was formed in 2013 and focused on rebuilding and construction
services. Lutheran Social Ministries were highly active in Monmouth County and
provided key employees to the Monmouth County Long-Term Recovery Group.
Presbyterian Disaster Assistance provided regional and national support to its local
congregations, and local congregational leaders held key roles on the Monmouth County
Long-Term Recovery Group volunteer committee. Presbyterian Disaster Assistance
continued to fund volunteer and housing managers, even after many organizations exited
the long-term recovery process. While less visible among the LTRGs, local Episcopal
dioceses played important roles in community-level recovery and provided leadership to
the NJVOAD throughout the recovery period.
Local churches and parishes played key roles in relief throughout the region.
Activities included establishing food pantries and food shelves, providing clothing,
distributing gift cards for household goods and supplies, connecting impacted residents
with other organizations for financial assistance and emotional and spiritual support, and
serving as a key point of contact in local neighborhoods and communities while
rebuilding and recovery took place. Food pantries and food shelves are spaces in local
churches or other community organizations that provide a limited number of shelf-stable
goods and usually operate with limited hours. Food banks in New Jersey are larger
warehouse-based operations that both serve residents directly and provide warehouse and
logistical support for regional food distribution operations conducted by other
organizations. According to multiple informants and the 2016 NJVOAD report on

147

nonprofits, use of food banks increased tremendously following Hurricane Sandy, and
remained high for several years after, while new grassroots food banks opened during
these years. Newly created food pantries and food shelves filled in the gaps in hard-hit
areas of the region. Some of these food pantries, such as the People’s Pantry in Brick
Township, continued to operate 5 years after their establishment after Hurricane Sandy.
The American Red Cross
The American Red Cross was highly visible throughout the recovery process as a
member of the LTRGs and the NJVOAD. However, the American Red Cross was not a
focal or central organization within many of the networked stakeholder relationships that
existed throughout the region. The most important contribution of the American Red
Cross to the post-Sandy recovery was its ownership and management of the coordinated
assistance network (CAN), a database of all case management records generated through
residents’ requests for assistance. Although ownership and management of this central
information repository would appear to make the American Red Cross a focal
organization in long-term recovery, its role in providing case management services and in
the rebuilding process itself was limited. Community organizations were reluctant to
engage with the American Red Cross because of negative experiences with the American
Red Cross during the emergency response period. These issues are addressed in
Hyperlocal Organizing, below. Hurricane Sandy also represented the first time that the
American Red Cross became engaged in the long-term recovery process, and its
inexperience with long-term recovery processes may have contributed to some of these
negative experiences.

148

Social Enterprises and Disaster Relief Nonprofits
In coastal New Jersey, SBP was the primary social enterprise active in long-term
recovery efforts. SBP was formed in March 2006 by two volunteers working on Katrina
recovery in St. Bernard Parish, immediately south of New Orleans. SBP has rebuilt 1,300
homes across the United States in Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana, Joplin,
Missouri, Staten Island and Rockaway, New York, San Marcos, Texas, Columbia, South
Carolina, and White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, as well as in Monmouth and Ocean
counties in New Jersey. The stated mission of SBP (n.d., para. 2) is to “shrink the time
between disaster and recovery.” SBP engages in different types of recovery activities to
meet that goal. SBP not only repairs and reconstructs homes using volunteer labor, but
also by working with other organizations, city, and state governments as an adviser on
poststorm recovery, and as an advocate for changes in public disaster assistance and
recovery support. The organization attempts to build public policies and
interorganizational processes that speed the time to recovery. Since its founding in March
2006, SBP has overseen approximately 25,000 volunteers per year, many of them
AmeriCorps volunteers, and has harnessed the power of 180,000 volunteers. SBP has an
extensive set of corporate partnerships. SBP’s corporate partnerships provides materials
as well as volunteer labor, with some corporations regularly loaning employees out for
rebuilding projects. SBP has partnered with Toyota Motor Corporation and is adapting its
lean manufacturing model to long-term recovery.
SBP was invited into the coastal New Jersey long-term recovery process by Beach
Town in March 2014 as a response to a perceived lack of commitment from state and
county authorities and a stalled recovery. This particular beach town had seen mass

149

evacuation and had been inundated by both ocean and bay water. SBP was already active
in Staten Island and The Rockaways in New York and initially focused on this one beach
town in coastal New Jersey at the invitation of the mayor. Once on the ground, the
widespread destruction in bayside towns became apparent, and SBP expanded its
operations to these mixed-income bayside communities to the north. Bayside
municipalities to the west were generally more affluent bedroom communities. However,
some of these bayside communities to the west had pockets of less affluent residents, in
many cases senior citizens who were struggling to repair or rebuild their homes. SBP
eventually extended operations to these communities as well. As of January 2018, SBP
was one of two remaining organizations in coastal New Jersey still focusing on Sandy
rebuilding and recovery activities.
Nonprofit Organization Builders Table
The Nonprofit Organization (NPO) Builders Table was created in 2016 as an
alliance of the SBP, A Future with Hope, the Affordable Housing Alliance, and the
OCLTRG. These four organizations were the last four recovery organizations active 4
years after Hurricane Sandy and chose to work with one another after observing each
other’s work over the previous 4 years. This alliance was based upon similar nonprofit
building alliances that had been enacted in New Orleans in the years after Hurricane
Katrina.
“We worked with one another at the Long-Term Recovery Group over a couple of
years and saw that we had similarities in our working styles, concerns, and
emphasis on clients.” (NPO Builders Table Executive 1)

The NPO Builders Table was created to address unmet needs throughout the
coastal region. Within the NPO Builders Table, the OCLTRG became responsible for

150

case management services, with the three other organizations splitting rebuilding
responsibility in different parts of the coastal New Jersey region. SBP provided
rebuilding services in the northern shore region, the Affordable Housing Alliance in the
central shore region, and A Future with Hope in the southern shore region. When first
created in 2013, A Future with Hope provided both case management and rebuilding
services, employing case managers to work with impacted residents as well as a
construction manager to oversee site construction and municipal permitting processes. As
the work of A Future with Hope evolved, the organization began to emphasize rebuilding
rather than comprehensive services and promoted modular construction. The Affordable
Housing Alliance also emphasized modular construction over “stick-build” homes—the
use of lumber and wood framing in residential construction. SBP emphasized stick-build
homes.
These building choices are not merely technical choices; they reflect the
organizational models that each member of the NPO Builders Table provides. SBP relies
heavily on volunteer labor that come into the impacted community for a week or two and
work on specific home rebuilding projects. SBP teams with corporate organizations that
provide volunteers to work on rebuilding project and hosts college and church-based
groups. In addition to this volunteer labor, SBP recruits and supervises AmeriCorps
volunteers to work on administering rebuilding programs and to work with the rotating
volunteer groups. The Affordable Housing Alliance and A Future with Hope rely much
less on volunteer labor (very little for the Affordable Housing Alliance) and use
professional construction and project managers to oversee the entire reconstruction and
rebuilding process in impacted communities. Modular homes require less labor than

151

stick-builds to put together and require attention to particular detail, such as ensuring that
utility hookups, flood vents, and stairs are included with each modular home purchased
or donated by national chains, individuals, or nonprofits.
Characteristics of Post-Sandy Recovery
Hidden pockets refers to the general regional invisibility of impacted homes and
neighborhoods as the post-Sandy recovery progressed over time, in contrast to Hurricane
Katrina, where widespread displacement and ruin was visible from Day 1 throughout the
post-Katrina recovery process. While living in New Orleans in 2009, 4 years after
Katina’s impact, there were still whole neighborhoods of vacant lots, stairs to nowhere,
boarded-up homes, and abandoned businesses everywhere. Unlike Katrina, the Sandy
damage tends to be hidden and tucked away in neighborhoods and communities that look
whole, but on closer look through a window or on a walk through the neighborhood,
incomplete repairs, stalled recovery, and possible displacement can be witnessed. An
understanding of these hidden pockets is important for understanding resource flow and
organizational activities over time in Sandy-impacted communities. Hidden pockets may
tell us something about the priorities of municipal and state leadership, the priorities of
nonprofits active in recovery in the region, and dynamics of real estate and development
in communities impacted by Hurricane Sandy.
Beachside and bayside refer to the tendency of the media and the general public to
associate the impact of Hurricane Sandy with the beach towns that typically see high
tourist volumes in the summer months. Also, beachside and bayside refer to the seeming
ability of beach towns to recover more quickly than bayside and riverside towns.
Hurricane Sandy is still associated with the iconic image of the roller coaster from the

152

Seaside Heights Boardwalk sitting in the ocean rather than with the empty lots and empty
homes that still dot many bayside and riverside towns 5 years after the storm. This
dichotomous image of uneven recovery kept emerging throughout the interviews, drives
through towns, and the press coverage on Sandy recovery. Boardwalk completions and
openings are celebrated as senior citizens struggle to find funding to pay for the venting
they need to receive a certificate of occupancy to complete their recovery and move back
home.
Given their draw as summer tourist destinations, some beach towns used media to
draw attention to and bring needed resources into their communities. Many coastal New
Jersey communities, despite their coastal location, did not have the same opportunities.
I was always able to get local press, News 12, NJTV, Asbury Park Press, the Post
Star, maybe NJ.com. But I can also get [Channel] 2, 4, 7, and 5 out of New York,
maybe 1 out of Philly. But what helps the most is if you get an AP reporter. And I
think this is the way local officials have to think. So a guy named Wayne Perry
who's an Associated Press reporter, good guy, I tell him what we're looking to do.
I say, "Wayne, I know this sounds odd. I need your help. If you write a story and
it's a good story, it goes out on the wire." Wire goes from here to California,
Texas to Minnesota. It's the whole thing. (Beachside Mayor 1, personal
communication)

When you turn around and you look at what [Beachside Town 2] did, they had
that frigging concert and all this. And they had a lot of money flow into their
town. Where are we going to do that? What big stars did we have in [Bayside
Town 1]? You know? I mean, we got what's his name____, who's part of that
band—what the hell is it—the _____. Do you think he'd come back and say, "I'll
give a concert to my own town to help them"? No.
[Famous Drummer] used to live in [Bayside Town] years ago. Did he come by?
No. The guy that wrote the song for Dirty Dancing, "Time of My Life." He lives
on [Point] Avenue. Did he help? Come forward? No. So, I mean, you know, how
do you go about pulling in the funds? But at that time, we still didn't have [local
community nonprofit] suck up the money. (Bayside OEM Director, personal
communication,

153

The dichotomous nature of the recovery between beachside and bayside towns in
coastal New Jersey after Hurricane Sandy provides a framework for understanding the
problem of hidden pockets and a sense of isolation and abandonment felt by many
middle-class communities, which by most measures should be well-resourced with strong
community networks and stakeholder relationships.
Isolation and Abandonment
Isolation and abandonment is a general theme and sentiment of residents who felt
geographically cut off from other parts of the region and/or from sources of assistance
and social support. It is a sentiment and theme raised throughout the post-Sandy
Internews (Napoli, 2014) interviews in Staten Island, in conversations and interviews
with organizers working with grassroots groups, in discussion or interviews around
unmet residential recovery needs with various recovery organizations in Monmouth and
Ocean counties, and in random comments by impacted residents in random encounters I
witnessed or was involved in over the 5 years of the study. Isolation and abandonment
may refer to those individuals and families who have had difficulty in accessing
government and nonprofit sources of assistance. It may also reflect the extent of unmet
needs in a particular disaster-impacted region. Middle-class communities in particular
may have a sense of isolation or abandonment as they may not qualify for certain
recovery programs because their income and assets were too high. Alternatively, the
recovery dollars for which they do qualify may not be enough to restore them to
predisaster standards of living. They have rebuilt, but they have not recovered.

154

Hyperlocal Organizing
Hyperlocal organizing is the process of grassroots communication and
coordination to meet local needs overlooked by institutional response efforts. Interviews
and field research across coastal New Jersey uncovered a variety of ways in which
residents responded to disruption in their communities and engaged in organizing
activities in the days, weeks, and years after Sandy made impact. Although emergent
behaviors among individuals are a normal response in disaster-impacted communities,
emergent organizing processes and establishing new organizations as a response to
disaster is less well understood and documented.2
Existing local organizations often mobilized to support emergent hyperlocal
efforts. In Monmouth County, the social enterprise JBJ Soul Kitchen sourced and
provided food to local restaurants that delivered meals and food supplies to hyperlocal
organizations providing services to displaced residents. The Oceanport Sports
Foundation, a registered 501c3 organization, collected financial donations that were used
to buy supplies for impacted residents until Oceanport Cares, the hyperlocal organization
that emerged from microshelter operations at the Maple Place School in Oceanport,
incorporated in December 2012.
A regional surf apparel company headquartered in a bayside town, used
approximately $500,000 from its corporate treasury to support heavily impacted
businesses and nonprofits in coastal New Jersey until state and federal assistance began
to be distributed. In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, the owners and leaders
of the company made daily Costco runs to support emergent microshelters at different
volunteer firehouses located in bayside towns. They eventually provided cash donations

155

and partnered with Waves for Water, an international NPO, to raise money to support
local organizations heavily impacted by Sandy.
Communities requested specific resources that national and regional nonprofits
and government agencies were unwilling or unable to fulfill. The failure of this ability to
meet community needs inspired organizing processes that connected local organizations
with one another to fill in the gaps of institutional response.3 This led to the emergence of
new (hyperlocal) organizations that specifically address these gaps. Sea Bright and
Rumson residents organized assistance for displaced Sea Bright residents (Sea Bright was
under mandatory evacuation and suffered severe damage) in a church hall across the river
from Sea Bright in Rumson. These efforts later became more formally organized as Sea
Bright Rising and the Sea Bright Resource Center, with one of the founders of the Sea
Bright Resource Center later becoming communications director at the MCLTRG 15
months after the storm.
Assistance in Oceanport was organized at a middle school where impacted
residents from Oceanport and the nearby towns of Sea Bright, Monmouth Beach, and
Long Branch could receive assistance. Oceanport later moved operations to a volunteer
firehouse so the school could reopen. Volunteer firehouses in Ship Bottom, Stafford
Township, and Eagleswood Townships in Ocean County served to collect and distribute
resources from multiple sources to impacted residents. Our Lady of Perpetual Help, a
Catholic Church in Highlands, New Jersey, became the nascent site of hyperlocal
organizing processes by impacted residents of Highland, as well as for residents from
adjoining bayshore areas. Churches in Keyport and Union Beach along the bayshore
became focal points of recovery in those communities and de facto community

156

organizations for interaction with regional and national disaster relief organizations and
the MCLTRG.
Although the media regularly ran images of a sunken roller coaster from the
Seaside Heights Boardwalk, year-round residents and officials in multiple communities
waited for the American Red Cross to arrive with resources and people, for local damage
assessments from FEMA and private insurance adjusters, for the reopening plans for their
neighborhoods and communities, and for information on what to do next. Residents and
small business owners in bayside communities in southern Ocean County reported
waiting in vain for the Red Cross to arrive, while other communities in northern
Monmouth County received resources and volunteers that were mismatched for the needs
of the community. Although some local communities had a well-organized emergency
response plan, others were left to rely on the mercies of their neighboring communities
and local volunteer organizations. New Jersey hyperlocal organizations were often able to
use volunteer firehouses, local schools, and church halls to organize and distribute
material and informational resources to impacted communities and residents. These
activities were not directed by the church, fire department, or school; they were organized
by residents of the impacted communities themselves.
Conflict Among Networked Stakeholders
Ownership of client files was a key point of conflict among case managers and
stakeholders. In particular, ownership of the CAN database and tools by the American
Red Cross became a source of contention in the long-term recovery process. CAN tools
are designed to provide access to client information in disaster-impacted communities,
ideally from the first encounter between an agency representative and displaced residents

157

in shelters to the time residents are able to return to their home. The American Red Cross
requires other agencies to sign a data sharing and confidentiality agreement. The data are
maintained within systems controlled by the American Red Cross. Multiple case
managers and agencies reported problems with moving client data from one nonprofit
agency to another and between the nonprofits and state agencies providing financial
assistance. Lost or misplaced documents and changing documentation requirements were
reported by case managers as major complaints of impacted residents. Experienced case
managers have clients bring all of their (the clients’) documentation in paper form,
photocopy those documents, and keep backup copies. Every time clients applied for a
new assistance program or changed case managers and agencies as organizations exited
the recovery process, impacted residents had to file new applications and new sets of
documentation of eligibility and need.
Rebuilding and reconstruction activities were another source of organizational
conflict during the post-Sandy recovery process. A key driver of this conflict was
different models of reconstruction and rebuilding by different nonprofits. Nonprofits
dependent upon volunteer labor favored a stick-build approach to reconstruction, which
relies upon flows of volunteer labor to complete rebuilding projects. Already established
housing nonprofits often favored modular construction, which relied on experienced
construction workers to deliver and assemble homes. Local pop-up organizations such as
Rebuild Union Beach, which partnered with Burners Without Borders, also favored
modular designs, which allowed for construction schedules to be move forward without
reliance upon volunteer labor from outside organizations. Nonprofits that were unfamiliar
with construction processes and modular design would often fail to budget for stairs on

158

elevated homes, connections to utilities, and sometimes even construction permits, all of
which would increase the cost of construction and sometimes even exceed the capabilities
and budget of the nonprofit serving the resident.
Networked stakeholders had different degrees of cooperative relationships with
municipal construction offices, which may have led to conflicts when the clients of one
nonprofit were able to move forward with recovery while another’s may have become
stuck or stalled in the recovery process. These issues would usually make their way back
to LTRGs and unmet needs committees. SBP, a national social enterprise that focuses
solely on long-term recovery housing issues, might also reenter a community to fix
problems associated with incomplete rebuilds after the initial wave of response, recovery,
and reconstruction was over.
Field research uncovered conflicts between SBP and more traditional nonprofits.
These conflicts appear to be both management- and business model-based. SBP was
originally invited into New Jersey by one specific beachside municipality. The unique
model and private sector partnership-driven approach favored by SBP brought SBP into
conflict with nonprofits in the coastal New Jersey region. Like many of the conflicts
identified in this study, case management and unmet needs appeared to be the main
drivers of conflicts during the first few years SBP was operating in coastal New Jersey.
Multiple community and organizational leaders reported that they had conflict with SBP
national executives due to insistence by SBP on a rigid model of eligibility and
rebuilding. Initially, SBP would only work within the one beachside community in which
the mayor of the community had extended an invitation. However, as the widespread
nature of the damage in adjacent bayside communities became apparent, SBP expanded

159

its operations. The community and organizational leaders who reported conflict with SBP
national executives reported that they were able to develop good working relationships
with the New Jersey executive director of SBP. The New Jersey operations of SBP
eventually became a key player in the NPO Builders Table.
Networks of Recovery
A total of 178 organizations were identified as active in disaster response and
recovery in the coastal New Jersey region between 2012 and 2016. Although more than
200 organizations were reported as being involved in initial long-term recovery meetings
in November and December of 2012, only 178 could be identified through interviews,
organizational records, and field notes. Network density is only 3.5% for this network,
meaning that there are very few connections among the stakeholders active in long-term
recovery in coastal New Jersey as part of the larger regional recovery network. In stark
contrast, the NPO Builders Table, which began supplanting the larger coastal regional
network in 2016, has a network density of 100%. A 100% network density means that all
organizations in this group are connected with one another. Within the NPO Builders
Table, one organization was an emergent organization, one was a planned disaster
response organization, one was part of the civic network in the community prior to the
storm, and one was a new entrant to the region, but had previous experience as a disaster
recovery organization.
Of the 25 most connected organizations active in the 2012–2016 recovery
network, 28% of the organizations were emergent—that is, they did not exist prior to
Hurricane Sandy and were organized in response to community and resident needs after
the storm. Of those 25 most connected organizations, 36% were active in the coastal New

160

Jersey civic network prior to the storm and became engaged in the long-term recovery
process because of their expertise or local knowledge. The remaining 36% of active
organizations were part of the planned disaster response and recovery. Table 11 breaks
down the organizations by type, role in the network, and ranking by degree centrality.
Degree centrality serves as a method for identifying those organizations that are most
connected within the network. Within the coastal New Jersey recovery network, the most
connected organizations were a regional grant maker and a networked grassroots
organization.
Connecting Stakeholders Through “Boots on the Ground”
A regional grant maker and a networked grassroots organization served as key
brokers connecting multiple organizations in coastal New Jersey after Hurricane Sandy.
Neither organization had been active in the coastal New Jersey region before the storm,
and both were distinct organizations. The regional grant maker was a large philanthropic
organization with high name recognition and credibility in an adjoining region. The
networked grassroots organization formed as a disaster recovery organization after
landfall of Hurricane Sandy. Although the organizations had different roles, both
connected and made connections in coastal New Jersey in similar ways. Both
organizations went into disaster-impacted communities and observed what organizations
were hard at work and achieving results and partnered with them.
Identifying Multiple Networks of Recovery in Coastal New Jersey
Networks of recovery is a theme developed during interviews as part of the
analytical memo writing that accompanied this study. This theme emerged as it became
clear that municipal leaders were naming other municipalities, state, and federal agencies

161

as partners, while nonprofits were naming other nonprofits. However, with only seven
municipalities interviewed, formal network analysis that compares the network ties of
municipalities to those of nonprofits may be misleading. The municipalities with leaders
interviewed span two counties out of a four-county region (plus parts of two other
counties), while the nonprofits interviewed span all four counties and include regional
and national nonprofits as well. Municipal leaders were asked directly whether or not
they connected with LTRGs during the interviews and all but one stated they did not
attend LTRG meetings or otherwise connect with them. One beachside mayor, when
asked about working with LTRGs groups replied, “Not really. For the first while, it was
just us and the governor's office.” The mayor focused on the mayor and governor’s office
having been able to get both the Small Business Administration and FEMA to locate in
the mayor’s town instead of some other nearby municipality rather than on connections
with a wider set of organizations providing services in the region. This mayor also used
the school district to reach underserved populations, such as the Latina/o community in
the town.
However, in one large municipality, the municipal administrator came from a
nonprofit background and regularly referred residents to a nearby nonprofit intake center
for assistance with needs that went further than what the municipality could provide.
Another large municipality that experienced major storm damage in both its beachside
and bayside communities hired a former insurance executive to work closely with
residents on issues related to private insurance, the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP), RREM, and the earlier Pathways programs. This newly hired municipal staffer
worked closely with their county long-term recovery group and other nonprofits to

162

educate themselves on the various recovery programs and to learn the capacity and
capabilities of different nonprofits. They would refer complex cases to case managers
working with the various nonprofits. A small bayside community utilized the services of
a reinsurance executive who lived in town and volunteered to help residents navigate the
complexities of private homeowners insurance and the NFIP.
What appeared to be emerging from interviews were three discrete networks of
recovery—a nonprofit network, a mayors’ network, and a municipal administrators’
network—with very little overlap. Nonprofits named other nonprofits and the grant
makers interviewed for this study named mainly nonprofits, although the list of grants
made by the Robin Hood Foundation, a major grant maker in coastal New Jersey,
included municipalities impacted by Hurricane Sandy. The Hurricane Sandy New Jersey
Relief Fund, also known as the Governor’s Fund, and the other prime philanthropic
funder of post-Sandy recovery, made grants specifically to nonprofits. However, although
not donating to municipalities directly, the Governor’s Fund also made donations worth
$4.5 million to 30 public schools across the state.

163

CHAPTER 9
DISCUSSION
Solomon [executive in disaster response, national FBO] explained that we may
perform several types of identifiable tasks, but never know every “knowable”
fact. In many cases, we will not know how many cases, or the scope of needs of
the individuals or the individuals who will be applying until we begin the work
and intake. (Coastal NJ LTRG executive committee meeting minutes, January
2013)
Processes of Long-Term Recovery After Disaster
This study unpacks four key components of long-term recovery after disaster: the
overall landscape of recovery, processes of long-term recovery, timelines of recovery,
and networks of recovery. These components shape the networked stakeholder
relationship and collaborative communication that emerges in communities and regions
grappling with long-term recovery after disaster. Time and geography bound the study,
with field research taking place between 2012 and 2017 in coastal New Jersey between
the Raritan Bay in the northeast and the Delaware Bay in the southwest. The study
uncovers the types of organizations active in long-term recovery and the organizational
activities in which they engage to help communities rebuild and reconnect. The
organizational landscape of recovery makes visible the timelines and processes of longterm recovery. Long-term recovery is defined as an organizational process with distinct
rhythms that unfolds over time as organizations and communities engage in specific
activities of rebuilding and repair, navigating public, private, and plural sector assistance
programs, and restoring the physical and social infrastructure of impacted communities.
Findings are generated from interviews, participant observation, archival data, and
encounters in the 5-year period following Hurricane Sandy in coastal New Jersey.

164

Immersion in the field began the day after landfall of Hurricane Sandy from the safety of
a microshelter in Oceanport, New Jersey, and continues through current activities with
disaster planning organizations. Official exit for this particular study occurred in
December 2017. Estimates of the completeness of post-Sandy recovery from 2017
interview participants range from 60% to 85%. The New Jersey Organizing project
estimates that 22% of impacted residents are still displaced or are only partially rebuilt
(Devecka-Rinear, et. al. 2017). Rebuilding, however, does not indicate a complete
recovery because residents may have been able to rebuild their homes but exhausted their
savings or retirement accounts in the process of rebuilding and/or while displaced from
their homes. These residents become “stuck” and may often need to turn to nonprofits or
other plural sector organizations to finish the recovery.
Data generated from this project make visible the contours of recovery following
natural disaster. A period of emergency response and short-term recovery gives way to a
lengthier and broader period of long-term recovery that extends over multiple years
(Doerfel et al., 2013; Doerfel et al., 2010; Harris & Doerfel, 2016). This multiyear period
of long-term recovery, in turn, has multiple inflection points in which the rhythms,
functions of, and organizations active in recovery change over time. More specifically,
long-term recovery can be defined as a specific set of communication and organizing
processes that enables communities to bounce back, rebuild homes and communities, and
restore some sense of normalcy, which is reflected in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1: Long-term recovery is a specific communication and organizing
process following natural disaster that is separate from emergency response and shortterm recovery.

165

During disaster response and recovery, individuals have specific needs that are
usually met by a mix of organizations local to the disaster-impacted community, acting in
partnership with state, regional, and national organizations (Doerfel et al., 2013; Harris &
Doerfel, 2016, 2017; Kapucu & Hu, 2014). While emergency response and short-term
recovery activities are geared toward safety, security, debris removal, and restoration of
utility services (DHS, 2013), cross-sector organizational recovery activities over the long
term are usually needed for residents and communities to rebuild using a combination of
personal, federal, state, and nonprofit resources (DHS, 2011; GAO, 2016). There are no
precise definitions of the timeline of long-term recovery in either the academic or
professional literatures (Rubin, 1985, 2009; Smith & Wenger, 2007). This study sets a
baseline of 5 years for long-term recovery with the caveat that recent field research
emerging from Hurricane Katrina across the Gulf Coast highlights long-term recovery
processes that may extend up to 10 years or more (Browne, 2015; Fothergill & Peek,
2015; Fussell, 2015; Kroll-Smith et al., 2015).
RQ1: What are the key functions of long-term recovery processes after natural
disaster?
Processes of long-term recovery after disaster comprise a set of organizational
activities that involve physical rebuilding, temporary housing, case management, social
support, meeting the unmet needs of impacted residents, and obtaining funding from
private insurance and state, federal, and nonprofit sources. Some impacted families and
individuals may require food assistance and financial help to handle gas or increased
transportation costs while displaced from their primary homes and communities. One
common theme throughout meetings of local community organizations and LTRGs was

166

the drawing down of impacted residents’ personal resources through not only the
rebuilding process, but also because of extended displacement from home, requiring
increased commute times, increased distances to travel to drop children off at school and
community activities, and round trips to meet with contractors, check in on the rebuilding
of their homes, and wrestle with permitting and other municipal construction processes.
Meeting these unmet needs often requires cross-sector collaboration of networked
stakeholders to allow impacted residents to finish the rebuilding process, move back
home or find a new home, and begin again to live their lives in their disaster-impacted
communities.
RQ2: What communication and organizing processes underlie long-term recovery
from disaster?
Cross-sector collaboration involving an extended set of stakeholder relationships
is a necessary component of long-term recovery (Chandrasekhar, Zhang, & Xiao, 2014;
Simo & Bies, 2007). These networked stakeholder relationships are embedded within the
disaster-impacted community and may represent either existing relationships among
organizations already active in the community prior to the hurricane or new relationships
formed as national and regional agencies and nonprofits enter the community (Harris &
Doerfel, 2016). These stakeholder relationships rely on collaborative communication
practices to share information, resources, and ideas (Deetz, 2017; Koschmann et al.,
2012; Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978).
Networked stakeholder relationships are organizationally embedded within their
communities (Crane, Matten, & Moon, 2004; Strand & Freeman, 2015) and provide the
social infrastructure of recovery (Diani, 2015; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Galaskiewicz,

167

1979; Taylor & Doerfel, 2011). Within the context of long-term recovery, stakeholders
may have either a financial interest in the community as a residential or business owner
or a broader stake as a citizen of a particular community in which an individual resides as
either a homeowner or renter. Stakeholders may also include tourists or other regular
visitors to the beach towns of New Jersey who have an emotional stake in the
community, and who may also contribute to the financial well-being of the community
through local spending that supports local merchants and provides sales tax revenues to
state and local government. This definition, of course, includes only domiciled residents
and leaves out the large transient and homeless populations that are unseen, uncounted,
and underreported in coastal New Jersey.
This study focuses only on organization-to-organization connections between
organizations active in long-term recovery and not on individual connections to
organizations. Understanding organizational relationships as connections among
networked stakeholders is the key to understanding how to improve the flow of
information, resources, and social support in disaster-impacted communities. If each
organization possesses a certain amount of organizational capital based on resources,
authority, status, role, or trust, then individuals as well as communities would be wellserved by stronger stakeholder relationships (D. P. Aldrich & Meyer, 2015; Diani, 2015;
Small, 2009b). Fostering stronger collaborative communication practices becomes a key
approach for improving long-term relationships among organizations active in disaster
response and recovery.

168
Stakeholder Relationships are Community Relationships
Traditional stakeholder frameworks offer precise definitions of what constitutes a
stakeholder (R. E. Freeman, 1984). Organizations are perceived as having a particular
stake in the success or survivability of another organization. A stake may be defined as an
employment relationship, a relationship between a supplier and a customer, the symbiotic
relationship between the media and the external relations functions of a firm, the stake of
a community in the success of an organization, or the stake of an organization in the
viability and sustainability of a community and the natural environment in which it
operates.
Study participants provided expansive definitions of stakeholders that identified a
wide range of organizations and people as stakeholders in post-Sandy coastal New
Jersey. Although residents and the overall community itself were named as stakeholders
by participants, renters were often overlooked in these definitions by community and
organizational leaders or in the discussion of the impact of Sandy on the overall recovery
of the community. Traditional Scandinavian stakeholder theory frames stakeholder
relationships as not only networked, but also embedded within the community
(Byrkjeflot, 2003; Strand & Freeman, 2015). These findings from this post-Sandy
research indicate that organizational leaders have a much more expansive definition of
stakeholders than that found in the academic literature and that these definitions align
with Scandinavian models of networked, embedded stakeholder relationships, rather than
with Anglo-American stakeholder frameworks that emphasize discrete primary and
secondary stakeholder relationships (R. E. Freeman, 1984; G. Jackson, 2005; Mesure,
2005). However, renters often find they do not have access to the same sources of

169

assistance that homeowners do and their voice is often mediated through landlords or the
local municipality. Renters are overlooked in discussions of stakeholder definitions
because, while they have voting rights, they lack property ownership, which may be seen
as more of a stake in a community than mere residence, even if children are enrolled in
local schools. Renter exclusion, then, qualifies this proposed extension of Nordic
stakeholder models to community survivability with an Anglo-American framing of who
counts within a community. It appears that those who count are those who pay local taxes
and own land. However, despite these renter exclusions from stakeholder definitions,
findings indicate a relational, whole community approach toward defining stakeholders
by organizational leaders, rather than a transactional, individualistic model. This leads to
Proposition 2.
Proposition 2: Stakeholders are networked organizations with joint interests, are
embedded within an organizational field, social sector, or community, and collaborate to
solve social or environmental problems of mutual concern.
Research Question 3 informs Proposition 2:
RQ3: How are networked stakeholder relationships generated from the formal
and informal communication activities and organizing processes within communities
solving a joint problem of long-term recovery after natural disaster?
Stakeholders are typically conceptualized as organizations that are central within
a network or organizational field. In disaster relief and recovery, national and regional
organizations that are part of a state or national VOAD or are federally chartered are
initially seen as the central, go-to organizations (DHS, 2008, 2013; Kosar, 2006).
However, community organizations and emergent disaster relief and recovery

170

organizations are often present in the disaster-impacted community, filling in gaps and/or
providing local knowledge (Drabek & McEntire, 2003; Harris & Doerfel, 2016; Stallings
& Quarantelli, 1985). Community and organizational leaders in coastal New Jersey
define stakeholders as a broad set of relationships within the disaster-impacted
community or region. However, certain populations such as renters are often overlooked
by community leaders and dependent upon stakeholders such landlords, developers, and
municipalities for the pace and speed with which multiunit residences are rebuilt and
renters are able to return to a community.
Stakeholders provide the organizational capacity, knowledge, and relationships
through which the processes and activities of disaster relief and recovery are enacted.
Stakeholders are connected through a series of communication practices that enable them
to build networked relationships over time as they work in disaster-impacted
communities.
RQ4: What are the most effective communication practices for connecting local,
neighborhood, and grassroots organizations with public agencies and larger nonprofits in
communities impacted by natural disaster?
Networked stakeholders used communication practices such as meetings, e-mail,
phone conversations, and text to address issues of mutual concern. These communication
activities allow for problems to be solved, activities to be coordinated, tasks to be split
among different organizations, information exchanged, and resources allocated (Barbour
& Gill, 2014; Schwartzman, 1989; Yates & Orlikowski, 1992). Meetings are the primary
conduit through which these organizational connections are made and advanced. The
formation phase of long-term recovery groups provided a physical and organizational

171

space within which organizations could connect and begin to partner with one another.
The subsequent weekly and monthly meetings of LTRGs are where organizational
relationships developed, problems were identified, and solutions generated (Koschmann,
2013; Koschmann et al., 2012; Sprain & Boromisza-Habashi, 2012). As organizational
partners begin to know one another and build trust, more frequent connections through
phone calls, e-mails, and one-on-one or small group meetings may occur. Those
organizations that engage in more frequent communication with one another may, in turn,
form smaller networks, such as the NPO Builders Table, that are focused on particular
problems or regions.
Networks of Recovery
Proposition 3: Networked stakeholders use collaborative communication to enact
joint problem solving, coordinate activities, differentiate tasks, exchange information,
and allocate resources.
Networked stakeholders create networks of recovery through their communication
and organizational activities (Koschmann et al., 2012). These communications and
organizing activities create a process of long-term recovery and shape how the timelines
of recovery unfold (Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015; Barbour & Gill, 2014). Municipalities in
New Jersey are responsible for getting things done after disaster, including debris
removal, making sure electricity and other utilities are restored, and rebuilding and
restoring public infrastructure such as roads, bridges, sewage systems, first aid squads,
fire houses, police departments, and municipal buildings. Nonprofits in the disaster zone
often deal directly with impacted residents neighborhoods, communities, counties, and
regions. It is the nonprofits, in most cases, that make connections between organizations

172

and connect residents directly to resources through a case management process, an unmet
needs table, or builders’ alliance. These connections create networked stakeholder
relationships designed to solve specific problems relating to recovery.
The NPO Builders Table in coastal New Jersey represented a small network of
recovery generated out of a larger, earlier set of networked stakeholder relationships. This
alliance or coalition of nonprofits emerged out of the interactions of four plural sector
organizations over a 4-year period between 2013 and 2017. First engaging with one
another through the county LTRGs, these four organizations found they had
complementary skills, organizational capacity and expertise, similar working styles, and a
like-minded approach to long-term recovery that focused on residents. These four
organizations—the Affordable Housing Alliance, A Future with Hope, the OCLTRG, and
SBP—represent a mix of local, regional, and national organizations, two of which were
active prior to Hurricane Sandy and two of which were created after Hurricane Sandy.
Consisting of a local housing organization, a regional FBO, an LTRG established in
2012, and a national social enterprise, this still-present network became responsible for
most of the remaining residential recovery efforts in the coastal New Jersey region in
2016 and 2017. While most homeowners continued to grapple with reconstruction and
rebuilding on their own late in the recovery, the NPO Builders Table became a resource
of last resort for residents who became stuck in the recovery process with funding,
permitting, or contractor issues. The NPO Builders Table is a strong example of how the
organizational landscape and stakeholder relationships of long-term recovery change over
time.

173
The Organizational Landscape of Recovery
The landscape of recovery is defined by a sequence of organizational activities in
which a wide range of organizations engage over time. Organizations may be local,
regional, or national in nature, and they may be either existing or emergent organizations
that enter into disaster-impacted communities to provide services and meet resident or
community needs (Carlson et al., 2016; Harris & Doerfel, 2016; Kapucu & Hu, 2014).
Emergent organizations, widely referred to as pop-ups by residents and organizational
leaders in impacted communities, are designed to fill in the gaps in recovery that
response and recovery organizations have not been able to fill (Drabek & McEntire,
2003; Majchrzak et al., 2007; Stallings & Quarantelli, 1985). The organizational
landscape of long-term recovery in post-Sandy coastal New Jersey was shaped by (a) the
social and organizational relationships of the disaster-impacted community, (b) the type
and extent of damage from Hurricane Sandy, and (c) whether the disaster-impacted
community was located beachside or bayside in the coastal New Jersey region.
Findings indicated that towns located directly on the beaches and barrier islands
fared better in long-term recovery than those located on the bays, estuaries, and rivers of
coastal New Jersey. The exceptions, however, are the large townships that straddle both
the barrier island and the bayside opposite these barrier islands. These townships suffered
extensive impact to their tax base. Within these large townships and across the many
bayside communities are hidden pockets of homes and neighborhoods where recovery
and rebuilding is slow or nonexistent. These hidden pockets of stalled recovery and stuck
residents may lead to a sense of isolation and abandonment among residents and
communities. Impacted residents living inside these hidden pockets may feel

174

geographically cut off or isolated or may have difficulty accessing sources of assistance,
leading to a further sense of isolation or abandonment as the processes of long-term
recovery unfold around them.
The organizations that remained active over the long haul of the recovery
primarily focus on residents and communities whose recovery is stalled or that have
hidden pockets of unrecovered neighborhoods and residents. Even in late stages of longterm recovery, new organizations may emerge to give voice to residents with stalled
recovery processes, or existing organizations may change focus and build new expertise
and capabilities to address problems and issues that arise during the long-term recovery
process. The New Jersey Organizing Project was formed in 2015 to address the combined
impact of delays in the distribution of state funding assistance, confusing paperwork, and
unclear processes that result in underpayments or ineligibility determinations for
impacted residents from private insurers and the NFIP. The OCLTRG became an expert
on the NFIP after identifying systematic underpayments to New Jersey residents and
improper clawbacks in which impacted residents were required to return money received
from the NFIP because of rebuilding assistance received from other sources. The
OCLTRG then worked with New Jersey U.S. Senator Robert Menendez to draft and
implement policy changes to the NFIP.
Long-term recovery requires networked stakeholders that are able to operate
across multiple domains of expertise as well as connect with and work with organizations
with different expertise, capacity, and capabilities. It is these cross-sector relationships
that shape the organizational landscape of recovery. The organizational landscape of
recovery itself is a set of connections and processes that sequence the delivery of

175

particular resources, competencies, and expertise to disaster-impacted residents and
communities. The emergence and change of these connections and processes creates
networked stakeholder relationships, which in turn contribute to the physical, social, and
organizational rebuilding required for communities to recover from a natural disaster
such as Hurricane Sandy.
Cross-Sector Relationships and the Plural Sector
Cross-sector relationships refer to the relationships between stakeholders with
different capabilities within the plural, public, or private sector, as well as to relationships
between organizations across the three sectors (Diani, 2015; Harris & Doerfel, 2016;
Mintzberg, 2015). Although this study emphasizes stakeholder relationships within the
plural sector, empirical evidence was also collected that identifies connections across the
different sectors that allows for an assessment of the implications of cross-sector
relationships in long-term recovery. Cross-sector relationships enable the organizational
sequencing of activities in long-term recovery to unfold. These cross-sector relationships
change over time and are organized through multiple forms of communication ranging
from face-to-face, individual, and small group meetings to large meetings and town halls,
as well as through communication by e-mail, text, and phone (Chewning et al., 2013;
Doerfel et al., 2010). Findings did not indicate that social media, videoconferencing, or
innovative digital communications infrastructure played a role in the development of
cross-sector relationships or in collaborative communication processes. Initiating
communication and organizing activities in these relationships are usually the result of
needing to solve a problem, make a decision, brief decision makers, exchange

176

information or resources, or connect impacted residents with recovery resources and
support.
Persistent and emergent stakeholder relationships. Relationships between
networked stakeholders may be persistent; that is, organizations engage and interact with
one another on a regular basis, either through existing community relationships or
through extended engagement among disaster relief and response organizations that
connect with one another across disasters and across communities. Interactions among
disaster relief organizations with persistent relationships may not entail regular meetings,
collaboration, or information exchange during blue sky periods, but these organizations
may have (a) experience with one another based on past interactions at other disaster
sites; (b) engaged in collaboration efforts during new disasters in other communities
occurring during the long-term recovery period following Hurricane Sandy; (c)
membership in the NVOAD, NJVOAD, or other VOADs or COADs; or (d) as regular
participants in service efforts by FBOs in communities impacted by disaster or other
socioeconomic issues. Organizations with persistent relationships may have either strong
or weak ties with one another, but these ties are not necessarily determined by frequency
of interaction, similarity of organizations, or the degree of connections among all
participants in these networked stakeholder relationships in disaster-impacted
communities (Atouba & Shumate, 2015; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Schermerhorn, 1975).
New organizational relationships. New organizational relationships are created
through the organizational partnering of both existing organizations without a previous
history of working with one another and new or pop-up organizations created in the
aftermath of a disaster such as Hurricane Sandy. Partnerships may be established between

177

two or more existing organizations, two or more pop-up organizations, or multiples of
existing and pop-up organizations. In almost all instances, these are networked
relationships in which many-to-many communication and organizing activities take
place. Emergent relationships are initiated as a way to solve problems such as the unmet
needs of residents or a community, to make available new resources and organizational
capacities, share information, provide social support, or give voice to residents struggling
with the recovery process. Like persistent relationships, emergent relationships may be
based on either strong or weak network ties, with the relationship determined by the
degree of interaction organizations have with one another rather than simply the
frequency of interaction, similarity of organizations, or degree of connections among
networked stakeholders.
The ties that connect partnering organizations in disaster-impacted communities
may be a form of engagement, which Doerfel (2018) defined as a type of network tie
initiated by a particular social or organizational interaction and that operates within a
particular community, organizational, or social context. In long-term recovery, this
engagement is triggered by an organizing event such as an LTRG meeting, rebuilding and
reconstruction, the unmet needs of residents in disaster-impacted communities, local,
state, federal, and nonprofit funding opportunities, private sector assistance, and activities
around the provision of social support and spiritual and emotional assistance. These ties
are not ties within the strict framework of network theory; rather, they are relationships
that trigger community engagement through a series of communication and organizing
activities designed to respond to a disruptive event such as a natural disaster.

178

Conflict and Collaboration in the Plural Sector
Different organizational activities created different sources of conflict at different
times over the course of long-term recovery from Hurricane Sandy. Case management
was a particular source of contention between different organizations and within the
LTRGs. Many philanthropic groups provided funding to employ case managers at many
different organizations, regardless of the core expertise of those organizations. These
funding allocations ran parallel to the master case management contract awarded by the
State of New Jersey to Catholic Charities. Multiple funding streams to multiple
organizations created some confusion over the management and model of case
management services utilized in long-term recovery from Hurricane Sandy. This
confusion created conflict not only with existing organizations with core competencies in
case management, but also with other organizations providing case management to
residents in addition to their core competencies in their particular field of expertise.
There were multiple reasons why the case management processes of long-term
recovery created organizational conflict among networked stakeholders. Confusion of the
terms, requirements, eligibility, and requirements of federally funded state assistance
programs resulted in different interpretations of programs by different agencies and case
managers. This confusion resulted in conflicts between agencies over client eligibility for
programs at weekly and monthly unmet needs meetings of the LTRG. Frequent changes
in programs, deadlines, and eligibility created additional confusion among agencies and
stakeholders between 2013 and 2016, which added potential sources of conflict.
Compounding these issues were differences in experience levels among the case
managers themselves.

179

Many LTRGs and agencies employed junior case managers who had recently
graduated from counseling and social work programs rather than senior case managers
who had experience working in the field. While having the credentials and explicit
knowledge from their degree programs, many lacked the tacit knowledge of how to
navigate complex systems and the many layers of government and multiple municipal
structures of New Jersey. In some cases, these junior case managers were the decision
makers because their agency was the designated provider for case management services
in a particular county. Also, rebuilding and reconstruction created organizational conflict
during the post-Sandy recovery process because of the different models of reconstruction
and rebuilding used by different nonprofits and widely varying levels of experience with
rebuilding and reconstruction in a disaster zone.
It appears that conflicts were resolved by organizations developing expertise as
well as by a reduction in the number of networked stakeholders involved in response and
recovery in coastal New Jersey over the 5-year period of the study. For example, the
OCLTRG developed expertise in case management, state programs such as the RREM,
and the NFIP. The New Jersey Organizing Project organized isolated and abandoned
residents in bayside towns to advocate for increased funding and extended deadlines. A
Future with Hope, helmed by an executive with an engineering background, developed an
expertise in construction management and rebuilding. As the NPO Builders Table
emerged from the LTRGs, organizations such as the OCLTRG and A Future with Hope
joined with housing-focused organizations SBP and the Affordable Housing Alliance in a
partnership that divided regions and tasks among them.

180
Task Differentiation as Collaborative Communication
By using task differentiation, the NPO Builders Table was able to take on
responsibility for rebuilding and recovery in coastal New Jersey even as the networked
stakeholders involved in long-term recovery dwindled from 200+ organizations to the
four members of the NPO Builders Table and the state agencies administering funding
programs. Task differentiation enables interorganizational relationships such as
networked stakeholders active in long-term recovery after disaster to act as a single
organization with expertise, management, client service, administration and finance
distributed among multiple organizations (Doerfel, 2016; Powell, 1990). Task
differentiation utilizes communication networks and practices to identify needs, define
problems, and find solutions (Koschmann, 2013; Lai, She, & Ye, 2015; Van de Ven &
Walker, 1984). Rather than a single organization acting as a primary stakeholder and
brokering tasks, networked stakeholders are able to organically connect with each other
and with Sandy-impacted communities to engage in joint problem solving around issues
of recovery that emerge over time. As more stakeholders exit the long-term recovery
process, the networked nature of these relationships makes it easier for roles and tasks to
be reconfigured among the remaining stakeholders and problem-solving networks such as
the NPO Builders Table to emerge. These informal processes of communication become
formalized among a smaller group of networked stakeholders as the nature of the
recovery and the needs of residents and communities change over time.
Communication Breakdown
A sense of abandonment within the community and a lack of listening by regional
and national institutions responsible for formal disaster response and recovery may foster

181

the emergence of hyperlocal organizations in these disaster-impacted communities. In
essence, a lack of listening constitutes an institutional failure or failures that become quite
visible among individuals and organizations grappling with the impacts of natural
disaster. Lack of listening may be defined as the reluctance or unwillingness of regional
and national agencies to incorporate local knowledge and resource networks into disaster
response and recovery activities. Browne’s (2015) articulation of long-term recovery
problems in post-Katrina St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, describes this phenomenon as a
bureaucratic tin ear: problems articulated over and over again are overlooked, unheard, or
even ignored, generating immense frustration among recovering residents and even a
sense of abandonment by the larger institutions of recovery. These communication
breakdowns make it more likely that impacted residents will turn to similarly impacted
neighbors and friends to navigate the multiyear processes of long-term recovery.
A Networked Stakeholder Model of Long-Term Recovery
Long-term recovery is a set of interrelated communication and organizing
processes that are used by individuals, communities, and organizations to jointly solve
problems, identify and allocate resources, and rebuild storm-impacted homes and
communities. Communication is used not only to coordinate work activities related to
recovery and rebuilding, but also to build trust and to talk through the problems of
recovery as a way to establish relationships with like-minded partners who view
community relationships and service to impacted residents in similar ways. These
interrelated activities create relationships among stakeholders over time and “cement”
these stakeholder relationships as the stakeholders achieve goals together.

182

Long-Term Recovery as Communication and Organizing
Long-term recovery after disaster is a process that unfolds over time. Although
the particular parameters of a disaster, response, and recovery are unique to the
community or region of impact, we can begin to understand long-term recovery as an
organizational sequencing of activities that begins when the immediate danger is over and
some impacted physical elements (e.g., roads, power, water) of the impacted community
have been restored. Long-term recovery is distinct from emergency response in that it
involves a set of organizational relationships that stabilize as organizations interact with
one another over time and learn each other’s capabilities and capacities. Research
Question 5 asks about long-term recovery:
RQ5: How do networked stakeholder relationships enact long-term recovery after
disaster?
These organizational relationships may be characterized as persistent and
emergent relationships. Persistent relationships are connections between disaster response
and relief organizations that may come in contact with each other regularly, either as
responders to different disasters in different locations at different times or as members of
coordinating groups such as the national VOAD, a state VOAD, or a COAD. Particular
FBOs may also fill the same organizational tasks across disasters; for example, the
Mennonites organized roof repair, and World Renew organized damage assessments and
regular volunteer deployments to a particular impacted community.
Emergent Relationships
Emergent relationships are those relationships that emerge over time as local
community organizations are brought into the relief and recovery for their expertise,

183

capabilities, or capacities, or as new organizations pop up to address unmet needs and
serve under resourced or neglected communities (Harris & Doerfel, 2016). Although
emergent organizations are defined in terms of this study as those organizations that
emerge after a disaster to fill a certain role or meet a certain need, emergent relationships
are much broader. Emergent relationships are the connections that stakeholders make
with other stakeholders as they jointly solve problems related to long-term recovery
(Doerfel, 2018; A. J. Porter, 2013; Rodríguez, Trainor, & Quarantelli, 2006).
Persistent and emergent relationships will stabilize as the long-term recovery
process becomes cemented and a new set of networked relationships within an impacted
community emerges. This stabilization of stakeholder relationships over time is what
differentiates long-term recovery from emergency response and recovery. The
interorganizational relationships of long-term recovery are networked stakeholder
relationships that become part of cross-sector relationships within the impacted
community.
Although persistent relationships in the disaster relief and response sector may
imply strong ties in a network sense attributable to frequency of contact or the likeness
and similarities between these organizations, persistence refers to ongoing relationships
between organizations operating together within a community or organizational sector
that may or may not be active at any particular point in time. Ties that are not active are
not strong, and organizations that may work together only every two to three years after a
disaster may move from strong ties to weak ties to nonactive ties and back again.
Local leaders are often lost in the dust and debris of cleanup and recovery and
their voices often overlooked within the years-long process of long-term recovery.

184

Although disaster relief organizations such as the American Red Cross, the Salvation
Army, the Saint Vincent de Paul Society, Catholic Charities, and other organizations
associated with the national or state VOAD have a permanent year-round presence and
persistent relationships with one another, local community organizations and leaders in
small municipalities or neighborhoods often lack these persistent connections to the
disaster recovery community. They may initially become overwhelmed by perceived
expertise that discounts the community relationships and civic relationships built up over
the years in Sandy-impacted communities prior to the storm. A key challenge for
stakeholders active in long-term recovery, then, is to develop processes of collaboration
and communication that account for the different mix of relationships, expertise, and
experience stakeholders bring to the long-term recovery process.
A Model of Long-Term Recovery Following Hurricanes in the United States
Long-term recovery following hurricanes in the United States rests upon a
foundation of networked stakeholder relationships and collaborative communication.
Collaborative communication is a communication practice that brings together multiple
stakeholders to solve the problems of long-term recovery (Deetz, 2017; Harris & Doerfel,
2016). Findings from this study in coastal New Jersey after Hurricane Sandy indicate that
low- or no-tech communication practices (Chewning et al., 2013; Doerfel & Haseki,
2013; Doerfel et al., 2010) were primarily utilized by stakeholders to connect with one
another. These practices involved meetings, face-to-face encounters, e-mail, phone, and
sometimes text. Client files were managed in both a database that could be accessed by
multiple stakeholders with the right access permissions and in hard copy files. Client
service and case management services were a key source of stakeholder conflict. As the

185

number of stakeholders active on long-term recovery diminished over time, remaining
stakeholders coalesced to serve larger geographic regions, began to standardize some
practices, and eventually created an NPO Builders Table of the four remaining
stakeholders active in the region.
Networked stakeholders represent a mix of organizations active in pre-Sandy
civic networks in pre-Sandy coastal New Jersey, organizations that operated to provide
emergency response planning at local, county, state, and federal levels, and new or
emergent organizations created following the storm to fill in the gaps in recovery and
meet specific needs of impacted residents and community. Trust plays an important part
in figuring out who to work with in post-storm stakeholder relationships (Tilly, 2005;
Vangen & Huxham, 2003). Over multiple years, stakeholders begin to know one
another’s capabilities and competencies and work more closely with those organizations
with which they have similar goals, purpose, and working relationships. Stakeholders
begin to fulfill more specifically defined roles and tasks as the networks of recovery
become smaller. Task differentiation becomes an important part of the collaborative
communication processes that help the multiplicity of stakeholders negotiating the
complex terrain of long-term recovery.
Stakeholders are defined by interview participants as a wide range of individuals
and organizations active in a community to varying degrees. This definition calls into
question the idea of a primary or focal organization responsible for organizing recovery.
Instead, a web of relations among very different types of organizations is necessary for
long-term recovery after a natural disaster such as Hurricane Sandy.

186

A networked model of stakeholder relationships addresses issues of long-term
recovery, stakeholder relationships, and collaborative communication as an interrelated
conceptual framework that is part of the social infrastructure of a community. Social
infrastructure is the web of community and organizational relationships that rest upon a
foundation of trust, provide access to resources, and serve as the bedrock of the economic
and political environment of a community. This study presents three propositions to (a)
understand what specifically long-term recovery is and how it differs from emergency
response, (b) extend stakeholder theory to include multiple interrelated relationships and
(c) collaborative communication practices.
Collaborative communication can be defined as those communication practices
such as physical and virtual meetings, face-to-face encounters, phone conversations, emails, and texts that enable stakeholders to solve problems together and advance the
common goals of a community or stakeholder relationship (Barbour & Gill, 2014;
Koschmann et al., 2012; Sprain & Boromisza-Habashi, 2012). The concept of networked
stakeholder relationships provides a framework for advancing stakeholder theory as a
relational model that collapses traditional distinctions between primary and secondary
stakeholders into a web of organizational and community relationships (Harris and
Doerfel 2016). Table 11 details the mix of organizations active in long-term recovery
over the five year period of the study and their role in the network. This relational model
of stakeholder theory may align traditional Anglo-American models of stakeholder
relationships with the foundational Nordic models of stakeholder theory, which
emphasizes social and organizational embeddedness (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Mische, 2011;
Rhenman, 1968; Strand & Freeman, 2015).

187

Proposition 1: Proposition 1 proposes that long-term recovery is a distinct
multiyear process of communication and organizing that is separate from emergency
response and short-term recovery. Although all three activities may be linked together as
part of a phased, continual whole, long-term recovery has its own unique rhythms and
timelines that depend upon networked stakeholder relationships. Over time, stakeholders
in the long-term recovery of a disaster-impacted community begin to understand each
other’s capabilities and competencies and the unique needs of the community.
Communication and organizing processes of stakeholders active in long-term recovery
include meetings, task differentiation, and organizational activities that meet the needs of
impacted communities and enable access to resources (Barbour & Gill, 2014; Dean, Gill,
& Barbour, 2016; Sprain & Boromisza-Habashi, 2012).
Proposition 2: Proposition 2 proposes that stakeholders are networked
organizations with joint interests, are socially and organizationally embedded, and
collaborate to solve social or environmental problems of mutual concern. Stakeholders
active in long-term recovery come together to solve problems related to long-term
recovery. Stakeholders may be part of a pre-storm civic network, the FEMA whole
community framework, or a local emergency response and recovery plan, and may
include new organizations that arise in the postdisaster environment to meet resident or
community needs (Harris & Doerfel, 2016). What unites these organizations is
participation in the multiyear process of recovery in a disrupted community or region.
Proposition 3: Proposition 3 proposes that networked stakeholders use
collaborative communication to enact joint problem solving, coordinate activities,
differentiate tasks, exchange information, and allocate resources (Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015;

188

Deetz, 1995, 2017). As defined above, collaborative communication involves meetings,
face-to-face encounters, and communication tools that enable stakeholders to solve
problems together. In long-term recovery, collaborative communication enables
participating stakeholders to learn one another’s capabilities and competencies and to
differentiate tasks among stakeholders based on these capabilities and competencies
(Dean et al., 2016; Koschmann, 2013; Koschmann et al., 2012). Collaborative
communication rests upon a foundation of trust and familiarity among organizations
active in long-term recovery.
Advancing Stakeholder Theory Through Relational Models and Collaborative
Communication
A study of networked stakeholders solving problems of long-term recovery
provides a framework for advancing stakeholder theory as a relational model in which
tangled webs of organizational and community relationships supplant the traditional
model of primary and secondary stakeholder relationships found in Anglo-American
stakeholder theories (Strand & Freeman, 2015). This framework more concretely aligns
stakeholder theory with the foundational Nordic models, which emphasized the social
and organizational embeddedness of the communication and organizing processes that
generate stakeholder relationships through negotiation, collaboration, and conflict
mediation (Byrkjeflot, 2003; Deetz, 1995; Rhenman, 1968). However, while Nordic
stakeholder models emphasize a singular flow of interrelationships among multiple
organizations and sectors in a given community, region, or nation, findings from this
study indicate that rather than just a singular network encompassing all active and

189

potential stakeholder relationships, multiple stakeholder relationships may exist
simultaneously in the same place at the same time (Mische, 2009).
These findings lend support to Deetz’s (1992, 1995, 2017) multiple stakeholder
model in which collaborative communication practices are used to broker relationships
and solve problems of mutual concern to a community. Rather than primary and
secondary stakeholders engaged in shared value creation and economic transactions
(Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015; Clarkson, 1995; M. E. Porter & Kramer, 2011), what these
models suggest are webs of organizations engaged in activities of problem solving, trust
building, and resource management over time. Simply put, stakeholders share expertise
and knowledge to address problems of mutual concern. These organizing activities are
managed in turn through collaborative communication and shape the social infrastructure
of a community (D. P. Aldrich, 2012; Diani, 2015; Doerfel, 2018; Taylor & Doerfel,
2011).
This framework places stakeholder theory firmly within relational models of
social and organizational interaction (Emirbayer, 1997; Granovetter, 1985; Mische, 2011)
and within a framework of “pluralistic interdependence” (Deetz, 2017). Relational
models of stakeholder theory place communication at the center of social and
organizational landscapes. These social and organizational landscapes are mutually
constructed over time (Koschmann et al., 2012; Mische, 2008; Mische & Pattison, 2000)
and can be shaped and reshaped through the communication practices and organizing
activities of networked stakeholders.
Space and time are deeply entwined elements of relational stakeholder theory
(Emirbayer, 1997; Gaddis, 2002). Stakeholder relationships take place within a specific

190

space—a physical community, region, or nation, organizational field, sector, or industry.
The space in which networked stakeholder relationships are enacted provides the social
and historical context of the problem(s) that need to be solved, for instance, in a
community recovering from natural disaster. Complex problems such as long-term
recovery after disaster can only be addressed through stakeholder relationships that
addresses mutuality and negotiation among partners as the path towards problem solving,
trust building, and resource allocation (Deetz, 2017; Diani, 2015). These relationships
evolve over time and in response to the specific needs and problems of mutual concern of
the stakeholders active in the space.
Partnerships form, evolve, and are discarded as needs change. The dynamics of
this partnering and the networked relationships they generate, in turn, shape the historical
and social context in which communication and organizing take place. At the community
level, these relationships generate the social infrastructure that contributes to the ability
of the community to solve problems of mutual concern and address resource allocation
issues. Social infrastructure, like social structure, is not static; it is generated through the
communication practices of partnering organizations and the web of relationships in
which the partnering organizations engage (Diani, 2015; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004; Taylor
& Doerfel, 2011).
Relational stakeholder theory can be defined as a dynamic set of partnerships
among organizations active in a shared space solving problems of mutual concern.
Stakeholders solve these problems of mutual concern through communication practices
that enable negotiation, trust building, resource allocation, and conflict management.
These communication practices can consist of multiple communication tools and

191

channels, but in this study of long-term recovery, networked stakeholders primarily used
low-tech communication practices such as meetings and face-to-face encounters.
Building a Theory of Collaborative Communication
A theory of collaborative communication takes into account the entanglement of
social, economic, and environmental issues and the impact of this entanglement on civil
society (Deetz, 1992, 2017; Strand & Freeman, 2015). These entangled issues require an
organizational response in which the capabilities, competencies, and expertise of multiple
organizations are used to collectively solve problems impacting the community or
communities of which they are a part. Complex problems such as long-term recovery
from disaster sometimes require organizations from outside the community to provide
additional expertise and resources. New organizations may also emerge to meet unmet
needs, address overlooked problems, or serve underserved populations (Drabek &
McEntire, 2003; Harris, Carestia, & Fedorova, 2017; Harris & Doerfel, 2016). These
networked stakeholder relationships rest upon a foundation of communication practices
and organizing activities that enable networked stakeholders to collectively manage
conflict and negotiate with one another. Figure 8 details the communication and
organizing processes of long-term recovery as a connected path of collaborative
communication, networked relationships, and long-term recovery activities. Ultimately,
collaborative communication requires each networked stakeholder to take responsibility
for the health of organizational partnerships and communication practices.
At a fundamental level, communication practices provide the organizational forms
and communication tools in which language and social interaction are created in a
networked stakeholder relationship. Formal and informal interactions among

192

organizational leaders create the networked relationships crucial for solving complex
problems of mutual concern (Aakhus & Laureij, 2012; Barbour & Gill, 2014; Mische,
2009). Ultimately, collaborative communication theories account for (a) the complexity
of the social problem, (b) the multiple stakeholders active in a community, (c) conflicting
goals, (d) inadequate or unfairly distributed resources, (e) emergent organizations and
practices, (f) outside expertise, and (g) trust.
Networked stakeholder relationships and collaborative communication are
mutually dependent. They provide a path along which to navigate webs of community
relationships and increasingly complex social, economic, and environmental problems.
While traditional Anglo-American stakeholder theory emphasizes the survivability of a
firm as the primary concern, relational stakeholder theory places stakeholder
relationships within the wider context of civil society (Mische, 2009; Mische & Pattison,
2000). Drawing from both Nordic and natural resources management approaches to
stakeholder theory, relational stakeholder theory emphasizes networked relationships that
change over time and communication practices that enable organizations to sequence
tasks temporally, allocate tasks among the different stakeholders active in the
community, and collectively solve problems. It is this emphasis on collective problem
solving through collaboration and negotiation that defines relational stakeholder theory
and collaborative communication as the key communication and organizing processes
that make long-term recovery after disaster possible.

193

CHAPTER 10
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Findings from this study support previous calls by analysts and practicing
professionals for more attention to be paid to the multiyear process of long-term recovery
following the emergency response phase of a disaster (GAO, 2016; Rubin, 1985, 2009).
This study provides empirical support for an organizational landscape of recovery and a
sequencing of organizational activities that provides a framework for understanding how
long-term recovery unfolds over time (Doerfel et al., 2013; Doerfel et al., 2010; Harris et
al., 2017; Harris & Doerfel, 2016). In practice, traditional models of response and
recovery emphasize the role of established disaster response organizations and persistent
relationships among these organizations. The NVOAD, increases in the number of FBOs
active in response and recovery, the FEMA whole community model, FEMA national
response and recovery models, the National Incident Management System (NIMS), and
congressionally chartered disaster relief organizations like the American Red Cross (the
only federally chartered U.S. disaster relief organization) all tend to frame their practices
around the notion that existing disaster relief and recovery organizations are the primary
stakeholders with the expertise and organizational capacity to deliver relief and enact
recovery (Anderson, 2002; Bigley & Roberts, 2001; DHS, 2011, 2013; Kosar, 2006).
However, the reality is that these organizations often lack the capacity, local knowledge,
and sometimes even the expertise to effectuate response and recovery in a timely and
effective manner.
Community, emergent, and grassroots organizations play a larger role in longterm recovery then they are often given credit for doing (Drabek & McEntire, 2003;

194

Majchrzak et al., 2007; Stallings & Quarantelli, 1985). Of the four organizations still
active in long-term recovery in coastal New Jersey as of December 2017 (5 years after
Hurricane Sandy), one was a local housing nonprofit with more than 25 years of
experiences in the region, the second was a faith-based disaster recovery organization
created after Hurricane Sandy in 2012 by the local diocese, the third was an LTRG with
funding received from local foundations and the local chapter of the United Way, and the
fourth was a national disaster recovery organization that emphasized long-term rebuilding
and reconstruction in disaster-impacted communities. From 2012 to 2014, local
organizations such as Sea Bright Rising, Oceanport Cares, Rebuilding Union Beach (a
joint venture between the municipal government and Burners Without Borders) in New
Jersey, Guyon Rescue, Yellowboots, and Midland Beach Hub in Staten Island connected
impacted residents with community, state, and federal resources. Networked
organizations such as OccupySandy also played a role, particularly in Staten Island, in
helping to organize local resources and local organizations.
Long-term recovery is about communication, coordination, and collaboration.
Collaboration, however, does not mean conflict-free agreement over key issues and
resource allocation. Negotiation and consensus building are critical parts of developing
effective stakeholder relationships in disaster-impacted communities (Deetz, 2017), and
an understanding of the role of not only community organizations, but also of hyperlocal
and emergent organizations is important for the emergence of effective stakeholder
networks that incorporate local sources of assistance, food banks, nonprofits utilizing
foundation funding, and state and federal grant and loan programs for impacted residents
within a framework that incorporates and values local knowledge, customs, and culture

195

(Browne, 2015; Sprain & Boromisza-Habashi, 2012). The most effective communication
interventions may be at the network level, where stakeholder relationships can be
redesigned to ensure that community organizations and knowledge are incorporated into
long-term recovery processes (Aakhus & Bzdak, 2015; Dean et al., 2016; Harris &
Doerfel, 2016).
By developing a timeline of recovery that associates disaster recovery
organizations and organizational activities as a sequence of communication and
organizing processes that exists over time, funding decisions can be made that account
for the reality of recovery at the community level, instead of philanthropic best practices
that emphasize rapid allocation of donor monies. Rather than replicating case
management services across multiple organizations, as occurred with foundation funding
after Hurricane Sandy in coastal New Jersey, funds might be better allocated to
hyperlocal and community organizations that are able to broker relationships between
impacted neighborhoods and communities and the organizations with the requisite
resources, capacity, and expertise to meet neighborhood and community needs
(Chandrasekhar et al., 2014; Harris & Doerfel, 2016; E. O’Neill, 2014).
Stakeholder Relationships in Long-Term Recovery Policy: Implications for the
FEMA Whole Community Model
The FEMA national response and national recovery plans both emphasize the
whole community model, which calls for a community-wide response to disaster that
incorporates all organizations within an impacted community or region (DHS, 2011,
2013; Moynihan, 2009). These response and recovery frameworks are organized around
local/state/federal cooperation and the premise that all disasters are local. In fact, federal

196
agencies and resources must be invited into a state via a governor’s declaration of a state
of emergency and request for assistance. In practice, however, permanent disaster
recovery organizations with persistent relationships with one another often jockey for the
lead and try to override local organizational infrastructures coordinating response and
recovery.
One potential solution to this issue is to incorporate stakeholder engagement as a
section within the national response and recovery frameworks (DHS, 2008, 2011, 2013)
and to emphasize the role and importance of multilevel stakeholder networks in longterm recovery. Although understood in theory, in practice, neighborhood and community
organizations are often overlooked as key and sometimes central parts of the stakeholder
network in disaster-impacted communities and regions. The whole community
framework for disaster recovery suggested by FEMA (2011) is merely prescriptive; that
is, it emerged after a year-long dialogue over best practices in communities across the
United States, and although it has been incorporated into Presidential Policy Directive 3
on national preparedness, which provided the organizing framework for the national
planning frameworks and the national preparedness goal, specifics related to training,
organizational learning, and implementation were not covered.
Building Stakeholder Relations and Knowledge into a National Disaster Recovery
Policy
Community Stakeholder Networks
Community stakeholder networks should be included as part of the designation of
emergency support and response teams within an amended Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (The Stafford Act). An amended act would expand

197

Section 3.03, which specifies the American Red Cross, Salvation Army, and Mennonite
Disaster Services as emergency response organizations in the legislation to include a
networked stakeholder model that would identify emergent, existing, and planned
emergency response organizations as critical elements of emergency response and
recovery. The precise organizations would be unnamed because they will vary by region
and disaster, but including a typology of organizations active in emergency response and
recovery will finally recognize the emergent characteristics of disaster recovery in a
formal manner (Doerfel, 2018; Harris et al., 2017). Emergency operations plans
developed by local, county, or state organizations should be required to identify and list
key community organizations and foundations that provide social services, housing and
energy assistance, medical, mental health, and wellness services, youth and recreational
activities, child protection, and services to senior citizens as part of an appendix to the
plan. Although the national and state VOADs typically include these organizations in
their ranks as members, requiring a documented appendix at different levels of local,
state, and county government would make actively visible key community stakeholders.
Emergency operations plans should be required to be updated at regular intervals, such as
every 12, 24, or 36 months to ensure knowledge of the community stakeholder network is
up to date.
Expanding the list of federally chartered disaster relief organizations beyond the
American Red Cross is an overdue and much-needed revision to U.S. disaster response
and recovery plans. Chartered in 1900 and renewed in 2006, the American Red Cross is
the only disaster relief organization congressionally charted in the United States (Kosar,
2006). Although the national and state VOADs take on increased responsibilities for

198

coordination among disaster relief organizations, education, and even specific services
such as case management (Ambinder et al., 2013; GAO, 2016), they are not accorded the
same level of respect and responsibility that the American Red Cross is in national
disaster planning (DHS, 2013; Kosar, 2006). Elevation of the NVOAD to federally
chartered status would build a more inclusive framework in disaster recovery by bringing
a more diverse array of organizations into the federal disaster planning framework. SBP,
with more than 10 years of experience in rebuilding and reconstruction, should also
become a federally chartered disaster relief organization with responsibility for multiyear
residential rebuilding and reconstruction processes in low-income communities.
Stakeholder education should be addressed in the NIMS, the national response
plan, and the national recovery framework (DHS, 2011, 2013; GAO, 2016). Training
modules in the NIMS should be developed that address stakeholder models and the
communication practices needed to design, build, and maintain community-level
stakeholder relationships that can be rapidly expanded to include regional and national
partners. Stakeholder education should emphasize the multi-stakeholder model, the
division of tasks and labor represented within a community stakeholder network, the
communication practices that are most effective in stakeholder relationship building, and
techniques such as stakeholder mapping that can be employed in the field (Aakhus &
Bzdak, 2015; Crane et al., 2004; Deetz, 1995, 2017; Harris & Doerfel, 2016; Prell et al.,
2009). By emphasizing the emergence of phased, sequenced organizational activities
throughout the long-term recovery process that are both planned and emergent, the role,
expertise, and capacity of local organizations can be made visible to emergency managers
and recovery professionals.

199

Stakeholder mapping exercises should be incorporated into national disaster
preparedness, disaster response, and disaster recovery frameworks and scheduled and
conducted at regular intervals. Community stakeholder networks are not static and should
not be treated as such. Disruption such as those from a natural disaster can break and
reconfigure these networks, with certain organizations exiting the network and others
entering at different points in time (Doerfel et al., 2010; Doerfel & Taylor, 2004, 2017;
Taylor & Doerfel, 2011). This disruption was particularly evident during the multiyear
long-term recovery process where stakeholder networks in coastal New Jersey were
found to winnow from 178 organizations in December 2013 to just four organizations by
December 2017. In 2018, there were just two organizations active, both in rebuilding and
reconstruction activities.
Disaster Recovery and Public Land-Grant Universities
Land-grant universities (Peters et al., 2003; see also social impact article on
universities posted by Shumate, 2012) can play an important role in disaster recovery,
particularly in helping to build effective processes of long-term recovery. Although
faculty, schools, centers, and institutes from across Rutgers were active in Sandy
response, recovery, and analysis across New Jersey, there was little to no coordination
across the university, and the university was not formally designated as a key partner
with either the New Jersey Governor’s Office of Recovery or other public agencies. This
lack of coordination and centralization of data and knowledge was evident in my
interaction with the Rutgers data librarian who serves on the state data council. Neither
Rutgers nor the state data council had any centralized and/or curated data, reports, or
records of the impact of Hurricane Sandy and the effectiveness of recovery activities in

200

New Jersey to date. This lack of centralized data is a major gap in our institutional
knowledge and contributes not only to the sense of isolation and abandonment found in
some impacted areas, but also supports the notion of hidden pockets of unrecovered
residents and communities existing in a coastal New Jersey region that appears recovered
from a distance.
Land-grant universities are higher education institutions responsible for providing
applied knowledge throughout the states in which they are located. Most land-grant
institutions operate county extension services in which employees of the university, often
tenured, provide programs, workshops, and technical assistance within their county of
operation. Land-grant institutions are public universities, with the exception of Cornell
University, an Ivy League institution with a public college that houses the land-grant
components. Land-grant colleges and universities operate in 50 fifty states and could be
utilized to support long-term recovery efforts and be supported by state and federal
funding. In addition to serving as knowledge management hubs for data, information, and
knowledge on federally designated disasters within their states, land-grant institutions
could provide technical support to the public agencies and nonprofits active in long-term
recovery. Land-grant institutions could support newly designated stakeholder
engagement and stakeholder mapping functions incorporated in either the national
disaster response and recovery frameworks or within an amended Stafford Act that calls
explicit attention to long-term recovery as separate functions of disaster management.

201

CHAPTER 11
FINAL REMARKS
Limitations of the Research
As a comprehensive multiyear study of long-term recovery after disaster, this
project generated large amounts of data that needed to be managed so that previous
findings could be used to inform subsequent interviews and analysis. Understanding
which findings were most salient to developing the organizational landscape of recovery
and the communication and organizing processes important for generating networked
stakeholder relationships was a key challenge that existed throughout the study. It was
important to separate out the anecdotal information from the information that actually
pointed to a timeline, a process, or a network of recovery that would be important for
understanding long-term recovery as a distinct process of disaster response and recovery,
the communication and organizing processes in which stakeholders engaged, or the
networked stakeholder relationships that organizations generated during their multiyear
engagement in long-term recovery in New Jersey. One of the key challenges of the study
was to ensure that my own perceptions or those of my volunteer colleagues did not overly
shape the framework I was developing during my multiyear immersion in this project.
As a study that “began with a hunch” and included my immersion in the field as a
resident and community leader, there is the always the possibility of personal bias and of
limitations due to lack of personal proximity and access to other communities and
organizations grappling with recovery from disaster. The use of multiple sources of
information that ranged across academic, nonprofit, and government reports,
organizational records, and media sources served to validate what I was seeing through

202

participant and ethnographic observation. Informants in sectors and organizations that
were not a primary focus of this study were useful in determining the face validity of my
thinking and the emerging themes and processes I was beginning to conceptualize.
This study emphasizes plural sector organizations because they were more
responsive to requests for engagement throughout the course of the study. A major effort
was made to gather additional information on municipal perspectives through interviews
with municipal leaders and access to documents, reports, and data directly from the
municipalities themselves. This limitation was overcome by focusing on the seven
municipalities where access was given, informal conversations with a county
administrator in the extreme southern part of the region to fact-check my thinking, and
accessing relevant municipal data online. A similar effort was made to gain different
perspectives from unions active in the recovery, and from the Portuguese small-business
community in the region. Many Portuguese small-business owners in coastal New Jersey
are contractors who own a variety of building trades businesses engaged in residential
repair and reconstruction. Neither effort was successful.
Entering the field via a sector such as the plural sector could shape findings
because other sectors may have a different set of priorities or consider another set of
goals and tasks as important. Public sector organizations may be focused on the
mechanics of providing financial assistance and protecting against fraud, while national
and multinational private sector organizations may be focused on supply chain
relationships. However, because plural sector organizations are those organizations
focused most directly on aiding impacted individuals and families, understanding their
practices, relationships, and the timelines of plural sector participation in recovery efforts

203

may provide the best window into the processes, timelines, networks, and organizational
landscape of recovery.
One specific issue that needs to be included in this type of research is the point of
entry. Researchers entering the field through an institution such as a national disaster
response and recovery organization or a state or federal agency may have a different
perspective on the shape of the stakeholder relationships enacted in the disaster-impacted
community. Their focus may be on the institutional relationships of established nationalor regional-level organizations, rather than the mix of organizations active in long-term
recovery processes in a particular community or region. They may, in fact, model the
stakeholder relationships according to the traditional model of primary and secondary
stakeholders, rather than as a web of interrelated organizations, expertise, and tasks. This
difference is why entering at the community level when conducting disaster research can
be an important and powerful method. By entering at the community level, the researcher
may witness and uncover a different set of communication patterns and organizing
relationships than those uncovered at an institutional level of preexisting relationships
among professional disaster recovery organizations. By entering at the community level,
this study was able to identify a mix of emergent, existing, and disaster recovery
stakeholders active in the recovery.
Another limitation of the project was access and proximity. The study leans
heavily upon data collected in Monmouth and Ocean counties. The reasons are threefold.
The organizations with which I engaged as an organizational and community leader were
primarily located in these counties. Both counties were geographically proximate to my
own location and contained a mix of beachside and bayside damage that appeared to be

204

similar to the mix in other counties. Finally, Monmouth and Ocean counties were two of
the areas most heavily damaged by Hurricane Sandy. For these reasons, I chose not to
attempt to make county-by-county comparisons of either long-term recovery processes or
networked stakeholder relationships.
This is an area where sequential interviewing paid off. As I expanded the range of
organizational leaders I interviewed or assessed through organizational documents and
media reports, similar themes around processes, conflict over resource allocation, case
management services, and organizational capabilities and competencies were expressed
across different organizations and counties. This similarity even extended to interviews
and encounters I had with LTRGs in northern New Jersey who were operating in a region
that was not part of the study. Sequential interviewing enabled me to not only confirm
what I was seeing, hearing, and reading, but also to dig deeper on subsequent interviews
and develop a set of themes and concepts that helped narrow and focus the organizational
documents, reports, and media reporting utilized to develop the organizational processes
and landscapes that emerged from the empirical evidence amassed for this study.
The most obvious limitation to this study is the lack of interviews from
institutional sources such as the American Red Cross. I approached regional leaders at the
American Red Cross early in the study (2013 and 2014) and was not able to make
headway in connecting with the leadership. After about late 2014, there was constant
turnover in the regional leadership and some sort of reorganization at the regional
chapter, according to the executive director of a prominent community organization with
whom I had worked and had interviewed. The American Red Cross was also exiting
disaster recovery efforts at that time and reverting to emergency response and disaster

205

planning, according to other interview subjects and informants. At that time, the
community dimensions of this research were becoming clear, and I placed an emphasis
on conducting research among organizations active in recovery on the ground in the
coastal New Jersey region I identified. This narrowed focus, of course, precluded pursuit
of a research approach centered around organizations affiliated with NJVOAD or of
national-level disaster relief and recovery organizations active in coastal New Jersey,
either of which could have constituted a study in their own right.
The “multiple municipal madness” (Karcher, 1998, p. 1) of New Jersey is a major
limitation that makes community-by-community comparisons of the effectiveness of the
recovery and the measurement of community social capital difficult, at best. The
elusiveness of data on recovery in New Jersey makes clear the need for better processes
and mechanisms of data collection and access for analysis of the processes and outcomes
of long-term recovery after disaster in New Jersey. The key limitation is the lack of
centralization of data related to long-term recovery in New Jersey and the control that
each municipality has over its processes and data. Census data make it difficult to do
community-by-community comparisons because many communities comprise fewer than
8,000 people and block data are nonexistent or often cross community boundaries. The
lack of data makes it difficult to correlate hidden pockets of unrecovered individuals and
neighborhoods with demographic information that could shed light on issues of race and
class in the community. As the most densely populated state in the country,
understanding the communication and organizing processes of long-term recovery in
coastal New Jersey provides insight into disaster response and recovery in large
metropolitan areas. Unlike other large metropolitan areas impacted by previous

206

hurricanes, however, the New Jersey metropolitan area is not a series of neighborhoods
within a single metropolitan area. Instead, New Jersey comprises autonomous
municipalities and school districts, each with their own political and cultural dynamics,
Findings related to the elusive data of recovery following Hurricane Sandy in
coastal New Jersey may also help us to better understand processes of coastal resilience
in New Jersey in a time of complex environmental change. Many of the issues that
bedevil comprehensive post-Sandy research on long-term recovery in New Jersey also
appear to impact disaster mitigation and coastal planning efforts. Despite passage of the
Coastal Areas Facilities Review Act, towns still have leeway over the approval of
construction and land use in environmentally hazardous areas. Continued rebuilding in
areas prone to regular tidal flooding and subject to continual beach erosion and potential
wave damage substantially increase the likelihood of damage to social and physical
infrastructure after hurricanes in coastal New Jersey. The understanding of fragmented
data on recovery effectiveness generated from this study could be used as an additional
case for proposals for regional coastal planning initiatives in New Jersey.
Although an argument could be made that Hurricane Sandy is a suburban, White
middle-class disaster and involves recovery in a heavily suburbanized state compared to
other disasters such as hurricanes Katrina and Maria, the data and findings do show the
importance of understanding a disaster in its social and historical context. Disasters differ
from one another and, although there are phases, patterns, and rhythms to recovery, these
phases, patterns, and rhythms are all enacted differently at different times and places,
depending on the nature of the disaster, the underlying community dynamics, and the
historical context in which disaster takes place. The type and mix of organizations active

207

in long-term recovery may be different based on region or the severity of the storm
impact and the commitment of stakeholders to relief and recovery in those regions. This
commitment to long-term recovery in specific communities or regions may also vary by
intensity across the public, private, and plural sectors, with different sectors having
different levels of commitments and focus due to ideology, class, race, or ethnicity.
Language barriers may also play a role in how networked stakeholder relationships are
formed. This study attempted to consider these issues through examination of literature
related to Hurricane Katrina and despite, the lack of empirical evidence in this particular
disaster (Hurricane Sandy) in this particular region (coastal New Jersey), issues relating
to race, class, or language informed the study.
Future Directions: Building an Agenda for Communication-Centered Research on
Long-Term Recovery from Disaster
This study suggests four paths of future research organized around (a)
collaborative communication, (b) networked stakeholder models, (c) social infrastructure
and community resilience, and (d) long-term recovery after disaster. Some potential
studies could cross multiple paths. For instance, a focused multiyear study of an LTRG
active in a disaster-impacted community could be conducted as an in-depth project
looking at specific communication practices utilized by disaster response and recovery
professionals in long-term recovery, provide a case-based study of long-term recovery in
a particular location, and analyze the role of collaborative governance in long-term
recovery.
LTRGs are essentially networked stakeholder relationships and a narrow, yet deep
dive into their organization, operations, and coordination may yield new insights into

208

how these organizations negotiate conflict and advance their purpose while jointly
solving problems of long-term recovery in a specific community. Challenges to such a
study would include obtaining access to case management, construction management,
and unmet needs committees where sensitive, confidential information about impacted
residents is shared. Access would involve sign-offs from multiple organizations as part of
the approval process of an Institutional Review Board. Issues concerning vulnerable
populations might also have to be addressed in the approval process.
Studying national disaster relief and recovery organizations affiliated with the
NVOAD or FEMA using institutional theory would provide a contrast to this communitylevel study of networked community relationships. The development, distribution, and
replication of disaster recovery practices and norms across organizations, disasters, and
regions would provide insight into how the institutionalized practices of disaster recovery
comport with community needs. Such a study may also provide some insight into the
communication and organizational breakdowns during catastrophic or outlier disasters
such as hurricanes Maria and Harvey in Puerto Rico. Recently, Ansell and Gash (2018)
presented a framework of collaborative governance that is centered around organizations
with specific expertise and are active in particular policy domains (pp. 16–19). These
“collaborative platforms” provide resources as well as expertise and may provide a mode
for scaling collaboration and governance needs in complex policy domains. Applying the
collaborative governance framework to disaster recovery would be a fruitful way to scale
the study of networked stakeholders from community to institutional levels of
collaboration and governance.

209

Networked approaches to the study of both stakeholders and long-term recovery
is an important area of future research for which this study provides a platform.
Networked approaches to analysis move stakeholder theory in a relational direction.
Findings from this study suggest that a survey of organizations affiliated with the
NVOAD or state VOAD(s) asking them to define the term “stakeholder” would expand
the scope of the finding of this study on practical definitions of stakeholders in the field.
Developing additional empirical evidence from additional cases at the community level
on the type and mix of organizations active in long-term recovery is an additional area of
inquiry suggested by this study. Such a study would provide an opportunity to formalize
networked stakeholder relationships as a type of civic network in which roles and
relationships in the network can be assessed as prestorm and poststorm civic networks. A
formal definition of a stakeholder network as a civic network collaboratively solving
problems of mutual concern would emerge from such a study. This long-term study of
long-term recovery across communities may complement Doerfel’s (2017) framework of
engaged ties through the development of a model of long-term recovery that identifies
stakeholder activation as the triggering of a specific type of network tie (relationship) at
certain inflection points during long-term recovery.
Finally, this study and the research paths described here provide a foundation for
the development of a model of social infrastructure that operates as a parallel construct to
physical infrastructure in communities facing complex environmental change. Such a
model of social infrastructure, combined with existing measures of community resilience,
could become a core part of disaster planning and mitigation. Mapping the social
infrastructure of a community (the web of stakeholder relations) would provide some indication as to the ability of the community to respond and recover and the anticipated
need for plural and public sector resources.
