INFORMATION SEARCH AND ACCESS BARRIERS AND THE ASSOCIATED
STRATEGIES: A STUDY OF REMOTE ACADEMIC LIBRARY USERS

by
Samuel Balistreri-Daum

This research is designed to explore what barriers online library users encounter when
attempting to access full-text scholarly articles remotely via proxy server and what strategies are
used to overcome barriers to gain access to the full-text articles. The intent of this research is to
fill a research gap that exists in merging identification of barriers with the types of access
strategies that are used to overcome them. For this research, a group of 15 students from a large
Midwestern university who use the library remotely were interviewed using an open-ended
online survey and then completed a research log during a live online library research session.
The open coding technique was used to categorize the barriers and subsequent strategies that
were reported by participants. This study found that there are two types of barriers, information
search related barriers and access barriers with a variety of access strategies online library users
employ to overcome them. The study attempts to close the gap in the current Library and
Information Science (LIS) literature by identifying barriers experienced by online users and
linking them to specific strategies that are used to overcome them. This study also has practical
implications for the improvement of library systems and services as well as information literacy
instruction.

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Background
As access to higher education through online distance learning continues to increase,
academic libraries have identified and mobilized around the need to provide access to high
quality scholarly information to students and faculty who do not have access to collections via
the library on campus. One of the primary ways academic libraries to provide access to a wide
range of scholarly information is through subscriptions to searchable online databases that
expand existing collections to include thousands of scholarly journals and articles across
disciplines. More recently, with the advent of more advanced internet access technologies,
academic libraries have been able to provide better access to scholarly articles using proxy
servers that allow users to log in and access subscription services online as though they were
physically at the library.
Though overall proxy server technology has greatly enhanced access to scholarly
information for students accessing the library from off campus, a variety of barriers do exist that
can either hinder or completely prevent a remote library user from accessing an article. As I will
discuss in the literature review, there is a major limitation in the current literature regarding the
difficulties remote library users can encounter when attempting to access scholarly information
remotely via proxy server. These barriers to represent an interruption in Interactive Information
Retrieval (IR) models that rely on interaction with texts mediated by a computer system for a
user to satisfy an information need or progress normally in their information-seeking strategies
and behaviors (Belkin, 1996; Ingwersen, 1996; Saracevic, 1997). The focus of this research is to
determine what types of barriers distance library users encounter when attempting to access

1

scholarly articles from the library’s catalog via proxy server and how this affects the information
search and retrieval process for distance learners and what strategies are employed to overcome
these barriers.
1.2 Research Questions
The focus of this research is to determine what types of barriers distance library users
encounter when attempting to access scholarly articles from the library’s catalog via proxyserver and how this affects the information search and retrieval process for distance learners. The
study will explore two research questions:
Q1: What barriers do remote academic library users encounter when searching and accessing
full-text articles via proxy server and what are the associated reasons?
Q2: What strategies do remote academic library users employ to overcome barriers when
attempting to search and access full-text articles and what are the associated reasons?
1.3 Definitions of Major Terms
Several terms will be used in this study. To keep terms standard and consistent, a list has
been developed and with terms defined:
Remote library user: A library user (patron) who is accessing the library catalog or library
databases from off campus (remotely) via the internet. This often requires the user to validate
using current university-affiliated credentials such as a user name and password.
Barrier: For the proposed study, the term barrier will be used to encompass a variety of issues,
both information search related and access related, that prevent users from accessing scholarly
information remotely.
Information strategies: This term will be used to encompass the variety of methods, resources,
and types of assistance remote users employ when attempting to access scholarly information

2

remotely. The focus of this study is to examine how barriers to access may affect information
strategy.
1.4 Design of the Study
The design of this study is the focus of the third chapter that provides details on research
design, sampling methods, data collection and data analysis methods. This study used a
purposive sample of online students who access the academic library almost exclusively from a
remote setting. This ensured that data was gathered from participants that is exclusively relevant
to accessing scholarly information remotely via proxy servers. The study uses retrospective and
snapshot research designs in the form of interviews and semi-structured journals. The study
utilizes both research designs to triangulate research methods and reduce the natural weaknesses
of each method. More detail will be provided on the strengths and weaknesses of each portion of
the research design and how triangulation by using both research methods will strengthen the
study. Since a very specific issue related to remote access is being explored in this research
study, a representative or stratified sample is not currently needed. Participants were recruited by
identifying online courses that have a research component such as a formal research paper or
assignment and contacting instructors or heads of academic departments via email to obtain
permission to recruit participants for the study.
The purpose of the research design is to gather the richest data possible both from the
perspective of participants’ perceptions of their own past information seeking experiences and
gather real time data from a current information seeking session. To achieve this, a retrospective
research design using interviews was applied, while the second part of the data collection is
based on a snapshot research design using semi-structured diaries (Flick, 2014). Each of the
research designs and data collection methods have natural weaknesses. Included in the design

3

section of this thesis are the various strategies, most importantly triangulation of research
methods, that are used to avoid any inherent weaknesses in the research design.
Data was analyzed using open coding to sort participant responses into meaningful
categories that will help draw conclusions to present theoretical and practical applications from
this study. Some coding categories were developed as part of a brief pilot study, however the
open coding scheme used in the full study is flexible in that it allowed for addition of new codes
“in vivo” or as new categories of information were presented from the data. A second coder was
also used for a portion of the data analysis to ensure that data is coded accurately to develop
more accurate conclusions. The research design will be discussed in greater detail in chapter
three of this proposal.
1.5 Significance of the study
Initially, this research was to focus on system-related barriers to access to full-text
articles via proxy server, however after reviewing the literature it was decided that the scope
should be widened to include any type of barrier to access users may experience. The research
idea and research questions originated in the researcher’s own experience as an online graduate
student at a state university in the Midwest. Ideal subjects for this study will also be online
students at a state university in the Midwest who are either in the graduate program or
undergraduates who are completing coursework with a research component or an assignment that
requires them to utilize the library for scholarly resources. Subjects were recruited for this study
by identifying programs at a state university in the Midwest that have online courses that fit these
criteria and contacting students via their instructor or a program administrator by email. Data
was gathered through interviews and focused semi-structured journaling to record online
information sessions. Interview data was gathered using open ended questions via the online

4

survey tool Qualtrics, the semi-structured journal documents were distributed and returned via
email, and a small reward in the form of a ten-dollar gift card was provided to participants who
completed both portions of the data collection.
There are numerous studies in current library and information science literature that
examine the role of the proxy server in information retrieval, as well as a multitude of studies
and theories concerning the information seeking behavior of university students both past and
present. A gap, however, exists in examining and categorizing barriers experienced by remote
library users and its effect on their information seeking strategies. This gap is also theoretically
significant since, as previously mentioned, barriers represent an unexpected interruption in many
of the currently accepted Interactive IR models, and it is important to understand how these
barriers affect information-seeking strategies. It was expected that encountering various barriers
to access would frustrate users and could potentially discourage them from using online
academic library resources in the future. This study has theoretical implications in beginning to
bridge the gap between discussion of information barriers experienced by online library users
and information strategy, specifically the types of information strategies used to overcome
barriers that will be referred to as ‘access strategies’ throughout this thesis. This study is also
important for its practical implications for changes in the current library setting to provide users
with the support needed to decrease the frequency of barriers to scholarly information via proxy
server. This has implications for system design and help seeking or reference options for online
library users as well as suggestions to be made to ensure that online library users are exposed to
information literacy instruction that will help them understand and navigate the library online
public access catalog (OPAC), databases, interlibrary loan (ILL), and reference among other
services and features available.

5

1.6 Thesis Overview
This thesis is divided into five chapters. This first chapter served as an introduction to the
research idea and the research questions with a brief discussion of the research design. The
following four chapters consist of a literature review, the research methodology, results of the
data collection, and a discussion and conclusion. The literature review is divided into three
sections; an introduction to and history of proxy servers in academic libraries, examples in
Library and Information Science literature of both the successes and difficulties experienced
when students access information remotely via proxy server, and an overview of some past and
current research on the information seeking habits of students in higher education. The research
methodology and data analysis chapter will outline the methodology of the study, sampling, data
collection methods, and data analysis methods that were used. The results section will discuss
coded participant results as they relate to answering each of the two research questions. The
results chapter is divided into two main sections discussing the types of barriers participants
experienced from the data collection and the types of strategies used to overcome barriers. The
concluding chapter consists of a discussion of the theoretical and practical implications of this
research, with pragmatic suggestions for improvement of online library services and suggestions
for further research.
1.7 Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the background and significance of this study were discussed as well as
three research questions relevant to the research problem of how barriers to access to remote
scholarly information via academic library databases affect the information seeking strategies of
distance learners in an online university environment. The next chapter consists of a literature
review focusing on past and present studies in Library and Information Science literature

6

focusing on remote access via proxy server and information seeking strategies in higher
education.

7

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

The literature review for this study is divided into three sections; a brief history and the
use of proxy servers in academic libraries, the successes and difficulties of proxy server use in
the remote academic library environment, and theoretical Information Retrieval (IR) models and
information seeking habits and strategies in higher education.
2.1 History and Use of Proxy Servers
There are many examples in the Library and Information Science literature that discuss
the origins and prevalence of proxy servers that provide online access to scholarly information
for remote library users. Murray (2000) and Webster (2002) discuss the rising need and ubiquity
of online access for libraries by the turn of the last Century. Webster (2002) discussed the
growing trend in libraries that provide access to resources online for remote patrons and helps to
define the proxy server as a validation tool that uses the Internet Protocol (IP) address of a
computer or server at the library to serve “as an intermediary between the remote users and the
database servers that the library makes available” (p. 20). The increased adoption of proxy
servers and the predominance of EZproxy among many libraries are also explored in Peter E.
Murray’s 2001 article “Library Web Proxy Use Survey Results”. In the year 2000, Murray
surveyed eighty-five libraries to determine whether they used proxy servers to provide remote
access and returned results that indicated that seventy-two of those eighty-five libraries used
them in some form. With this survey, Murray was able to show that in the 21st Century, proxy
servers had already become a major tool in the enhancement of library patron access. Murray’s
survey results also divided the respondent libraries by type and suggested that academic libraries
were the most common type of library to utilize proxy servers and suggested that among
vendors, EZproxy was the most common vendor in use. In a more recent survey of the history
8

and progression of remote access in academic libraries, Namachchiyava’s in depth article “The
first 30 years of the internet through the lens of the academic library” (2012), traces the role of
online technology in information retrieval resources by examining three decades of technology
implementation at the University of Illinois Library. Advances in computing technology made
automated cataloging and record retrieval possible, however it was the advent of networked
technologies via the Internet in the 1990s that served as a major turning point for electronic
services. By the late 1990s networked technologies and digital resource technologies were on the
rise in academic libraries, and in Namachchiyava’s case of the University of Illinois vendorbased proxy servers were adopted to increase and facilitate access to online scholarly resources.
In the Information Science literature, much has been said about the proxy server vendor
EZproxy and its general acceptance as a validation tool among academic libraries.
Namachchiyava (2012), Webster (2002), and Lawrence (2009), in their discussions of proxy
server technology, all mention EZproxy as the preferred vendor for provision of remote access
services. Returning to Webster’s (2002) article, the library could set up proxy servers internally,
but at the time of his writing the vendor EZproxy had already emerged as the standard for an
increasing number of libraries to provide remote access to patrons. By the late 1990s, EZproxy
had become the premier choice in remote access technology among most academic institutions to
mitigate any limitations of older or home-grown remote access solutions. Lawrence (2009)
discusses the limitations of the older “dial-in” proxy technologies in use in the late 1990s and
early 2000s and the superiority of an increasing number of vendor options, primarily EZproxy,
which she helped to adopt and implement at Minnesota State University - Mankato. Among the
issues cited in earlier iterations of proxy server technologies at academic libraries were multiple
browser portals, a variety of log in methods, and firewalls that had the potential to limit users’

9

access to information. Lawrence notably mentions the necessity of having a separate set of
instructions for library patrons who used America Online. Lawrence’s article highlights the
primary function and intent of standardized proxy server technology to help libraries and their
patrons overcome barriers to access experienced with older proxy technologies. An important
milestone for remote access came in 2008 when the Online Computer Library Center (OCLC)
purchased EZproxy, further solidifying the association with EZproxy and remote access for
academic libraries. (Hadro, 2008) This acquisition served not only to expand OCLC’s network of
services, but to integrate EZproxy into OCLC’s WorldCat database with the goal of facilitating
access to more resources for its users. This was a significant event in the development and
evolution of remote access to library and scholarly resources that shapes the way that library
users interact with scholarly information remotely in today’s academic environment.
In addition to providing remote access to scholarly information, proxy servers such as
EZproxy also enrich the relationship between libraries and their users through their ability to
assist in data collection that can be utilized in a variety of ways. Sirisha et al. (2009) and Samson
(2014) give examples of how data collected via proxy servers can both improve user experience
and monitor utilization of library databases. Studies such as these may have implications for
future research regarding barriers to access to remote library access. Sirisha et al. (2009) in their
study of personalization of search portals, discuss a variety of proxy server features in addition to
their primary function of providing remote user access. Helpful features of proxy servers that are
mentioned in the article are the ability to collect usage data based on patron log in and activity
through the server as well as serving as an online intermediary that can increase the speed with
which online information is downloaded to the patron by a process called “proxy caching” that
relies upon accurate prediction of item requests. This article demonstrates that proxy servers, in

10

addition to their primary function of providing access to remote information, are also powerful
tools for data collection. These tools can be used by library administration to track metrics and
usage data as well as for research. Samson (2014) uses these data gathering features in a study at
the University of Montana Missoula and could show that students were using the library to
access scholarly information at a higher rate than was expected and acknowledged the potential
for a causal link between access to library resources online and higher grade-point averages.
2.2 Proxy servers and online access: Successes and barriers
As cited previously in this literature review, the purpose of proxy-server technology is
primarily to increase access to information through remote validation. While this is generally the
case, in this section of the literature review we will explore examples of both the successes and
difficulties of proxy-server technology and discuss their implications for the proposed study.
2.2.1 Increased availability of information
Recent studies exist in Library and Information Science literature that highlight the
successes of proxy-server technology in increasing patron access to scholarly information in an
academic library setting (Bower & Mee, 2010; Wang & Howard, 2012) Consistent with the
general evolution and trend in academic libraries providing increased remote access to digital
resources over time, Bower and Mee (2010) describe the ways the Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT) has developed its library services to offer a wide variety of electronic services
to distance learners. Bower and Mee cite EZproxy as crucial in reducing or eliminating the
limitations users faced when attempting to access licensed materials. Proxy servers can also
serve as validation tools for students who prefer to use Google Scholar. Wang and Howard
(2012) describe how Google Scholar, a popular commercial search tool for scholarly
information, can provide access validated via an academic library for access to full text articles.

11

The authors report that on campus users were able to use Google Scholar easily through IP
validation since they were using library computers for access, but remote users accessing the
library off campus needed to adjust their settings to access full text articles as if they were on
campus. This barrier for remote users was overcome by adding remote authentication for Google
Scholar through the library’s proxy server.
2.2.2 Barriers to access and proxy servers
Though proxy servers vastly improve online access to scholarly articles in general, issues
that create barriers to access do occur and several examples in the literature describe the potential
issues that can occur that create barriers to access and lead to decreased satisfaction with library
services. (Behr & LaDell-Thomas, 2014; Covey, 2003) Covey (2003) surveyed libraries to
identify what types of issues were reported, including but not limited to server support, browser
support and troubleshooting. This survey study suggests that the problems users encounter when
using proxy servers or virtual private networks (VPN) to access data leads to diminished quality
and user satisfaction. Behr and LaDell-Thomas (2014) interviewed distance learners at Central
Michigan University to determine what type of libraries they use and what library services they
value most. The results of their interviews reveal that most of distance students were satisfied
with library services. However, of the small percentage of students that were not satisfied, their
dissatisfaction related to technical issues that created barriers to access to full text articles.
Technical issues that specifically affect the way that a proxy server not only validates a
user’s credentials but retrieves information are also cited in recent literature (Crum, 2011; SadatMoosavi et al., 2012). Crum (2011) conducted a study at the Oregon Health & Science
University Library, where barriers when using the academic library online had become a concern
among library patrons. Among the issues explored in this study were technical problems, defined

12

as issues that that arose when attempting to access information from of the journal’s website or
the library’s proxy server. Though the study found that there were not many true technical
problems with access and retrieval, many of the issues users faced when attempting to access
full-text articles dealt with incomplete or inaccurate metadata that did not allow the link resolver
to function properly when navigating to an article, which are potential causes for barriers to
access. Sadat-Moosavi et al. (2012) were also concerned with the issue of accessibility of online
articles and focused their study on citations in LIS literature. An important concept in this
research was that of digital information decay. Citation data was gathered for 608 articles, for
which 24 percent of citations were online resources. In their analysis they found that 36 percent
of URLs providing access to cited resources had decayed and were no longer accessible,
however by using a variety of techniques including Google search, path depth reduction, and the
“Wayback Machine” the accessibility rate increased to 95 percent. A significant portion of the
citations collected for this study required additional effort and an array of online tools and
techniques to access, while a small percentage were not able to be recovered using these
methods. While previous studies cited in this literature review focused on potential barriers to
access from the users’ perspective, focusing on the information seeking process and strategies,
barriers to access can also potentially exist within the library’s proxy server that have the
potential to frustrate users and encourage them to turn to other sources of information outside of
the scholarly information available through the academic library.
2.3 Information Seeking and Searching Models and Strategies
Due to the nature of this study, concerning the information strategies of students that are
both distance learners and participating in a higher education environment, it is necessary to
examine examples in past and current literature to better understand theoretical IR frameworks

13

that guide and inform research and information seeking habits of students both in the higher
education and distance education environments. There is a dearth of information in current LIS
literature concerning information strategies specifically as they relate to information barriers
experienced by online academic library users, however it is important to understand the
evolution of information retrieval (IR) models and theory as well as the use of library resources
in the higher education environment. This section of the literature review will be divided into
two sections: First exploring important IR models as a foundation and continuing with more
recent interactive IR models. Discussion of IR models will be followed by an examination of
literature that discusses use of library resources in higher education and convenience as a factor
in the information process.
2.3.1 Information Seeking and Searching Models
When considering the information seeking habits of any user population, it is important
to have a strong theoretical foundation to inform research and develop new theories. This section
of the literature review will examine Library and Information Science literature to develop a
theoretical basis for this study. The literature in Information Retrieval (IR) within Library and
Information Science has in the past focused on user-oriented study and more recently with the
advent on online access to information, interactive IR models (Xie, 2008).
There are numerous models in the Information Science literature that seek to define and
understand a user's information process and strategies. Taylor (1968), developed the levels of
information need that examined the "negotiation" of an information query either through a
librarian (considered an "intermediary") or by interacting with the library and its contents on
their own. Additionally, Taylor indicates four levels of information need: visceral need,
conscious need, formalized need, and compromised need. Along the continuum of Taylor's

14

levels of information need, compromised need is the level at which an information query is
created and communicated in a way that the information system will understand. In the past, the
negotiation of an information query or the communication of a formalized need occurred through
a librarian, typically through a reference interview. However, in today's library context, a user's
information needs are communicated to an information retrieval system (Xie, 2008). Taylor’s
theory is an important basis for IR research because it describes the information need or the
mental process that encourages a user to seek library resources. However, in today’s
environment user interactions with library materials are mainly facilitated through an IR system
rather than direct interaction with a librarian. Therefore, we will continue to examine
increasingly complex models of IR interaction to build a theoretical foundation for that process.
Belkin (1980) developed the "anomalous state of knowledge" or ASK hypothesis. The
ASK hypothesis is a model wherein a user recognizes a gap in their knowledge and queries the
information retrieval system to retrieve texts. The user then evaluates the retrieved texts to
determine whether they satisfy the information need or “anomalous state of knowledge”.
According to Belkin, there are three factors that describe an IR situation; recognition of
information need and querying the IR system, presentation of texts from the system likely to
meet the information need based on the input request, and evaluation by the user to determine
satisfaction of the information need. For the purposes of this study, barriers to access
experienced by users when attempting to access scholarly articles via proxy server through their
library's online catalog represent interruptions to the otherwise normal information process of
information retrieval. The various types of barriers to access experienced by remote users of the
library complicate their information seeking processes and strategies and it is the goal of this
study to understand how these barriers to access affect user's strategies.

15

In her article “Inside the Search Process: Information Seeking from the User’s
Perspective”, Kuhlthau (1991) introduces the theory for the Information Seeking Process (ISP),
which consists of six stages: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection, and
presentation. Kuhlthau goes further to unpack and identify various thoughts, feelings and
emotions experienced by information seekers at each stage and applied actionable tasks to each
stage in the ISP. Therefore, according to Kuhlthau, information seekers recognize, identify,
investigate, formulate, gather, and complete an information seeking task. It will be important to
keep these information theories in mind for this study since this study is not only interested in
what causes barrier to access to online scholarly information via remote library use, but also how
this alters their information seeking strategy as they attempt to overcome challenges. Kuhlthau’s
research regarding not only the information seeking process itself, but the thoughts and feelings
of information seekers as they move through the stages of this process serve as an important
foundation as we examine more recent studies of the information seeking habits of distance
learners and remote academic library users in today’s setting.
Wilson's (1999) Information Seeking Context is a model of information seeking behavior
that introduces intervening variables to previous information retrieval models. These intervening
variables include psychological, demographic, role-related or interpersonal, environmental and
source characteristics. Wilson's intervening variables in information seeking context will be
important to keep in mind as we explore barriers to access and how these factors may influence a
user's information seeking strategies. Wilson's (1999) problem-solving model is also useful in
understanding the stages of information seeking strategy. Wilson identifies four stages; problem
identification, problem definition, problem resolution and solution statement with an
"uncertainty resolution" that is met at each stage in the process before the user moves forward to

16

the next stage in this model. This represents another possibility for barriers to access online as
barriers represent disruptions that could occur that would prevent uncertainty resolution as users
are unable to access information that would allow them to move naturally through their
information seeking process.
While traditional IR models are helpful for understanding the nature of information
retrieval processes, they focus only on the input and output supplied by the user and the IR
system respectively. Current IR models are more dynamic, and a variety of search strategies
factor into information seeking sessions (Xie, 2010). Additionally, the traditional IR models are
limited to the illustration of a single information seeking strategy and are not reflective of an
interactive and changing process regarding user strategy (Belkin, 1993). This section of the
literature review will focus on interactive IR models introduced in the 1990s that sought to
illustrate the more complex and interchangeable nature of IR interactions between the user and
the system. According to Xie (2008), the most frequently cited interactive IR models are the
cognitive model (Ingwersen, 1996 ; Ingwersen and Jarvelin, 2005), the episodic model of
interaction with texts (Belkin, 1996), and the stratified model (Saracevic, 1997). These three
models will be briefly discussed to build a richer foundation of IR theory for this study to better
understand information seeking habits and strategies in an interactive context.
Ingwersen (1996) and Ingwersen and Jarvelin (2005) apply the cognitive epistemological
approach as a framework for Information Science and Information Retrieval research. The
defining characteristic of the cognitive framework for IR is that both human and system are
actors within a cognitive model. The difference is that the cognitive state of human actors
changes with the introduction of new information and their cognitive model can be influenced by
many factors. The system, while acting based on a cognitive model, remains in a relatively fixed

17

cognitive state, receiving only "signs" input from the human user. The user and the system
interact at a linguistic level (Ingwersen, 1996). Additionally, the cognitive framework possesses
five simultaneous and linked factors including information processing occurring for both
"senders" and "recipients" of texts, processing occurring on varying levels, influence of factors
such as time, culture and environment on actors, influence on the environment by the actors, and
that "information is situational and contextual" (Ingwersen & Jarvelin, 2005, p. 25). These
applications of the cognitive framework in IR agree with, and expand on Belkin's (1993)
"interaction with texts" wherein the interaction between the human user and the system is the
central process. Ingwersen and Jarvelin (2005) suggest that the cognitive framework for IR
introduces the possibility of models and solutions in IR research that would otherwise be
unsolvable. Indeed, the complexity of the framework is robust enough to help understand the
nature of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) in an IR context.
Building from the Anomalous States of Knowledge (ASK) theory (Belkin, 1980) and
interaction with texts (Belkin, 1993), Belkin (1996) introduced an interactive IR model called the
Episodic Model of Interaction with Texts that suggests that users cannot articulate an
information need due to their current state of cognition and a fluid information seeking problem,
users exhibit a variety of information seeking behaviors and strategies, IR is based on interaction
(most importantly interaction with texts), and with the main objective of an IR system being the
support of a variety of information seeking behaviors and strategies. According to Xie (2008),
Belkin’s Episodic Model is significant as a theoretical model since it considers the variety of
information-seeking strategies among users and implies theoretically supported suggestions for
IR system design as well as representation of changing information-seeking strategies among
users. Along with the clear advantages of Belkin’s Episodic Model there are also limitations,

18

chiefly that it does not consider entities outside of the IR system that may influence the user’s
cognitive state, for example social or organizational factors that contribute to a user’s
information seeking process (Xie, 2008). The Episodic Model is a useful theory in considering
this study since it is concerned not only with IR interaction, but information-seeking strategies
and change in information-seeking strategies caused by barriers to access. While some barriers
to access may exist in the previously mentioned socio-organizational context such as a lack of
system knowledge or awareness of help-seeking tools, there are certainly implications for change
in information-seeking strategies and behaviors based on the behavior of the IR system itself
causing barriers that prevent interaction with texts, which is a central process.
Saracevic (1997) introduced the stratified model of IR, focusing much like Ingwersen
(1996) and Ingwersen and Jarvelin (2005) on the nature and complexity of Human Computer
Interaction (HCI) as it relates to IR. The stratified model is built on two key ideas; “that users
interact with IR systems to use information”, and “that the use of information is connected with
cognition and then situational application” (Saracevic, 1997, p. 315). Therefore, in Saracevic’s
model, users access information via a computerized system and then synthesize that information
to modify their cognitive state. This interaction has both “user” and “computer” components
with each possessing stratified levels of interaction meeting at the surface level, called the
“interface”. The three strata on the user’s end involve the situation that drives the user to seek
information, an affective level influenced by the user’s intents and beliefs, and the cognitive
level where users interpret a text for relevancy and possibly change their cognitive state based on
new information. Within the computer strata exist content, or texts stored within the system, and
the processing and the engineering components that contain the software and hardware
respectively that allow the system to operate in retrieving texts (Saracevic, 1997). Saracevic’s

19

Stratified Model is again an expression of the cognitive epistemological framework in that users
retrieve a text with the goal of changing their cognitive state to either satisfy their information
need or return to the interface with a new query. It also builds on Belkin’s (1993) interaction
with texts as the content contained within the system are texts and both user and computer must
move through the strata on either end of the surface interface to access texts. Where Saracevic’s
Stratified Model is useful in informing this study is that barriers to access can occur on the
computer end of the model, particularly in engineering and processing, and represents and
interruption in the text retrieval process that prevents the user from evaluating new information
to modify their cognitive state.
More recent literature focusing on information seeking habits of higher education
students and distance learners indicates a variety of information seeking strategies and behaviors
(Denison and Montgomery, 2012; Barrett, 2005; Clark, 2014). Denison and Montgomery (2012)
studied a small group of students using Q Methodology to better understand their subjective
attitudes toward research and information resources. They evaluated the results of their data
collection and grouped most participants along three categories: “experienced critiquers”,
“technology admirers”, and “extrinsic motivators” with a relatively even number of participants
falling into each category. The authors identified experienced critiquers as students who
remained skeptical of many online resources such as Wikipedia, and preferred to use library
databases and critically evaluate resources to ensure that they are retrieving the most reliable
sources. Technology admirers were identified as being very familiar with information technology
but having less familiarity with information literacy concepts and therefore rely more on other
internet sources besides online library sources. The extrinsic motivators shared characteristics of
each of the previous two groups and may start an information search via Wikipedia or the

20

Internet to get started before turning to more reliable sources such as full-text scholarly articles
available through the library. While examining data from participants of this study, it was
important to keep in mind a variety of personal factors or attitudes that may influence their
information seeking habits and behaviors regarding remote services provided by the library and
their confidence in these resources and their ability to access them.
Barrett (2005), in a study of research patterns among graduate students, found that
graduate-level students overwhelmingly use authoritative sources of information and will go to
great lengths to get them. He found that they relied less on their own collections of sources as
was more common with faculty and on internet sources, which is more common of
undergraduates. Returning to Clark’s (2014) study of distance learners in the music program at
Kent State, it was found that if library users were unaware of library resources or help features
that they would rely on other resources, particularly their local library collections, in their work.
These studies suggest that information seeking strategy is a complex concept and relies on a
variety of factors including, but not limited to, age, familiarity with library resources, and level
of education.
Information retrieval models help to inform our conceptualization of how users seek
information and the exchange that takes place with the IR systems that aid in the access to large
amounts of information resources. This study examines barriers to access experienced by users
as they execute and otherwise normal information seeking session. There is a gap in the
literature regarding these access issues as current IR models are focused on the information
process itself, which tends to ignore factors that could lead to the types of access barriers
experienced by remote library users in actual situations. Therefore, while it is important to
consider the various information seeking strategies and IR models that inform the discipline of

21

Library and Information Science, it is also important to consider a separate set of information
strategies in the form of access strategies that are employed when users encounter access barriers
that are otherwise unrelated to their normal information seeking process. This study is intended
to begin filling this gap in current IR knowledge and to make suggestions for further research
and solutions to these issues.
2.3.2 Online Library Resources in Higher Education
There is no doubt that the rise and prominence of proxy servers for remote information
retrieval has changed the information landscape in higher education. Therefore, it is also
necessary to survey the literature both past and present to establish general trends in information
seeking among students seeking degrees in higher education. Several studies, both past and
present, suggest that scholarly sources of information such as those found in a library database
are preferred by students in higher education. (Kuhlthau, 1988; Colón-Aguirre & Fleming-May,
2012; Ritterbush, 2014) Kuhlthau, in a study of information habits and perceptions of students as
they transition from high school through college established in her study that library resources
become more integral to a student’s success in their course work. At the college or university
level, library research contributes to a deeper understanding of course concepts or is “related to
course work rather than an extraneous assignment”. (p. 425) College-level students’ preference
for scholarly sources was explored more recently in a study by Colón-Aguirre and Fleming-May
(2012) who interviewed a group of college undergraduates to determine to what extent they rely
on Internet resources rather than scholarly articles in their research and coursework, with
emphasis on the use of Wikipedia. The authors of this study reveal that many students brought
up and extended discussion of library resources in their information seeking behaviors despite
the authors’ lack of library affiliation and having included fewer questions about academic

22

library resources than questions about Wikipedia and in a literature review of user perspectives
among distance learners, Ritterbush (2014) identified several studies that suggest that the
majority of distance learners utilize library resources in their coursework. However, in the
literature he also identified a potential barrier for distance learners in that once resources were
identified through an information search it can be difficult for students to acquire them. These
examples in the literature illustrate that distance learners in a higher education environment are
highly likely to both need and value the type of scholarly information accessible remotely via
their academic library.
Attitudes toward e-journals accessed via remote library servers have tended toward
acceptance in recent years as shown in survey studies by Dillon and Hahn (2002) and Kaur
(2012). Findings by Dillon and Hahn (2002), who surveyed faculty and graduate students at the
University of Maryland, support electronic access to journals. However, at the time of this
study, the findings also supported significantly among both faculty and graduate students that
journals considered essential to the discipline be available in both print and electronic formats. In
a later survey study Kaur (2012) finds nearly complete acceptance of e-journals among teachers
who participated. Most teachers surveyed (93.7%) responded that they recommend e-journals to
students. Kaur also finds that time saved is also a potential factor valued by users of e-journals
with responses indicating that participants save an average of 28 minutes when accessing and
reading an article. Though Kaur finds that e-journals are generally accepted and recommended
by teachers as a valuable means of access to scholarly information, some issues identified with
accessing articles were referred to in the article as general “access difficulties” as well as “slow
access speed” or “lack of connectivity”, difficulties reading from a computer screen and lack of
computer knowledge (p. 188). These studies show a progression of acceptance of e-journals in

23

higher education and of interest for this study are the identification in Kaur (2012) of barriers to
access that affect a user’s ability to access full text scholarly articles. It was expected that some
of these factors such as access speed or connectivity and lack of system knowledge could be
significant factors that contribute to barriers to access. While remote access to scholarly articles
has become not only accepted but normal in today’s academic setting, there is still the potential
for barriers to hinder a user’s ability to access full text scholarly articles.
2.3.3 Information seeking strategies and associated factors
Information seeking strategies in the current higher education environment are of interest
for this study since it informs the process that leads to a library user attempting to access a full
text article when they are searching the library’s database. Several recent studies (Whitmire,
2002; Nicholas et al., 2006; Currie et al., 2009; Porter, 2011) focus on the information seeking
habits of students of the current generation, often referred to as millennials. An understanding of
the information seeking habits of millennials or web natives is important to this study since many
of the participants, while primarily accessing the library remotely, fit these criteria. Whitmire
(2002) divided participants in a study about user judgement of information resources and
information seeking behavior into three categories: pre-reflective, quasi-reflective and reflective.
These categories indicate a gradual increase in reflective judgement regarding sources of
information with pre-reflective users employing the least amount of reflective judgement and
reflective users employing the most. Whitmire finds that pre-reflective users generally use the
first few hits in a list of results without going deeper, a finding that is also reflected in Porter’s
(2011) study of the information seeking strategies of Millennials.
Another important aspect of information seeking among a younger generation of students
in higher education is the use of natural language (Currie et al., 2009; Porter, 2011). Library

24

databases do not retrieve results in the same way as web search engines such as Google that are
more forgiving of search queries presented in natural language rather than use of specific search
terms with the use of Boolean operators. Currie et al. (2009) found that students often expect
databases to behave like web search engines though they do not and use natural language queries
that have difficulty in retrieving relevant results. This finding is reinforced in Porter (2011) who
proposes a theory that millennials utilize very little sophisticated search strategies, often opting
instead for queries based in natural language. Nicholas et al. (2006), in a study of information
seeking behaviors of online journal users, also noticed a pattern of information seeking strategies
that closely resembled web search behavior. An important finding in this study was that “web
users do not dwell”, instead quickly examining content for relevance and then moving to the next
piece of information (p.1354). This, the authors propose, is a factor of the massive choice of
possible information sources available in web-based systems.
Factors that also appear in the literature about the information seeking strategies of
students in higher education are convenience (Connaway et al., 2011; Colón-Aguirre & FlemingMay, 2012; Clark, 2014) and information anxiety (Ritterbush, 2014). Though the articles
previously cited in this literature review emphasize the importance of scholarly information to
higher education students, there are also examples that emphasize the importance of convenience
when locating information. In a sample of undergraduate and graduate students in the Midwest,
Connaway et al. (2011) identified convenience as a major factor in the information seeking
habits of respondents, with a significant number of respondents indicating that convenience was
a factor in their information seeking behavior. An important concept highlighted in the
discussion of this study was that a variety of “contexts and situations for information needs did
not detract from the centrality of convenience” (p. 187). This suggests that convenience is a

25

factor for on-campus and distance learners alike at all stages of their academic experience. In a
study of distance learners in the music education program at Kent State University, Clark (2014)
identified some factors that suggest important differences in the information seeking process. Of
the distance learners who were surveyed, Clark found that only 4% of the students had physically
visited the library at Kent State, which he suggests has implications for receiving help when
looking for information as many of the students were unaware of the help available to library
students online. Use of non-academic library resources plays a factor in the information seeking
habits of distance learners as well and of note in Clark’s data was the extent that participants
often used their public library and other types of libraries to locate materials. Keeping in mind
the variety of perceptions and opinions about scholarly resources provided by the academic
library and the processes involved in locating and accessing those resources, the academic library
does continue to play a very important role in the information seeking process for many student
library users, though it does not come without certain difficulties. Participants in a study by
Colón-Aguirre and Fleming-May (2012), while acknowledging the reliability of library resources
versus Wikipedia indicated that library resources require more effort and “expressed some level
of frustration with the process of interacting with the OPAC and database search platforms” (p.
395). This again indicates that while students may generally value authoritative information from
library databases, convenience is a factor when choosing information resources. It was expected
that some of this same frustration would present itself in the results of the data collection and that
it plays a role in both the decision to terminate an attempt to access an article and the strategies
employed to overcome barriers to access.
Additionally, Ritterbush (2014) briefly discusses the concept of information anxiety as it
relates to remote access to library resources. From this brief assessment of this concept in the

26

context of distance learning, Ritterbush identified that a patron’s age and their level of library
anxiety have an inverse relationship, but the level of library anxiety and increased distance from
the library were not related. Though according to Ritterbush information anxiety and distance do
not have a correlative effect, it will still be important as with the various stages of the
information process identified above to consider information anxiety as a potential issue that
may face remote academic library users potentially due to their age, as Ritterbush found, or their
level of familiarity with the online library environment and influence their ability to overcome
any barriers to access they may face in the online environment.
2.4 Limitations of Previous Research
Current Library and Information Science literature contains an abundance of studies and
articles on the information seeking process, information strategies, and information habits as well
as articles and studies that examine the purpose, various uses, and limitations of proxy server
technology in the academic library environment. There is, however, a research gap to be found in
linking various barriers to their effect on the information seeking behaviors and strategies of
students. This study also intends to add to the theoretical discussion of IR as the problems of
barriers to access to remote scholarly articles affects many of the theoretical models in
Interactive IR that form the foundation of research in the field and represent a barrier or
interruption in the concept of a normal IR interaction. There are also gaps in the literature
regarding access strategies as distinct from information seeking strategies. When confronted
with an issue when attempting to access a full text article, what strategies or techniques do users
employ to overcome the issue and gain access to the needed information? This gap in the
literature will be addressed by research question 2 as the proposed study seeks to establish
potential access strategies and associated factors. The literature review also discusses the

27

successes and challenges of remote access to online scholarly articles, however there is a
currently a gap in the literature regarding solutions to those challenges. This concept is closely
related to access strategies as solutions may be a result of successful strategies or arise from
discussion or analysis of collected data. It is hoped that this study will not only help to close
these gaps in Library and Information Science research, but also to potentially guide future
research as remote access via proxy-server relates to concepts such as help-seeking and
information literacy.
2.5 Chapter Summary
This literature review focused on three primary ideas as they relate to this study. First, the
history and evolution of proxy servers in the academic library environment was examined in
detail with the emergence of EZproxy as the leading vendor of remote access technologies for
academic libraries. Second, an overview of successes and difficulties encountered while using
proxy-servers to access scholarly information remotely via the academic library were explored
with emphasis on some potential barriers to access that remote library users may face when
attempting to access scholarly information remotely via their academic library. Finally, examples
in past and current Library and Information Science literature were cited to gain an
understanding of the variety of theoretical IR models to provide a framework for research in IR
and information-seeking strategies and information seeking habits and strategies that exist in
higher education and distance education. Limitations of the current Library and Information
Science literature were also discussed with the hope that the proposed study can fill the current
gap that exists in studying barriers to access to scholarly information and its effect on IR and the
information seeking strategies of distance learners.

28

CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
3.1 Research design
This study combines two research designs to gather the most complete information on
both participant perspective and concrete examples of their information seeking behaviors and
strategies and the potential effects of remote barriers to access. Selecting the appropriate
research design is of the utmost importance in conducting successful research as the purpose of
the design must appropriately match and be able to answer the research question (Beck &
Manuel, 2008). Therefore, the design of this study has been carefully considered to best match
the associated research questions. The first portion of the study applies a retrospective research
design to gain past perspective from student participants and better understand their thoughts and
understanding regarding remote access issues as they perceive them. The second portion of the
study applies a snapshot research design using a semi-structured diary to capture a current
information seeking session to better understand barriers to access, any changes to information
seeking strategy in real time and the circumstances in which users experience barriers when
attempting to access full text scholarly articles. The intent of the application of these research
designs is that richer data may be gathered, and any weaknesses associated with either research
design may be mitigated. Each research design will be discussed in further detail in the
following sections.
3.1.1 Retrospective
To gather background data for the participants and to establish baseline information
seeking habits of the participants, the study began with a retrospective research design.
Retrospective research designs focus on past perspectives and experiences. According to Flick
(2014), the strengths of the retrospective research design are that it reveals the past perspective

29

and can help to derive meaning from the past experiences of the participants. The method that
was used to support the retrospective research design is an unstructured interview, which
according to Connaway and Powell (2010) is a way for researchers to obtain information from
participants for which they do not know the range of responses in advance. Strengths of the
retrospective research design using interviews are that it will allow for gathering data that will
encompass a range of time and experience rather than focusing on a single event (Connaway &
Powell, 2010). This retrospective research design allowed for the gathering of data that revealed
general thoughts and feelings regarding barriers to digital scholarly articles via proxy server and
will also allow for the development of coding categories to organize responses appropriately.
3.1.2 Snapshot
The second part of the research design consisted of "snapshots", a design that uses
methodologies that gather data from the current perspective (Flick, 2014). The advantage of
using the snapshot design is that it adds a current or real-time focus to compliment the data
gathered in the retrospective interviews that can only focus on past situations and perspectives.
To gather current data for the snapshot portion of this study semi-structured diaries were used for
participants to record a current research session to discover any additional data related to barriers
to digital scholarly articles via proxy server or information strategies participants use to mitigate
these barriers that may not have been addressed in the interview portion of the study. In the
results of the study, participants did in fact report barriers and access strategies that differed from
and enriched data given in the interview portion of the data collection. Structured diaries are
often used as a tool in user experience (UX) studies and have several advantages. Using
structured diaries over time, or in conjunction with other methods (such as interviews), can
increase the longitudinal scope of the data as well as provide a data collection method that

30

resides within the context of the situation or phenomenon being studied (Lallemand, 2012). This
study employed a semi-structured diary document that organized participants’ responses, yet
allowed them to respond freely in their own words.
3.1.3 Limitations and Synthesis of Research Design
Both designs have weaknesses. Snapshot data can only capture the process and do not
necessarily achieve a deeper understanding of phenomena, while retrospective studies in the
form of interviews consist of data filtered through the participant’s memory (Flick, 2014). To
mitigate the weaknesses in each design, it is hoped that combining the two designs will provide
the dual perspective of past experience combined with an actual record of each participant’s
information process regarding digital access via proxy server and their information seeking
strategies as they perform their own research. Beck and Manuel (2008) cite the Heisenberg
Uncertainty Principle to describe how combining designs and methods for research can give a
more complete picture from the data being gathered. In this application of Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle, in an interview, researchers would know what participants say they do in
each situation but have no way of knowing if the participants’ statements are actually true.
Therefore, using another method, such as in the case of the proposed study the structured diary,
helps to validate the data gathered in the interview by using a real-time data collection method to
reinforce the retrospective data. For this study the semi-structured diary is used not to seek out
which answers may be untrue, but to delve deeper and unpack the information process of
participants to introduce barriers and access strategies they may not have considered in the
interview. The retrospective research design using interviews and snapshot research design
using structured diaries have been specially selected to appropriately address and answer the

31

research questions and to enhance the strengths and mitigate the weaknesses inherent in each
type of design.
3.2 Sampling
Participants for this study needed to meet specific criteria to satisfy the requirement for
the type of library user specified in the research questions. Participants needed to use the library
primarily on a remote basis via proxy server. The participants also needed to use the library for
research related to their course work, perhaps a library research assignment or an advanced
research paper. For these reasons the study sought a sample of a specific set of remote library
users who may encounter issues accessing scholarly articles via proxy server. The primary
sampling strategy for this study consisted of finding a purposive sample of students who fit these
criteria. Flick (2014) outlines several types of purposive sampling, and a type of purposive
sampling that was useful for this study consisted of finding typical cases of students that
experience barriers in their online library sessions to try to capture issues as they occur in as
many participants as possible.
As mentioned previously, this study recruited a group of participants from students who
use online library materials in the distance environment via proxy server. This means, according
to Flick (2014), the sample for this study is also a theoretical sample as well as a purposive
sample as it draws participants from a specific area of expertise or experience to answer a
specific research goal. Individual participants in a theoretical sample are not selected randomly
or stratified to make the sample representative. Instead, “you would select individuals, groups,
and so on according to their (expected) level of new insights for the developing theory in relation
to the state of theory elaboration so far” (Flick, 2014, p. 171). The sample size was open ended.
Glaser and Strauss (1970) suggest ending the sampling at a point called “theoretical saturation”,

32

where no new data emerges from the participants. This study intended to gather data from as
many participants as necessary until theoretical saturation is reached, and it was expected that
around 30-40 participants would be needed. It was also thought to be beneficial to have
participants from disciplines in the social sciences, science, and arts and humanities, perhaps
around 10 participants from each type of discipline.
Participants for this study were recruited by reviewing courses that are offered online at
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and then contacting course instructors and to explain
the study and inquire whether they may be interested in having their students participate using an
IRB-approved scripted email. Potential challenges arose from the fact that online students can be
far-flung geographically and as many of them are post graduate or non-traditional students many
have time constraints that would make participation in a research study difficult. Additionally,
the pragmatic snapshot data collection mentioned in the design portion of this chapter required
additional effort on the part of the student when doing research to complete their coursework,
which may make some students apprehensive. These challenges were overcome through active
communication with participants to check progress, through use of IRB-approved scripted
reminder email messages and by providing a small incentive in the form of a ten-dollar gift card
to participants who completed both portions of the data collection.
The response rate to the recruitment emails was not as high as was expected at the outset
of the study. In total, fifteen students agreed to participate in the study, with fifteen participants
completing the interview portion of the data collection and 12 participants completing the semistructured diary portion of the data collection in addition to the interview. Coded responses from
both portions of the data collection regarding barriers and strategies were combined for the
results chapter of this thesis. Despite the total number of participants being lower than expected,

33

it is believed that the data provided by these participants was rich enough to draw conclusions
and make theoretical and practical suggestions for the LIS discipline and academic libraries
respectively. The participants were primarily seniors and graduate students, with area of study
ranging from Library and Information Science, Geography, and Psychology among others. The
following participant demographics table provides the year of study, gender, and concentration
of each participant taken from the interview data:
Table 1: Participant Demographics
Participant number

Gender

Year of study

Concentration

001

Male

Graduate student

Educational psychology

002

Female

4th year

International studies

003

Male

5th year +

Film studies

004

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

005

Female

5th year +

Psychology

006

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

007

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

008

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

010

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

011

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

012

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

013

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

014

Female

Graduate student

MLIS

015

Male

Graduate student

MLIS / Geography

016

Female

5th year +

Geography / Urban
studies / GIS

34

3.3 Data Collection Methods
Following the research design, the data collection methods for this study were twofold:
First, participants were interviewed using open ended questions using the online survey tool
Qualtrics to better understand their research process when completing course work and what
types of issues they may have encountered when accessing scholarly information online via
proxy server in the past. Second, participants were asked to complete a structured diary during a
live research session for their current coursework to capture how students deal with these issues
in an actual research situation. Both the interview and the structured diary asked questions that
addressed the two research questions: what barriers to access do remote users encounter and
what strategies do they use to overcome these barriers? The following sub-sections will discuss
each data collection method individually and as they relate to the research questions as well as
the strengths and weaknesses of each data collection method and how triangulation of these
methods mitigated weaknesses and enhanced the strengths of each method for richer data
collection.
3.3.1 Interview
The interview portion of the data collection focused on past perception of participants’
information search habits and strategies and serves as a basis to identify any barriers they may
have experienced when attempting to access full-text scholarly articles remotely via library
proxy-server in the past. The interview also enabled open coding to develop strong categories
from the data and to establish patterns to encourage the development of a theory. The interview
consisted of four sections; the first consisting of demographic questions, the second consisting of
questions designed to gather data on participants' general information needs and what resources
they typically use in order to meet their information needs, the third section consisted of

35

questions to gather data on what types of barriers to access participants experience specifically
when they are attempting to access digital scholarly information via proxy server through their
academic library's OPAC, and finally a fourth section of the interview consisted of questions
designed to gather data on what types of strategies participants generally use to overcome these
barriers.
By interviewing participants before collecting snapshot data is the hope that participants
would be able to provide background information regarding their thoughts, feelings and opinions
about their online information process that may be difficult to capture in a real-time information
seeking environment. One of the primary benefits of using interviews is the ability to collect
data that ranges over a general scope of time rather than focusing on one single event or
occurrence of a situation as well as the ability to "probe, clarify and create new questions"
(Connaway & Powell, 2010, p.219). A reliable means of conducting interviews with participants
is extremely important. Since participants for this study were distance learners who access the
library from off campus and were likely to be geographically displaced, email was used to
recruit, communicate consent, and distribute the interview via hyperlink to the Qualtrics survey
in addition to any further communication that was needed. According to Meho (2006), email
interviews are advantageous in that they are cost-effective and are useful for reaching a
geographically dispersed participant base. Additionally, email interviews have the potential to
return higher response rates, are useful for synthesizing complex information and can encourage
more comprehensive responses because participants are able to think for a longer about their
responses before answering according to Connaway and Silpigni (2010).
Email, being a form of asynchronous electronic communication, has obvious advantages
for participants who are geographically dispersed and likely have scheduling and other conflicts

36

that will make it difficult for them to meet in person or use other forms of face to face
communication. However, there are also disadvantages to email as a tool for data collection that
will need to be planned for if the interview portion of the study is to be successful. A chief
concern when conducting email interviews will be increased difficulty in the researcher's ability
to probe or ask additional or clarifying questions (Connaway & Powell, 2010). This
disadvantage was softened by making it clear to participants at the outset of the study that the
researcher may need to reach out to participants via email to perhaps clarify or ask further
questions in order to gather more data. Though it is still possible that participants may not
respond to a reply email asking for more data and probing and clarification cannot happen in real
time, it is believed that the benefits to using email communication as a data gathering tool for
this study outweighed the disadvantages.
3.3.2 Semi-structured Diary
Snapshot data collection in the second half of this study was gathered using a semistructured diary method, then analyzed and coded to discover themes from the data as they apply
to the research questions. The semi-structured diary was intended to be a record of an actual
information search to further explore potential problems and to gather data from the current
context of an information search session than will not be available through retrospective
interviews. The semi-structured diaries provided student participants with a template to provide
insight into their information process and how barriers to access to scholarly articles they
experience influenced their information process. Like the interview, the semi-structured diary
was organized into sections to gather data on the goals or purpose of the information seeking
session, what barriers to access were encountered during the information seeking session, and
what strategies, if any, were used to overcome those barriers and whether a participant was

37

successful in gaining access to the needed scholarly article. The semi-structured diary format
used in this study was what Pickard (2007) calls a “participants’ diary”, as opposed to a
“researchers’ diary” and puts the data collection in the hands of the participants, to be analyzed
and coded by the researcher once they were completed. This data collection method is intended
to be flexible, since students in the online environment may have schedule and timing constraints
that could make other forms of visual data collection such as screen sharing or interview
methods such as think aloud difficult. For the second portion of the data collection, participants
were asked to use the semi-structured diary during a live online research session for their current
research or coursework. Clear instructions and concise instructions were provided at the head of
the document. Participants provided the length of their online research session and for each
barrier they experience using the library online they were asked to provide the type of
information barrier, at what point in the access process the barrier occurred, strategies used to
overcome the barrier, whether they were successful and why, and what the next steps were if
they were unsuccessful in their attempt to access. The semi-structured diary document used for
this study can be found in the appendix.
3.3.3 Triangulation of Research Methods
To gather more focused and reliable data that can better answer the research questions,
triangulation of data collection methods was used in this study. For a basic definition of
triangulation in research Flick (2014) states, “triangulation means that researchers take different
perspectives on an issue under study or – more generally speaking – in answering research
questions”. (p.184) Triangulation can be applied at various points in research design. For this
study, triangulation was used in the data collection as the retrospective interview data and the
snapshot semi-structured diary data both informed one another and provided a broader and more

38

complete perspective on student’s information seeking behaviors as they apply to barriers to fulltext scholarly information via proxy server. In addition to providing a richer and more detailed
perspective, the retrospective interview data helped to inform the structure of the diary used in
the snapshot portion of the study to provide data that is applicable and comparable across design
perspectives.
Both data collection methods used in this study have strengths and weaknesses and by
triangulating both research design and data collection methods, many of the weaknesses were
mitigated and strengths were enhanced. The retrospective interview portion of the data collection
captured barriers experienced by participants generally and through the lens of perception,
whether the answers provided were concepts the user identified as occurring often or something
that happened only recently. While the disadvantages of this method include lack of focus on the
pragmatic process of information seeking behaviors of participants as they apply to the research
questions, triangulation of data collection methods through use of the semi-structured diary
opened participants to a set of responses that were often different and provided additional data
when compared to the interview responses.
Like the weaknesses discussed regarding retrospective data collection, the semistructured diary for the snapshot portion of the study focuses on the current process, with little
insight into past perspectives and behaviors. Triangulation of data collection methods effectively
resolved these weaknesses and data collected both retrospectively and in an actual research
scenario, as stated above enhanced the data collection overall and led to more data and coded
categories than either one of the two research methods alone could have accomplished. In
addition to theoretical strengths and weaknesses of these methods, there are also several
pragmatic issues that needed to be addressed to gather useful data. Data collection was done

39

from a distance, since participants in the study were frequent remote online library users and
many are distance students who are taking their classes completely online. Therefore, most if not
all interactions will take place in the online environment. This means that good communication
with course instructors during recruitment and with participants during the recruitment, consent
and data collection process was of primary importance and that instructions and expectations for
completion of the data collection were well communicated to ensure accurate and complete data
was provided by participants. In addition to strong communication with participants, a small
incentive in the form of a ten-dollar gift card as thanks for participating in this study provided
some additional incentive necessary to encourage most participants to go above and beyond in
demonstrating their research process by completing the semi-structured diary document in
addition to the interview.
3.4 Data Analysis and Coding
Data analysis and coding techniques are crucial for the accurate interpretation and
reporting of research data. This study employed a data analysis and coding strategy that allowed
for coding categories and hierarchies to develop out of the data provided by participants, which
is used to draw conclusions, make suggestions for future research as well as suggestions for
improvement of the online library experience, and identify and place this study within the current
gap in Library and Information Science literature. This method of data analysis, called open
coding, allows for unique coding categories to develop to best answer the research questions.
The open coding technique used for this study was based on Strauss and Corbin’s (1998)
grounded theory coding methodology, which includes open coding, axial coding and selective
coding. Due to the small number of participants, the open coding technique was used for this
study and will be described in this section with some axial categories developing from the data,

40

however theoretical and practical implications rather than a grounded theory are provided in the
concluding chapter. Discussion of the coding will include a brief description how codes were
developed and applied to the data provided by participants and follow with a description of axial
coding techniques that help to establish connections between the nodes established in open
coding and selective coding techniques that help to sharpen and refine the coded data for the
development of conclusions.
To begin analysis for data gathered through interviews and semi-structured journals for
this study, the open coding technique was employed to break down and categorize the textual
information provided by participants and organize ideas and phrases into codes that are
predetermined, yet are open-ended so that new codes may be created as the data suggests. It was
possible through the development of the study through literature review and pilot studies to
determine some general coding categories, however the data provided in the live study provided
even more unique data that encouraged the development of new codes. These newly developed
codes can be created as categories by the coder or taken directly from the words of the
participant data, known as “in vivo” codes (Strauss & Corbin). This is a major advantage of open
coding study since codes emerge naturally from the data provided by the participants. The next
step in the coding process is axial coding, which as the name suggests involves grouping
categories and subcategories of codes together where each category represents a phenomenon.
According to Strauss and Corbin, the categories and subcategories may not be apparent to the
researcher during open coding but will reveal themselves as the open coding process proceeds.
As the data collection progressed, patterns began to emerge in the open coding process that
allowed for some axial links to be made to begin to draw conclusions and determine theoretical
and practical implications. For instance, information barriers in the online environment

41

presented themselves as information search related barriers and access barriers, with open coding
categories fitting into each axial category. Likewise, the strategies participants provided in their
answers to interview questions and in the semi-structured diary document lent themselves as
solutions to either information search related barriers or access barriers. The final step in the
coding process is selective coding, which Strauss and Corbin define as “the process of
integrating and refining categories”. (p. 143) In selective coding the categories and subcategories
are refined, and allow for conclusions and implications of the data to be developed from one or
more central phenomena. Regarding Library and Information Science (LIS) research
specifically, Pettigrew and McKechnie (2001) indicate that theory is an important foundation and
that generation of new theories upon which to base more research strengthens the field. With
selective coding, the refined coding categories present strong associations between information
search related barriers, access barriers, and the various strategies used to overcome these types of
barriers encourage the development of theoretical and practical implications and conclusions
based on the results. It is hoped that in the future this research can be continued or expanded
upon to include more open coding categories, leading to more complex axial coding categories,
the application of selective coding techniques and the development of a grounded theory.
In an open coding scheme, data is typically gathered to the point where no new
information is learned, or no new codes result in the analysis of the data. This point is called
theoretical saturation. Creswell (2013) identifies one of the limitations of a grounded theory
study as difficulty in identifying the point of theoretical saturation and that it can be difficult to
set aside other theories and ideas while new concepts emerge from the data. It is important for
the development of strong conclusions and implications to continue collecting data to ensure that
theoretical saturation has been reached. According to Glaser and Strauss (1970) the researcher,

42

“goes out of his way to look for groups that stretch diversity of data as far as possible” to ensure
that the saturation point is reached (p. 61). For the purposes of this study, the intent was to gather
data to the point of theoretical saturation as determined by the open coding scheme developed for
the data. Despite 15 participants having agreed to participate in the study, short of the 30-40
participants initially desired it is still felt that strong data provided a central group of coding
categories that arose from the open coding scheme and allowed for conclusions to be drawn and
for theoretical and practical implications of the study to become clear. In future studies, it is
hoped that the codes developed in this study can be validated and expanded upon to develop a
grounded theory.
3.4.1 Coding Scheme
The data collection was conducted, and as responses were collected data from both the
interview and semi-structured diary were combined and synthesized into an open coding scheme.
In this type of coding, the categories did not exist previously, rather they emerged from the data
as it was collected, analyzed and compared. Coding categories can then be filled with multiple
pieces of data that reflect the same concept, or new coding categories can be created. Categories
may even be named using the same words given by study participants or in vivo codes. (Glaser
& Corbin, 1998) This section will discuss the open coding scheme used for this study. Tables 2
and 3, ‘types of access barriers’ and ‘types of access strategies’, illustrate the coding scheme that
was developed along the types of barriers remote library users encounter when attempting to
access full text articles via the online catalog and the strategies they use to overcome these
obstacles derived from research questions one and two respectively:

43

Table 2: Types of Access Barriers:
Code
A. Unable to download
full text article
B. Results too

broad/narrow
C. Login / credential

Definition
Participant was unable to
download the full text PDF of
a scholarly article.
Participants retrieved too
many or too few results
because of their search query.
User is asked to log in before
proceeding.

D. Bad/invalid hyperlink

Full text link from the online
library search take the user to
a page that does not give
access to the full text article

E. Unsure how/where to
locate scholarly
information

The user is unsure of how to
use the libraries resources
online or where to locate
appropriate resources and
databases for their topic.
User experiences
compatibility issues related to
computer software or
hardware that prevents access
to full text article.
User experiences no barriers.

F. Computer

software/hardware
issue

G. None

Example
“It doesn't always give you
full access to articles that it
says are downloadable”
“Sometimes my searches
result in too many results or
no results”
“When using the library
catalog remotely, I am
sometimes required to sign in
before I view full text
articles”
“Occasionally broken links'full text available' link will
just go to the general
resource/journal/database
landing page”
“I also have difficultly
knowing which resource I
should use to request texts”

“Needed [special] software to
view a downloaded copy”

“I haven't had trouble
locating the information I
need via the UWM library. I
understand remote access and
how to login to retrieve
information”

Types of barrier codes from the open coding scheme reflect potential barriers to access from
research question one. The codes presented in the table above were developed as data was
returned and formed into the axial coding groups, information search related barriers and access
barriers, that are discussed in the next chapter. The examples given of each defined code

44

represent actual participant responses that were considered exemplary of that coded concept.
These codes provided the primary information that will be used in the next chapter to provide the
answer to RQ1 regarding types of barriers experienced by remote library users.
The participant responses also provided rich data regarding the various types of access
strategies used by remote library users to overcome the various barriers they described. The
strategies were also coded using an open coding scheme that yielded a variety of access
strategies. The frequency and use of these access strategies as they apply to specific information
search related and access barriers will be discussed in the next chapter:
Table 3: Types of Access Strategies
Code
A. Interlibrary loan (ILL)

Definition
Requesting the resource
through the library’s online
ILL service

B. Search multiple
databases

Trying a variety of databases
provided via the UWM
libraries webpage

C. Use internet or noninstitution affiliated
databases
D. Narrow or refine
search terms

Use of non-university/library
internet resources and search
engines (primarily Google)
Modification of the search
query to retrieve more
relevant results
Closing and restarting the
internet browser or tabs
within the browser
User logs in when prompted
by the system
Navigate through the
publisher’s website to access
the full text for a known
article

E. Restart or reopen web
browser
F. Log in
G. Navigate the
publisher’s website

45

Example
“I could use Interlibrary
Loan, but I sometimes bypass
that, especially if I am
pressed for time”
“I usually use the quick
search bar instead of clicking
through to individual
databases, since I want to be
able to search multiple
databases at once”
“Typically I search Google
Scholar to see if they are
available there”
“Change keywords to make
them less specific and
possibly remove quotations”
“Use ‘Open in new tab’ to
make sure I don't lose my
place”
I was then asked to type in
my username and password.
I had the citation for the
article, so I searched by
journal title, then drilled
down via

year/volume/issue/page
number
H. Try another link

I. Use familiar databases

J. Find alternate
article/give up

Attempting to access a full
text article by clicking
another access link if multiple
links are available in the
catalog
User searches databases that
are familiar due to instruction
or past use

Terminate the attempt to
access a full text article,
possibly in favor of finding
an alternative article that is
accessible

I noticed additional
hyperlinks to the journals
listed below the Full-Text
Available hyperlink.
“I try to use databases
recommended by my
professors, rather than trying
to sort through the large list
myself”
“If I find an article that isn't
accessible, I will move on
and find an alternative source
that is available”

As with the table detailing the various codes developed for barriers, open coding revealed a
variety of strategies used to overcome barriers. These coded categories are used in the next
chapter to answer RQ2 regarding strategies used to overcome access barriers.
3.4.2 Intercoder Reliability
Data from four interviews, about 27% of the returned responses were coded with the
assistance of a second coder to help determine intercoder reliability. Table 4, ‘intercoder
reliability’, provides the interview question as well as codes for four participants from both the
researcher and an independent coder, the first letter represents the corresponding code provided
by the researcher and the second represents the corresponding code provided by the independent
coder:

46

Table 4: Intercoder Reliability

Question
What types of
resources do you
use in your research
projects?
Describe your
information seeking
strategy for
research projects.
How often you use
the library catalog
remotely to search
full text scholarly
journal articles?
When using the
library catalog
remotely to search
full text scholarly
articles, what types
of difficulties or
barriers to access
do you encounter?
In your opinion
what are the causes
of these barriers?
Describe any
strategies you
typically use to
search full text
scholarly articles
when you
experience a barrier
to access.
Describe your level
of familiarity with
reference, help and
other services the

Participant 1

Participant 6

Participant 7

Participant 13

A/A

A/A

A/A

A/A

A/A

C/C

E/A

A/A

A/A

A/A

A/A

A/B

A/A

C/C

D/D

B/B

A/A

C/B

B/B

D/D

A/A

E/E

F/F

A/A

B/C

C/B

A/A

B/B

47

library provides
online.
Describe your level
of familiarity with
the library’s
website and online
catalog.
List and describe
any library
instruction courses
you have
participated in and
briefly describe
their content.

C/C

B/B

B/B

B/B

A/A

B/B

B/B

B/B

Inter-coder reliability can be calculated using several methods. For the purposes of this study
Holsti’s method was used. The formula for this calculation is C.R. = 2M/(N1 + N2) where M is
the number of coding decisions where the two coders agree, and N are the total number of
decisions made by each coder. Inter-coder reliability for the pilot data was as follows:
2(31)/ (36 + 36) = 0.86
Inter-coder reliability for double coded data for this study was 0.86 or 86%.
3.5 Chapter Summary
This chapter discussed the research design, sampling and data collection methods. The
design and collection methods consist of a combination of data collection techniques that focus
on participants’ perception of their past experiences as well as a record of a current information
seeking experience to mitigate any weaknesses that may exist by examining either current or
historical data alone. Sampling of participants was also discussed in detail, focusing on the
theoretical sample as the optimal sampling method since it will ensure that participants meet the
criteria of remote library usage while conducting some form of research. Advantages and
48

disadvantages of the research design and data collection and analysis methods were also
discussed, with triangulation of research methods using retrospective interviews along with
“snapshot” data in the form of a structured diary to be used in conjunction to reduce the effect of
weaknesses. Open coding and data analysis as well as grounded theory were also discussed along
with examples of coded data from the study to demonstrate the codes applied to collected data as
well as a demonstration of the reliability of the coding scheme with a test of intercoder
reliability. This data and the analysis that followed was used to develop and propose theoretical
and practical implications of the effects of barriers to online scholarly articles on a distance
user’s information-seeking behavior and strategies. The next chapter will focus categorically on
the results of the data collection as they relate to the two research questions.

49

CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Results of the study are discussed in this chapter as they relate to and provide answers to
the research questions. This chapter is divided into two sections. The first section addresses
results of the data collection as it provides answers to research question one:
Q1: What barriers do remote academic library users encounter when searching and accessing
full-text articles via proxy server and what are the associated reasons?
The second section of the chapter will address results of the data collection as it provides
answers to research question two:
Q2: What strategies do remote academic library users employ to overcome barriers when
attempting to search and access full-text articles and what are the associated reasons?
4.1 Barriers to Access
Participants identified several issues relating to access to full text scholarly articles when
using the library’s catalog and databases online. Though there were multiple categories of
barriers to access as revealed by both the interview questions and the semi-structured diary, the
types of barriers to access fell into two main groups, information search related barriers and
access barriers. An access barrier is defined as a difficulty in accessing a full text scholarly
article that is related to the information retrieval system. Examples of access barriers from the
results coding are library patrons being unable to download an article from the database or bad
hyperlinks that do not take them to the correct webpage. An information search-related barrier is
defined as a difficulty in locating full text articles that is not related to the information retrieval
system. Examples of information search-related barriers from the results coding are too many or
too few results from a search and being unsure of how or where to locate the appropriate
resources to satisfy information need. Table 5 below shows the barriers reported by participants,

50

in the online interview and semi-structured diary portions of the study respectively, when using
the library online and their frequency:
Table 5: Barriers identified in data collection
Barrier

Definition

Unable to download full text
article

The resource that is being
requested from the search
query is unavailable
User reports a broken link
leading to an error message or
to a page other than access to
the full text article
Search query entered by the
user returns to many or too
few results
User must log in to show
university affiliation before
proceeding
User is unfamiliar with which
library resources to use or
how to search for resources
User experienced no issue

Bad link

Search results are too broad
or narrow
Log in / credential

Unsure of how or where to
locate resources
None
Computer software or
hardware problem

User’s computer system or
software is not compatible
with the requirements to
access the resource

Frequency of occurrence
(interview / semi-structured
diary)
8 / 20

3 / 14

6/4

6/3

2/1

1/ /2
0/2

The frequency with which barriers occurred reflect a combination of reports of barriers from
both the interview and semi-structured diary portions of the data collection. Both data collection
instruments yielded responses that were complex and often fell into multiple categories,
therefore each time a barrier was mentioned as either a full or partial response it was counted as
an occurrence of that barrier. This section of the chapter will individually discuss results and
implications of information search-related barriers and access barriers identified by the
participants.
51

4.1.1 Information Search-Related Barriers
Information search-related barriers were identified by participants in the interview
portion of the data collection in response to a question asking them specifically to state the
barriers to access they experience when using the library and its databases online. Due to the
nature of the structured diary document that was used for part two of the data collection,
information search-related barriers were not captured as effectively since the focus was on
accessing an article that the participant had already found, however one participant did mention
an information search-related barrier that will be discussed along with the interview responses.
Despite the information search-related barriers being limited generally to interview responses,
two concepts did emerge as the results were coded. The types of barriers given by participants in
response to this question that are considered information search-related barriers include search
results that were either too broad or too narrow based on search terms used and being unsure of
how or where to locate the correct articles. Figure 1, ‘Information search-related barrier
frequency’ shows the number of coded responses that fit into each information search-related
barrier category:

52

Information search-related barrier frequency
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Results too broad or narrow

Unsure of how/where to access information
Responses

Figure 1: Information search related barrier frequency

Search results that are too broad or narrow was identified as a barrier by participants 1, 2, 3, 5,
8, and 13, six of the fifteen total interview responses. This barrier is information search-related
in that it is related not to the delivery of full text articles by the system but to the user’s search
query. Two participants specifically identify broad or narrow search results as being a result of
their search terms. Participant 8 stated in the interview:
“Sometimes my query doesn’t bring me the results I need. I have to then reformulate it.”
Participant 13 responded in the interview:
Sometimes my searches result in too many results or not enough results.
Additionally, Participant 13 stated in the structured diary:
For my beginning search, I didn’t refine my search to articles and got a first page of
results that did not include any articles.

53

In the responses of Participant 8 in the interview and Participant 13 in the interview and
structured diary, the language that is used takes personal ownership for the barrier experienced.
The participants refer to “my query” and “my searches” respectively. It is clear based on the
number of participants that identified this issue that this is a significant barrier to access for
distance users of the library.
The second information search-related barrier that was identified in the coding, being
unsure of how or where to access information, while not identified as a barrier by as many
participants (only participants 2 and 4) is still significant not only in its existence as an
information search related barrier perceived by distance users of the library but also in the
reasons why these users are experiencing this barrier. In addition to two other barriers to access,
Participant 2 states:
I also have difficulty knowing which resource I should use to request texts.
The responses indicating information search-related barriers suggest that a significant portion of
library users find that a primary barrier they experience when attempting to access scholarly
information is related to their own ability to query the system or know how or where to access
scholarly articles. Of greater concern is the implication that there exist remote library users who
are unsure of how or where to locate the scholarly articles that will help them in their coursework
and research. Fortunately, these barriers can be explained, and suggestions made to address
these barriers to access when looking at the responses to other questions from the interview by
those who identified information search related barriers.
It is important to further examine interview responses for those participants who
identified information search related barriers (Participants 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, and 13). These responses

54

may help to identify some issues that will be helpful in recommending various library services or
suggesting future study in this area. Since the information search-related barriers presented
themselves more strongly in the responses to the interview questions, the responses to additional
interview questions by this group of participants were isolated and analyzed. From the responses
of these six participants to questions relating to their comfort level and familiarity with library
instruction, the library website and online catalog, and online reference and help services it is
possible that library users who identify information search-related barriers have not had a library
instruction course, are unfamiliar with the library website and online catalog or find it difficult to
use, and are unfamiliar with help and reference services or do not find them useful. Of the six
participants who identified information search-related barriers, three participants (1, 2, and 5)
answered these three interview questions in a similar way. When asked to describe their level of
familiarity with reference, online support and other services Participant 1 indicated a very limited
view of library services online,
I have only used the generic search via online library for journal articles. (P1)
Participants 2 and 5 acknowledge a lack of awareness of library services,
I am unfamiliar with help and other services the library provides. (P2)
Very limited. Poor reference level. (P5)
The participants were then asked to describe their level of familiarity with the library’s website
and catalog. While responses to this question for Participants 1,2, and 5 vary between unfamiliar
and moderately familiar in the coding, each response reflects a lack of confidence in the use of
the online catalog and website. Participants 1 and 5 fell under the unfamiliar category:
I am not sure I have ever used it. (P1)
55

Very poor. (P5)
While Participant 2 considered their self moderately familiar with the library website and online
catalog, they indicated a low level of confidence in its use:
I have some familiarity with the website and online catalog, but find that they are both
difficult to navigate. (P2)
Finally, participants were asked to describe any library instruction they had received in the past if
any. Five of fifteen participants indicated that they have had no library instruction (Participants
15 and 16 in addition to Participants 1,2, and 5), however Participants 1 and 2 elaborated on their
responses in ways that give further insight to how they interact with the library:
I have never had a library instruction course, but at 44 years old have enough sense to
navigate resources, often through trial and error. (P1)
I have no[t] participated in any library instruction courses, I didn’t know they existed.
(P2)
Responses to these questions help to further understand the library user regarding specific types
of barriers they encounter. For the information search-related barriers described in this section,
we can see that of those that indicated this type of barrier, a significant portion lack familiarity
with online services provided by the library, have a low level of confidence or familiarity with
the library catalog and website and have not participated in library instruction. This insight into
the background of these participants can have implications for suggesting future study or
improving library services and will be discussed further in the next chapter.
4.1.2 Access Barriers

56

Participant responses to interview question four also identified the access barriers that
remote library users experience when attempting to access full text articles online using the
libraries online catalog and databases. The access barriers identified through coding were the
inability to download the full text scholarly article, log in and validation issues and bad links and
computer hardware or software issues. Access barriers were reported in significant numbers in
both the interview portion of the data collection and in the semi-structured diary and were
distributed relatively evenly among participants. Figure 2 illustrates the frequency of access
barriers from both portions of the data collection:

Access barrier frequency
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Unable to download full
text article

Bad link

Log in / credential

Computer software or
hardware

Access barrier frequency
Figure 2: Access barrier frequency

Of the access barriers identified, most participants experienced an inability to download or
access the full text PDF of a scholarly article. In the interview portion of the data collection
Participants 1, 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14, and 15 indicated barriers relating to difficulty downloading
or accessing the full text of an article and this access barrier was reported often in the semi-

57

structured diary. This is the most common barrier to access identified across all results including
both portions of the data collection. When experiencing this barrier to access, participants
reported being able to see the abstract of an article without being able to access the full text. This
aspect of being unable to download the full text of an article was reported by Participant 4:
Many times. the library catalog will give me information or an abstract, but not the full
article. (P4)
Another aspect of being unable to download the full text of an article related to problems with
links to the full text stemming from the lack of a full text link or in difficulty knowing where to
click. This issue is best described by Participant 6:
It can be sometimes [sic] hard to find where to click on to obtain the full text article.
Also, when the same article is available from different databases, the list can get a little
confusing where to click to get the full text. (P6)
A third manifestation of the inability to download full text articles, and one that seems to cause
users the most frustration, are articles that appear in catalog searches but have no links available
for full text. This issue was described multiple times in the semi-structured diary and in
Participant 14’s interview response:
Articles whose full text isn't available that appear in searches. Sometimes (maybe a
couple times a month) I come across an entry where there are no links for available, and
no link to request. This is frustrating because then I have to fill out the ILL request in
another tab rather than having most of the information already filled out. (P14)

58

The second access barrier identified by participants are bad hyperlinks that do not direct
the user to the full text even if the system indicates the full text is available. Participants 15 and
16 identified this access barrier in the interview. Participant 15 states:
When looking for academic articles, many times when I am redirected to an academic
journal's website/database, I cannot figure out how to navigate to the resource I'm looking
for, or I have to look up the resource by "hand" (i.e. find the volume, date, page). (P15)
Participant 16 encountered a similar issue:
Occasionally broken links- 'full text available' link will just go to the general
resource/journal/database landing page. Sometimes articles I find on google scholar, we
do not have access to at the UW-system. (P16)
Though this access barrier does not seem to result in failure to access an article every time it
occurs, it does represent an interruption in the flow of a user’s research session. In the situation
described, both Participants 15 and 16 have clicked links in the catalog search results expecting
to be taken to the full text of the article they chose only to be taken to what Participant 16 calls a
“landing page” that may feature links to multiple volumes or issues of a scholarly journal but not
the specific full text article they intended to access. This occurred twice during Participant 6’s
semi-structured diary research session. In both cases the participant needed to click two access
links from the catalog that ultimately took them to pages that did not have the article they
requested. In both cases the participant was able to resolve the issue, however it required another
search for the article of the page that hosted the articles. Participant 13 experienced a similar
barrier in the semi-structured diary research session. When they clicked the link for the full text
version of the article they were brought to a page that only displayed a title and abstract, they

59

then needed to browse on the page, eventually finding another tab within the structure of the
page that allowed them to access full text.
An access barrier that was reported by many participants, but with relatively low overall
frequency were issues related log in or credential validation identifying the user as affiliated with
the university. In the interview portion of the data collection Participants 2, 6, 7, 8, and 12
reported barriers to access related to logging in to the catalog or providing university log in
credentials though a database to access full text. While this access barrier rarely results in a
failure to access a full text article, Participant 6 expressed frustration with the need to log in
multiple times in various tabs in the internet browser:
You also must click through from the UWM library catalog search results into the
database's website to get the full text, so for example, if you are logged in to UWM
libraries on one tab, and have the database open in another tab, that database service
doesn't register that you're logged in and doesn't show you articles that we have full text
privileges to as part of UWM. (P6)
Participant 7 also identified log in issues as creating an access barrier when moving between
databases and the UWM library system during a web browsing session:
Often times if I'm searching for something outside of the University's system, and I find
an article citation through a specific journal or through google, I'll then have to go back
through the University's system to re-find it in order gain full access. Wish there were a
faster way to do this (ie with Shiboleth) (P7)
In both responses, participants indicate having experienced the need to log in multiple times
despite being logged into the system elsewhere. Participant 12 noted that they are sometimes
60

required to sign in before accessing a full text article and does not consider it a major problem
representing only a minor access barrier, however Participant 8 states:
Other times, I want the full text and even after I sign in with my credentials, I can't gain
access. (P8)
Log in and validation issues can be frustrating for library users, create confusion and at worst has
the potential to create an unresolved access barrier resulting in a user being ultimately unable to
access a full text article. Users may be able to access the article in the end in most cases,
however the log in process can interrupt a user’s search session and cause them to lose their
place.
Computer hardware and software issues as an access barrier only occurred twice during
the data collection, and both occurrences were found in the results of the semi-structured diary.
In one instance, Participant 15 described needing to download software from a publisher’s
website to view the full text of a resource. They described this process as time consuming and
ultimately terminated their attempt to access the resource. Participant 2 reported having trouble
accessing a resource online from their personal computer, however once they were on campus
and tried a library computer they were able to access the resource. Hardware and software
issues, likely due to increased interoperability among various computing platforms, are rare
when accessing library resources online, however it is possible that they can occur.
In the interview portion of the data collection, participants were asked their opinion of
what causes barriers. Responses to this question for participants who indicated access barriers
were isolated to understand the user’s perspective and to gather data that may have future
implications for the library as they continue to update and improve their systems or for

61

suggesting future studies. Three concepts emerged in the coding of these responses. Bad
hyperlinks and database issues (Participants 2, 6, 7, 14, and 15), log in or credential issues
(Participant 8), and lack of availability of materials (Participants 4 and 14). Of those that cited
issues with links from the catalog, participants perceive a lack of communication between the
library’s online catalog and the vendor database that is providing access to the full text.
Participants 14, 15, and 16 cite the lack of functioning links or a lack of interoperability:
The lack of a functioning request link I think is on database administration on our end.
(P14)
Lack of interoperability between databases (metadata scheme standards), poor
maintenance of databases, poor website design (not intuitive) (P15)
For the broken links issue, probably not enough upkeep/checking that links still function
properly. (P16)
These three participants describe multiple issues related to the database itself such as poor design
and interoperability and metadata schema mentioned by Participant 15, however the common
thread in these responses is that the participants feel that broken links and database issues are
likely the result of poor maintenance and database administration. Participant 7 stated that there
should be better reporting mechanisms in place for online library users to report bad or broken
links in the online catalog:
Need to be checking for broken links - or having an easier way for students to report
broken links. (P7)
Many of the participants show an awareness of access barriers and their causes, which will show
in the many effective strategies that participants reported using to ultimately access and article
62

after experience a barrier. Not many participants cited the lack of availability of materials as a
barrier to access. Participants 3 and 4 both explain that while it is understandable that the library
cannot possibly have access to everything, it can still present itself as a barrier to access when a
text is unavailable:
Purely a matter of limited resources. Obviously, everything ever written or made can't be
on these databases, and that's a barrier I expect to run into on occasion. It's honestly ok, I
can usually find a text that might not be online in the library or through other means
which rarely happens anyways. (P3)
UWM doesn't have subscriptions to all the information. Also, poor information on what
exactly is available (abstract vs full text). (P4)
Participant 4 reinforces why not having a subscription to a resource through the library is
considered a true access barrier. If a user sees a record for an article that they would like to
access, but the library does not have access it can be frustrating if the article seems like it may be
available but is not. Clearly communicated holdings could help mitigate some access barriers
and the strategies users employ to overcome this type of barrier will be discussed further in the
strategies section of this chapter.
As was done in the previous section with the information search related barriers,
interview questions to determine if more could be learned about this type of library user to start
to gain insight into access strategies they may use. Generally, participants who identified access
barriers as their main concern were more familiar with the library website, online catalog, and
databases (Participants 4, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, and 16) indicated having some library instruction
(Participants 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, and 14), and were more familiar with online services provided

63

by the library such as reference and ILL (Participants 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 15). Participants
10, 12 and 14 were also familiar enough with ILL services that they mentioned using ILL to
request articles in their response to what barriers they experienced. For example:
Sometimes I might have to try accessing the same article from a database instead of the
catalog. In the past, I have had to use InterLibrary Loan to view an electronic article.
(P12)
Participants utilize ILL services and a variety of other strategies to overcome both access and
information search related barriers and will be discussed in the next section.
4.2 Strategies Used to Overcome Barriers to Access
Participants use a variety of strategies to overcome both access and information search
related barriers that they reported experiencing while using the library online. Participants
described their strategies in the interview portion of the data collection and then had the
opportunity to demonstrate their strategies in the structured diary portion of the data collection.
Coded responses from the fifteen participants from both the interview and semi-structured diary
portions of the data collection yielded eleven response categories with some participants
responses fitting into multiple categories if they described more than one strategy. Table 6
below defines each access strategy category and its frequency in the data collection from the
interview and semi-structured diary respectively:

64

Table 6: Access strategies identified in data collection
Strategy

Definition

Interlibrary loan (ILL)

Requesting the resource
through the library’s online
ILL service
Search multiple databases
Trying a variety of databases
provided via the UWM
libraries webpage
Use internet resources or non- Use of non-university/library
UWM databases
internet resources and search
engines (primarily Google)
Narrow or refine search terms Modification of the search
query to retrieve more
relevant results
Restart or reopen web
Closing and restarting the
browser
internet browser or tabs
within the browser
Log in
User logs in when prompted
by the system
Navigate the publisher’s
Navigate through the
website
publisher’s website to access
the full text for a known
article
Try another link
Attempting to access a full
text article by clicking
another access link if multiple
links are available in the
catalog
Use familiar databases
User searches databases that
are familiar due to instruction
or past use
Find alternate article / give up Terminate the attempt to
access a full text article,
possibly in favor of finding
an alternative article that is
accessible

Frequency of occurrence
(interview / semi-structured
diary)
4/9

3/8

6/4

5/4

2/5

0/7
0/7

0/5

3/1

1/2

The most common access strategies among all participants in both portions of the data
collection was Inter Library Loan (ILL) with a frequency of 13. Next were the use of another

65

database (from the UWM Libraries page) and use of internet sources or databases that are nonUWM affiliated with frequencies of 11 and 10 respectively. The most common non-library web
resource that was reported was Google, which will be discussed later in this section. The
remainder of responses included narrowing or refining search terms (common in those that
identified information search related barriers) with a frequency of 9, restarting or reopening the
browser, logging in, and navigating the publisher’s website all with a frequency of 7, trying
another hyperlink (if there are multiple in the catalog) with a frequency of 5, using familiar
databases with a frequency of 4, and finding an alternate article or otherwise giving up an
attempt to access a full text article with a frequency of 3.
Interlibrary loan (ILL) emerged as the most frequent strategy that was mentioned by
participants from the combined results of both the interview and the semi-structured diary. Use
of ILL occurred as an access strategy primarily when participants encountered access barriers,
since it is necessary to have attempted to access a specific article for the need to arise to request
it through ILL. ILL was described as a favored access strategy for full text scholarly articles in
both the interview portion and the semi-structured diary, with some participants reporting using
ILL multiple times in one research session. Participant 5, in the semi-structured diary portion of
the data collection encountered an access barrier in being unable to download the full text of an
article four times in their online library session and in all four cases used ILL services to request
the article. Using ILL services as an access strategy seems to be a viable and reliable strategy for
overcoming technical barriers to access whether the user is having difficulty using a full text link
to access a scholarly article or it is an item that the library does not have full access to. Yet
despite ILL being a relatively effective strategy, two factors make ILL slightly problematic. Of

66

the four participants that discussed ILL as an access strategy in the interview, three mentioned
the factor of time that comes into play when requesting materials in this way:
I often will ILL something to get a digital "hard copy" of the article I need. This takes
some time (P7)
I could use Interlibrary Loan, but I sometimes bypass that, especially if I am pressed for
time. (P8)
Unless I find I really need it (a historical article or a foundational article), I won't take the
additional time to request it via ILL. Time is key! (P10)
If a user is short on time and needs an article quickly, ILL may not be an effective option.
Participant 8 will “bypass” ILL when time is a factor and Participant 10 uses ILL, but only in
circumstances where accessing the article is necessary for their research. The second factor that
is necessary for ILL to be an effective access strategy is the user having a higher level of
familiarity with the library and its services and having library instruction courses in the past was
also a major factor in knowing to use ILL services or in using them in the live research
environment. Of all participants that either mentioned use of ILL in the interview or used ILL
for the structured diary portion of the data collection (six total participants) only Participant 5
reported using ILL and having never had library instruction courses. It is obvious that for a user
to utilize ILL as an access strategy they must first know about its existence, it is also clear that
having a general familiarity and understanding of library services and often a background that
includes some library instruction is crucial. Unfortunately, this is not every user.
Searching multiple databases is another frequent access strategy reported in the data
collection. This access strategy manifested itself in two different ways in the coding and was
67

therefore reflected in two separate categories. First, participants described using multiple
scholarly databases from the UWM webpage. The second category involved the use of other
databases, not including those scholarly databases provided on the UWM webpage. This second
category includes government and other agency databases, and most predominantly Google and
Google Scholar. Google and Google Scholar were mentioned many times as access strategies in
the interview portion:
Googling and hoping I manage to get lucky and find a PDF somewhere is my next
option. (P2)
Next, I'll try Google Scholar or Indiana Inspire database (the state's free database for
scholarly articles for Indiana, where I live) (P4)
Sometimes I will check to see if Google Scholar has the article (P8)
Typically I search Google Scholar to see if they are available there. (P 14)
If I find an article in the catalog but cannot access it, then I will use Google Scholar, then
google and rarely torrents to find the article. (P15)
If I cannot use my UW-system credentials, sometimes I just do a google search for the
title. This is only if I am really set on accessing the resource. Generally, if I cannot gain
access through google scholar or UW-system, and if I have gathered sufficient other
resources, I just give up. (P16)
Using Google and Google Scholar appears often in both the interview and semi-structured dairy
portions of the data collection. Use of Google, as can be seen in the responses above, often gives
the impression of being a last-ditch effort, as Participant 2 stated “Googling and hoping I manage

68

to get lucky”. Google and other web-based searches emerges as the quick strategy, standing in
contrast to the reliable yet sometimes time-consuming ILL option. There is also notably very
little overlap between the use of ILL and the use of Google or Google Scholar as access
strategies with Participants reporting one or the other, but not both. Use of Google is extremely
hit or miss and is the quick option for dealing with access and information search related
barriers, often at or near the point when a user will otherwise give up attempting to access an
article and move on.
Narrowing or refining search terms to counter information search related barriers to
access seems intuitive, however only three participants who responded in the interview as having
experienced to many or too few results as a barrier also reported refining their search terms as a
strategy to overcome that barrier. As an access strategy, narrowing and refining search terms is
an effective tool for countering information search related barriers. Though it came up only one
time in the semi-structured diary portion of the data collection, the participant reported
narrowing search terms and finding relevant results. Participant 2 explains their information
search related barrier:
For my beginning search, I didn’t refine my search to articles and got a first page of
results that did not include any articles. (P2)
The participant then refined their keyword search terms:
I refined the reach to only search for articles with my keyword search. (P2)
The results of this strategy were effective and allowed the participant to continue with their
online library session:

69

I was successful and got relevant results related to the topic that were scholarly articles.
(P2)
This series of semi-structured diary responses from Participant 2 show an ideal and successful
use of refining a search as a strategy to counter information search related barriers. Participant
12 effectively uses narrowing and refining search terms as an access strategy, however made an
additional comment in the interview response that makes their strategy more effective:
I usually have my searches refined to show me only articles with full-text available, so I
tend not to use sources that are not immediately available to me. (P12)
Participant 12 is referring to using facet browsing to further refine their search so that only full
text articles available through UWM Libraries will turn up in searches. This is an extremely
effective strategy to counter both information search related and access barriers at the same time
since it would greatly diminish the occurrence of any access barriers, particularly the full text
being unavailable. This appeared in Participant 12’s structured dairy as well since the only issue
they reported was having to sign in, and then reported having no further issues for the duration of
their online library session. Participant 12 responses show that effective search strategies can
reduce most types of access barriers and helped to mitigate the one barrier they did experience,
logging in, which was easily taken care of and resulted in an online library session that was free
of barriers for its duration.
Logging in, as well as restarting web browser software were both described as strategies
seven times each throughout the course of the data collection. Both are relatively quick and
simple fixes for access barriers. Logging in, though it does solve many access barriers can cause
frustration among users when using tabs in a web browser or when multiple browsing windows

70

are open where a user may be considered “logged in” in one screen but not others. Returning to
the descriptions of access barriers, Participant 6 explains:
You also must click through from the UWM library catalog search results into the
database's website to get the full text, so for example, if you are logged in to UWM
libraries on one tab, and have the database open in another tab, that database service
doesn't register that you're logged in and doesn't show you articles that we have full text
privileges to as part of UWM. (P6)
Logging in reduces the occurrence of access barriers, however where it comes into as an access
strategy is when library users are logging into the library system after their information search
has begun and they are attempting to access full text articles. Logging in as an access strategy
after starting the process of attempting to access a full text article interrupts the flow of a user’s
online library session. At best it can be an inconvenience, but at times it can cause users to lose
their place entirely. Participant 1 explains this phenomenon during their research session for the
semi-structured diary. When asked to explain whether their access strategy was successful:
Yes, but then I lose my track of thought, and it makes me re-enter search. (P1)
As with logging in, closing and restarting browser windows and tabs was also an access strategy
described by some users. Just as logging in had the potential to interrupt a user’s library session
and lose their place, restarting the browser will most certainly be followed by the need to begin
the session over. Participant 1 explains using new tabs as a sort of wayfinding strategy in the
interview:
[I] use "Open in new tab" to make sure I don't lose my place. (P1)

71

Using tabbed browsing as a way of keeping one’s place, almost like leaving a trail of
breadcrumbs seems an effective use of this access strategy, however closing, restarting,
switching or refreshing browsers did not yield results for participants in the semi-structured diary
portion of the data collection. In one instance, Participant 15 refreshed the browser they were
working in, but were still unsuccessful in their attempt to access the full text article. Participant
14 closed out of one browser entirely in the hopes that a different browser software would help:
Since this was the second time the “Use Get it to Request” link wasn’t working I
attempted to use another internet browser. Chrome instead of Firefox. But it still didn’t
work. (P14)
Though using multiple browsers could be used as a wayfinding strategy that can assist users in
keeping their place during an online library session, restarting, switching or refreshing browser
windows and tabs does not appear to be an effective strategy in overcoming access barriers.
Navigating the publisher’s website for a known article title or an issue or volume number
is a strategy that did not come up in the interview questions, but was captured in the semistructured diary document. This strategy is effective to overcome the access barrier users
experience when clicking a full text link that brings them from an online catalog entry to an
index page or landing page for a journal or even a more general landing page for the publisher.
Participant 10 used this strategy twice, once to locate an article when a full text link brought
them to an index page but not the full text and a second time when searching for a known article
did not yield the proper results, but the journal title, issue and volume number was known.
Participant 10 describes this strategy:

72

I first did a quick article title search at the publisher’s site (no results), then drilled down
via the archives link to the year and volume, then found the article. (P10)
Participant 15 also describes this method:
I looked through the archive using the year and issue number, to find the issue number I
had to open each issue of that year. (P15)
This is an effective method that seems to have a high rate of success for those online library
users who understand what page they have landed on and are confident enough in their skill and
understanding of the series structure of journals and the information architecture of the journal or
publisher’s landing page. This may be why this strategy was described relatively infrequently
(seven times) while being a highly effective strategy. Participant 10 gives a clue as to why this
may be:
Yes, it took a bit more searching than what article linkers normally do, but I’m familiar
with how to locate materials and know the “back doors” (P10)
The term “back door” implies that navigating the journal or publisher’s web page in this manner
is a trick that those “in the know” may be able to do above and beyond the typical online library
user. This is a very effective access strategy.
4.3 Chapter Summary
This chapter discussed the findings from the data collection of this study as they applied
to the two research questions. Barriers that participants described experiencing were divided into
two types; information search related barriers and access barriers. The categories of barriers that
fell under these two types of barriers were then explained in detail using responses from

73

participants. Access strategies participants reported using to overcome these barriers were also
sorted and explained in detail using participant responses as they related to overcoming specific
types and categories of barriers and their effectiveness. The next chapter will focus on the
theoretical and practical implications of the results of this study, its place in Library and
Information Science literature and suggestions for future study.

74

CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This chapter discusses the results of the study as they apply to the dearth in Library and
Information Science literature mentioned in the literature review chapter regarding barriers in the
online academic library environment and the access strategies specific to those barriers. This
chapter is divided into four sections starting with a discussion of the implications of the study
both theoretical in the field of LIS and practical for academic libraries and online academic
library services, suggestions for future study in this area, limitations of the study, and
conclusions.
5.1 Implications of the Study
This section discusses the implications of this study both theoretical and practical as it
relates to the study’s place in current LIS literature as well as in the practical online academic
library setting. This section will be divided into two parts, first discussing the theoretical
implications followed by a discussion of the practical implications of the study.
5.1.1 Theoretical Implications
This study can begin to bridge the gap in the types of studies done previously in the areas
of information barriers and access strategies. In each case, the studies referenced in the
Literature Review chapter and that will be returned to for this section focus on a specific aspect
of barriers to online scholarly information or online information strategies. Some of the barriers
identified in this study could apply to on-site as well as remote library users, however the
specific access issues that arise from remote IP validation via proxy-server and information
literacy concepts that could help users better navigate the remote environment could play a factor
in compounding these issues. This study, and hopefully future studies of this type, can broaden
75

the scope to encompass multiple types of barriers including access barriers and information
search related barriers and especially to merge these concepts with discussion of the strategies
used to overcome these barriers, since these specific access strategies are largely absent from
current LIS literature, which tends to focus instead on more general information seeking
strategies. It is important to examine the concepts of information search related barriers and
access barriers along with the access strategies introduced in this study since they are connected
and reflect a more realistic and complex picture of the online academic library user’s interaction
with scholarly information. Information search related barriers, access barriers, and the
associated access strategies are intertwined and iterative and it is hoped that this study can help
begin the discussion of how to merge these concepts in LIS literature and theory.
As mentioned in the literature review in Chapter 2, there exists a research gap in current
LIS literature regarding barriers to online scholarly information and specifically the effect
barriers have on users’ information seeking behaviors. This study intends to begin merging these
concepts to close the gap that was identified in the literature. This study began the process of
answering the question of what barriers users encounter when attempting to access scholarly
information remotely using their academic library online and what information seeking
behaviors in the form of strategies they use to overcome the barriers they experience. To return
briefly to some of the LIS literature cited in Chapter 2, these examples can be reexamined
through the lens of the results of this study to more clearly see what is missing from
consideration and how the results of this study and future studies of this type can begin to fill the
gap.
In the literature review, among the various IR models and theories discussed, several
recent practical studies regarding information seeking behaviors were introduced. Particularly
76

useful in thinking about the information search related barriers found in the results of this study
were studies by Currie et al. (2009) and Porter (2011) that examined the use of natural language
in searches formulated by a younger generation of students influenced using internet search
engines. These studies suggested that students often expect library catalogs and databases to
work like popular internet search engines (Currie et al., 2009) and that the younger generation of
students will often resort simple or unsophisticated searches (Porter, 2011). The focus of these
studies is related to information search habits and closely resembles the information search
barriers described by participants in this study. What these studies lack that is captured by this
study and future studies of this type are the examination of access barriers and various types of
access strategies in addition to information search related issues.
There are also studies that exist in current LIS literature regarding what were identified in
this study as access barriers. Studies cited in the literature review in Chapter 2 that most
resembled the types of access barriers described by participants of this study were studies by
Crum (2011) and Sadat-Moosavi et al. (2012) that examined technical issues including issues
related to hyperlinks and metadata that rendered full text articles inaccessible. These issues
resemble the bad or broken links described as access issues by participants in this study who
reported full text articles not being available on the linked page, including the need to navigate
the publisher or journal index webpage as an access strategy to overcome this barrier. The study
by Crum (2011) found that inaccurate or incomplete metadata caused hyperlinks to resolve
incorrectly, preventing users from accessing full text scholarly articles while Sadat-Moosavi et
al. (2012) focused on digital information decay finding that 36 percent of the links examined
were incorrect or otherwise broken leading to an inability to access full text articles. These
studies described in these articles focus on what this study refers to as access barriers without

77

also examining information search related barriers, and again there is no mention of access
strategies.
5.1.2 Practical Implications
In addition to the theoretical implications of this study there are also many practical
implications that academic libraries can learn from this study and others like it in the future.
While it is acknowledged that this study is not generalizable, there is still much to be learned in
the practical setting from this study that can be used to improve academic library services,
particularly in the online setting. The results of this study suggest (perhaps somewhat obviously)
that some form of library instruction is highly beneficial for online library users. The delivery of
library instruction to a group as diverse in age and experience as the typical non-traditional or
online student is no easy task. Yet it is imperative that a solution be found to provide
information literacy instruction for the online environment and that tutorials be easily accessible
if they are not embedded into online students’ regular coursework. As this study, and hopefully
similar studies in the future, reach the attention of library and information professionals in the
academic library environment it is hoped that more effective library instruction for distance
learners can be developed and that the academic library can reach out within the larger university
community to ensure that all library users are exposed to some form of library instruction.
The results of this study also suggest potential improvements to the online experience
using the library’s website, OPAC, and databases. In the results section of this study, one
participant mentioned that the library’s website was not user-friendly. As the studies by Currie
et al. (2009) and Porter (2011) suggest in their examination of search behaviors of a younger
generation of students that expect library searches to act like internet searches, it is reasonable to
expect that library users will value not only a good online experience, but an online experience
78

that is akin to the online experience they are used to in the non-academic environment. Making
links clear, promoting and making easily accessible help, reference, and ILL services could go a
long way towards reducing and even eliminating completely many of the barriers that users
experience. Participants in this study did not mention using online reference or help services as a
strategy to overcome barriers to access, and in fact the only mentions these services had were in
response to what types of services participants were aware of. Users may be aware of these
services, but may lack confidence in their use, especially since it seems rare that users employ
reference services to overcome barriers based on the participant responses. Perhaps the library
could examine reference and help services online, whether they are easily found, and how
effective they are.
Many participants in this study mentioned logging in as an access barrier, which it can
be if it interrupts a search session and causes the user to need to start from scratch. Something as
simple as making sure a user is asked to sign in before starting a search session could go a long
way towards that user experiencing a smooth research session while experiencing relatively few
access barriers. At least one participant found that the library webpage was not user friendly.
When it is time for the library to update their webpage or search interfaces, a thorough test of the
upgrade can ensure that users are comfortable in the updated online environment and do not
experience an increase in barriers to online scholarly information as a result.
5.2 Suggestions for Future Study
The possibility of future study around barriers to online scholarly information and the
strategies used to overcome barriers are numerous, and the results of this study allow for several
suggestions for future study to be made. The first, and perhaps most obvious, suggestion for
future study would be to continue the work started here and to replicate this style of study over a
79

longer period and with a larger and more diverse sample of online students. This can only help
to strengthen the conclusions drawn by this study and enrich LIS literature by filling the gap
identified in the literature review. There are also several facets of the results of the data
collection that would make for interesting and more specific study of the barriers and strategies
discussed in this thesis.
Results of this study suggested the possibility of a sharp divide in users who had received
library instruction in the past and those who had not. Future studies could dig deeper into
information search related barriers and access barriers through the vantage of library instruction
to determine if there exists a stronger correlation between library instruction and the types of
barriers that users experience and their information strategies or if a student being on-site versus
studying online provides a distinct advantage in the forms and ease of access to library
instruction that are available. From the viewpoint of strategies participants reported using to
overcome barriers, ILL is used heavily to access scholarly information deemed necessary to
satisfy a user’s information need when access barriers occur. Future studies could examine
online ILL requests and check them against the library’s database and journal subscriptions to
determine whether an article should be accessible or whether it is truly an item that would need
to be requested through ILL and explore the reasons why barriers may exist. These are only
some examples, however in each suggestion the link between barriers and strategies is
emphasized in the hope that in the future this gap can be bridged in LIS literature and theory.
5.3 Limitations of the Study
This study successfully identified many of the types of barriers online academic library
users experience when attempting to access full text scholarly articles online and the strategies
used to overcome those barriers. There are, however, limitations to this study that will be
80

addressed before theoretical and practical implications can be discussed and suggestions for
future studies made. This study was conducted over the course of a single semester at a state
university in the Midwestern United States. Though recruitment via direct emails to course
instructors was heavily pursued, only 15 online students expressed interest in participating in the
study and completed portions of the data collection. Though it was desirable for the sampling to
include students who use the library heavily for course assignments and research projects,
presumably upper-level undergraduate students and graduate students, the sample group was
relatively homogenous with many of the participants being graduate students and many of those
students’ concentration being Library and Information Science. Though these participants
provided excellent insight into barriers and strategies they experienced, in future studies a more
diverse grouping of online students from various years of study and concentrations would be
desirable. Another important limitation was that the study, as stated previously, took place over
the course of a single semester. The study would have no doubt benefitted from more data
collected over time either by the same students agreeing to participate over a longer period or by
renewing recruitment in subsequent semesters to build the participant pool to even greater
numbers over time. With these factors taken into consideration it should be made clear that a
primary limitation of this study is that the results are not generalizable. This is not to say that the
results are not valid or useful to inform the theoretical and practical workings of the academic
library in the online environment. However, for more generalizable conclusions to be drawn
further study will be necessary.
Though some of these concepts were mentioned in the initial discussion of the limitations
of the study above, there are several suggestions to be made for future studies in this area to
gather more data and richer, more complex data. This study and future studies in this area of LIS

81

would benefit from a larger sample. Participants in this study were all recruited from the same
state university in the Midwest. Perhaps some limitations of this and future studies could be
mitigated by recruiting participants from multiple universities in areas as geographically diverse
as their online distance learners. Using a variety of online academic library systems as an
environment to gather data could potentially detect more access barriers than a study conducted
through the lens of a single online academic library environment. As stated above, the sample of
students that participated in this study were relatively homogenous in both their year of study
and in their disciplines. This and future studies in this area would benefit from a more diverse
range of online students from first-year through PhD level of study and with a greater variety of
concentration of study from the Arts & Sciences as well as specialized areas of study such as
Nursing and Law. Increasing the complexity and diversity of the participant base would almost
certainly affect the amount of time needed to gather adequate data for a study of this type. This
study and future studies of this type would benefit not only from the factors mentioned above but
also the addition of time. Conducting a study of this type over multiple semesters or even years
would increase the amount of useable data to develop more solid patterns in the types of barriers
and strategies in the way users interact with the academic library online. These factors combined
would help to increase the generalizability of the results.
5.4 Conclusion
This study was conceived to address a gap in the current LIS literature and merge
theories and concepts around barriers to online scholarly information and information strategies
used to overcome them. The results of the data collection suggested two types of barriers,
information search related barriers stemming from search queries input by the user and access
barriers related to issues accessing the full text of a specific article, and several strategies online
82

library users employ to overcome these barriers. It is hoped that the results and implications of
this study, both theoretical and practical, will encourage more work in this area of LIS and that in
the future more complex and longitudinal style studies can be undertaken to form a stronger
theory to merge the concept of barriers to online scholarly information and the information
seeking process.