Durr, Angel Krystina Washington. A Text Analysis of Data Science Career Opportunities
and U.S. iSchool Curriculum. Doctor of Philosophy (Information Systems), December 2018, 114
pp., 3 tables, 13 figures, 3 appendices, references, 100 titles.
Data science employment opportunities of varied complexity and environment are in
growing demand across the globe. Data science as a discipline potentially offers a wealth of jobs
to prospective employees, while traditional information science-based roles continue to decrease
as budgets get cut across the U.S. Since data is related closely to information historically, this
research will explore the education of U.S. iSchool professionals and compare it to traditional
data science roles being advertised within the job market. Through a combination of latent
semantic analysis of over 1600 job postings and iSchool course documentation, it is our aim to
explore the intersection of library and information science and data science. Hopefully these
research findings will guide future directions for library and information science professionals
into data science driven roles, while also examining and highlighting the data science techniques
currently driven by the education of iSchool professionals. In addition, it is our aim to
understand how data science could benefit from a mutually symbiotic relationship with the field
of information science as statistically data scientists spend far too much time working on data
preparation and not nearly enough time conducting scientific inquiry. The results of this
examination will potentially guide future directions of iSchool students and professionals
towards more cooperative data science roles and guide future research into the intersection
between iSchools and data science and possibilities for partnership.

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Data is defined by Cambridge International, 2017 as, “a collection of text, numbers or
symbols in raw or unorganized form,” (p. 3). This definition will serve as the theoretical basis for
discussion of data throughout the following text. Data appears to be a term many industry
professionals are quickly becoming familiar with in one capacity or another, at least from a
terminology standpoint. However, just because a term is discussed does not mean it is
theoretically or historically understood by those who use it. Data can be defined in the simplest
terms as information lacking any contextual understanding, or raw information. Information is
defined by Cambridge International, 2017, as, “data that has been processed, e.g. grouped… to
give it meaning and make it interpretable,” (p. 3). Data is collected on a variety of subject matter
and across industries and languages. “As data continues to grow within our lives, businesses,
organizations, and governments, there is a greater need to make sense of all the data. With this
increase in data there is suddenly a great need for people to learn and up-skill themselves with
key data science and analytics techniques and tools to make better informed decisions,” (Anslow,
Brosz, Maurer, & Boyes, 2016, p. 620).
For the second year consecutively, data scientist was declared the best job in America
according to Glassdoor. This ranking is based on “the number of job openings, the job
satisfaction rating, and the median annual base salary,” (Zhang & Neimeth, 2017, p. 1). Despite
this rating, there remains a shortage of qualified applicants to many of the currently in-demand
positions available. According to Zhang and Neimeth (2017), “the role of the data scientist is
evolving, and organizations desperately need professionals who can take on data organizing as
well as preparing data for analysis. Data wrangling or cleaning data and connecting tools to get

1

the data into a usable format, is still highly in demand,” (p. 1). While data has existed for
thousands of years in various formats, across the globe organizations are quickly learning that
with a rapid influx in electronic data comes an increased need to prepare it for usage. “Data
preparation may require many steps, from translating specific system codes into usable data to
handling incomplete or erroneous data, but the costs of bad data are high. Some research shows
that analyzing bad data can cost a typical organization more than $13 million every year,”
(Zhang & Neimeth, 2017, p. 2). Therefore, it is extremely important that data be properly
maintained and prepared for analysis, not only for potentially becoming information, but from a
cost perspective.
Data is often defined according to whether it is accessible to the public or not. Data that
publicly accessible for anyone to utilize is known as open data. Meanwhile there is also data that
is not available to publicly utilize and this is known as closed data. Many organizations have
opened vast data sets to the public in hopes that it will be used in such a way as to gather
additional meaning. In the generation of open data, where unstructured data is plentiful, work
must be done to transform data into a true tangible asset. Data science is defined as the scientific
understanding of data. Data science has a variety of subcategories that are growing
simultaneously, as the relatively new scientific study of data continues to expand.
Data analysis is one subcategory of data science. Data analysis is defined as the process
of making sense of data through analyzation techniques. Data science work and the work of data
scientists requires understanding not only data, but analysis, a skill not part of the common
education tract in most public education institutions. Analysis is the ability to take seemingly
uncorrelated information and process it in such a way as to derive meaning and value and relay
that meaning to others. Analysis skills are in growing demand as data expansion continues to

2

spread across all industries and countries. As a direct result, some argue, “a widely-cited
McKinsey report predicted a shortfall of nearly 200,000 knowledge professionals with in-depth
preparation in analytics,” (Topi & Markus, 2015, p. 39). Therefore, learning early the skills
necessary to perform complex analysis will become increasingly important for future generations
of data scientists. A much larger percentage of individuals within current and future generations
of students will need data skills if this workforce shortfall is ever going to get caught up. Data
literacy knowledge is often regarded as a precursor to data analysis knowledge, therefore
developing both abilities early is an integral component of educating a knowledgeable data
science community.
Data literacy is the ability to gather usable information from data. Data literacy is simply
the ability to interact with data in such a way as to find meaning. For example, viewing a bar
graph and being able to determine what bar means what is a commonly utilized form of data
literacy. Data analysis techniques often utilize critical thinking ability that is honed over
continued practice and an eventually acquired understanding. Data literacy is integral to
performing data analysis and beneficial to people in many professional capacities, as more and
more data is being thrust upon the public for consumption. For members of the public,
information overload is a symptom of growing amounts of accessible information. Data is just as
overwhelming accessible to the public. Thus, there is a new subcategory of information overload,
know commonly as ‘data deluge’. For data to become information it must be available in a
format that is manageable and understood by those who need to utilize it.
Open data seems great, but when data is not readily accessible to those who need it, or
well organized using properly applied metadata, it is virtually meaningless to those who need it.
A well-structured and defined committed manpower source is necessary for data science services

3

to occur on a grand scale, collection isn’t enough, data has an entire lifecycle which must be
managed to successfully become information. “While, consolidating data from various sources
can help innovation; it requires commitment, investment of resources, and sustained efforts…to
achieve economic and social value,” (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016, p. 672).
Before data analysis can ever occur, there is usually some degree of data management
effort necessary. With growing amounts of data now accessible management of data is more
important than ever. Data often comes to analysts in various stages of raw formats. Data analyst
duties can vary tremendously based on the type of data management operations that take place
prior to them obtaining the data. Depending on the state of the data itself and how much data is
being analyzed at one time, data management can take vastly differing amounts of time. Yet
certain data science professional roles have yet to emerge as a specialized degree tract under any
major discipline. Providing more opportunities for data science partnerships with information
science professionals could potentially allow data analysts and data scientists and related
professions to focus on the actual task of performing analysis instead of spending valuable time
preparing the data for that process to happen and further managing the data afterwards for
continued use. There is wealth of knowledge indicating, “… that data work is 80% preprocessing, wrangling, cleaning, etc.,” (Howe, Franklin, Haas, Kraska, & Ullman, 2017, p.
1473). Despite the amount of time being spent on these varied data science tasks,
“…few…programs even attempt to teach students what any of these colloquialisms might mean
in practice, or what principles are applicable to solve problems,” (Howe, Franklin, Haas, Kraska,
& Ullman, 2017, p. 1473). Since there are rarely individuals responsible for performing data
management tasks, this often leaves the arduous and time-consuming task of data health and

4

integrity falling into the same hands of the person responsible for data analytics and research,
which requires a vastly different, yet related skill set.
Information science is the science of all things information. In the same way data science
takes a scientific approach to data, information science seeks to define and standardize
information collection and organization for dissemination, consumption, and usage. Whereas
library science is the scientific approach to specifically library management and organization.
Due to the historical accessibility of information within libraries, over time, these two seemingly
separate disciplines became somewhat intertwined. Even today, library science and information
science disciplines are often discussed in conjunction with one another. Over a hundred years of
scholarly effort has been devoted to maximizing the organization of libraries, as well
information. Based on the already well-established theoretical and historical understanding of
information science, many scholars have discussed the strategic value in training library science
and information science professionals for a variety of data science and curation tasks. “Data
management services are becoming increasingly prominent for library service developments in
the future,” (Sutherland & Wildgaard, 2016, p. 17). Some may argue that data management, like
many other library managed tasks, should be the work of computer science. However, arguments
regarding the distinction between library science, information science, and computer science,
with related disciplines are not new. “There has long been discussion about the distinctions of
library science, information science, and informatics, and how these areas differ and overlap with
computer science,” (Marchionini, 2016, p. 1). One such area of overlap lies in the realm of
informational computing, commonly regarded as belonging to information technology, which
has the potential to provide valuable skills to a specialization that is vastly underserved and
under skilled resulting in a vast gap in comprehensive understanding. Information computing is

5

the ability to utilize applications to gather information for a specific purpose and can be
extremely valuable to those both inside and outside the both the information and IT sectors.
While data scientists can potentially analyze data in such a way as to provide meaning,
well thought out and thorough management and stewardship of data must occur before and after
data analysis for the process to provide meaning for not only current generations, but future ones
as well. “Data sources exist in silos…which often makes it difficult to get a complete picture of
an organization’s data assets, and a lack of governance means data must be cleansed and
standardized before it can be used. For these reasons and many others, business leaders today
find it hard to trust their organizations data assets,” (Schutz, 2017, p. 1). Trust is an essential, and
often overlooked component to growing the data science profession. “We found that more than
half of organizations globally say that lack of trust in their data contributes to increased risk of
non-compliance and regulatory penalties, as well as a downturn in customer loyalty. To become
truly data-driven, organizations need information they can trust,” (Schutz, 2017, p. 1).
Big data is a term often discussed in the business community and the research community
alike, like data, but rarely is it differentiated from data in general. For data to big, as compared to
simply data, it needs to be very large in storage size, often so large that standard data processing
and analysis tools cannot be used. This type data is much more difficult to manage and analyze
because of its size and maneuverability. “Stewardship of big data is not easy. Data scientists may
have science knowledge and computing skills but might lack the data science knowledge and
skills of data curation and management. Studies integrating data curation and cyberinfrastructure
are few,” (Tonta, 2016, p. 9). Information curation is a job historically performed by librarians,
while cyberinfrastructure is often handled within the information technology realm, therefore,

6

stewardship often requires the successful coordination of multiple roles within a library or
organization.
Data science abilities are becoming necessary for a variety of job titles which often
makes teaching for a specific role difficult. However, positions requiring data science and basic
data management skills are plentiful, which is extremely beneficial to potential applicants. “The
wealth of Data Analyst, Data Engineer and Data Journalist positions within the job bank
searched is evidence of the continuing investment in and growth of data-driven markets and the
accompanying huge demand for a workforce with the critical skills in these areas,” (Lyon &
Mattern, 2016, p. 9). Since roles are varied and titles are just as varied, detailed assessment of job
postings is necessary to evaluate current market needs. To lessen the potential for bias,
assessment should not be limited to one method. Instead, multiple efforts in conjunction with one
another are necessary for a multi-faceted understanding of data science roles. Workforce roles
and needs should be assessed in a number of ways, such as surveys and interviews, [and]
analysis of job descriptions,” (Varvel, Palmer, Chao, & Sacchi, 2011, p. 13). Additionally, major
stakeholders outside the data science education community, such as recruiters, must be surveyed
to determine the current needs of employers and how closely job seeker abilities align to meet
workforce needs.
As data continues to grow, so do the roles associated with managing data for
consumption. The changing data science professional community could potentially benefit from
more public acknowledgement of the bridge that already exists between information and data.
The group responsible for defining data science coursework and training must also insure the
bridge that bonds data to information is visible far beyond the limitations of the library science
and information science communities, to the point it becomes commonly understood among

7

professionals in cross disciplines. “It is in the middle ground between programmers, statisticians,
and data scientists, where the librarian’s skills must be developed in data reference and data
curation. Librarians must take a lead in data science education to prevent data specialty positions
within libraries from being sourced from other professional backgrounds, (Reinhalter &
Wittmann, 2014, p. 369). Library and information science leaders should acknowledge on a
global scale the capacity for management and maintenance of data resources by library science
and information science professionals currently and in the future.
Coordination between information science and related disciplines is beneficial to data
science community in further defining potential roles that exist within the growing data
ecosystem. Partnering data science and information science will require coordinated leadership
and management. “Current data science efforts will benefit from a more coordinated approach,
where critical mass advantages can be realized, and network effects may be catalyzed,” (Burton
& Lyon, 2017, p. 3). Since there are roles within the data science community that are closely
related to the existing skill set of information scientists, data science potentially offers a unique
opportunity for the library science and information science communities to expand their
relevancy. Highlighting more data science services already offered in the current library science
and information science curriculum could help create distinction between other related
disciplines, while also providing value to both traditional libraries and information environments
of all kinds.
Many information schools teach information students; however, a specific group of
higher education information schools officially joined together and formed a group known as the
iSchools. Members of the iSchool group work together to train the future leaders in the
information field, and member information institutions are often regarded as pioneer institutions

8

for new information science initiatives. It has been reasoned that information schools, especially
those considered iSchools, should act strategically and logically if they want to declare their
relevancy in the widely diverse data community. “It could be argued that data science is a subset
of information science and some data science training programs may be housed in information
schools, however, it is more strategic to view information science as an essential component of
data science so that the emerging field can benefit from the diversity of perspectives that
interdisciplinary collaborations bring,” (Marchionini, 2016, p. 5).
Information, or data after it has defined meaning, is varied in form, format, subject, etc.
Additionally, since the evolution of data has a direct impact on information, the current
understanding of information will likely need to evolve alongside data. Information schools and
library and information schools are already teaching coursework that closely relates to that of the
data science professional. Since information and data are integral multiple aspects of society,
data science touches those both inside and outside the traditional library environments. Data and
information are also required components of most research therefore, function within a variety of
disciplines and domains. “The expertise data professionals need is closely related to that of
information professionals. It includes development and management; archiving; preservation;
information representation and organization; information retrieval; access and use; and
information policy,” (Varvel Jr., Bammerlin, & Palmer, 2012, p. 527). To better understand the
relationship between data scientist roles and the potential partnership opportunities for the
information scientist, “a further study should focus on how those key areas of data management,
data analysis, and data curation are covered in the ‘data management/curation’ courses at LIS
school with such programs,” (Chen & Zhang, 2017, p. 22).
It has been suggested that, “further investment in data centric courses and programs will

9

be essential for our field to educate professionals with the level of data expertise needs to support
contemporary science and research,” (Varvel Jr., Bammerlin, & Palmer, 2012, p. 528). As
research grows to accommodate vast amounts of data so too must the traditional research
services librarians are used to providing. Research data services are research services that
incorporate data services and support as well as traditional library research services. Research
data services are quickly becoming an essential component for library services as many
librarians try to establish a relationship as a cocreator in the research process, while encouraging
data sharing and proper maintenance of data beyond its use in the initial research and analysis
process. Librarians can also use the extensive experience they already have in curation to
improve data and digital curation efforts, which could improve not only data science, related
fields, and research data services. Data curation skills must be disseminated beyond the library
environment for data retrieval. However, “…many librarians lack the technical skills to be
effective in a data-rich research environment,” (Burton & Lyon, 2017, p. 1). This is what Burton
& Lyon (2017) refer to as a ‘skills gap.’ A skills gap could indicate that the course work is not
adequate for the work being performed. “The scholars in charge of teaching and assessment at
higher education institutions must assess the competences emphasized in their curricula and need
feedback as to whether these competences have been enhanced by graduation and whether they
are important in the graduates’ subsequent work,” (Teichler & Schomburg, 2012, p. 214).

Problem Statement
According to Thomas Schutz, SVP and GM of Experian Data Quality, “Organizations
need to be able to effectively leverage their information to make decisions and drive new
initiatives,” (Schutz, 2017, p. 1). “Good data is good for business. We find that when

10

organizations make improvements to their data, they see positive results. However, organizations
need to speak a common language around data and prove its value so that investments can be
made in data management practices,” (Schutz, 2017, p. 1). Making improvements to data quality
can be difficult. “94% of companies across all levels have experienced internal challenges when
trying to improve their data quality,” (Carmody, 2016, p. 1). Additionally, many organizations
have yet to recognize data management and data quality activities as an organization-wide
priority and therefore lack integral data science functions, which as we stated in the introduction
can lead to extremely costly mistakes from bad data.
Based on the literature regarding current data science roles it appears data scientists
spend too much time conducting data preparation tasks, while other scientists and people
conducting scientific inquiry do not seem to spend enough time performing data science
activities. There appears to be a disconnect between the data science profession and most of the
public, including those within management roles, and the library science and information science
discipline potentially holds the key to bridging that gap. With a rich history of providing
information services and training to scholars, scientists, and the public alike, library science and
information science trained professionals could offer a unique blend of research and instruction
services combined with data management, literacy and information services. Data science roles
such as information literacy, data management, and data curation skills are clearly in high
demand. Therefore, it is imperative to the future of data science that qualified individuals are
available to meet the growing demand. Whether training individuals to perform data science
tasks or employed in a data science capacity outside the traditional library environment,
information professionals could be an integral component to advancing data science and other

11

related fields as specific subsets of data science, warranting their own detailed study and
understanding for the overall success of data science activities.
Information science and other iSchool professionals may not only be integral to
managing and guiding the research process from an information standpoint, but from a data
perspective as well. Additionally, the traditional reference and instruction offerings will likely
need to evolve to meet the needs of a data rich research community. “Universities are making
significant investments in data infrastructure across their campuses and librarians will need to be
prepared to contribute to these efforts…However, many librarians lack the technical skills to be
effective in a data-rich research environment. We call this the skills gap,” (Burton & Lyon, 2017,
p. 33). “Current data science efforts will benefit from a more coordinated approach, where
critical mass advantages can be realized, and network effects may be catalyzed,” (Burton &
Lyon, 2017, p. 35). “As society is increasingly infused with data, librarians will have a crucial
role in the future development of the data science ecosystem across multiple sectors,” (Burton &
Lyon, 2017, p. 33). “RDM can be understood as a natural extension of the role of the Academic
Librarians. Libraries have always managed research outputs, albeit in the form of books and
journals, so librarians have many of the intellectual frameworks already in place,” (Morgan,
Duffield, & Walkley Hall, 2017, p. 304). “Among the organizations, iSchools are becoming a
leading community that actively promotes data science education across many disciplines,”
(Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 17). “In order to cope with the latest trends, we argue that
iSchools…empower students with information computing by educating them to create values,
information, and knowledge,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 17).
While study has been done examining the importance of data science activities within
organizations, there remains gaps in the research as to who is responsible for providing the data

12

handling training necessary for data science professionals in the field. We propose that
information science and other iSchool professionals be utilized and recognized as a component
of the data science profession and field of study. Data and information remain closely related as
members of both the data and information lifecycles. Therefore, it seems reasonable to suggest
information science professionals be integrated into essential data science professional roles.

Significance of the Study
It is becoming increasingly evident that data scientists spend too much time conducting
tedious data preparation and maintenance tasks as opposed to logical data science inquiry. Data
science roles are quickly growing to meet the demands of an increasingly data driven society.
Data is rapidly available but often lacking the proper management and maintenance to make it
useful to those who need it. Since there is currently no universally agreed upon path to training
and educating for data science professional roles currently, this research will hopefully make
way for future research around data science training and education, as well as information
science. Additionally, it is our aim to develop a specific framework for the skills and
competencies necessary for data science professional roles to guide future research in this area
based on current job postings in this area. If data science professional roles are more clearly
defined and housed under specific disciplines of study, the skills and abilities necessary can be
trained for and upon graduating from specific programs of study students will have the
knowledge necessary to conduct the duties expected of them in their daily work. We hope to
provide iSchools with the results of this analysis to help them better align course curriculum with
specific data science knowledge and skills necessary for these types of roles. Moreover, it is our
hope this preliminary investigation will lead to further research to better identify even more

13

potential partnerships opportunities for information scientists and data scientists. Library and
information scientists already have a long history of providing information and data services that
can be used to provide a stable theoretical foundation and historical context to the data science
community. Instead of introducing new skills into the information science discipline, information
scientists and other iSchool graduates would potentially benefit from publicly recognizing the
data science knowledge they already have. Information science skills such as storytelling,
metadata preparation, curation and information organization are in demand in the data science
community. Data science is a field that is rapidly growing and changing, therefore, further
investigation into how information scientists can contribute to this expansion could be extremely
beneficial to both communities of study.

Research Questions
Our research questions are as follows:
1. What are the job characteristics and requirements mentioned in data science job
postings?
2. How does iSchool curriculum map to the job requirements specified in data science
job postings?
Our first step in the research investigation process will be to examine the definitions of
iSchools, library science, information science, and data science from the literature. Following
this literature review the research will then to turn to job posts to examine the career
opportunities in the data science profession. Additionally, iSchool learning objectives and similar
content will be examined from iSchool syllabi within master’s level iSchool membership
institutions. To compare against data science job post. We believe data science job posts should
be compared against the data science literature to get an accurate perspective of both the industry
and academic perspective of data science as an occupation. Data science remains an extremely
14

varied landscape so our literature review will briefly examine all the major areas traditionally
discussed within the area of data science as well as information science. Additionally, we believe
examining course learning objectives provides a framework for examining what topics are being
outlined within iSchool masters level course offerings across the U.S. It is our goal to conduct
exploratory research to explore the relationship between the information science and data science
profession through the analysis of job postings and course syllabi to determine what type of
relationship exists between the two fields of study. Since this research is exploratory in nature
due to the lack of information available on our specific focus, in future research we intend to
further investigate professionals within either discipline see their own role as a part of the larger
discussion of data science and who is responsible for training individuals for data science roles.
This initial research is purposefully broad to get a more complete and robust sample of the
current data science opportunities available to students entering the job market upon successfully
completing their required coursework. Additionally, this research will measure the potential for
information science and other iSchool professionals to fulfill data science roles based on current
academic training. Unlike other research in this area, it is our goal to determine if information
science course learning objectives align to data science job market needs, and if so, determine
what specific roles currently available best align to the knowledge information scientists are
already exposed to in their required coursework. Instead of teaching library science and
information science professionals new skills that more closely relate to the data science
framework it is our aim to understand how the disciplines are already connected via data science
job postings and information science coursework examination.
The competency-based education framework (Burke, 1989) will be used to determine the
specific skills and competencies specifically requested in data science professional job postings

15

and then measure how closely required skills and competencies align to existing iSchool
curriculum via course syllabi learning objectives. The competency-based education framework is
intended to improve curriculum and instruction for students by translating student performance
into specific learning outcomes. The knowledge and skills outlined in collected data science job
postings will be summarized as specific learning outcomes which will then be compared to
course learning objectives. These values will be measured against complete 2017 academic
calendar year syllabi from the 7 iSchools that provided the necessary course syllabi to participate
in the study. These schools vary in size and geographic location, so we believe the sample is
valid. All 37 U.S. iSchools were contacted and asked to participate multiple times, however, only
7 institutions responded by providing their complete course syllabi offered to graduate students
enrolled in their iSchool institutions. It is our goal to determine if data science skills and
competencies are currently being integrated the iSchool curriculum and if so, which specific
skills and competencies identified from job postings are represented and to what degree.

16

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
Data Science
According to the text, the last thirty or forty years humans have shifted from the third
research paradigm of ‘computation science’ to the fourth, ‘data-intensive science’, (Hay,
Tansley, & Tolle, 2009). The fourth paradigm of research is marked with a societal surplus of
data sets that require the intervention by a variety of tools to properly manage, utilize, and
analyze. Because of the sudden data surplus and the perceived value in structured data, “an
increasing number of new scientific initiatives, activities, and programs have been created by
governments, research institutions, and educational institutions to promote data science as a new
field of science,” (Cao, 2017, p. 11). Data science defines and evaluates the cycle data takes from
data to information with the goal of becoming knowledge. While this cycle sounds complex, it
involves a variety of concepts that must be mastered for successful data extraction and
knowledge creation. “The aim of data science is the extraction of knowledge from the large
volumes of data that are structured or unstructured. There are many techniques of data science
that require mastering such as analysis, capture, data curation, search, sharing, storage, transfer,
visualization, and information privacy,” (Anslow, Brosz, Maurer, & Boyes, 2016, p. 615).
Data science, as a discipline, lacks a clearly universally defined subject composition.
Some argue that is due to an often-interdisciplinary application capability. Data science
techniques can be applied to any domain therefore, “in the fractured landscape of school subjectmatter disciplines, data science has no natural home,” (Finzer, 2013, p. 1). Data science was once
considered a product of statisticians since it was scholars of statistics who initially promoted the
term within their work. “Statisticians have had much to say about data science, since it is they

17

who actually created the term ‘data science’ and promoted the upgrading of statistics to data
science as a broader discipline,” (Cao, 2017, p. 7). Data science was quickly identified as an
independent discipline which required its own form of study and focused attention from
dedicated scholars and researchers from a variety of specializations, including, but in no way
limited to only statisticians. “From the disciplinary perspective, data science is a new
interdisciplinary field that synthesizes and builds on statistics, informatics, computing,
communication, management, and sociology to study data and its environments to transform data
to insights and decisions by following a data-to-knowledge-to-wisdom thinking and
methodology,” (Cao, 2017, p. 8). Data science is a specialization born out of a variety of
research fields with a variety of fields making up the diverse community of practice. If data
science educators and researchers can successfully exploit the truly interdisciplinary nature of
data science, then the field has the potential to be rich and diverse discipline. “…Data science is
an interdisciplinary research field, including data collection, analysis, modeling, application and
other issues, the community large-scale data sharing and universal application is related to the
supporting action of data management and service measures, such as data infrastructure, data
policy, data standards, data storage, data management, data publishing and data services, in order
to ensure the data use and to realize the data value,” (Xiaoying & Xiangmei, 2017, p. 1).
Business schools and computer science programs across many higher education
institutions have often been the first to react to the data science employment market. “Many data
science programs are housed in business administration or computer science departments. These
departments tend to extend existing curriculum on logic and statistics under the name of data
science. However, few have required classes on ethics, data engineering, or data management,”
(Washington, 2016, p. 5). Therefore, data science is identified as potential area for additional

18

cross-discipline partnerships and continued specialization. Additionally, “a second wave of data
science education is emerging, one with increased emphasis on practical issues in ethics, legal
compliance, scientific reproducibility, data quality, and algorithmic bias,” (Howe, Franklin,
Haas, Kraska, & Ullman, 2017, p. 1473). This new data science wave could benefit from
partnership with a discipline that already has an established framework for dealing with
theoretical and ethical issues related to information, data, compliance, bias, and privacy.
For data science curriculum to successfully train graduate level students, educators will
need to find a way to start introducing general data skills from an early age through its various
subdisciplines of study. One such area, data literacy, is becoming increasingly important for
researchers in all areas. “Data science training should extend to all people through online
courses, citizen-science projects, and K-12 education. Research in data-science education should
explore the notion of data literacy, curricular models for providing data literacy, and the datascience skills be taught at various grade levels,” (Big Data Senior Steering Group, 2016, p. 10).
For this to occur someone will have to spearhead the advancement of data literacy and data
science in k-12 education, this is a task far easier executed by a discipline with an existing
established relationship with education institutions on a widescale level. However, since data
science doesn’t fit into the established k-12 curriculum model it is difficult to see data literacy as
something teachers themselves would be responsible for teaching. For example, information
literacy is already something k-12, and even higher education librarians, are often tasked with
providing instruction on. Data literacy, a subcategory of data science, being closely related to
information literacy, seems like it would it naturally align under the same type of instruction.
Sapp Nelson, 2017, utilizes a matrix structure to analysis data education competencies of library
uses within the Purdue University libraries and suggests other librarians do the same “to create

19

rigorous data literacy programs appropriate to specific local situations to graduate data fluent
researchers at all levels of education,” (Sapp Nelson, 2017, p. 10). By utilizing data literacy
instruction “with a more rigorous structure,” (Sapp Nelson, 2017, p. 10), in University settings
and beyond Nelson believes there will be a “data fluent” population, (Sapp Nelson, 2017).
Data available on a specific subject is often vast, as it combines a variety of attributes
about a specific item or items, not to mention, data can be collected in ways that are
dimensionally limitless. Therefore, data collected in large storage quantities has become
commonly known as ‘big data,’ a major player in rapidly evolving field of data science. Not all
data is big, but much of it is. Globally data collections are getting larger as collection continues
in some cases daily. “In March 2012, the Obama Administration announced the Big Data
Research and Development Initiative to leverage the fast-growing volumes of digital data to help
solve some of the Nation’s most pressing challenges,” (Big Data Senior Steering Group, 2016, p.
10). The administration also offered federal support to advance data collection and analysis on a
national scale. “The [Big Data Research and Development] initiative calls for increasing
government support and R&D investment to accelerate the Federal agencies’ ability to draw
insights from large and complex collections of digital data,” (Big Data Senior Steering Group,
2016, p. 11). With a variety of seemingly unrelated groups coming together for the common
purpose of societal advancement through data solutions. “Together, public and private partners
announced an inspiring array of new projects that address such national priorities as economic
development, healthcare, energy sustainability, public safety, and national security,” (Big Data
Senior Steering Group, 2016, p. 11). Big data, like data science, requires the dedicated support of
a commonly trained and defined workforce. “Big data needs decision support. Generally,
decision science (or theory of choice) in economics, computer science, statistics and mathematics

20

is referred to as identifying the values, uncertainties, rationalities, resultant optimal decision and
other relative issues,” (Wang, et al., 2016, p. 748). The growing data science and big data needs
will require an initial investment of not only a workforce, but tools to better manage the process
of data management and analysis on such a large scale. “…increasing investments in the next
generation of large-scale data collection, management, and analysis will allow agencies to adapt
and manage the ever-increasing scales of data being generated and leverage the data to create
fundamentally new services and capabilities,” (Big Data Senior Steering Group, 2016, p. 8).
Because of the growing amounts of data currently available, “an increasing number of
organizations recognize the value of data as a strategic asset and invest in building infrastructure,
resources, talent, and teams to support enterprise innovation, and to create differentiators that
will lift competition and productivity.” (Cao, 2017, p. 15). Data science as a discipline is still
relatively in its infancy stages, therefore advances in big data are still being developed so it is
difficult to measure the total impact big data has in the decision-making process or the economic
value of its results. “Developments of Big Data will enrich current decision science. Big Data
will produce bigger value along with the resolutions of current challenges. It is no doubt that the
value will be created by intelligent decision making based on the analytical results of raw data,”
(Wang, et al., 2016, p. 748). However, it is already clear to many in the corporate community
and beyond that big data can be a strategic asset when managed effectively. “Big data brings big
value. The value takes the form of a value chain and is created through the process of data
discovery, integration and exploitation,” (Wang, Xu, Fujita, & Liu, 2016, p. 748). Business
executives have long since took notice of big data in a big way as has been identified by many
leaders and managers as an extremely cost-effective way to manage efficiency through a variety
of contexts. “…over 50% of 560 enterprises insist that Big Data can help them in increasing

21

operational efficiency, selecting informing strategic direction, supplying better customer service
and so on,” (Wang, et al., 2016, p. 748). Big data, like data science, has a seemingly endless
array of environments for application, bringing together often unrelated fields to reach even
greater conclusions, often in advance, this is often referred to as ‘forecasting.’ “Big data have
been playing a central role in many decision-making and forecasting domains such as business
analysis, product development, loyalty, healthcare, clinicians, tourism marketing, transportation,
etc.,” (Wang, et al., 2016, p. 748).
Data was once limited, primarily due to the cost of both collecting and maintaining large
quantities of data. Now that data is cheap to collect and reproduce it can be collected to
potentially solve a variety of complex problems in ways that were previously only imagined.
“Big Data will change the paradigms of investigation in social science. The presence of Big Data
alters the research style such as the questions we can ask and the methods we can apply. The
constantly depressed cost of data capturing, and new techniques enable us to achieve frequent,
controlled and meaningful observations of real-world business and economic phenomena,”
(Wang, et al., 2016, p. 762). To address the growing workforce demands for big data
professionals, like all data science professionals, “many universities and institutions have either
established or are creating research centers or institutes in data science, analytics, big data, cloud
computing, or IoT,” (Cao, 2017, p. 12). While formal programs in data science are varied in their
approach and organization, “…every analytics and data science program should include a
significant emphasis on the implications and potential consequences of big data. This can be
accomplished through a set of components (or a single course) that provide students with the
opportunity to engage, theoretically and experientially, with the legal, ethical and societal
implications, and potential consequences of big data,” (Topi & Markus, 2015, p. 45). Big data,

22

like data science in the broader context, is having an impact not only on data professions, but all
advanced researchers. As researchers across disciplines are often expected to have some level of
comfort working with data. “With the shift to big data…researchers suggest that all marketers
and PhD students have some base understanding of computer science skills and a base
understanding of data,” (Hilgers, Stanley, Elrod, & Flachsbart, 2015, p. 200). Therefore, an
urgency for data literacy training, regardless of subject matter specification, among all
researchers is evident.
Since big data is rapidly becoming an essential component to the research process it has
already begun to make its way into libraries, facilitated already in part by librarians. “As Big
Data emerges as the basis of modern research, it has fittingly become increasingly present in
research libraries, where data centers, equipped with data librarians (sometimes called data
curators), are becoming more common,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2014, p. 364). Data librarian
positions, common in research libraries, intend to serve as a guide to those engaged in the
research process. Data librarians are often expected to aid researchers through the data science
lifecycle, regardless of data size. “As data is information as its most basic, this is not that far of a
stretch. In seeking further data education, librarians will be poised to succeed in the data age,”
(Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2014, p. 369). While data science is a relatively new science, data has
long been seen by information science professionals as a building block of information. Just as
investment in information was an essential component of the information age, so too will
investment in data be essential to the growth of big data. “Big data has the potential to radically
improve the lives of all Americans…Government agency research and public-private
partnerships, together with the education and training of future data scientists, will enable

23

applications that directly benefit society and the economy of the Nation,” (Big Data Senior
Steering Group, 2016, p. 8).
Often known as data scientists, “data science professionals play active roles in the design
and implementation work of four related areas: data architecture, data acquisition, data analysis,
and data archiving,” (Beaudoin et al., 2014, p. 2).The US National Science Board defines data
scientists as, “the information and computer scientists, database and software engineers and
programmers, disciplinary experts, curators and expert annotators, librarians, archivists, and
others, who are crucial to the successful management of digital data collection,” (Cao, 2017, p.
29). Tools and languages can be learned, but people who can manage real-world data science
projects and who own the necessary big data analytic skills and knowledge are rare, producing
such capable people takes time,” (Song & Zhu, 2016, p. 372). According to some, “the biggest
bottleneck in the big data era is the production of capable data scientists. Formal education
programs in data science are relatively new, therefore, many practicing data scientists have
training from a variety of sources, not in any way limited to the traditional classroom setting. In
fact, “most data scientists have acquired big data skills outside the university,” (Song & Zhu,
2017, p. 5). While many scientists lack formal training in data science, some scholars argue that
advanced degrees are necessary for data scientists. Cao states data scientists should have a,
“master’s or PhD degree in computer science, statistics, mathematics, analytics, data science,
informatics, engineering, physics, operation research, pattern recognition, artificial intelligence,
visualization, information retrieval, or related fields,” (Cao, 2017, p. 31). Training data scientists
is often difficult because of the variety of knowledge they need to obtain to be successful in
diverse and newly evolving data environments. “The ‘hard part’ of training data scientists is
beginning to be seen in terms of business-facing issues-data sharing, curation, reproducibility,

24

provenance and explanations, experimental design and hypothesis management, legal
compliance, algorithmic bias, communication results / storytelling / visualization,” (Howe,
Franklin, Haas, Kraska, & Ullman, 2017, p. 1473). Data science requires a diverse skill set that
doesn’t align to one specific domain but is also applicable to any discipline. “As data science has
now become one of the most challenging fields, there is a great demand for more talented data
scientists,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 17). While data scientists are in high demand, the lack of an
equally large workforce with strong analytical skills makes finding qualified applicants to fill
data science roles often difficult for recruiters. “Glassdoor, a U.S. job website, reports that data
scientist is one of the top 25 jobs in the U.S. for 2016…With such emerging demands on data
management, there is a need to identify qualifications and responsibilities of such job positions
as expected by employers,” (Chen & Zhang, 2017, p. 18). Therefore, data scientist roles are
plentiful for those able to meet the demands of the rapidly defining specialization. Those
responsible for the educational goals of those who will directly with data must teach a variety of
data science skills including data management and analysis.“…The education objectives of
scientific data education should be described as follow: scientific data specialists’ education
should be oriented by the requirements of e-Science, the scientific data management and
cultivate practical talents with theory and practical skills that can effectively collect, analyze,
preserve and manage data and deliver service,” (Li, Xiaozhe, Wenming, & Weining, 2013, p.
719). Data scientists utilized in a variety of environments therefore, domain knowledge should
be broad in nature to be applicable to a variety of potentially complex data problems. To keep the
field of data science from being limited to one siloed and rigid domain structure, those
responsible for training data scientists must also, “assure cross-domain and trans-disciplinary
cooperation, collaborations, and alliance in complex data science problem-solving, this requires

25

the education of competent data scientists who are multidisciplinary experts, as well as
collaboration between data scientists and domain specific experts…” (Cao, 2017, p. 34). This
level of cross discipline and domain collaboration ensures the further progression of the field of
data science as more domains require data science knowledge and resource support.
While the data scientist may be a relatively new specialization born out of a sudden
influx in data, “… data is the rawest form of information; the data scientist is the closest relative
to the information scientist,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2014, p. 370). While the science of data
may be new, information science already has a rich established history as a discipline dealing
with information and data in a variety of contexts and formats.

Library and Information Sciences
Information science, like data science, follows the entire life cycle of information.
“…Information Science…i.e., the study of the information processes…[is] the study of the
properties, behavior, and flow of information. It includes: (1) environmental aspects of
information and communication, (2) information and language analysis, (3) the organization of
information, (4) man-system relationships” (Donohue, 1966, p. 120). Not to be confused at all
with computer science, information science is a related discipline but distinct in that information
science is solely concerned with the process of information, regardless of the environment. “At
the most general levels, information science deals with the genesis, flow, use, and preservation of
information; computer science deals with algorithms and techniques for computational
processes,” (Marchionini, 2016, p. 1).
Data is a relatively newly discussed economic driver, but scientists in a variety of
disciplines have long since recognized the economic power of information. “Information is the

26

lifeblood of scientific discoveries, economic growth and social development,” (Tonta, 2016, p.
2). Libraries were once really the only way information and, therefore, knowledge could be
obtained only within a defined infrastructure of a library. In the age of universal digital
technologies information once confined to the library structure is now readily accessible. As a
result, information is driving global knowledge creation in communities and leading to economic
advancement of entire regions that were previously economically inferior. “We live in
a…’Information Society’, and information commodities have become a principal driving force in
national economies,” (Doucette, Bichler, Hofkirchner, & Rafft, 2007, p.S199).
Since information accessibility has impacted society on such a global scale,
“…information scientists are concerned with the entire life cycle and with the socio-cultural
issues associated with data collection and use,” (Marchionini, 2016, p. 5). Information
accessibility is a common topic of conversation when discussing issues of collection and use but
also information retrieval. “Information retrieval is a fundamental component of performing
tasks and making decisions,” (Rice & Borgman, 1983, p. 253).
Information is ever changing, as a wealth of data and research grows by the day across
industries and disciplines. Therefore, like data science, cooperation across disciplines is integral
to the success of those in the information field. “Because of the complexity and ever-changing
nature of the research field information, transdisciplinary approaches, theories and methods are
required,” [for the] … “cooperative research concept that includes scientists and scientific
branches,” (Doucette, Bichler, Hofkirchner, & Rafft, 2007, p.S204). Globalization means
scientists can more quickly work on problems beyond the boundaries of their local community
and engage with a variety of scientific communities globally. Further cooperation and
collaboration are now possible, and some would argue extremely essential, across geographic

27

boundaries as well as discipline lines. “The need of a such a cooperative research has emerged
with the increase in global problems, issues and questions that because of their complexity
cannot be solved anymore within disciplinary boundaries,” (Doucette, Bichler, Hofkirchner, &
Rafft, 2007, p.S204). Therefore, opening information science as a true interdisciplinary field that
stretches even across global geographic boundaries has “…the capacity to increase the exchange
of knowledge and information and go beyond academic boundaries to solve real-world
problem,” (Doucette, Bichler, Hofkirchner, & Rafft, 2007, p.S204).
The vast amounts of information suddenly accessible has created new problems for
researchers and ordinary information seekers alike. “…new types of document and collection,
new technologies, media and forms of publication, all pose problems for the effective
communication of information. New physical and virtual information environments bring the
need to understand the novel information behaviors which will result,” (Bawden & Robinson,
2016, p. 5). “In the past, the scarcity of information was usually the main problem whereas it is
now the opposite: the abundance of information and the…’data deluge’,” (Tonta, 2016, p. 2).
Not only are information overload and data deluge related concepts, but “the mission, task and
nature of data science are consistent with those of information science, and they are closely
interrelated and together form the components of ‘information chain’ research,” (Wang, 2017, p.
1). “…data science and information science have the same core principles and share the same
theory logic, methods and technique, (Wang, 2017, p. 1).
As result of the many apparent correlations between information science and data
science, “many schools of information science-which teach information technology and
specialties such as systems analysis-are introducing data science courses. A data science
specialization is available in some degree programs,” (Clemmitt, 2017, p. 13). Those responsible

28

for creating data science curriculum are beginning to see value in training information scientists
for data work. “…information professionals have the theoretical background and are in a prime
position to help with the managing and curating and curating and even visualizing data,” (Tang
& Sae-Lim, 2017, p. 13). With an already established framework for information management,
“…information science is a matter of discipline, has a lot to contribute to data science and
probably the data science itself will also enrich the curriculum of information science as a better
discipline,” (Tang & Sae-Lim, 2017, p. 2).
Information is the result of data collection and extraction, while library science and
information science follows the lifecycle of information and provides structure to an otherwise
undefined aspect of the research communication process. “Library and information science is the
discipline which studies the information communication chain: all aspects of the creation,
organization, management, communication and use of recorded information,” (Bawden &
Robinson, 2016, p. 1). Once information can be processed it has the potential to become
knowledge. Therefore, libraries and other collections of information are possible sources of
knowledge in the knowledge creation process. “Libraries and their collections are both systems
and scaffolding for knowledge processes. The goal of that work, like other ‘scaffolding’ work, is
to help us think,” (Gold, 2013, p. 8). “Underlying most of the research-oriented definitions is a
constrained view of the nature of libraries. Yet using the term to imply the broader view favored
by librarians constrains the institution by the type of content it collects,” (Borgman, 1999, p.
240). In library science, like many fields tied to the education profession that is generally driven
by public funding, “staff allocation and hiring of new skilled personnel is one of the challenges
that libraries are facing,” (Choi & Ramuseen, 2009, p. 457). Therefore, providing visible and

29

detailed value to organizations is often integral to health of research and records management
services.
Library science and information science, “supports the professional activities of the
collection disciplines, including information management, librarianship, archiving and records
management,” (Bawden & Robinson, 2016, p. 1). “Most graduates (71%) are employed in a
library or information science institution, 11% are employed in a library or information science
capacity but are working outside a traditional institution, and another 11% are employed outside
the LIS field entirely. About 6.7% claimed to still be unemployed,” (Allard, 2016, p. 1). Library
and information science is a discipline that is varied in its applications and approach, but singular
in its commitment to information accessibility. “Library and information science is regarded as a
meta-discipline, with a wide variety of applicable theories, philosophical bases and research
methods. The discipline is undergoing changes as it adapts to new forms of documents and
collections, and to new information environments,” (Bawden & Robinson, 2016, p. 1).
Libraries were once simply a collection of books and librarians were only responsible for
managing said collections, however this is rapidly changing to reflect the needs of an
information driven society. Library collections and the means library patrons are being served
are expanding rapidly in the current data age. “Librarians and information professionals have
traditionally served as stewards of information access, research instructors, and privacy
advocates. Librarians are poised, and arguably required, to be a vital part of the data era,”
(Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2014, p. 364). Some would argue that librarians, already being the selfproclaimed stewards of information would take to becoming stewards of information as a natural
reaction to the progression of science and human knowledge. However, this shift will potentially
require the evolution of job descriptions, as well as additional partnerships between the library

30

science and information science communities and related disciplines. “The concept of evershifting job descriptions is not new to librarians. As technology has changed, so have libraries
and the nature of the work performed within them,” (Elmore & Jefferson, 2014, p. 253). While
libraries themselves may be evolving to meet the needs of the data driven researcher through
“…developing data curation and repository services…LIS education for data professionals is still
limited and evolving,” (Varvel Jr., Bammerlin, & Palmer, 2012, p. 527). “Data services are
growing in academic libraries. Services such as data management, data curation, and data
visualization are parts of the larger research data lifecycle. With the advancement of technology,
scholars can make use of data to produce new kinds of scholarship,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p.
2). “Research libraries and universities engaged in reinventing themselves for a digital age will
need to draw upon the best research, theory and practice from a myriad of disciplines. These are
urgent challenges,” (Borgman, 1999, p. 239). “Technological developments, structural changes
in the way universities are funded, escalating costs of information resources, demographics and
other factors combine the transformation of research libraries an urgent challenge,” (Borgman,
1999, p. 240). “Academic librarians articulate their roles in academe by creating and
implementing a range of practical and strategic activities by weaving digital technologies into the
traditional functions of libraries for knowledge creation, dissemination, and use,” (Choi &
Ramuseen, 2009, p. 457). Just as libraries should be evolving with the advance of knowledge, so
too should the fields of library science and information science. “…library information science
has always been evolving. It is a dynamic field...data science gives…new innovative skills that
we need to incorporate into library and information science education,” (Tang & Sae-Lim, 2017,
p. 13). Changing roles within the library science and information science discipline are changing
the occupational landscape of opportunity within the LIS career itself. “In the recent LJ, Library

31

Journal’s salary survey, place salary survey, their top fields earned positions in library school,
the first one is software engineer…the second one…is the UX researcher and the third one is the
data scientist and data analyst,” (Tang & Sae-Lim, 2017, p. 14), despite making up less than 10%
of the total positions surveyed.
Libraries are no longer limited to four walls. Advances in digital technology have brought
libraries into the virtual environment, with most metropolitan and all major research libraries
accessible from anywhere at any time. “…digital libraries and technology have brought a new
dimension to librarianship…by embracing changes in the digital environment, academic libraries
increasingly utilize digital technologies and resources, and demand library professionals with
qualifications areas such as digital technology, management, and skills in communication,”
(Choi & Ramuseen, 2009, p. 466). Like data science, “…collaboration and sharing IT courses
among LIS Schools through online education will be an efficient way to enhance and develop
LIS education for IT related contents…,” (Hu, 2013, p. 8). IT serves as the basis for a variety of
essential skills that the technologically savvy librarian needs in the constantly evolving
professional landscape of LIS. “There appears to be significant confusion over what every
librarian should understand about IT and the specialization and in-depth training needed for
those who wish to devote their careers to this role within the profession. The time has come to
make the changes necessary to meet the needs of the specializations,” (Xu & Chen, 2001, p.
316). “The essential skills and knowledge for IT, such as organizing information resources, web
interfaces for user services, databases and systems management for information services would
be necessarily required as essential background and should be kept updated by all LIS
professionals, LIS administrators, including faculty of LIS education,” (Hu, 2013, p. 8).
However, simply learning IT foundations isn’t enough for LIS professionals in the rapidly-

32

changing technological environment of modern times. “Along with-IT development in libraries
and information agencies, the competencies of LIS professionals should be constantly updated
and ensure updating IT skills and knowledge. LIS education and curriculum design would follow
the practical needs of information services,” (Hu, 2013, p. 8). LIS career offerings are swiftly
changing alongside technological advances and as a result the curriculum must be adjusted just
as quickly to meet current workforce skill demands. “…one-third to one half of the IT courses
provided in LIS curricula could be considered as a reasonable proportion,” (Hu, 2013, p. 7).
Regardless of the exact number of IT integrated course offerings in LIS schools, “LIS schools’
curricula should still include processing/organizing information resources and providing
information services, which are services that are different from those required by IT
professionals whose focus is on creating/producing IT software and hardware programs,” (Hu,
2013, p. 7). More importantly, IT skills are essential for LIS graduates intending on entering data
science roles within libraries or other information environments. But also, more robust IT
training within the LIS curriculum could widen the potential career net upon graduation, and
open LIS degree holders to a variety of previously unidentified positions that easily integrate
their already rich existing library and information skill set.

Bridging Data and Information
Data is often collected for research purposes to eventually gather information about an
object or objects. “Data are raw material of information, typically numeric,” (Zins, 2007, p. 485).
Additionally, “data are observations are measurements you make on objects (artifacts, sites,
seeds, bones) and one their contexts. Data are theory-laden,” (Zins, 2007, p. 484). Because data
is raw information, it can take a variety of final forms once in the hands of the person responsible

33

for analyzing and drawing conclusions based upon it. Therefore, data sharing and management is
essential for research growth because it ensures preservation of data for continued use. “Data in
diverse formats are at the heart of the research process, but there are significant gaps in
infrastructure to effectively share, manage, curate, preserve and potentially reuse the rapidly
growing volumes of data generated by text corpora, video collections, ‘big science’ endeavors
and by the expanding long-tail of ‘small science’”, (Lyon, 2012, p. 127).
Information is data combined with the existence of meaning. “Information is a set of facts
with processing capability added, such as context, relationships to other facts about the same or
related objects, implying an increased usefulness. Information provides meaning to data,” (Zins,
2007, p. 484). Therefore, information is the result of the human experience, that provides the
context for an individual’s understanding of a specific collection of raw data. “Information is
facts, figures, and other forms of meaningful representations that when encountered by or
presented to a human being are used to enhance his/her understanding of a subject or related
topics,” (Zins, 2007, p. 485). Information can come from a limitless variety of situations and
actions, because individuals can find meaning in almost anything. “People are informed not only
by intentional communications, but by a wide variety of objects and events. Being ‘informative’
is situational and it would be rash to state of anything that it might not be informative, hence
information, in some conceivable situation,” (Buckland, 1991, p. 359). Despite its often-limitless
bounds of sources, information can be measured by the availability of choice. “To be somewhat
more definite, the amount of information is defined, in the simplest cases, to be measured by the
logarithm of the number of available choices,” (Weaver, 1949, p. 9). “Having calculated the
entropy (or the information, or the freedom of choice) of a certain information source, one can
compare this to the maximum value this entropy could have, subject only to the condition that

34

the source continue to employ the same symbols,” (Weaver, 1949, p. 13). Individuals often have
choice when it comes to information sources, with differing messages competing for the
attention of the observer. “The information source selected a desired message out of a set of
possible messages…the selected message may consist of written or spoken words, or of pictures,
music, etc.,” (Weaver, 1949, p. 7).
Once data becomes information it could also become knowledge for the receiver.
“Knowledge is information with more context and understanding, perhaps with the addition of
rules to extend definitions and allow indifference,” (Zins, 2007, p. 484). For data to successfully
transition to become knowledge it must be understood in such a way where it is available for
future use. “Knowledge is information that is understood, further to its utilization, stored,
retrievable and reusable under appropriate circumstances or conditions,” (Zins, 2007, p. 485).
“Data is the basis for defining information and information is materialized by processing
data. Following this logic, data science and information science are twin disciplines by
nature…It is highly possible and beneficial to bridge them, which may lead to emerging a
general theory of information sciences,” (Wang, 2017, p. 2). For this transition to be successful,
“it has become evident that librarians and information professionals must take a leading role in
working with big data…in these jobs they will be helping collate, process, and make useful the
enormous volume of data that is being generated in all areas of life,” (Kim, 2016, p. 162). By
elevating the already existing relationship between data and information, library science and
information science professionals will be able to grow both data science and information science
roles and skill sets on a broad scale. This in turn will provide a rich foundation for data science
practitioners as well as future information professionals, who will be an essential partner in the
research process.

35

iSchools
“…the curriculum of library and information studies encompasses information and
knowledge creation, communication, identification, selection, acquisition, organization and
description, storage and retrieval, preservation and curation, analysis, interpretation, evaluation,
synthesis, dissemination, use and users, and management of human and information resources,”
(Committee on Accreditation of the American Library Association, 2015, p. 5). “...if the demand
for the collection, curation, management, and manipulation of data eclipses that for systems and
services for other information resources, programs will need to broaden the scope of general LIS
education to assure that information professionals are also qualified data professionals,” (Varvel
Jr., Bammerlin, & Palmer, 2012, p. 528). “In response to the current data-intensive research
environment, iSchools are beginning to build new programs and enhance existing programs to
meet workforce demands in data curation, data management, and data science,” (Varvel Jr.,
Bammerlin, & Palmer, 2012, p. 527). “Many universities have begun to offer data science
educational programs at all levels of undergraduate, Master’s, and doctoral study. At the heart of
this information field, the iSchools have been successfully producing information scientists who
are proficient in doing studies/work related to data, information, and knowledge acquisition.
Now is the time for iSchools to foster talented data scientists by leveraging strengths of
information disciplines,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 4).
“So, when we talk about iSchools, we’re talking about the information school. And there
are a lot of theories. information science is the discipline that deals with the creation, origination,
retrieval, storage, and sharing – the entire process of information. There is a conceptive affinity
between information science and this newly emerged data science,” (Tang & Sae-Lim, 2017, p.
2). “The iSchool movement originated in 1988 when three Deans of the information schools at

36

the University of Pittsburgh, Drexel University and Syracuse University, joined together to form
a group that was extended to include the Deans from the University of Michigan and the
University of Washington,” (Lyon & Brenner, 2015, 112). “…the deans were united by their
common view of the breadth and scope of ‘Information Sciences’ and how best to communicate
this view to the wider academic community,” (Lyon & Brenner, 2015, p. 112). “The members of
iSchools have a strong interdisciplinary structure, which is consistent with the strong
interdisciplinary nature of the data sciences,” (Xiaoying & Xiangmei, 2017, p. 1). “iSchools have
been preparing information professionals for work with a variety of digital resources for many
decades, with moderate advances in curriculum focused specifically on digital research data,”
(Mayemik, Palmer, Allard, & Tenopir, 2015, p. 2). “…. there is a great opportunity for iSchools
to develop and extend their curriculum to embrace data-centric programs, courses and
certificates to both educate new-entrants and to upskills existing practitioners to achieve the datasavvy profile, which is currently in high demand,” (Lyon, Mattern, Acker, & Langmead, 2015, p.
7). “The iSchool community has an opportunity to contribute to data science and offers a unique
blend of knowledge and skill, given information science interdisciplinary foundations in
expertise in the collection, organization, manipulation, access, and use of information,”
(Greenberg et al., 2017, p. 2). “…iSchools…have a strong track record in education for data
professionals; this is evident by the finding that the number of academic programs and courses of
the iSchools is significantly larger than that of non-iSchools,” (Kim, 2016, p. 10). “Modernized
iSchools have trained their students as versatile researchers and professionals who are skilled in
information management and data analysis. What made this possible is the multidisciplinary
characteristics of iSchools who faculty members come from diverse educational backgrounds,”
(Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 6).

37

“Compared to other Subject alliance, iSchools have good discipline composition, a longterm experience of extracting knowledge from data and a natural advantage in global data
literacy training and international cooperation in data science research and teaching,” (Xiaoying
& Xiangmei, 2017, p. 3). “In this regard iSchools are probably the most ideal institutions for
teaching user-based and application-focused data science education,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 6).
“…big data drives the fourth industrial revolution, and iSchools should educate successful data
scientists who are prepared for this revolution,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 6). “…iSchools are key
players in the data space. They are already well-connected with primary data stakeholders…they
have the ability to…be transformative in scaling-up the human infrastructure component of the
knowledge economy,” (Lyon & Brenner, 2015, p. 120). “The iSchool community is significant
in its focus on ‘relationships between information, people, and technology,’ and has an important
role to play data science endeavors,” (Greensberg et al., 2017, p. 2). “It is predictable that data
science and information science will interact and complement each other, the ideal consequence
of which is an iSchool organically integrates them and develops organizational ambidexterity to
fully explore the academic resources of library science and information science and exploit new
potentials of data science, meeting the challenges of big data era,” (Wang, 2017, p. 1).

“A

2012 study of iSchools and LIS courses, identified 475 digital or data curation courses at 158
programs at 55 universities; of the courses, only 8% were data-centric, 11% were data-inclusive,
and 27% were digital courses,” (Thompson, Mayemik, Palmer, Allard, & Tenopir, 2015, p. 2).
“One of the primary problems for advancing the field is the need to disambiguate and
develop definitions for professional roles, such as ‘data manager’, ‘data curator’, and ‘data
scientist’ which tend to be used loosely in the science and information communities,” (Varvel,
Palmer, Chao, & Sacchi, 2011, p. 6). “A more sustainable approach would be to develop a

38

network of LIS programs and data centers that support internships in a distributed fashion, with
LIS students conducting projects at local data centers were possible,” (Thompson, Mayemik,
Palmer, Allard, & Tenopir, 2015, p. 8). “As the iSchool community scales up research and
education in data curation, extensive expertise in the curation of research in the curation of
research data already exists in data and research centers, where data services have been evolving
for decades. To date, the iSchool community has had limited interaction with these
organizations,” (Thompson, Mayemik, Palmer, Allard, & Tenopir, 2015, p. 1). “New
educational programs for data curation and data science in iSchools have an opportunity to learn
from, and to inform, the work in data centers, as both professional groups work to evolve best
practices for the future of data services for data-intensive research,” (Thompson, Mayemik,
Palmer, Allard, & Tenopir, 2015, p. 1). “Because we were most successful in achieving
professional acculturation and professional development outcomes, it would make sense to either
focus future efforts on these two areas, or to modify the program to be more successful in
achieving the outcomes related to projects, internships, and other opportunities,” (Steinhart &
Qin, 2012, p. 130).
“Overall, students and mentors alike responded quite favorably to the mentorship
program,” (Steinhart & Qin, 2012, p. 130). “Less common are mentoring programs for library
and information science (LIS) students,” (Steinhart & Qin, 2012, p. 121). “Assessment is less
standardized and visible at the graduate level in library and information science and for each
ALA-accredited program compared to other professional degrees, as LIS in North America
operates with more variety due to diverging foci of individual programs’ missions and clientele,”
(Bishop, Parrish, & Grubesic, 2015, p. 6-7). “Program goals and objectives are fundamental to
all aspects of master’s degree programs and form the basis on which educational programs are to

39

be developed and upon which they are evaluated. Program goals and objectives are required to
reflect and support student learning outcomes and the achievement of these outcomes,”
(Committee on Accreditation of the American Library Association, 2015, p. 3). “…iSchools
should focus on educating data science problem-solvers at application levels, rather than
developers,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 7). “…iSchools’ methods of teaching data science education
should broadly emphasize actual problem-solvers or users who are going to use data science
products,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 8).

Information Computing
There have been arguments that iSchool faculty, with their diverse and strong
information skill set, need to better prepare students for successfully administering computing
tasks, which are at the core of many essential data science skills. “We argue that iSchools should
empower their students with ‘information computing’ disciplines, which we define as the ability
to solve problems and create values, information, and knowledge using tools in application
domains,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 1). Not to confuse information computing with computer
science as these are two distinct disciplines. “Computer Science teaches computing with more
emphasis on fundamental elements such as data structures, algorithms, computational theory, and
computing models. On the other hand, information computing in iSchools should emphasize
users, tools, and applications,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 6). Information computing encompasses
computation thinking which allows users to exploit appropriate tools and systems for the
application of data science. “We propose the concept of information computing, which we define
as the ability to solve problems and create values, information, and knowledge using tools in

40

application domains. Information computing in iSchools is different from traditional computing
in Computer Science,” (Song & Zhu, 2017, p. 6).
Computational thinking has its roots in the computer science discipline, but it is not in
any way limited to the computer science environment in terms of application. “Computational
thinking is not just or all about computer science. The educational benefits of being able to think
computationally—starting with the use of abstractions—enhance and reinforce intellectual skills,
and thus can be transferred to any domain,” (Wing, 2014, p. 5-6). Computational thinking is, “a
way of solving problems, designing systems, and understanding human behavior that draws on
concepts fundamental to computer science. It represents a universally applicable attitude and
skill set everyone, not just computer scientists, would be eager to learn and use,” (Wing, 2006, p.
33). At the core of computational thinking is the concept of abstraction, like that often discussed
within the mathematics discipline. However, all subject areas of study could benefit from
exposure to additional computational thinking as human beings develop relationships with
automation in all areas of life. The computational process allows one to solve problems using
computer manipulation, by determining the appropriate course of action for the computer to
carry out. Computational thinking used to be reserved for computer science disciplines alone, but
other disciplines are now learning it can be used to solve a variety of problems cross a variety of
disciplines for very little effort or cost (Wing, 2012). “Computation thinking is the thought
processes involved in formulating a problem and expressing its solution(s) in such a way that a
computer-human or machine-can effectively carry out,” (Wing, 2014, p. 1).
Computational science can extend to all fields of study to further advance disciplines
utilizing data, regardless of size. “…in social science, decisions can be made by not only
analytical approaches but also computational ones. Computational approaches may even be more

41

powerful and effective,” (Wang, et al., 2016, p. 748). Computational science training is essential
for those who want to engage in efficient data science activities such as data management and
analysis. This training has the potential to impact researchers and change the process by which
they conduct their overall research through streamlined integration. “The application of
computational science and growth of data-intensive research, combined with a veritable
explosion of social media tools and web technologies, are reshaping research practice,” (Lyon,
2012, p. 127). Computational science could potentially shape society through innovative
operational efficiency by exploiting the power of computers for better research outcomes.
Through the utilization of computational science, research outcomes can be built upon quickly to
reach theories faster and grow science with potentially a lot less manpower effort. “Science,
society, and our economy will benefit from the discoveries and innovations produced by a
workforce trained to think computationally,” (Wing, 2014, p. 6).

Open Data
While more data is available now than ever before, there is still data that needs to be
made available to further drive the economic value of big data. “Across the globe, public
agencies are liberating data held in administrative systems…more than 44 countries have open
data platforms, and over 1 million datasets are now available,” (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016,
p. 668). By opening data sets to the public, you allow data that would otherwise be unused or
only used for a specific purpose internally to be openly accessible. “Opening up data not only
advances the needle on transparency, but also has the potential to improve civic engagement,
spur innovation, and generate economic and social value,” (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016, p.
668). A report from, “…McKinsey has estimated that globally the economic benefits of open

42

data are more than $3 trillion,” (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016, p. 668). However, like all data
initiatives, open data requires resources to drive growth and encourage participation on a large
scale. Therefore, “…to accomplish the goals of open-data initiatives, public agencies need to
devote resources to develop their capacities, plan for unintended consequences, and engage
communities to harness the potential of open data,” (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016, p. 672).
Open data also encourages the sharing of data, which beneficial to the research
community, as it can allow scientists to reach conclusions more rapidly and advance science
more efficiently and effectively. “Data sharing and accessibility of data are crucial for future
scientific purposes. Since research data are a valuable resource, the benefits of sharing data
include facilitating new scientific inquiry, promoting potential new uses of data, and encouraging
the validation of research,” (Charbonneau, 2013, p. 371). Partnerships across disciplines provide
an excellent opportunity to share research and potentially learn from research in other fields.
“With continued support and investment in both distributed technical infrastructure and
diversified human expertise, the benefits of cyberinfrastructure will extend broadly to all fields
of research and discovery, to the preservation and dissemination of knowledge, and to quality of
life in the digital age,” (Ray, 2012, p. 620). Human skill provides knowledge to ensure research
is accessible while also secure. “Providing a secure but flexible cyberinfrastructure while
promulgating best practices such as data citation and metadata use, will help to build confidence
in data sharing,” (Tenopir et al., 2011, p. 19). Librarians have an excellent opportunity to educate
individuals interested in all types of research about open data and encourage participation on the
front lines. “Educating faculty and researchers about the importance and benefits of data sharing
provides one avenue for librarian engagement,” (Charbonneau, 2013, p. 371). While data
repositories that maintain open data are available at research institutions many are not widely

43

used or easy to access, some would argue the result of failure by design. “If data repositories are
to succeed in attracting submissions from researchers, repository developers and managers will
need to be able to understand and respond to the needs and requirements of individual
researchers,” (Carlson, 2011, p. 4).

Data Literacy
Open data makes more data readily accessible, but this can be overwhelming to those
unfamiliar with dealing with data. Since data is relatively undefined to consumers, it would be
extremely beneficial to the public if a group willingly served as an unbiased gatekeeper, one that
could help users understand how to engage with and feel comfortable around data. “The recent
great expansions of the amount of available data, (research, government, civic, organizational,
personal), and of public and institutional awareness of its importance, lends an urgency to the
need for library/information specialists to be fully aware of the new ‘data dimension’ to their
work, and this certainly amounts to a new role for librarians,” (Robinson & Bawden, 2017, p.
312). Librarians have long since been responsible for providing information literacy instruction,
therefore, data literacy instruction should be easy to integrate alongside existing curriculum.
“Libraries, the bastions of information, are adapting to accommodate for the growth of data
resources and provide data literacy instruction,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2012, p. 368).
Libraries and librarians are both integral components to the future of data literacy. “As academic
librarians have traditionally provided information literacy instruction, the research determined if
they were perceived as having a role in data information literacy instruction,” (Frank & Pharo,
2016, p. 2). Since they already offer data science and information science integrated courses,

44

“information schools are well positioned to explore a more nuanced approach to the art of
interpreting data,” (Washington, 2016, p. 5).
We call the ability to evaluate data effectively, “Data information literacy” and
understand this concept as, “the skills needed to understand, use, manage, share, work with, and
produce data-reflects the confluence of data skills with information literacy competencies,”
(Frank & Pharo, 2015, p. 2). Additionally, data literacy requires a certain level of critical
thinking for individuals to effectively evaluate data. “Data literacy is the ability to collect,
manage, evaluate, and apply data, in a critical manner. It is an essential In the global knowledgebased economy; the manipulation of data occurs in daily processes across all sectors and
disciplines,” (Ridsdale et al., 2015, p. 2). Data literacy knowledge is extremely beneficial for
society to evolve data access and use data effectively. “Developing the solid foundational
knowledge of data literacy is integral to building discipline-/domain-specific knowledge and
ensuring that citizens are able to use and apply these skills appropriately and diversely
throughout their personal and professional lives,” (Ridsdale et al., 2015, p. 2).
Data literacy training does not always imply a high level of training for working with
data, average data users would likely benefit from exposure to simple data literacy training.
“Data fluency does not just mean the skills of being able to work with statistics or use a
relational data-although this a key part of it. It is an easy awareness of when is appropriate to use
Excel rather than Word, or Access rather than Excel, as well as the skills to exploit those
programs fully,” (Kirkwood, 2016, p. 283). Data literacy extends beyond understanding data to
knowing how to use data successfully. Data literacy training could potentially expose students to
data science related techniques, which in turn could expose students to proper data preparation.
“The other side of data literacy, that is, students’ ability and skills in ‘pulling’ data (processing

45

and managing data), is often thought of a domain for computer science and, hence, is left out of
data literacy programs,” (Qin & D’Ignazio, 2017, p. 190). Librarians responsible for working
with data literacy training should have the proper computer science foundational knowledge to
successfully articulate the work that is essential to turn data into information. “Data are nothing
without analysis, and many librarians currently lack the data fluency to work confidently in a
world of dynamic content creation,” (Kirkwood, 2016, p. 275). Computational and information
technology skills are also integral components to a data literacy course. Data literacy training
must include some coverage of data processing but also data inquiry. Inquiry is often the driving
force behind data manipulation and can lead to effective story telling. “What is needed is an
appreciation of how data can be used and manipulated, how it needs to be structured in order to
facilitate computational processing; and an enquiring, imaginative mind that can ask questions of
data, allow one question to prompt another, and imagine what stories the data might help us to
tell,” (Kirkwood, 2016, p. 283).
While some librarians are clearly already taking part in some form of literacy training,
“participants revealed that they currently do not associate librarians with data information
literacy instruction. When asked to identify the stakeholders associated with data information
literacy instruction, only two participants identified librarians-a student and librarian…
nonetheless. the majority perceived the potential for librarians to play a role in the future,”
(Frank & Pharo, 2016, p. 14). Therefore, there is a positive outlook for the future of librarians for
many, with many seeing potential in librarians taking a more active role in the data landscape.
“Librarians’ blended domain knowledge, that is, technical skills combined with contextual
understanding of the domain, will have transformational impact on professional roles, associated
practices and the perceived value of libraries more widely,” (Burton & Lyon, 2017, p. 1). If

46

members of the LIS community could expand their already robust domain knowledge to include
computer science and information technology concepts in a very public way, some feel LIS
professionals could more easily claim their role in the data economy. However, “for librarians to
enter this domain, they would need to improve their technical skills, enhance their discipline‐
specific knowledge, or rely on collaborations,” (Frank, 2016, p. 1). Librarians can add value to
the area of data literacy by focusing on K-12 saturation in addition to higher education research.
“The need for people fluent in working with data is growing rapidly and enormously, but U.S.
K–12 education does not provide meaningful learning experiences designed to develop
understanding of data science concepts or a fluency with data science skills,” (Finzer, 2013, p.
1).
Data literacy is becoming an integral part of the successful researcher’s skill set as data is
becoming a more essential component of the research process. “Data literacy instruction is often
the first step in supporting researchers, encouraging updated data practices and growing data
services,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p. 3). The library science and information science discipline
has an established history in information seeking behavior research. “Core knowledge of system
and user behavior continues to be a strong competence of students…but developing…knowledge
through hands on experience of different data analysis tools will further strengthen these skills
and ultimately create stronger connections with users,” (Sutherland & Wildgaard, 2016, p. 17).
By using the existing information seeking behavior foundation, librarians can more easily
provide instruction on how to interact with systems effectively for proper data interpretation.
Raw data, no matter how limitless, is ineffective without knowledge of the proper tools for
harvesting information. “A data-driven world requires a citizenry that is data literate. This
includes the ability to read, correctly interpret, and communicate information from data, as well

47

as create data and knowledge derived from other data,” (Big Data Senior Steering Group, 2016,
p. 39).
Data and Digital Curation
Data curation is an essential component of successful data literacy and data management,
two components of data science. Additionally, data curation propels the scientific process by
allowing researchers to grow up previous findings to quickly advance and produce new scientific
knowledge. “Data curation is a creative enterprise responsible for producing a question space
from scientific choices and measures of the world that enable both new narratives and new
questions about the world,” (Gold, 2013, p. 8). Data curation is not simply the act of collecting
for the sake of maintaining control over knowledge but rather data curation encourages data
accessibility. “A primary reason to curate data, as for curating other digital and tangible artifacts,
is not to accumulate, control or manage products. Rather the work of curation is a form of
participation in the process of knowledge,” (Gold, 2013, p. 8). Therefore, proper curation is
necessary to advance society from a knowledge economy perspective and should be considered
an important aspect of the data science lifecycle.
Digital technologies have rapidly increased the number of artifacts available that require
properly defined maintenance and management for access, within libraries this duty usually falls
on those responsible for cataloging. “The rapid expansion of digitization and digital repositories
is reflected in the job responsibilities expected of cataloging professionals. Analysis of job
descriptions shows that electronic resources management (40.4%) has become one of the core
duties for cataloguing professionals,” (Park, Lu, & Marion, 2009, p. 854). While in the past
digital preservation was considered a way to save non-digital items for future generations to
access via electronic means, digital curation is the act collecting and organizing digitally born

48

artifacts. ‘Digital preservation’ should be clearly differentiated from ‘curation’ as “Digital
preservation emerged during the late 1900s to address the new media’s vulnerability to
deterioration and catastrophic loss after less time than traditional formats such as paper,
microform, and photos,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p. 3). Therefore, digital curation is distinctly
different from digital preservation, even though librarians often perform both duties, these are
different specializations.
Digital curation ensures researchers can maintain data therefore it is extremely important
to society. “As digital curation has emerged as a new field, the need for professionals who are
competent in the field has risen with the number of positions concerned with digital curation,”
(Kim, Warga, & Moen, 2012, p. 2). Researchers need competent professionals to not only step in
and lead them through the data preservation process but help them understand why curation is
important. “Although some researchers acknowledge that their data could useful to other
researchers, there is little incentive to invest time in archiving and repackaging data sets…in
such cases, reframing data curation within a comprehensive backup and management strategy is
potentially valuable,” (Jahnke, Asher, & Keralis, 2012, p. 17). Since librarians work directly with
researchers already they have an established relationship as an integral component in the
research process. Data curation can easily be integrated into the existing information training
librarians offer researchers and perhaps even become its own area of specialization within
libraries. “In the near future ‘data reference’ will be included in general reference and datasets
not given special attention. Adding to this forecast, data curation curriculum will not only be
provided as an option, but one day become core requirements to library and information science
degrees,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2012, p. 370).

49

For data reference specializations to exist, librarians are going to have to start taking a
more active role in the digital data management process, at all levels, including curation.
“…libraries must become curators of digital data to adhere to their core mission: to protect and
disseminate information,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2012, p. 368). Some libraries are beginning
to integrate new data specific positions into their librarian specialization offerings. However,
these positions are varied in practice therefore it is still somewhat difficult to manage their usage
on a large scale. “The field of digital curation, which intersects with a variety of broader topics,
is evolving rapidly presenting academic libraries with new challenges and exciting
opportunities…. Terms such as digital curator, data librarian, data scientist, data manager and
eScience professionals are used to describe various roles for professionals in this arena,” (Kim,
Warga, & Moen, 2012, p. 1). Because of the varied structure of data curation roles within
libraries and the difficulty in finding librarians with extensive data science experience, these
positions may be filled by individuals outside the traditional library science and information
science disciplines. “Two phenomena compound the challenge of data curation. First, although
the stewardship of digital data demands both general and domain specialist knowledge, there are
currently no effective ways to prepare people for that hybrid role…the second phenomenon
compounding the challenge is the lack of conformity among the places of practice,” (Henry,
Jahnke, & Keralis, 2012, p. 2). For librarians to serve as effective data stewards there must be
more integration of data curation topics covered in coursework. Additionally, librarians will have
to abandon the more traditional role of subject specialization and instead be comfortable working
with data in a variety of domains. “Libraries, data centers, academic departments- all
organizations where data curation can be done-have varied, sometimes idiosyncratic, approaches

50

and often entail different attitudes, cultures, and practices,” (Jahnke, Asher, & Keralis, 2012, p.
2).
Data curation education tracts do exist however, there is a definitive need for additional
skill sets. “Data curation specializations within MLIS programs are designed to provide
employable skills for the crucial, growing need for data support services. However, the skills and
topics covered in the Master of Library and Information Science (MLIS) programs are not
adequate for practice in the field,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p. 2). “The scientific data curation
courses in iSchools include the main methods and technologies of data curation,” (Li, Xiaozhe,
Wenming, & Weining, 2013, p. 719). Therefore, the basics of data curation are covered for
students who enroll in these specific courses. But, “… the approaches for user training are
seldom treated in the courses, which are sometimes even more valued by the employers,” (Li,
Xiaozhe, Wenming, & Weining, 2013, p. 720). User training is going to be an integral part of
designing data curation instruction on a broad scale. For digital curators, “…the responsibilities
and job demands of the position involve understanding users’ specific demands and the current
changes of information environment, identifying the distribution of data sources and grasping
user training approaches besides the methods and technologies, and these contents are seldom
embodied in the courses,” (Li, Xiaozhe, Wenming, & Weining, 2013, p. 719).
Data curation is an essential component of a knowledge-based data-driven economy.
“Data curation is critical to the progress of 21st century science and the emergence of e-science
and e-research. Universities and scientific organizations have recognized the necessity of a
professional data workforce as an integral part of the enterprise of scientific research, stimulated
in part by funding agency requirements for data management planning,” (Varvel Jr., Bammerlin,
& Palmer, 2012, p. 527). Data curation services still have a long way to go if researchers are

51

going to get the full benefit of data curation services within libraries and research centers.
“…when asked if participants were satisfied with the data curation positions or procedures at
their institutions 44.12% of participants said Yes and 55.88% said No (n=69) ….51.33% of
participants (n=71) reported that there was no assessment for data curation services at their
institution,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p. 24). Therefore, more work is still necessary to aid
researchers in their research endeavors successfully now and in the future.

Data Management
For science to continue to advance scientific information must be stored for continued
access and reference. “A record if it is to be useful to science, must be continuously extended, it
must be stored, and above all it must be consulted,” (Bush, 1945, p. 103). This is not a new
concept for scientists, as it has long been acknowledged that scientific research must be grown
from previous data. “As long as empirical research has existed, researchers have been doing
‘data management’ in one form or another,” (Antell, Foote, Turner, & Shults, 2014, p. 557).
“Given the proliferation of research and scientific data, an information workforce prepared to
address data management issues in partnership with the research community is warranted,”
(Charbonneau, 2013, p. 373). Data science related instruction is essential to the research
community growing their existing understanding of basic data science techniques. “Although
there is currently some satisfaction with tools for data collection and analysis, there is less
awareness and satisfaction with tools for metadata creation and preservation,” (Tenopir et al.,
2011, p. 19). Librarians already have an established history working with metadata creation and
preservation therefore it seems only reasonable that they would be appropriate for providing data
science instruction to researchers from all disciplines. However, this will require additional

52

training beyond information management to data science concepts. “An understanding of various
research life cycles, workflows, and communities of practice is central so that librarians can
advise on data management planning issues,” (Charbonneau, 2013, p. 368). The LIS curriculum
will need to adjust to meet the needs of students and researchers for data management skills to
expand within the research community. “Findings show that there is a need to provide students
with the knowledge and complex skills centering on the organization and provision of access
mechanisms for digital resources. Knowledge and skill sets related to electronic resource
management, metadata creation, and computer and Web applications need to be reflected in LIS
curricula,” (Park, Lu, & Marion, 2009, p. 855).
Data science efforts must be organized and comprehensive enough that they are not only
focused on current use but reuse. “…managing data requires a comprehensive approach that
enables effective data sharing, curation, preservation, and reuse,” (Chen & Zhang, 2017, p. 18).
Proper application of data science techniques will ensure data is well aligned with current and
future organization standards. “Data management helps with the proper naming of data files, file
organization, the process of data documentation, and continuous quality control and assurance
for preventing errors within data package which can be used as evidence of invisible quality
dimensions…,” (Yoon, 2016, p. 5). Data management also encourages open data by making data
available for reuse, therefore it is critical that metadata be applied appropriately. “Good
documentation practices that meet the users’ needs can increase the openness and transparency
of data,” (Yoon, 2016, p. 5). “Appraisal and selection processes to identify data with long-term
value are now seen as essential to data management preservation,” (Ray, 2012, p. 607). There is
a human level and a technological level to data management, as selection of the appropriate tools
from the beginning is integral to successful management. “The infrastructure encompasses

53

hardware and software components for data integration, manipulation, recombination and
storage, but also includes the essential human infrastructure required at an institutional level to
advise, guide, train, coordinate and lead the stewardship effort to develop data management
capacity and capability,” (Lyon, 2012, p. 127).
Like all areas of data science, investments in data management are essential to the
success of data management training. “Increasing investment in data management education is
needed to benefit scientists, educators, and ultimately, scholarship. With the increase in data
management requirements by federal and other funding agencies, sound data management
education is imperative,” (Tenopir et al., 2016, p. 243). Data management specifications are now
often a requirement of grant submissions. “Data management and resource sharing plans are now
mandated for applicant’s submissions for certain federal research grants from both the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and National Institutes of Health (NIH),” (Elmore & Jefferson, 2014,
p. 253). When it comes to working with grant data management duties, “it is largely the
librarians’ role to create and provide data management services that meet this new grant
specification,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2012, p. 368). However, “data management work in
research libraries clearly is still in its emergent phase,” (Antell, Foote, Turner, & Shults, 2014, p.
571). Library data management instruction is still in its infancy stages. Whether libraries offer
face to face instruction of not, “…libraries webpages on data management are instructional
sources for researchers, as well as an important way for researchers to learn more about the
libraries’ services,” (Yoon & Schultz, 2016, p. 19).
Despite their similarities, data management and data curation are two distinctly different
data science specifications. “The difference between management and curation is that ‘data
management emphasizes organizing, collecting, describing, and storing data for communication

54

among scholars,” (Thomas & Urban, 2017, p. 3). Good data management techniques will ensure
data health is of the utmost importance. “Quality control/quality assurance is one of the most
important data management topics taught, mirroring good science practices to ensure the highest
quality of data. However, topics such as creating metadata, archiving, and preservation still need
more focus,” (Tenopir et al., 2016, p. 243). The topics of metadata, archiving, and preservation
are already covered in the general library science and information science education. Therefore,
ensuring librarians can provide quality instructional guidance on these topics for researchers is
essential to the expansion of data management. “Data management instruction assistance, such as
that which can be provided by trained data managers or data librarians, can help science
educators with both the lack of time and expertise barriers,” (Tenopir et al., 2016, p. 242).
However, librarians will need to take their existing information domain knowledge and broaden
it to include data management. “In addition to learning new skills, though…librarians also report
that they are applying their ‘traditional’ librarian skills to data management tasks. Reference
skills- the ability to liaise, refer, consult, and teach-are among the competencies that survey
respondents cite more frequently as being necessary for…librarians who plan to assist
researchers with data management,” (Antell, Foote, Turner, & Shults, 2014, p. 571). Not all
librarians will require broad data management skills, “…some…librarians will perform basic
data management work (such as liaising, consulting, and referring) using their existing skills
while maintain their roles as…librarians, while others will undertake additional training and
become data management specialists,” (Antell, Foote, Turner, & Shults, 2014, p. 570).
Therefore, data science instruction within library and information course offerings should be
available at different levels to ensure all students are at least introduced to data science concepts.

55

Advanced data science courses should be offered for those students who want additional data
science training.
Through both data curation and related data science activities “…libraries have entered
the data lifecycle by taking on the task of housing and preserving the data generated from student
and faculty research projects in data repositories,” (Reinhalter & Wittmann, 2012, p. 368). As a
result, research libraries are often far ahead of the curve in developing formal data science
policies. “Currently, libraries in research-intensive institutions tend to be ahead of others both in
terms of policy development and service delivery. This is not surprising since it is in these
institutions that the data science imperative is perhaps felt most keenly and where libraries have
more capacity to resource new areas of activity,” (Cox & Pinfield, 2014, p. 23). Despite evidence
of some library policies that acknowledge data science activities, specialization continues to
increase in data science roles without any real guiding definition as to how these roles are
defined broadly. “There is a growing mountain of research. But there is increased evidence that
we are being bogged down today as specialization extends,” (Bush, 1945, p. 102). “More LIS
schools will need to adapt their curricula to help students and practicing professionals develop
the needed competencies in research data curation and management,” (Tonta, 2016, p. 10). The
LIS curriculum should define data science roles for information professionals and subsequently
prepare prospective employees for these roles. Without aligning the curriculum to professional
specifications there will continue to be a lack of awareness among external communities as to
what information science and library science can offer the entire research community. “The lack
of MIS/MLS/MLIS degree requirements for these positions requires further exploration because
this may be interpreted in several ways: (1) that many employers are not aware of the potential
contributions of LIS graduates to new data science professions, (2) LIS graduates do not have an

56

advantage over graduates from other programs, and (3) LIS programs are not preparing students
for such positions, (Chen & Zhang, 2017, p. 22). Per the study from Thomas & Urban (2017),
the most desired areas for continuing education for practicing information science professionals,
“included Data Management, Information Policy, Digital Preservation and Information
Organization” (p. 24).
Data management is integral for data reuse and therefore the expansion of science
depends on good techniques in data management among scholars. “…data management
contributes to the invisible dimensions of quality and helps to make… invisible dimensions more
visible to data reusers,” (Yoon, 2016, p. 5). Despite the importance of data management
techniques there is a general lack of understand among scholars as to why data management is
important. “…there is a lack of awareness about the importance of metadata among the scientific
community-at least in practice-which is a serious problem as their involvement is quite crucial in
deal with problems regarding data management,” (Tenopir et al., 2011, p. 20). “Awareness
regarding best practices in data management is still in its infancy. The continued improvement of
the state of data management education depends on the widespread implementation of policies
related to creation of metadata, open access to data, data sharing, preservation, and archiving.”
(Tenopir et al., 2016, p. 243). In addition to providing good data management instruction to
scholars, data management systems require additional fine tuning to encourage further user
participation. “Current data management systems must be fundamentally improved so that they
can meet the capacity demand for secure storage and transmission of research data. Integrating
the data preservation system with the active research cycle is essential to encourage researcher
investment,” (Jahnke, Asher, & Keralis, 2012, p. 19). If librarians can take the reins and steer
scholars towards data science by exploiting their existing information organization domain

57

knowledge they can change the entire perception of the information science discipline. “By using
their data science and digital skills, research librarians have the opportunity to make an impactful
contribution to the workflow of their faculty colleagues. Librarians’ data science skills can help
navigate through the deluge of information, and can truly change how they are perceived: from
an overhead service to research coinvestigators,” (Ekstrom, Elbaek, Edmann, & Grigorov, 2016,
p. 2).
The data specialization should be a clearly defined iSchool career tract. “Not all
librarians, even in academic and research settings, will become data specialists to this extent,
although many certainly will. But all library and information professionals, in all sectors, will
need to gain at least a basic appreciation of the issues around data, both technical and socioethical,” (Robinson & Bawden, 2017, p. 313). “If librarians-in general, and beyond a few
specialists and enthusiasts-are to be effective in this new role, professional education will have to
adapt accordingly,” (Robinson & Bawden, 2017, p. 313). “A good way to gain recognition from
employers is to prepare job ready LIS graduates for these data management positions. Identifying
essential skills and knowledge is an important step towards preparing such graduates…”, (Chen
& Zhang, 2017, p. 22). The success of data management curriculum design depends on the
continued survey of the professional landscape, through both traditional and non-traditional
means of inquiry. “The design and development of data management curricula should also
consider the input from stakeholders…Surveying stakeholders helps offer feedback and
indicators of not only what is needed and how to meet those requirements, but also how well LIS
programs are preparing data management professionals,” (Chen & Zhang, 2017, p. 23).

Research Data Services

58

“Increased reliance on technology in all parts of scientific endeavor, or
cyberinfrastructure, and the establishment of data management and data sharing mandates by
many research funding bodies have motivated academic libraries to respond to the changing
needs of their faculty and student researchers and consider how best to engage in e-science
through the development of library based research services (RDS),” (Tenopir, 2013, p. 1).
“Libraries have a natural leadership role for data services, because they are one place in their
institution that sees the broad picture across all constituents or subject disciplines,” (Tenopir,
2013, p. 2). “We should collectively view the ‘Informatics Transform’ as an important
opportunity for libraries: a chance to engage new audiences, deliver innovative services and
adopt new roles,” (Lyon, 2012, p. 136). “…both staff and students have opportunities to become
increasingly multidisciplinary competent by developing the ability to think/work across cultural
and domain divides, disseminating knowledge across different paradigms and importantly,
collaborating,” (Sutherland & Wildgaard, 2016, p. 18). “Librarians are looking for new roles in
serving researchers and collaborating with them. Research data management services are part of
this development…demands for data sharing from governments, funding agencies and science
publishers have increased the need for these services,” (Kuusniemi, Heino, & Larmo, 2014, p. 1).
“Research data services are services that a library offers to researchers in relation to
managing data and can include information services (e.g., consulting with faculty, staff, or
students on data management plans or metadata standards…,” (Tenopir, Birch, & Allard, 2012,
p. 8). However, research data services also include activities such as, “…providing reference
support for finding and citing data sets; or providing web guides and finding aids for data or data
sets), as well as technical services (e.g., providing technical support for data repositories,
preparing data sets for repository, deaccessioning or deselecting data sets from a repository, or

59

creating metadata for data sets),” (Tenopir, Birch, & Allard, 2012, p. 8). Research data services
should correspond to the full life cycle of data. “Research data services are services across the
full data lifecycle, including data management planning, digital curation (selection, preservation,
maintenance, and archiving), and metadata creation and conversion,” (Tenopir, 2013, p. 3).
Librarians can provide valuable guidance to researchers as, “funder and journal policies
that require data sharing are new to many researchers, and those who have not been accustomed
to sharing their data many need guidance in best practices for doing so,” (Federer, 2016, p. 41).
“Describing data through metadata, preserving data in secure and long-term fashion, organizing
data for discovery or knowing where to discover others’ data, and reusing and integrating data
collected by others are often not yet part of scientists’ normal routine,” (Tenopir, 2013, p. 3).
“This new environment allows libraries to take a more active and visible role in the knowledge
creation process by placing librarians at all stages in the research planning process and by
providing expertise to develop data management plans, identify appropriate data description, and
create preservation strategies,” (Tenopir, Birch, & Allard, 2012, p. 42). “At a time when many
libraries face challenges to funding and must demonstrate their continued relevance, expanding
services to encompass research data management and other data science services may be a useful
way to provide novel types of support to their user communities,” (Federer, 2016, p. 42).
“Making the future librarian an indispensable research partner to faculty would not only close the
gap in how the role is perceived, but also create a self-sustaining conduit for including best
practices in collaborative and open scholarship, and implementing Open Science by default.
Ultimately, everyone would get more impact,” (Ekstrom, Elbaek, Edmann, & Grigorov, 2016, p.
3).

60

“First, academic libraries can provide consulting services related to research data
management and curation. Second, academic libraries can provide the infrastructure, or at least
the front end, for data storage and curation. Third academic libraries can support librarians
becoming active members on research and grant proposal teams as data curation consultants,”
(Tenopir, Birch, & Allard, 2012, p. 42). “Despite the wealth of training programs dedicated to
librarians acquiring data skills, there are few focused-on cultivating tech-savvy managers or on
operationally managing data-intensive teams,” (Burton & Lyon, 2017, p. 2). “Library managers
and administrators need supporting frameworks and toolkits to leverage data science capability
in their strategic planning and decision making, in the cost effective operational management of
library services and in the development of librarian teams supporting data-intensive communities
on campus and beyond,” (Burton & Lyon, 2017, p. 2). According to Faniel & Connaway, 2018,
“librarians have successfully established RDM (research data management) programs on campus
to support researchers needs, but there are still opportunities to more efficiently and effectively
support the broad range of activities throughout the data lifecycle,” (Faniel & Connaway, 2018,
p. 20).
“Most scientists do not believe their organization is doing a sufficient job in helping them
achieve long-term data preservation and many researchers are not currently using international
metadata standards,” (Tenopir et al., 2011, p. 19-20). “Input and training modules must be a part
of system to assist scientists with preparing their data and datasets to be retrievable into the
future. Adherence to formal metadata standards is crucial to retrieval effectiveness. Moreover,
the problem of easy conversion between different metadata standards needs to be addressed,”
(Tenopir et al., 2011, p. 20). “Before any recommendations can be made on the sharing,
management, or curation practices for a data set it is important that a librarian and others

61

involved have as rich an understanding of the researcher’s situation, issues, and needs as
possible,” (Carlson, 2011, p. 13). “Conducting a data interview is an important approach to
collaboratively working and engaging with researchers for data management. Conducting data
interviews can be instrumental in eliciting helpful information about researcher data needs while
also affording librarians an opportunity to demonstrate their ability to advice on various data
management planning issues,” (Charbonneau, 2013, p. 368). “Employers and managers
participating in Data Scientist Training for Librarians complained of weak communication,
practical and presentation skills in new graduates; expecting more multi-dimensional and
market-oriented skills and interest in leadership roles,” (Sutherland & Wildgaard, 2016, p. 17).
“iSchools also need to place more emphasis on training students’ communication and
interpersonal skills,” (Li, Xiaozhe, Wenming, & Weining, 2013, p. 720-721). “An important
point to convey to librarians is that the purpose of the data interview is to investigate, not
advocate. Pushing a particular course of action too soon is likely to be counterproductive,”
(Carlson, 2011, p. 13). Training librarians to be conduct successful and productive data
interviews is an integral component to advancing data science and related subdisciplines.

62

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
Now that we have provided a literature framework for both information science and data
science we will turn to our research questions to determine how, if at all, career opportunities in
data science, relate to those taught in iSchool masters level courses. This is intended to provide a
well-rounded and more complete definition of data science from both the academic and
professional communities alike. Methodology in this study will include a variety of coordinated
techniques of analysis because the subject being deconstructed is multifaceted and far too varied
of a concept to tie to one method of analysis. Therefore, through a combination of latent
semantic analysis of text via related job postings and U.S. iSchool masters level course syllabi
learning objective information, it is our aim to explore the intersection of information science
and data science and highlight potential partnership opportunities that already exist. Hopefully
these research findings will guide future directions for information science professionals into
additional data science professional roles, while also investigating the data science techniques
already integrated in the information science profession.
There are growing employment demands in data science professions that require varied
skill sets. It has already been established that data and information are related fields therefore,
both information science professionals and data science professionals should have a basic
understanding of how the two disciplines and professions, are interrelated and beneficial to one
another in practice.
To understand the current data science career opportunities potentially available to LIS
graduates, this research will present textual analysis of data science job postings. The postings
included will contain both traditional library science and information science roles, as well as

63

postings for employment opportunities outside the LIS and traditional iSchool communities.
Over 1500 employment postings will be collected and used to perform textual topical analysis
using SAS Enterprise Miner. While we intend to collect job postings from the data science
profession, it is important to understand how often data science and LIS appear with one another
on job postings as a gage of the public perception of what the LIS community can offer data
science. Job postings are a valuable source of data in terms of data science professional
opportunities. Studying the positions being offered to potential graduates is integral when
determining what skills and abilities are shared across the information science and data science
disciplines. Additionally, collecting job postings from across the geographic United States is
essential to understanding the complete job market graduates will encounter upon graduation.
Since education is integral to advancing data science and related subfields within the
traditionally LIS community, textual analysis will also be performed on current course offerings
at iSchools. iSchools were specifically selected as a primary area of study because they already
have a noted reputation in the LIS community for training dedicated leaders and highly skilled
information professionals that are often regarded as pioneers. Course offerings will be compared
to employment postings to determine how closely the two align, if at all. Specifically, course
titles, descriptions and learning objectives will be collected from 37 of the 83 currently
participating iSchools across the globe. A total of 37 of the 83 participating iSchools are within
the United States. All 37 U.S. iSchools were contacted multiple times over a course spanning a
total 3 months. A total of 7 of the 37 possible iSchools, or 19%, responded and agreed to
participate in this research by providing syllabi from all courses offered in the 2017 school year.
The initial goal was to get a minimum of 10 iSchools to respond and participate in our research
by providing complete syllabi materials, however, many institutions appear to currently lack a

64

centralized repository of course syllabi which makes collection in mass difficult. Appendix A
contains a current complete list of U.S. iSchools and the number of course syllabi obtained from
each. All syllabi are from 2017 academic school year and are limited to graduate level courses. It
is our aim to measure the potential knowledge and skills obtained by students currently entering
the workforce, therefore syllabi collection times are intended to integrate with job post collection
times.
Learning objectives will be compared using textual analysis, specifically frequency
analysis of applicable data science related terms and skills, via the software SAS Enterprise
Miner. Additionally, course titles, descriptions, and learning objectives will be measured to
determine how often data science and related terms are found within job postings as compared to
other nonrelated terms. Overall the goal of the initial syllabi textual analysis is to measure the
saturation of data science and determine any related terms within the existing iSchool
curriculum.
In addition to textual analysis of iSchool course syllabi, frequency based textual analysis
will be conducted on job postings with the keyword “data science” or related terms contained
either in the job title or required skills. The aim is to better understand the correlation between
data science job postings and information science course syllabi to determine how well the two
relate to one another. Textual analysis of job posting will be conducted using SAS Enterprise
Miner as well. Job postings will be collected from the job search engine Indeed.com. Indeed.com
was selected as the source of job postings because it serves as a search engine for all other job
websites. “Indeed is the #1 job site worldwide, with over 200 million unique visitors per month.
Indeed is available in more than 60 countries and 28 languages, covering 94% of global GDP,”
(Indeed, 2018). Therefore, indeed.com job results are complete and robust and can be searched

65

using Boolean operators. Over 1500 job postings will be analyzed in total to determine what, if
any, information science skills are most often mentioned in conjunction with “data science” and
related terms and how often LIS degrees specifically, if at all, are mentioned within the degree
requirements. The same keyword search terms will be reused throughout the job search process
to ensure uniformity and accuracy in research scope. The keywords utilized for the job collection
process will be documented in the research results section. Job postings will be collected from
indeed daily over a consecutive 60-day period to ensure a varied, yet accurate sample is
collected.
Frequency analysis between job postings and syllabi will be measured against another to
better understand current and future directions in data science from the education and
employment sectors. However, this only represents part of the complete data science picture.
Terms that appear within the job postings and course information will be measured by cross
tabulations to determine and compare frequency. The Vector Space Model (Salton, Wong, &
Yang, 1975) was selected for text analysis, including filtering of unnecessary terms and words,
term weighting and reduction (Cousseement & Van Den Poel, 2008). to streamline topics to only
those with value associated via term frequency analysis. Additionally, Latent Semantic Analysis
(Deerwester et al., 1990) will be performed via Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) (Landauer,
2007) through reduction of the resulting term frequency matrix. The skills and abilities from job
postings will be compared to course syllabi learning objective skills and abilities to determine
weight in either category. The skills and abilities most discussed in job postings will be
compared to course syllabi to determine the similarities and differences of weighted terms. Value
of skills and abilities will be measured using chi-square analysis (Winson-Geideman &
Evangelopoulos, 2013).

66

Additionally, a “greedy” approach algorithm is applied to results based on chi-square
scores to eliminate terms based on value until the top 10 skills and abilities within the job
postings remain, (Cormen, Leiserson, & Rivest, 1995). All other skills and abilities are
eliminated from analysis at this point and the remaining 10 skills and abilities are isolated to
compare against iSchool course learning objectives. Elimination through attribute reduction will
be conducted a second time to determine what skills and abilities align to course learning
objectives, if any, and which skills and abilities, if any, do not appear to be represented,
(Winson-Geideman & Evangelopoulos, 2013).
Course syllabi contain specific data related to course learning objectives. This area is
often labeled learning objectives. Competency based learning is now standard practice at most
higher education institutions therefore, data should be available within course syllabi to provide
specific detail as to what specific knowledge and skills students should obtain from a course.
Because they provide specific knowledge expectations, learning objectives and similar content
will be measured for specific competencies based on skills and abilities represented in data
science job postings. The two will be compared to one another to determine where the two
competency expectations, overlap, if at all, and diverge. Data science is clearly being discussed
within the information science community but it to what extent and in what context within the
course material itself?
The research questions declared in the last section will be measured via iSchool masters
level course syllabi and data science job postings.
1. What are the job characteristics and requirements mentioned in data science job
postings?
2. How does iSchool curriculum map to the job requirements specified in data science
job postings?

67

The results of this examination will hopefully guide future directions of iSchool and information
science students and professionals towards more data science professional roles and guide future
research into the intersection between information science and data science. We believe future
research is essential to guiding both institutions and professionals as more and more data science
roles and opportunities continue to emerge, and the library and information professionals
continue to support the needs of a data driven professional research community. Additionally, as
data science efforts continue to grow across industries and disciplines, who has the knowledge
necessary to partner with data scientists as they struggle to manage, maintain, and utilize the vast
array of data currently being produced and stored?

68

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
As stated in the previous section, detailed textual analysis was performed on iSchool
syllabi and data science job posts to determine if similarities exist. The first step in this analysis
was determining how many iSchools would be solicited. Since our first step is to study the
relationship between information science and data science in the United States job and education
market, this initial research will focus on U.S. iSchools and U.S. job posts. From July 2017 to
February 2018 all 45 iSchools were contacted via email regarding our research efforts. iSchools
were contacted via email exclusively and asked to provide syllabi for all Graduate level courses
within their iSchool. Multiple emails were sent over the course of 7 months and multiple
members of administration at each institution were contacted and asked to participate.
Participants were notified that their syllabi would not be distributed and would remain
anonymous throughout the research process. Additionally, the iSchool organization itself was
asked initially if they were able to provide this level of syllabi detail for all U.S. members and
unfortunately at this time they were not able to. They did say they would like to collect this in the
future which is encouraging for individuals who may want to replicate this research in the future.
As illustrated in Figure 1 in total 7 of the total 45 U.S. iCaucus member iSchools
provided syllabi for this research. Therefore, there is just over an 18% participation rate for this
research study. Syllabi were categorized by institution, given a unique id, and stripped down to
only the learning objectives in sentence format for each graduate level course description
provided. During the months of April, May, and June 2018 over 1600 U.S. job posts were
collected using the job search engine indeed.com with the keyword “data science”. Like the
syllabi, job posts were stripped down to skill requirements and categorized in sentence format,

69

complete with unique ids for mainting seperate classification from the syllabi for comparison
later. The 7 iSchools that were included in the analysis are outlined in Figure 2, along with the
number of syllabi provided from each institution for the purposes of analysis.

Figure 1. U.S. iSchool research participant count.

iSchool Syllabi Document Counts
University of Washington: Information School
University of Texas, Austin: School of…
University of North Texas: College of…
University of North Carolina: School of…
University of Tennessee, Knoxville: School of…
University of Kentucky: College of…
University of Colorado: Boulder: Department…
0
University of
Colorado:
Boulder:
Department
of
Information
Science
Documents Provided
8

University of
Kentucky:
College of
Communicat
ion and
Information
53

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

University of
University of
North
University of
Tennessee,
University of
University of
Carolina:
Texas,
Knoxville:
North Texas:
Washington:
School of
Austin:
School of
College of
Information
Information
School of
Information
Information
School
and Library
Information
Sciences
Science
59
84
73
80
82

Figure 2. iSchool syllabi document counts.

70

Figure 3. Screenshot of syllabi and job post data converted to SAS format.
Graduate level iSchool syllabi from the seven participating iSchools and job post data
was cleaned and prepared for analysis using Microsoft Excel during July 2018 and August 2018,
and then it was loaded into SAS Enterprise Miner for topical analysis and comparison. A
complete textual topical analysis was conducted using SAS Enterprise Miner during the month
of August 2018. Text was converted from excel format to SAS format as depicted in Figure 3.
The analysis diagrams used in SAS Enterprise Miner are depicted in Figure 4 and Figure 5.

Figure 4. Analysis diagram Screenshot 1.

Figure 5. Analysis diagram Screenshot 2.

71

A total of 46,966 sentences were collected from 1,603 total job posts and a total of 4,072
sentences were collected from 439 syllabi for a total of 51,072 sentences analyzed from 2,042
documents combined as depicted in Figure 6. The counts of sentences used per document for
both data science job posts and iSchool syllabi are included in Appendix B and Appendix C of
this paper.
1000000 λ

Screen Plot
51,072 total sentences analyzed
(46,996 sentences from data science job posts and 4,072 sentences from
information science syllabi)…

500000

k

0

1

11

21

31

Principal
component
41

Figure 6. Eigenvalue screen plot.
Upon performing a topical analysis on all 51,072 sentences from 2,042 documents
Eigenvalues were plotted using Minitab and excel as depicted above in Figure 6. It was
determined based on this analysis that the first 18 eigenvalues were significant and were
therefore extracted for further topical analysis. The original topics and values associated with
each from SAS Enterprise Miner are provided in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Topic analysis from SAS miner.
72

The 18 topics extracted for analysis were synthesized and summarized as outlined below
in Table 1. Topics are identified by the ID provided with them below, ranging from 1 to 18. For
the purposes of our examination these will be the topics used going forward for the remainder of
the analysis conducted.These raw topics vary in complexity and type and range from general
employment skills to more specific data science related topics identified in our literature review.
Table 1
Topic Analysis Key
Topic ID

Summarized Analysis
Topic

Raw SAS Topic

T1

Statistical Analysis

+analysis, statistical, data, +data analysis, +statistical analysis

T2

Degrees

+degree, +statistic, +computer, +field, +bachelor

T3

Communications Skills

+skill, +communication, written, +strong,excellent

T4

Programming
Languages

python, +program, +language, sql, java

T5

Data Science

+science, +data science, data, +computer, +team

T6

Machine Learning

+learning, +machine, +machine learn, +technique, +deep

T7

Work Environment

+work, +ability, +environment, +team, +fast

T8

Data Scientist

+scientist, +data scientist, data, +senior, senior data scientist

T9

Experience

+experience, +year, +work,minimum, +prefer

T10

Data Visualization

data, +tool, +visualization, +big, +data visualization

T11

Information & ICT

information, +technology, +system, management, +understand

T12

Problem Solving

+problem, +solve, +solution, analytical, +ability

T13

Advanced Analytics

analytics, advanced, +team, related, +related field

T14

Business
Understanding

+business, +analyst, +intelligence, +understand, +solution

T15

Project Management

+project, management, +ability, +manage, +lead

T16

Team Work

+team, +engineer, +product, +development, +work

T17

Predictive Modeling

+model, predictive, +develop, +build, statistical

T18

Customer Service

+customer, +company, +help, +market, +service

Following up the topic mapping outlined in Table 1, topics were compared to one another
by occurrence in all collected iSchool Graduate level syllabi and data science job postings as
73

displayed in Figure 8. Topics were also measured for individual frequency was examined within
collected job posts Figure 9 and collected iSchool syllabi Figure 10 separately. This allows us to
examine topic frequency as it truly occurs in both the data science job posts collected and
iSchool syllabi despite either group having a deep divide between the number of sentences
included in the text analysis. However, this data is integral to providing transparency in how the
numbers were prepared and transformed from sentence count measurement to topic frequency
measurement for more accurate overall analysis. We wanted our readers to see both topics
independently and combined for better understanding of how data was prepared in its entirety.

Customer Service

412

Predictive Modeling

196

Team Work

265

Project Management

277

4520

Business Understanding

258

4663

Advanced Analytics

141

Problem Solving

176

Information & ICT

811

Data Visualization

322

Experience

191

Data Scientist

116

Work Environment

250

Machine Learning

166

Data Science

210

Programming Languages

138

Communications Skills

178

Degrees
Statistical Analysis

77
206

5915
3707
6188

3458
2889
3097
6325
6397
2829
5291
2492
3724
3495
3217
2540
3700

Figure 8. Topic comparison by sentence count.

74

Customer Service

5,915

Predictive Modeling

3,707

Team Work

6,188

Project Management

4,520

Business Understanding

4,663

Advanced Analytics

3,458

Problem Solving

2,889

Information & ICT

3,097

Data Visualization

6,325

Experience

6,397

Data Scientist

2,829

Work Environment

5,291

Machine Learning

2,492

Data Science

3,724

Programming Languages

3,495

Communications Skills

3,217

Degrees

2,540

Statistical Analysis

3,700

Figure 9. Job posts, topic frequency analysis.

75

Customer Service

412

Predictive Modeling

196

Team Work

265

Project Management

277

Business Understanding

258

Advanced Analytics

141

Problem Solving

176

Information & ICT

811

Data Visualization

322

Experience

191

Data Scientist

116

Work Environment

250

Machine Learning

166

Data Science

210

Programming Languages

138

Communications Skills
Degrees
Statistical Analysis

178
77
206

Figure 10. Syllabi, topic frequency analysis.

76

Experience
Data Visualization
Team Work
Customer Service
Work Environment
Business
Understanding
Project
Management
Data Science
Predictive
Modeling
Statistical Analysis
Programming
Languages
Advanced
Analytics
Communications
Skills
Information & ICT
Problem Solving
Data Scientist
Degrees
Machine Learning
Jobs

Syllabi

Figure 11. Job posts, ranked emphasis on topic.
77

Information & ICT
Customer Service
Data Visualization
Project Management
Team Work
Business Understanding
Work Environment
Data Science
Statistical Analysis
Predictive Modeling
Experience
Communications Skills
Problem Solving
Machine Learning
Advanced Analytics
Programming Languages
Data Scientist
Degrees
Syllabi
Figure 12. Syllabi, ranked emphasis on topic.
78

Jobs

Figure 13. Chi-square analysis of sentence counts.

79

Table 2
Topic Frequency Ranking by Job Posts
Topic
Experience
Data Visualization
Team Work
Customer Service
Work Environment
Business Understanding
Project Management
Data Science
Predictive Modeling
Statistical Analysis
Programming Languages
Advanced Analytics
Communications Skills
Information & ICT
Problem Solving
Data Scientist
Degrees
Machine Learning
Totals

Jobs

Syllabi

8.59%
8.50%
8.31%
7.95%
7.11%
6.26%
6.07%
5.00%
4.98%
4.97%
4.69%
4.64%
4.32%
4.16%
3.88%
3.80%
3.41%
3.35%
100.00%

4.35%
7.33%
6.04%
9.38%
5.69%
5.88%
6.31%
4.78%
4.46%
4.69%
3.14%
3.21%
4.05%
18.47%
4.01%
2.64%
1.75%
3.78%
100.00%

Table 3
Topic Frequency Ranking by Syllabi
Topic
Information & ICT
Customer Service
Data Visualization
Project Management
Team Work
Business Understanding
Work Environment
Data Science
Statistical Analysis
Predictive Modeling

Jobs

Syllabi

4.16%
7.95%
8.50%
6.07%
8.31%
6.26%
7.11%
5.00%
4.97%
4.98%

18.47%
9.38%
7.33%
6.31%
6.04%
5.88%
5.69%
4.78%
4.69%
4.46%
(table continues)

80

Topic
Experience
Communications Skills
Problem Solving
Machine Learning
Advanced Analytics
Programming Languages
Data Scientist
Degrees
Totals

Jobs
8.59%
4.32%
3.88%
3.35%
4.64%
4.69%
3.80%
3.41%
100.00%

Syllabi
4.35%
4.05%
4.01%
3.78%
3.21%
3.14%
2.64%
1.75%
100.00%

Following a separate and consolidated general comparison of topic frequency by
additional analysis was conducted with an emphasis on topic as a percentage of relevant
documents for both collected Syllabi Figure 11 and job posts Figure 12. Then frequency was
compared according to percentage of emphasis in either group of collected documents. Based on
this comparison, one can clearly see that a relationship exists between collected LIS iSchool
syllabi and data science job posts within the context of topic comparison. We showed topics
independently and combined as we did in the sentence count data collection to provide an equal
frame of reference for our analysis. As a final step we also conducted a chi square analysis upon
examining the above bar charts. This extra step was necessary as a much smaller group of syllabi
was collected as compared to the extremely large group of job post text analyzed in comparison.
This additional step in the research analysis procedure allows ranking based on percentage for a
more equal and unbiased comparison. Upon conducting a chi-square test Figure 13 using Minitab
and the frequency counts of both the collected job posts and syllabi we obtained a chi square of
1955.325 with 17 degrees of freedom as illustrated in Figure 13. Upon taking this to the t table
we can see we can reject the null hypothesis based on the value being lower than the chi square
we obtained. The chi square null hypothesis we measured was iSchool syllabi learning objectives
and related text collected have equal topic frequency to data science job posts collected. In this
81

context the alternative hypothesis for the chi square analysis would be that the two groups of
sentences have unequal distribution topic frequency. Based on this value we have quantitive
support that the data does not follow a standard normal distribution. The two sentence clusters
we performed text analysis against were confirmed to have unequal topic frequency by a chi
square analysis. Additionally we provide a measurement of topic ranking placement as proof the
topics are related which will be discussed in the following section.
Table 2 and Table 3 display this ranked percentile of topic occurrence data in a table
format as well to provide an additional visual representation of topic ranking by frequency in
both collected job posts and iSchool graduate level syllabi. The results of a comparison based on
ranking shows that 11.11% of topics have the same ranking by emphasis on topic. The topic
“Business Understanding” is ranked 6th in frequency by topic within both the group of collected
iSchool syllabi and collected data science job posts. Additionally, the topic “Data Science” was
ranked 8th within both groups of collected documents. Once it was determined there were no
other topics that shared the same ranking in either document collection, topics were measured to
determine if any were close in ranking. The results of this analysis confirmed that 33.3% of the
topics were ranked within one row of one another. These topics were “Data Visualization”,
“Statistical Analysis”, “Predictive Modeling”, “Communication Skills”, “Data Scientist”, and
“Degrees”. The close rankings outlined above lead us to believe there is an existing relationship
between what is being presented within in iSchool graduate level syllabi learning objectives and
data science job posts. Lastly, the topic analysis confirmed that 27.8% of topics on either the
collected iSchool syllabi or job post sentence analysis were within 2 rows of one another. These
topics identified were “Team Work”, “Customer Service”, “Project Management”, “Work
Environment”, and “Problem Solving”. Therefore a total of 72.2% of the topics collected were

82

related in the iSchool masters course syllabi learning objective content and the job post
requirements for data science roles. This leaves only 27.8% of the topics ranked in either group
unrelated to one another in terms of ranking by topic frequency. The remaining 5 topics that
were unrelated in terms of frequency measurement were “Experience”, “Advanced Analytics”,
“Information & ICT”, “Programming Languages”, and “Machine Learning”.
Upon comparing topic frequency, it appears the topic “Information and ICT” is more
emphasized in collected Information School iSchool syllabi then in data science. The topic
“Experience” appears to be weighted more heavily in the collected data science job posts then in
collected iSchool syllabi. This is perhaps an opportunity to provide Information School students
more opportunities to get hands on experience with data science tools as a part of course learning
objectives presented in Syllabi. This seems to also be further emphasized by the fact that the
topic “Programming Languages”, while ranked in both document groups, is higher ranked in
collected data science job posts then collected iSchool graduate level syllabi. iSchool students
interested in data science roles would likely benefit from expanding these areas for future
opportunities. On the opposing side, collected iSchool syllabi appear to have more emphasis on
the topic “Machine Learning” then data science job posts which could be perceived as an
opportunity for iSchools to more formally partner with data science employers and education
providers to emphasize the importance of machine learning on future growth of the data science
field. Table 2 outlines the response to Research Question #1 by providing a comprehensive list of
the skills and competencies outlined in data science job posts. Additionally, Table 3 outlines the
collected text response frequency to Research Question #2. iSchool curriculum stated learning
objectives were compared against the text in over 1,600 data science job posts. In Table 2 and
Table 3 one can see the frequency of collected skills and competencies in either area that overlap

83

in frequency between syllabi and job posts. Therefore, we can safely assume that there is overlap
between the skills and requirements for data science roles and the iSchool curriculum for
information and science professionals. This leads us to the conclusion that iSchools curriculum
does successfully map to data science job posts available within the U.S. job market. However,
we believe additional evaluation still needs to occur for a more accurate picture of how
information science and data science are related.

84

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Based on the conclusion reached in Chapter Five, we will now discuss next steps in this
research. We have determined that there appears to be a relationship between specific topics
presented in both collected iSchool graduate level iSchool syllabi and data science job posts
when sentences are broken down and analyzed for topic frequency in either document group.
Since this research was intended to be exploratory since it was the first research of its kind, we
feel additional research is necessary to fully grasp the scope of the relationship and determine
how iSchools can best meet the current needs of the data science community. We believe that
this could be done initially by comparing data science syllabi to data science jobs posts to
determine what, if any, gaps exist between the job market and the current education offerings.
Also, we believe it would beneficial to survey data science professionals and employers to
determine if there are needs that they believe are not being met by current formal data science
course offerings.
Our initial hypothesis without conducting any additional research on this topic matter is
that there are areas within current data science job posts that are not being sufficiently covered
by data science learning objectives which presents an opportunity for iSchool students to fill this
gap in the employment sector. We feel this would require a formal universally recognized
partnership between data science and iSchools within both the employment sector and the
education requirements for either degree. By presenting our research in this topic area we hope to
make it easier for the two fields to reach a common and shared theoretical framework based on
similar, if not the same, foundational concepts, whether the context is data or information.

85

It is our sincere hope that both the data science profession and information science
professions could benefit from a mutually beneficial relationship that defines both areas both as a
set of related subject matters, but fully integrated fields with a shared and yet separate defining
concepts. Without conducting additional research, it is difficult to speculate what areas, if any,
are not being currently being covered within course learning objectives of data science courses
so the results of this type of research would define the next steps in this research area.
As with any study there were limitations to this analysis. We did not have access to all
iSchool graduate level syllabi. Additionally, a single measure was used to measure both career
opportunities and iSchool syllabi. For career opportunities only job posts were selected to
measure data science skills and competencies while likewise only iSchool syllabi, specifically
learning objectives and similar content, was used to measure iSchool standards of learning. This
research did not include any additional measures due to time limitations but it could be expanded
upon in additional future research. While we reached out to every U.S. iSchool institution via
multiple contacts via email, not every institution responded and additionally many of those who
did respond did not have a formal process in place for sharing syllabi. Some states have strict
laws about this type of information sharing for public universities, such as Texas, and require
schools to electronically publically share, while other institutions and states do not require this
type of public information sharing. This made is extremely easy to access some syllabi and
difficult to access others. Additional research could easily be conducted to compare all iSchool
syllabi if a formal repository is set up via the formal iSchool executive leadership. I was
informed that something like this was already in discussion so this a reasonable possibility in
terms of future research possibilities. If more schools digitize their syllabi in the U.S. this
research could easily be built upon to include additional iSchools on a case by case basis as well

86

or expand to include non iSchools with information science and/or data science programs, both
masters level and otherwise. Also, as stated above this analysis was only conducted using U.S.
iSchool graduate level syllabi and U.S. data science job posts. It could be replicated for other
countries to determine what differences, if any, exist between the U.S. only version of this
research and other data science markets in other countries.
Another potential limitation of this research is that analysis was only conducted using
data science job posts. Information science job posts could also be included in the analysis to
further determine what gaps, if any, exist between current traditional information science job
posts and course offerings, especially nontraditional iSchool opportunities. Additionally, it
would be interesting to survey iSchool recent graduates and current students to determine their
perspectives on future employment prospects and current ones for those students already
employed. Also, it is important to track the unemployment rates of recent iSchool graduates to
determine if there are any difficulties within finding job opportunities upon graduation within the
traditional iSchool career tracks. As a follow up it is equally important to track iSchool students
that have selected to take their iSchool training and enter the data science career realm. Tracking
these types of iSchool students over longitudinal methods is essential to determining and
defining future potential career opportunities for iSchool graduates.

87

CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we conducted an analysis of Topics within current U.S. iSchool graduate
level syllabi course objectives and data science job posts. These documents were collected over a
period of 9 months combined with over 400 syllabi included in total and over 1,600 data science
job posts included. Each was broken down to the sentence level to determine if a relationship
existed between the two document groups when a topic comparison was conducted using SAS
Enterprise Miner. Based on the results of this analysis a relationship is evident between data
science job posts and iSchool graduate level syllabi. This presents a tremendous opportunity for
additional research in this area to determine how to best communicate the opportunities for data
science professionals and iSchool professionals to partner for the growth of both disciplines,
especially as it pertains to employment opportunities for graduates of either discipline. It is our
hope that this topic is further analyzed through additional research areas presented in the
previous chapter.
By collecting and analyzing the text of data science job posts and iSchool course syllabi,
the research questions outlined in previous sections were completed. The skills and competencies
of data science professionals stated in Research Question #1 were outlined by the textual analysis
performed on over 1,600 U.S. data science job posts. Additionally, the skills and competencies
taught in iSchool curriculum during the same period provided a data set for Research Question
#2. At which point as we discuss above we reach the conclusion that there is indeed overlap
between iSchool learning objectives and current data science professional offerings.
As a formally trained iSchool professional I am particularly interested in how this topic
correlates to my own career professional as I personally shifted from the traditional information

88

science employment sector, to the data science, particularly data analysis, sector, despite my
formally recognized professional training as an information science professional at an iSchool
included in this analysis. I personally feel my education at an iSchool provided me with all the
skills to be an accomplished data analyst and scientist and I believe other similar stories need to
be isolated and brought to the attention of both iSchool and data science educators in a both
formal and broad way. It is our hope that this research will help bridge that gap.