ABSTRACT

THE SCHOOL LIBRARY AS AN OTHER SPACE:
A CASE STUDY INQUIRY INTO LITERACY AND IDENTITY

Alyson Thompson Rumberger

This study builds on research conducted in classrooms by proposing that literacy
happens in a range of school spaces that educational research has traditionally left
unattended, such as lunchrooms, hallways, and libraries. Libraries are one space, of
many, in schools where literacy “happens,” despite the paucity of information about this
complex space. This study explored the library as situated within a disagreement about
how libraries should be utilized—either as democratic sites that provide access to a range
of texts, or as sites of direct instruction in standards-aligned informational literacy.
Informed by a spatial framework, this study investigated one school library to
trace which literacy practices circulated in the space through observations, spatial maps,
semi-structured interviews, and artifact analysis. Findings included the library
functioning as a liminal space, where competing ideas about literacy circulated. Focal
students demonstrated dominant notions of what “counted” as literacy, in that they
engaged in discourses that were privileged within established conceptions of schooling.

However, there were also pockets of playfulness, where the space began to “crack” and
gave way to a construction that was fluid, interrupting expected literacy practices.
In a context where classrooms continue to become constrained, alongside reduced
funding for library programs, the diversity of literacy experiences that students can
encounter decreases. Discovering what is possible in one space can offer fruitful
discussion around the potential of school libraries, and other spaces for literacy, to
strengthen literacy experiences in schools for our students who are most implicated by
narrow definitions of literacy.

Chapter I
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY

There is plentiful research around literacies in classroom spaces (Dyson, 2003;
Dutro, 2010), outside of school spaces (Bloome & Enciso, 2006), and the connections or
disconnections therein (Heath, 1982). However, the dichotomy of literacy as
inside/outside of school is problematic, as students do not solely engage in literacies
while in the classroom and at home—literacy happens throughout a student’s day as they
traverse many spaces, even within the school building. This study seeks to build on
research conducted in classrooms and communities by proposing that literacy happens in
a wide range of school spaces that educational research has traditionally not attended to,
such as common areas, lunchrooms, hallways, and school libraries. Throughout this
dissertation, I investigated the school library as a site of fruitful literacy research. The
existing literature around libraries most often explores the isolated tasks and activities
that students engage with in school libraries and doesn’t necessarily examine the diverse
literacy practices that underlie those experiences. In fact, ethnographers of education
have typically paid little attention to school libraries as a site for literacy research
(Dressman, 1997).
Libraries are one space, of many, in schools where literacy “happens.” In a time
of increasing standardization and a culture of accountability (Olivant, 2015), the library
merits consideration as an “other space” (Foucault, 1986) for literacy. Foucault (1986)
defined these “other spaces” as distinctly different, and yet in relation to, more structured

2
spaces, mentioning libraries as one example. As an other space with more institutional
fluidity, I argue that the library might offer unique possibilities for literacy. Scholars
(Gutiérrez & Orellana, 2006; Janks, 2009) have argued that, too often, language and
literacy act as mechanisms of sorting and selecting students, becoming gatekeepers for
who might be considered literate or not. This is perhaps made most clear in classrooms.
However, in other spaces such as libraries, such sorting and selecting may or may not be
present, as the library is designed to be open to everyone. On the other hand, libraries are
not outside of school structures and can also be spaces of rules, order, and organization.
In his essay, Foucault (1986) argued that even within a real place are often multiple,
competing spaces, impossible to be characterized monolithically. For example, school
libraries are often repurposed for meetings, activities, or because the librarian is needed
to cover a classroom, which positions the library as multipurpose, and not necessarily a
space reserved for literacy practices, despite its original intent. This common practice, in
turn, has great implications for the identity of the school librarian. To better understand
the complexity of literacy education and the many spaces in which it takes place, I argued
for the need to examine and document these other spaces in efforts to move beyond
conflating “in-school” with merely “in-classroom,” conceptualizing the school institution
as a collection of multiple spaces.
Background of the Study
This dissertation study was situated in an elementary school library in a major
urban center in the Northeast of the United States. Libraries have perhaps always
contrasted with the more structured design of a classroom, made evident through the

3
library Information Fluency Continuum, which designates the library as “a public forum
for learning” (New York City School Library System, n.d., p. 1). This continuum,
containing standards and outlining particular benchmarks, calls for the collaborative
teaching of inquiry skills by both librarians and classroom teachers, which is outlined as a
cycle of asking questions, investigating answers, and constructing and communicating
new understandings (New York City School Library System, n.d.). Libraries, in the
continuum, are positioned as an effective space to strengthen these types of skills due to
their compilations of diverse texts and access to a certified school library media specialist
(New York City School Library System, n.d.). The opportunity and support to engage in
sustained inquiry-based learning is central to the current conceptions of a school library,
as described in the current standards above, although this conception also resonates with
its original intentions.
Background on School Libraries and Librarians
Over the last 50 years, school libraries have shifted from housing classic books to
acculturate children, to information hubs that offer a collection of resources and materials
(Michie & Holton, 2005). School libraries have a long history in our nation as democratic
institutions, though they “originated as literal colonies of the children's reading rooms in
neighborhood public libraries and settlement houses” (Dressman, 1997, p. 271). Here,
Dressman (1997) described groups of reading rooms run by women that were designed to
share canonical stories to assist new immigrant children in assimilating to American life.
This conception of libraries didn’t last, and school libraries have undergone many shifts
over the history of schooling in this nation. For example, a 1918 National Education
Association (NEA) report stated: “the library should collect materials ‘such as maps,

4
pictures, lantern slides, and Victrola records’” (Midland, 2008, p. 30). In this report were
the first instances of a library becoming multimodal, and with the intention of exposing
children to many different forms of text. In 1925, the NEA and the American Library
Association (ALA) first prepared a suggested set of standards for elementary school
libraries, drawn largely from the 1918 NEA report. These standards would later
experience many iterations, pointing to evolving and contested notions of literacy and the
multiple roles that school libraries might play in literacy education.
The postwar years around 1945 were characterized by efforts to expand the
library collection and make available to students a variety of materials (periodicals, films,
and slides) in efforts to prepare educated adults for a democratic society (Midland, 2008).
In the spirit of American competitiveness, the National Defense Education Act (NDEA)
of 1958, followed by the Elementary and Secondary Act of 1965, marked the first period
of funding for school libraries (Michie & Holton, 2005). These pieces of legislation were
pivotal in rethinking libraries as essential to children’s literacy development, as well as an
educational right.
As the role of school libraries has evolved with political and social changes in our
nation’s history and competing definitions of what “counts” as literacy, the purpose of a
school librarian has also evolved to support the literacies privileged at the time. As
standards for student learning in the library increased, so did expectations for the role that
the school librarian would take on, particularly in regards to collaboration with and
support of teachers (Barnett, 2015). For example, Barnett (2015) explained that during
the middle of the 20th century, librarians were encouraged to participate in the
professional development opportunities that were offered to teachers. In this way,

5
librarians were connected to teachers, and yet their positions still remained distinct. This
more significant role of the school librarian, in turn, meant that standards for entrance
into the profession rose as well, with preparation programs largely regulated by the ALA
and the American Association of School Librarians (AASL), although states did (and still
do) vary in their specific requirements (Church, Dickinson, Everhart, & Howard, 2012).
Although technology had a presence in library education since the middle of the
20th century, when libraries first began incorporating audiovisual materials (Michie &
Holton, 2005), this presence grew stronger. The most recent iteration of the shifting role
of the school librarian was evident with the emphasis on digital literacies, and school
librarians subsequently being called to lead technology integration in schools (Killeen,
2009). In fact, the ALA and the AASL have included informational technology as
standard three out of five of initial librarian preparation in 2010 (Church et al., 2012).
Therefore, those who enter the profession have always been implicated by the larger
shifts in the field of librarianship, and education in general. Importantly, however, in the
already small research base on school librarian preparation (Church et al., 2012;
Shannon, 2002), the voices, experiences, and identities of school librarians have been
largely absent from the literature.
While school libraries and librarians have afforded unique literacy experiences for
students, they have not been immune to the many shifts, priorities, and ideologies that
have shaped school institutions throughout history. At the same time, libraries have not
been held directly accountable for student achievement. In large part, libraries are a space
dissolved of the responsibility to directly produce student outcomes, while a necessary
support of the more formal literacy of the school institution. This makes the library a

6
highly unique and complex space, and the librarian a complex position, one that cannot
be reduced to a single role.
Research on School Libraries and Librarians
Research on school libraries has been predominantly rooted within the field of
library science and has explored a wide variety of topics within varying ideologies. In
The Library Quarterly, an interdisciplinary journal of library research, Nitecki (2011)
argued: “formal inquiry about library spaces has only recently begun to be conducted and
reported, suggesting that spaces mostly have been subjected to descriptive assessments,
with few sharable evaluations or evolved theories to inform practice” (p. 28). Within
library science, very few studies before 2000 were empirical. An even smaller number
focus on elementary school librarians—the vast majority explore high school, college, or
academic libraries. Before the year 2000, the literature on school libraries and librarians
largely emphasized librarians as teachers, positioning the library as an instructional space
that could further the work of the classroom. In the early 2000s, the literature shifted to
an overwhelming focus on calls for deeper collaboration between teachers and librarians.
The majority of the literature in the early 2000s, however, still appeared in the form of
periodicals and opinion pieces—Nitecki’s (2011) “descriptive assessments” (p. 28). In an
era where libraries continue to change dramatically, there has been little documentation
of the literacy practices circulating in and through libraries, and the experiences of the
librarian and children therein. The identities of school librarians are informed by the
tensions between the changing field over time, and yet their continuous absence from the
research literature.

7
Multimodality, and access to diverse forms of texts continues to be at the
forefront of current research around what a 21st century library education looks like
(Gann, 2013), as do discussions around library standards. Mardis and Dickinson (2009),
for example, argue that the field of librarianship has always been driven by standards, but
has depended on the support from a variety of stakeholders in schools, making
implementation of these standards challenging. Interested in standards and student
achievement in a library context, Keith Curry Lance is a widely known researcher who
studied the impact of school libraries and librarians on student achievement. In a recent
piece, Lance and Kachel (2013) explored the perceived connections or disconnections
with school library standards in Pennsylvania and student achievement, in order to better
understand the ways in which school administrators view the standards as impacting
students. Lance and Kachel (2013) found that administrators rated the first library
standard—inquiry-based learning—as essential. This pointed, again, to the focus of
inquiry in library programs, and was consistent with findings of other scholars and
studies (Lance & Kachel, 2013). Although inquiry has a large presence both in the
original conception of libraries and in the recent standards of libraries, the impact or
effect of the standards has been largely under-researched. The library space is one that
has strong ideologies about literacy learning, and yet scholars have largely left these areas
unexplored.
Statement of the Problem
Schools are complex institutions. The onset of Common Core, coupled with
assessments and punitive accountability systems, is the most recent iteration of attempts

8
to limit teacher and school autonomy. In this current “ever-increasing wave of testing”
(Olivant, 2015, p. 116), teachers and schools are under pressure to produce improved
student outcomes, with teachers bearing the brunt of this pressure (Cochran-Smith &
Lytle, 2006). Subsequently, many teachers have felt compelled to directly teach students
the content and skills that they need to succeed on these measures lest they be labeled
inadequate (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2006). As a result of this pressure, there is often a
narrowing of literacy to what can be assessed, as teachers need to prepare students for the
high-stakes tests that they will inevitably encounter (Stahl & Schweid, 2013). This
narrowing of curriculum is particularly true in schools that serve high-minority and/or
high-poverty demographics of students (Dutro, 2010). This has impacted the culture of
the classroom space most significantly, in that a focus on accountability and
measurement has left little room for diverse literacy practices and responsive literacy
instruction. An emphasis on meeting grade level benchmarks and teaching prescriptive
content knowledge has contributed to a “classroom-as-container” discourse (Leander,
Phillips, & Taylor, 2010, p. 329), one where the significant literacy learning (and
research into literacy learning) is placed neatly within the classroom, and in particular,
within the literacy block.
While the library is intended to be a space for inquiry (New York City School
Library System, n.d.), as standards for students increase and classrooms become more
standardized, content specialists and intervention staff, such as school librarians, are also
being called to take on more defined roles within their schools (Uecker, Kelly, &
Napierala, 2014)—an “all hands on deck” attitude. As expectations for informational
literacy instruction and the integration of technology has increased in the library, so have

9
calls for school librarians to work closely with teachers, taking on a collaborative role
and sharing ownership of student learning, resources, and curriculum (Kimmel, 2012;
Montiel-Overall, 2005). New terms, such as teacher-librarian and school library media
specialist, point to the increased expectations for schools to integrate digital resources
and equip students with the skills needed to access information in a more sophisticated
technological world (Killeen, 2009). In this construction, the library becomes more
standardized (Uecker et al., 2014), a space that directly supports and extends the
standards-based literacy work of the classroom, particularly in “high-risk communities”
where library instruction is spent supporting students in “closing word gaps” (Hunsinger,
2015, p. E11). While access to texts and inquiry-based learning may still be viewed as
essential, the manner in which they are taught has, in many contexts, narrowed.
Librarians are pushed and pulled by multiple external forces that are reshaping schools
and the literacy landscape—often in contradictory directions.
Against this background, a contrasting conception of libraries has emerged.
Resisting the notion that libraries should become more standardized are those who call
them to maintain their democratic principles (Dressman, 1998), where they exist as open
spaces to provide students with access to a variety of texts. Some library scholars contend
that libraries should transition to a learning commons, a “responsive, flexible, innovative,
collaborative, student-centered hub” (Mueller, 2015, p. 1). This mirrors the positioning of
libraries as a powerful intellectual and social space for students and teachers to gather
(New York City Library System, n.d.). However, studies investigating and documenting
the extent to which these spaces exist and are utilized are largely absent from the
literature, which limits the understanding of how the conception of a learning commons

10
might be taken up in practice. The school library is therefore a highly contested site, and
school librarians are greatly implicated by these contestations, as are the children who
utilize the library space. There is a striking tension between what the literature expects
students and librarians to do while in the library (what type of space the library should
be), which is compounded by the lack of information about what actually happens in this
unique and porous space. In other words, this contested site has gone largely unexplored.
Statement of Purpose and Research Questions
Informed by a spatial theoretical framework, this case study (Dyson & Genishi,
2005) investigated the literacy practices that circulated in and through one library space,
and the implications that this posed for the librarian and her students. As Leander et al.
(2010) assert, examining learning across spaces “is a push to move conversation from
where we expect or desire learning to happen to where it does happen” (p. 381). Literacy
does not only happen during the formal literacy block of the classroom. Literacy learning
is happening in the library, and therefore, I explored the extent to which the library has
the potential to push at the boundaries of what literacies are possible and valued in the
larger school institution. To do so, I employed ethnographic methods such as
observations (including spatial maps), semi-structured interviews, and artifact analysis to
investigate the multiple literacy practices that circulated in and through the library space,
and what connections these literacies have to the identities of two school librarians and
their students. I included four first-grade focal students to look more specifically at the
language and literacy practices that students took up in connection with my librarian
participants, herein referred to as Amanda and Deborah. I argue that youth were agentive

11
constructors of literacy and identities across spatial contexts (Wissman, Staples,
Vasudevan, & Nichols, 2015), and therefore merited inclusion in this study. In beginning
my pilot study, Amanda expressed that a focus in primary grades is where she would feel
most comfortable situating this inquiry, given her knowledge of and experience with the
students. Ultimately, neither Amanda nor Deborah constructed the library space on their
own, but rather, in tandem with the students and other individuals who entered the space.
Investigating multiple classes provided an opportunity to think across space. While in the
same physical room, the social space between different class sessions varied dramatically
because the students, their social relationships, and their use of space shaped the space in
unique ways.
I position the elementary school library as a complex space that is vital to seeing
literacy in new ways in an educational context with increasingly narrowed views of
whose knowledge and experience “counts.” On one hand, students had the space to
engage with texts in ways that have become limited in the classroom, and where school
librarians can invite student inquiry into the space. On the other hand, this inquiry was
often met with moments of contention. To investigate this complex space, I asked two
inter-related research questions. In these questions, I take up the term produced to refer to
the ways in which space was socially produced through materials, bodies, and discourses.
1. What are the ways in which a school library is produced in one urban elementary
school?
2. How do two school librarians, and four first-grade focal students, create spaces
for literacy in one urban school library, and what is the nature of those spaces?

12
Overview of the Study
The school site for this dissertation study, City Partnership School, was the same
school site in which I conducted my pilot study. Amanda, the original school librarian at
City Partnership School, was a veteran classroom teacher who had recently transitioned
to the role of the librarian, and thus her background was in classroom instruction and not
librarianship. As Amanda’s curricular flexibility increased with her transition from a
teacher to the school librarian, so did her desire to use the library space to engage young
students in thematic, inquiry-based literacy experiences, with instruction deriving from
student interests and questions around a relevant topic through the use of compelling
texts (Brown, 2012). Importantly, Amanda’s identity shifted in response to the new
possibilities offered by the library space, just as she had the opportunity to shift the space
with the various identities (Moje & Luke, 2009) that she brought to it. Because Amanda
had experience teaching in primary grades, and this is where she located her expertise,
she was most interested in exploring this inquiry with young students. This dissertation
study was a means to work alongside Amanda’s vision of the library as a potentially
inclusive learning space.
However, due to the contested nature of school libraries, Amanda was asked at
the beginning of the school year to return to the classroom to fill a sudden vacancy.
Despite her desire to stay in the library, and her hope that this was a short-term solution,
Amanda remained in the classroom for the rest of the school year. Thus, my study
continued with the substitute librarian, Deborah, a staple substitute at City Partnership
School and veteran teacher. Therefore, my dissertation sought to study the literacy
practices that both Amanda and Deborah, and four focal children, took up in the space of

13
the library, and the ways in which they took them up. This work builds on the work of
literacy scholars (Moje & Luke, 2009; Janks, 2009; Gee, 2000-2001; Street, 2005) who
have argued that literacy is social, and have looked at the ways in which literate identities
are constructed through the language and literacy practices that individuals employ and
the spaces in which they employ them (Sheehy, 2010; Soja, 1996).
As one other space for literacy in schools, I explored the library as situated within
a problematic disagreement about how libraries should be utilized—either as democratic
sites that provide access to a range of texts (Dressman, 1998), or as sites of direct
instruction in standards-aligned informational literacy (Uecker et al., 2014). Ultimately, if
schools hope to invest in their school librarians and reframe the space of the library as an
inclusive and potentially transformative literacy learning environment (Mueller, 2015),
which I argue is a step towards a more equitable education, a firsthand understanding of
what literacies are already circulating in and through the school library space is essential.
Rationale for the Study
The library as a case study addresses the ways that both scholars and practitioners
conceptualize and examine literacies and identities in schools by working against the
dichotomy of inside- and outside-of-school literacies. It illuminates the importance of
examining other spaces in the school setting where both students and adults construct
their identities, understanding that the classroom space is just one of many that are
traversed in everyday life (Leander et al., 2010) as individuals construct their literate
lives. This works against the notion that a school library is a static container (Leander et
al., 2010), and instead positions it as complex, social, and continually evolving.

14
Given the paucity of research on school libraries, my study adds to the body of
empirical research on literacies in library spaces and has implications for literature
exploring the professional identity of school librarians. Much of the literature on
elementary school libraries does not provide accounts of the literacies that students and
librarians take up. Partially as a result of this, Everhart (2013) has argued: “this lack of
knowledge [of the school librarian’s role] has led to disappearance of jobs and denied
student access to the skills that school librarians bring to twenty-first-century learners”
(p. 15). Empirical studies that explore the wide variety of literacy practices and materials
that librarians and students engage with in the library are needed to better understand the
potential of the space in this era of standards, and could inform policy around funding,
expectations, and opportunities for school librarians when “the sustainability of the
school librarian position is questionable” (Everhart, 2013, p. 15). Of course, the school
library isn’t the only space for student inquiry in literacy. However, if not the school
library, then where are the other spaces for student inquiry, particularly in underserved
areas with lack of access to diverse and culturally relevant literacy materials (Rivas,
2012)? Rather than let libraries become obsolete, or reserved for privileged schools with
a surplus of funding, I argue for the need to re-position the space of a school library as
one example of an other space for literacy in schools, and to investigate the ways in
which school librarians and their students produce this unique space.
Theoretical Framework
I situate this study within a spatial theoretical framework. In taking up spatial
theory, I argue that language and identity are constructed spatially—allowing some things

15
to go unseen or to become the “underbelly” (Sheehy, 2010) of social processes, rather
than attending to the nuanced interactions in and across the space. Because this study
took place in the library, a spatial framework allowed me to explore how Amanda,
Deborah, and their students constructed the space, and what literacies they took up in the
process. Additionally, this framework illuminated the way that the students (Mark, Nikki,
Carla, and James) utilized the space to construct social identities with each other. In
positioning the library as a fluid and dynamic space (Leander et al., 2010), therefore, I
sought to understand the various connections and knowledge constructed in the space,
and consider the ways in which Amanda, Deborah, are their students were influenced by
these connections and knowledge.
In this dissertation, I position myself within the field of New Literacy Studies
(NLS), which frames literacy as situated within social and cultural frameworks
(Giampapa, 2010), rather than as neutral or autonomous sets of skills. The literacy events
that occurred in the library space were therefore mediated by the sociocultural histories,
and the various identities, that the students and school librarians brought to the library,
while in turn librarian and student identities and literacies were mediated by the library
space. Therefore, embedded in the spatial framework that I take up are implications for
considering identities in and across various spaces.
The Complexity of Space
Spaces, such as libraries, have unique histories, social norms, and beliefs about
“doing literacy.” In this study, I took up conceptions of space as socially constructed in
efforts to understand its complexity, and to move beyond merely discussing libraries as
rooms within buildings. A pioneer of spatial theory and French philosopher, Henri

16
Lefebvre, argued that historicality, sociality, and spatiality were too complex and
essential to be siloed in individual disciplines. Spatial theory is a type of critical theory
(Soja, 1996), with Lefebvre drawing his philosophical roots from Marxism, and in large
part, the theory seeks to work toward social progress, uncovering the ways in which a
simplistic definition of space has reproduced inequitable geographic borders and barriers.
I utilized spatial theory to uncover the ways in which power circulated in and through
networks of space to privilege some literacy practices over others. Therefore, I took a
critical lens to my use of spatial theory to better understand how some students were
constructed as more “literate” than others, and how the construction and use of social
space contributes to this unequal power distribution in schools. Contemporary scholars
have taken these notions and continued to work with them in seeking spatial justice,
Edward Soja being chief among them. I took up Soja’s (1996) definitions of the spatial
dimensions—Firstspace (Lefebvre’s physical), Secondspace (Lefebvre’s mental), and
Thirdspace (Lefebvre’s lived)—in my own work.
While this dissertation took place primarily in the school library, distinctly
different from a traditional elementary school classroom, I followed Soja (2004) in the
belief that “every space and place in the world becomes readable or interpretable as a
classroom” (p. xi), in that learning is happening whether the space is marked for official
learning or not (Dyson, 2003). Both the traditional classroom and school library are
pedagogically complex, and though they function uniquely, I read both through a spatial
frame, ultimately with the objective of understanding the space as lived. However,
because space is a site of constant change, spatial knowledge can never be exact, as space
is merely studied within particular points in time (Moje, 2004). Space is always moving

17
and can never be pinned down or fully measured. I argue that by taking on a spatial
framework, the ways in which literacies circulated in spaces over time, to privilege some
practices over others, might be exposed and interrupted.
What is Space? Place vs. Space
A distinction between place and space is critical, one primary reason being that
place-based education has received much attention in recent years. Place is one
dimension of space, but is not synonymous. Place refers to a bounded setting (Nespor,
2008), independent of human activity. The traditional way of teaching geography—as
separate from history, culture, politics, and even social interaction—is a clear example of
this. Furthermore, Nespor (2008) contends that advocates of place-based education
conflate “place” with “community,” which results in community education often being
reduced to “a stable, bounded, self-sufficient communal realm” (p. 479), focused
primarily on geography whilst ignoring historical, political, and cultural considerations.
Unlike conceptions of “place” which are static, “space” is a process and a site of constant
change (Sheehy, 2010; Soja, 1996). The studying of space, therefore, demands a nuanced
view of how spaces actually have historical, cultural, and social dimensions. In this way,
space is like identity. It is a site that is constantly shifting.
School is made of places and language, and children construct identities as they
move through those places and utilize language. The physical place and the spoken words
matter, and yet they are not all that matters—school is more than this, and a library is
more than this. Place and words, when taken up by individuals, have meaning and are
imbued with power. Sheehy (2004) argues: “according to Lefebvre, space was not
environment, not stage setting, and not place; yet it involved each of these, which came to

18
be significant as a result of how they became engaged in and changed by social practices”
(p. 95). Space involves culture, social interactions, and the passage of time, all which
converge in complex ways. The library is a unique space, as in many ways it is offered
greater flexibility and freedom than the classroom space (in terms of curriculum and
assessment), while being more rigidly bound by chunks of time. Recent ways of
theorizing space argue that it isn’t a receptacle—it is dynamic, fluid, and is a set of
relations. Taking a more simplistic and contained view of space, where space is thought
of as a receptacle where things happen, serves in “blocking from view how space is
actively involved in generating and sustaining inequality, injustice, economic
exploitation, racism, sexism, and other forms of oppression and discrimination” (Soja,
2010, p. 4). This view reproduces notions of what literacy looks like, and what a literate
child does, while in the library. Failing to see space as dynamic serves to reinforce the
status quo and to actively resist change. For this reason, examining the school library as a
room with books, people, and instruction was insufficient. I approached the library space
as socially and culturally produced and reproduced across time, while still acknowledging
its physical space and materials.
A key tenet of spatial theory is that knowledge, beliefs, and discourses flow in and
out of spaces. While a space certainly has discourses or language-in-use (Gee, 2005) that
circulate within, these are not static, as discourses are continually being added to and
change within and across spatial “boundaries” to create larger patterns of social
membership. When Amanda took on the position of the school librarian, for example, she
reconfigured the space to reflect the new knowledge and beliefs that she brought to the
space, notably about the power of inquiry. Subsequently, when Deborah came into the

19
library, she simultaneously brought her identity, interests, and values and again shifted
the space. Furthermore, key in distinguishing between space and place is that space also
takes on a temporal lens. The library at City Partnership School, like many other school
libraries, organized “library time” in 45-minute increments, therefore boundaries were
constructed between “library time” and what was not library time. A spatial and temporal
lens seeks to disrupt this dichotomy (Wilson, 2004), instead conceptualizing how space is
organized through networks and intersections of time and space.
Social and temporal space is not stagnant, and therefore a library is not stagnant.
A library shifts, changes, and evolves as new children enter it, pick up and discard
materials, and literally or figuratively leave their mark on the library. A library shifts as
the librarian selects new books to order and display. A library changes to reflect events,
values, and politics of the time. The library, subsequently, leaves its mark on the children,
as a space where they interact with people, texts, knowledge, values, and language. Of
course, these marks will vary, as not all libraries are the same. While some children may
find that they are given the freedom to take up new literacies, other library spaces may
restrict literacies that do not adhere to expected practices. A library, therefore, is not a
monolithic space.
Firstspace, Secondspace, and Thirdspace
As stated above, I took up Soja’s (1996) conceptions of Firstspace, Secondspace,
and Thirdspace in my own dissertation work. Firstspace included spoken language,
physical arrangements, and other elements that are directly observable. Lefebvre labeled
the Firstspace the observable—it is a sensible, cognitive space where social interactions
can be directly seen and heard. Secondspace, on the other hand, is a conceived space. In

20
other words, the Secondspace is the “cover story”—the discourses that people use to
explain and make sense of Firstspace. Importantly, the Secondspace operates dialectically
with the Firstspace; the Secondspace gives the Firstspace meaning—it codifies it
(Sheehy, 2010). I took up Gee’s (2000-2001) conception of Discourse (capital D) to refer
to this discursive perspective, which consisted of the details of the language melded with
non-language elements such as clothing, gestures, symbols, materials, and the body, all
which were utilized by individuals to assert group membership in the eyes of the “other”
(Gee, 2005). Amanda could be viewed with an institutional perspective, within Soja’s
(1996) observable Firstspace, as a librarian who shares resources and information with
teachers in the school. However, she could also be read with a discursive perspective
(Gee, 2000-2001) as a librarian who desired to integrate choice, as well as inquiry-based
and student-directed instruction to allow students the “free reading” and “browsing” that
she believed had been limited in the classroom—Soja’s (1996) Secondspace.
Spatial theories are relatively new in the field of literacy studies. Sheehy (2010)
addresses this emerging field and her own interest in spatializing literacy with: “it is a
Firstspace desire, however. If it is to happen, Secondspace needs to be reorganized and
researched, so we can learn how to effect change—at the level of systems, and within the
whole trialectic” (p. 131). Simply bringing in a different text, a new lesson, or rearranging the room won’t affect change if the way that we think about it (and use it) does
not. By attending to Secondspace in one school library context, I argued that the potential
for rethinking the materials, language, and arrangements of the Firstspace was made
possible when these dimensions work in tandem.

21
Thirdspace, a more abstract concept, “interrupts the rationality of First- and
Secondspace” (Sheehy, 2010, p. 14). It is a lived space, where change is constant, where
social life is constantly moving, churning, and changing. Thirdspace is a felt space. It is
not rational. It is not easily explainable. Sheehy (2010) explains: “Thirdspace may not be
a conscious space, but it is a feeling space that does not rationalize what is going on. It
feels what is going on and relates to space without regard for appropriateness.
Appropriateness belongs to Secondspace” (p. 14). Thirdspace is a site of radical social
change. It is a space of interruption, which can “split open and undercut what is perceived
and conceived as normal” (Sheehy, 2010, p. 16). Thirdspace cannot be seen, as Firstspace
can, and it cannot be objectively traced. Patterns of talk, text, and behaviors are ways of
thinking about identity that are important. However, Thirdspaces also demand attention,
because they disrupt the status quo and can be a source of social change. They force us to
think outside the patterns of what is normal, outside the Secondspace discourses to which
we have often become accustomed. Janks (2009), building on the work of Soja and
others, argues that Thirdspace can begin to disrupt powerful binaries between “us” and
“them,” and can introduce new ways of approaching culture, language, and identity. The
Secondspace discourses, therefore, construct what “counts” as reading, and who can be
considered a reader, while the Thirdspace can trouble these discourses. The Thirdspace of
the library merits examination because those disruptions in the discourses around what
“counts” as reading—other types of literacy practices that emerge in the library—have
the power to then become patterns themselves. In other words, Thirdspace interruptions
allow us to consider what else might be possible.

22
Multiple Conceptions of Thirdspace
Kris Gutiérrez (2008) in many ways, presents conceptions of Third Space that
overlap with the spatial theory (in particular, Thirdspace) that Soja (1996) presents. For
example, both scholars approach their work with a critical stance, arguing that research
and education are inherently power-laden, and aim to use these spatial theories to expose
power imbalances within space (for Soja, this draws from his work as a critical
geographer). Gutiérrez (2008) on the other hand, draws from “repertoires of practice” (p.
149) to demonstrate that within schooling, students learn across multiple contexts, and
asks schools to create spaces that might also include the local knowledge that students
bring. Therefore, both Gutiérrez (2008) and Soja (1996) believe that space is fluid and
non-linear, rather than contained and stagnant. Similarly, then, learning and literacy do
not develop across linear trajectories.
Gutiérrez, Rymes, and Larson (1995), drawing on this notion of Third Space in
their work, argues that it is a site of intersection, in particular, an intersection between the
teacher script and the student counterscript. In this conception, change occurs when the
teacher script is permeated by the student counterscript, and the transformative space
occurs when both teacher and student voice is permitted and valued in the space—and the
space is ultimately restructured. Until blended in the Thirdspace, then, the teacher script
and student counterscript may function independently. In a similar vein, Soja (1996)
contends that Thirdspace is an interruption in the physical and discursive dimensions of
space. However, rather than an intersection, I see Soja’s (1996) spatial dimensions as
layered. The Thirdspace is not an intersection between the First- and Secondspace, for
example, but it is an interruption that cuts across both the First- and Secondspace. For

23
both theories, the Third Space/Thirdspace is a site of something new and potentially,
unexpected. Ultimately, Gutiérrez (2008) and Soja (1996) frame the Third
Space/Thirdspace differently, but their conceptions aren’t at odds. Both scholars aim to
position space and fluid, and further this theory to ultimately disrupt unequal power
balances and work toward greater social justice.
For Gutiérrez (2008) and Soja (1996), the Third Space/Thirdspace can provide a
site for transformative learning. However, Gutiérrez (2008) more recently describes Third
Space as something that is deliberately constructed, both by teacher and students for the
purpose of transformational learning. The Third Space is strategic, and yet is contested
(Gutiérrez, Baquedano-Lipez, & Turner, 1997). Gutiérrez (2008) describes examples of
the restructuring of Third Space, one where instructors can rethink instructional
questioning and pedagogy to work towards a more democratic space. For example, she
details one instance where “the pedagogy and curriculum of the program are designed to
create opportunities to collectively generate new forms of joint activity (Gutiérrez, 2008,
p. 160) to better solve and attend to issues that immigrant students may face upon
entering schools. Ultimately, then, this Third Space is transformative, as is Soja’s.
Soja (1996) positions Thirdspace more explicitly as a site of disruption. It is a
space that cuts across and interrupts the First- and Secondspace of daily life. Therefore,
Soja’s (1996) Thirdspace cannot be deliberately planned and constructed—it is inherently
an interruption. Once the space is planned and constructed intentionally, it becomes the
First- and Secondspace. As Soja (1996) argues, this is ultimately the goal—to change the
First- and Secondspace. However, the Thirdspace is reserved for interruption, for
dissonance, as these interruptions are ultimately what prompt us to rethink the other

24
dimensions of space. On the other hand, Soja’s (1996) Thirdspace, while always an
interruption, may not always be a transformative space. It depends on how it is attended
to and then used. For example, the Thirdspace interruption could be ignored and
dismissed as an isolated unexpected event, or it could be used as a tool to rethink
instruction. This diverges from Gutiérrez’s (2008) conception of Third Space, she argues
can be organized in ways that promote more transformational and collaborative learning.
Ultimately, then, Gutiérrez (2008) and Soja (1996) present conceptions of space
that are similar and yet distinct. Both work toward greater spatial justice and aim to
disrupt unequal distributions of power in teaching and learning, although they do this in
slightly different ways. For Soja (1996), the Thirdspace is always an interruption in the
seemingly normal, and it always remains an interruption that has the potential to rethink
space. On the other hand, Gutiérrez (2008) contends that Third Space can be deliberately
constructed in more equitable and transformational ways. I choose to take up Soja’s
(1996) conception in efforts to continue to focus on the interruptions in the library space,
and to consider what those interruptions might do, or have the potential to do.
Just as spaces cannot be easily compartmentalized, neither can identities. I follow
Zacher (2009), who argues that identity cannot be separated from the spaces—
geographic, social, and cultural—that an individual traverses. As she follows a focal
student (Christina), Zacher (2009) demonstrates how Christina’s identity as a young girl
who walked in and through different kinds of urban spaces matters—labeling them in
relation to one another, some imbued with more power than others. Amanda’s history
within the urban school district in which she worked was not singular nor is it linear—she
took on multiple roles and traversed many types of spaces all within and across the

25
organization over time. Her long-standing personal friendships with several staff
members, professional history as a veteran employee of the school district, and her recent
move to the library space from the classroom worked in conjunction to curate a social
and professional identity from the multiple positions (Moje & Luke, 2009) that she took
up. Also a veteran teacher, Deborah was well-known as a substitute at City Partnership
School. Like Amanda, she brought in her personal history, as well as her desires to share
books with children and plan engaging, thematic activities, such as a cornucopia project
around Thanksgiving. These spatial shifts are intimately tied to the identities of the
individuals who traverse the space, but the shifts are not without messiness. The
Thirdspace is what allows us to get outside of the First- and Secondspace—to think
differently, dream differently, and perhaps see possibilities that we hadn’t seen before.
A Social Justice Perspective on Space
Power is inextricably linked to the language and literacies taken up in various
spaces, the struggle for language rights being tied up with the struggle for human rights
(Freire, 1983; Janks, 2009). I follow Vasquez (2007), among others, in asserting that even
young students are actually already engaging in this critical interpretive work by reading
their own communities and the other various spaces that they traverse. For example, the
recent remake of the movie Annie (Lassiter & Gluck, 2014) discusses Harlem as largely a
hub of poor and disadvantaged children, a world away from the corporate offices and
wealthy elites of midtown Manhattan. Young children, who view this popular text, might
internalize or challenge these portrayals of their community, though they construct
identities in and through these portrayals whether these critiques are welcome in schools
or not. The shift to sociocultural conceptions of literacy brought to light the ways in

26
which literacy has historically been used to oppress groups of people, and therefore,
certain identity markers such as race, class, and gender. Recognizing the impact of
standardization on student identities, both Amanda and Deborah positioned the library as
creating the space for “leisure” reading regardless of reading levels or other markers of
reading proficiency. In doing so, they both provided the space for students who might not
be considered proficient at “schooled literacy” (Cook-Gumperz, 1986) to experience
literacy in the library. This blurring of literacy and identity lines therefore requires a
spatial framing that situates space as dynamic, constructed socially, and in relation to
individuals and other spaces (Leander & Sheehy, 2004; Soja, 1996).
Critical in discussions around equity and justice are issues of access, and in
particular, access to digital literacies. Digital literacies are rapidly shifting the landscape
of school libraries and the positioning of school librarians, as information mobilizes more
rapidly across spaces through the use of technology. In some spaces, advances in
technology have replaced books themselves, shifting the space. Janks (2009) discussed
literacy and technology in her assertion that “in the information age, the literacy stakes
are therefore higher and, as always, there is a differential access to the newer literacy
technologies, the latest means of production and the elite literacies that they enable” (p.
4). How do we give our students access to these forms of text, while using them in a way
that integrates multiple perspectives and ways of thinking about the world? Although
technologies are called for in librarianship literature, they are not often called to do this in
the critical way that Janks (2009) and other literacy scholars advocate for. Building on
this, I believe that “not only do we need to redefine what ‘literacy’ involves, but also to
note new uses of the term text” (Bearne, 2005, p. 13), including the digital texts that have

27
broadened the type of literacies that students engage with. Technology can be used as a
tool to work towards social justice, but this means that simply integrating technology is
not enough—it needs to be used with equity in mind, towards the inclusion of all literate
identities.
In this study, I investigated the ways in which the social space impacted what
literacies are possible. As the space of the library shifted, the librarians shifted within it.
The identity of the librarians, therefore, were connected to the space, but these
connections did not work in isolation. The sociopolitical context of schooling and
libraries, access to resources, and multiple other forces also influenced the space and the
individuals who traversed it. In the concept of “thickening” identities and positions being
layered upon others (Moje & Luke, 2009), was the often omission of the sudden tensions
that one might feel when they encounter a new position or spatial shift, which might be
dismissed as an aberration. I argue that new and contentious positions that individuals
take up are actually the result of spatial shifts—both of the literal and metaphorical,
which is why it is essential to integrate space, identity, and literacy. Taking both a spatial
and identity lens to literacy studies can serve as a site for deconstruction, critique, and
ultimately, possibility.
Significance of the Study
This dissertation presented an opportunity to see what was possible when two
school librarians identified as agentive constructors of learning and were in a space that,
in some ways, diverged from the stringent standards of accountability imposed on
classrooms while being simultaneously constrained in others. While what is possible in

28
classrooms continue to narrow (Olivant, 2015), attending to school libraries opens other
possibilities for academic inquiry and critical engagement with texts. This study
documented, in-depth, one such other space in order to interrogate which literacy
practices circulated in the space, and how the identities of the school librarians and
students were taken up in and through these literacies. This positions other spaces, such
as school libraries, as a fluid nexus where ideologies, pedagogies, and literacies intersect,
often with tensions. Though this offers just one case, and is therefore not generalizable
beyond this immediate population, discovering what is possible in one space can offer
fruitful discussion around the potential of school libraries to strengthen literacy
experiences in schools for our young students who are most implicated by narrow
definitions of literacy (Dutro, 2010). This, therefore, is an issue of equity and access in
the midst of budget cuts and staffing problems, many of which are felt in public schools
situated in large cities, such as City Partnership School (Everhart, 2000a).
Of course, the library is just one example of an other space. Ultimately, this study
demonstrates the possibility of other spaces for students to engage in inquiry and to
connect with texts and with each other. After all, language, literacies, identities, and
spaces are collaboratively constructed. In a time when classrooms continue to become
more constrained and limited in what definitions of literacy they are able to take up, there
is an urgent need to look to other spaces where literacy also happens, and might happen
in transformative ways. This has the potential to disrupt the dominant discourses about
who is literate (Campano & Damico, 2007), where literacy takes place, and the role of the
library and librarian therein. In studying the school library as one such other space (of

29
many), I argue that educators can reframe what is possible in the nuanced, and yet often
dismissed, other spaces of an elementary school.

30

Chapter II
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

When we picture elementary school libraries, we typically picture reading. For
some, literacy is defined as autonomous and linear reading skills. However, different
people take up literacy differently, with many overlapping and contentious beliefs about
what it is, who has it, and how to best teach and study it. For others (Heath, 1982; Street,
2005; Luke, 2012), literacy is not autonomous skills, but is a way of looking at and
making sense of the world. I take this latter stance. In this view, Janks (2009) asks us to
consider, “What then is the usefulness of the word literacy? Why do we need it?” (p. 1).
This chapter traces different perspectives on the notion of literacy, and frames libraries as
one literacy-based institution of many. There is dissonance in my work because I seek to
bring a spatial theoretical framework to the studying of the library, while considering
implications for identity, whereas the field of librarianship has typically framed identity
within descriptions of tasks, roles, and status (Lance, Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000;
Johnston, 2012). Lytle (2000), drawing on Pratt (1991), describes contact zones as places
where cultures meet. She takes up and uses this metaphor to describe the intersection of
practitioner and academic research, whereas I draw from the contact zone metaphor to
illustrate the tensions between the field of librarianship and the literacy studies field,
which have separate and distinct beliefs about literacy, institutional cultures, and ways of
“doing research.” The legacies of each field (Lytle, 2000) are often seemingly at odds,
and I have encountered tensions in my own work in trying to reconcile a literacy studies

31
framework with a social site of research that has not traditionally been situated within this
framework. I sought to find ways to bridge literacy studies with the space of the library,
in attempts to better discover what literacy practices the librarians, and their students,
were taking up (and how).
In the sections that follow, I trace perspectives on literacy, and then look to other
spaces (that differ from classrooms) to think through the wide range of literacy practices
that circulate through school institutions. In my desire to position libraries as spaces for
inclusive literacies, I also discuss the distinct history of the library institution. Finally, I
examine several bodies of scholarly work that have studied the identity of school
librarians, in order to better situate this particular dissertation in the existing literature.
Perspectives on Literacy
Literacy has been taken up differently in different spaces and is researched in a
broad range of fields (literacy studies, library science, policy, early childhood, etc.).
While this dissertation largely focused on how literacies circulate in school library
spaces, I cannot discuss literacy in the library without also attending to literacy in the
school at large, as school libraries must be contextualized within the school. I frame
literacy within a socially situated perspective, as I believe that literacy is deeply and
inherently connected with ideology and identity. In particular, I approach the literature—
and notions of literacy—from theories of space (Sheehy, 2010; Soja, 1996) to examine
the ways in which the library is produced through discourses (Gee, 2000-2001), texts, and
the identities of the individuals therein.

32
Schooled Literacies
Street and Street (1995) ask us to consider how it is that one particular variety of
literacy has come to be seen as the only literacy, at least in the policies of formal
schooling. When literacy is discussed, evaluated, and taught in classrooms, it is typically
of a “schooled” nature—one drawn from standards, assessments, and a universal and
hierarchical skill-set assumption, where classroom spaces are also assumed to be
inherently similar. That is, taking up schooled literacies often has the potential to
reproduce assumptions that classrooms and schools are ideologically neutral spaces, and
students can therefore acquire literacy within these spaces. Jenny Cook-Gumperz (1986)
has argued that it is through this “process of classroom exchanges, learning-group
formation, through informal judgments and standardized tests and all the other evaluative
apparatus of schooling that our notions of schooled literacy are formed” (p. 2). Schooled
literacies are not just autonomous ways of thinking about literacy. Schooled literacy is a
social construction, one that is reproduced through the process of tests, evaluation, and
instruction, which produce certain notions about who is a reader and how one becomes a
reader. While autonomous literacies, defined here as seemingly sets of neutral
competencies (Street & Street, 1995), often do get taken up in schooled literacies, it is
important to note that “schooling is not only knowing how to do things but demonstrating
this knowing in the correct contexts” (Cook-Gumperz, 1986, p. 7). Being a “good reader”
in school, therefore, isn’t just having the skills to decode words accurately, it is also
knowing what textual response is acceptable, when to raise your hand, how to navigate
the space, and how to talk about books (often in a socially-classed manner). In other
words, the autonomous model of literacy, which appears often in schooled literacy

33
practices, refers to the neutral and discrete skills that can, assumedly, be taught and
learned regardless of context (Street & Street, 1995).
Schooled literacy is perhaps most often of an autonomous and skills-based nature
by virtue of its connection to assessment, although it isn’t necessarily so. Even more
progressive and critical literacy practices can become “schooled” as students learn which
types of responses to literature are valued in the classroom (Heath, 1982) and how they
should (or should not) utilize the space. Drawing on Cook-Gumperz’ (1986) definition of
schooled literacy, Street and Street (1995) contend that this narrow focus of literacy,
considered primarily to operate in the contained space of the classroom, has dismissed
other forms of literacy that ethnographic research has brought to light.
As Willis (1997) contends: “there is no singular history of literacy, nor is there a
singular definition of literacy” (p. 388). Early research into literacy took the form of
“laboratory-like studies of reading predominantly focused upon ‘inside-the-head’
processes tied to word and sentence recognition” (Tierney, 2014, p. 34), pointing to a
valuing of autonomous forms of literacy in the academy. Informed by policies such as No
Child Left Behind (NCLB), the Common Core State Standards movement, corresponding
assessments, and stringent teacher evaluations, the literacies that still prevail the most in
schools are taught and assessed in a skills-based manner. For example, in an analysis of a
teacher toolkit to assist with NCLB mandates, Cochran-Smith and Lytle (2006) uncover
language in the policy purporting that “scientifically based reading instruction can and
does work for all children” (p. 673). Because these policies are so narrow, in classrooms
that don’t trouble schooled literacies, teachers typically define and control texts, papers,

34
materials, and the organization of time and space (Street & Street, 1995), often at the
expense of a responsive and fluid curriculum.
Libraries, in turn, have often been conceptualized in relation to the literacy
privileged in classroom spaces and have operated distinctly, yet alongside classrooms.
Historically, “schools might specialize in teaching reading skills, but libraries could
ensure moral and intellectual betterment, and cultivating and elevating of tastes”
(Sensenig, 2010-2011, p. 11). Libraries were expected to promote literature and literacy,
while the classrooms taught “fundamental” cognitive skills. Therefore, when children’s
reading skills became a national concern in response to events like the Sputnik launch
and the report A Nation at Risk, scientific intervention programs that focused on explicit
instruction received more attention. Meanwhile, the “democratically driven learning tools
like libraries” (Sensenig, 2010-2011, p. 15) were set to the side to operate separately, as
they assumedly didn’t have a direct impact on academic achievement as measured
through test scores. This points to school libraries as a contested site, one that is often
(though not always) more democratic and inclusive in principle, and yet is situated within
the larger, more standardized school institution. Literacy, then, might be taken up in
school libraries in ways that they may not be able to in traditional classrooms. The
uniqueness and complexity of the library space offers possibilities for inquiring into what
literacies are possible in schools. Therefore, the library has the potential to problematize
the concept of “schooled” literacies (Cook-Gumperz, 1986), as it provides a space within
the larger school site where literacy may indeed manifest quite differently than expected.

35
Literacies as Socially Situated
While schooled literacies have dominated public education, the notion of getting
beneath skills-based reading tasks is not new and has offered a more complex way of
conceptualizing literacy and literacy education. Many scholars, with varying ideologies
and conceptions of literacy, have studied literacies within their socially situated contexts.
Rosenblatt (1969), for example, advocated for a transactional approach to reading, in
which she argued: “the reader is active. He is not a blank tape registering a ready-made
message” (p. 34). The text, therefore, is an essential part of this transaction, but it is not
the only part. Barton and Hamilton (1998) later posited that literacy, like all human
activity, is rooted within social interaction. To understand various social literacy
practices, however, these practices must be situated within their space-time contexts
(Barton & Hamilton, 1998). The notion of socially situated literacies, therefore, directly
resists the belief that literacies are universal, and that the spaces where students take up
literacies are universal. Further, the field of New Literacy Studies (NLS) emerged in
response to the autonomous, linear view of literacy, where Street (2005) argued for a
broader definition of literacy and a rethinking of who might be considered literate. NLS
takes the stance that literacy is first and foremost social, and is how people make sense of
their daily lives. Despite the skills-based approach to teaching literacy most privileged in
schools, NLS argues that literacy cannot be “given neutrally” (Street, 2005) in a one-sizefits-all approach, because it is already something that exists in everyday lives. NLS
rejects literacy as a linear and contained model (Luke, 2012), arguing that it is fluid,
complex, and contextually dependent. Therefore, literacies are socially situated, but they
are also spatially situated (Leander & Sheehy, 2004).

36
Shirley Brice Heath’s (1982) sociocultural work, in particular, was seminal in
examining the ways in which different socially situated literacies meet—a type of
“contact zone” (Lytle, 2000; Pratt, 1991). Theorizing the “literacy event,” Heath (1982)
argued that interactions with written texts are socially and culturally situated, rather than
neutral or autonomous. Many other scholars have taken up sociocultural perspectives
within literacy studies, further problematizing the notion that literacy is universal in a
wide variety of contexts, both inside and outside of schools. Dyson’s (1992) work, for
example, was pivotal in demonstrating how young children are sociocultural beings who
use literacy in unique and complex ways, arguing for ethnographic research to more
deeply understand children's literacies as socially situated and enacted. Her work in
primary classrooms has helped illuminate how students resist schooled literacy practices
by “remixing” official and unofficial literacies, bringing their own social knowledge into
the cultural space of the classroom (Dyson, 2003).
However, also crucial to examining literacy as socially situated is the
understanding that literacy practices are raced, classed, and gendered. For example,
Commeyras, Orellana, Bruce, and Neilsen (1996) argued against a viewing of culture and
social groups as monolithic, which can easily be done if these identity markers are not
attended to. In doing so, they argued that “we lose sight of how males and females often
learn to take up those practices in different ways or to construct very different meanings
of them” (Commeyras et al., 1996, p. 460). Therefore, even within studying literacy as
socially and culturally situated, identity markers such as race, class, and gender must be
acknowledged. As Commeyras et al. (1996) contended, gender issues are central to
literacy. Therefore, often operating alongside sociocultural theory are types of critical

37
pedagogies, which do attend quite explicitly to the various identity markers that are taken
up within literacy practices. Freire (1983), considered the pioneer of critical literacy
pedagogy, sought to explicitly explore relationships between literacy and power, and
explained: “reading the world always precedes reading the word, and reading the word
implies continually reading the world” (p. 10). Ultimately, these many takes on socially
situated literacies have provided an alternate paradigm to the studying, teaching, and
theorizing of literacy, arguing that any interpretation of text is done within some frame of
reference, perspective, and experience. However, while literacy has been redefined and
contested over time, the autonomous and linear model of literacy has continued to prevail
in most classrooms, with the role of the library to subsequently provide children with
access to texts in a more leisurely environment. However, this has shifted in response to
increased standards, assessments, and accountability measures imposed on schools and,
in particular, school librarians (Luke & Kapitzke, 1999).
Other Spaces for Literacy in Schools
Scholars who situate themselves in NLS have largely used ethnographic research
to investigate the ways in which teachers might engage students in different forms of
literacy even within the constraints of standardized literacy practices and curricula. Many
literacy scholars (Dutro, 2010; Dyson, 2003; Rist, 1970) and have studied these varied
practices within the classroom context, with others (Bloome & Enciso, 2006; Heath,
1982) focused on outside-of-school literacies. While both classroom and community
spaces are essential, I turned to other spaces for literacy in schools (that are different from
classrooms), as these spaces are held to less accountability measures, and therefore often

38
lend themselves to more unique and varied literacy practices. I conceive of these other
spaces as “trajectories” with porous boundaries (Leander et al., 2010), resisting the model
of both classrooms and libraries as containers.
Student Agency in Other Spaces
The term “other spaces” (Foucault, 1986) refers to spaces that are distinct, and
often diverge from, orderly and utopic spaces. Libraries and museums, Foucault (1986)
explained, are examples of sites with multiple and complex spaces within it, where time
continues to accumulate more fluidly. Time and space in libraries and museums,
therefore, is not bound in the way that traditional classrooms often are. In this way,
“unofficial” spaces, even within larger official sites, might be analyzed as an other space.
For example, in an ethnographic study of a classroom of African-American first graders,
Dyson (2003) examined the ways in which students brought cultural and popular texts to
their school literacy practices, blurring the lines between the official and unofficial
literacy spaces. By creating the space for other literacies to enter the classroom, such as
group singing and radio play, the teacher created a curriculum that left space for student
agency. Dyson (2003) argued that the children “benefited from a curriculum that was
‘permeable,’ that made space for and productively engaged their social and symbolic—
their textual—resources” (p. 356). This agency and freedom in integrating multiple
literacy practices is key to encouraging inclusivity of student identity markers. These
unique spaces, where the official and unofficial worlds of school often coincide, are not
without tensions. This mirrors the dissonance Campano (2007) described in navigating
between the second classroom and the standardized classroom in one urban school.

39
As Campano (2007) illustrated, tensions between literacies “[points] toward a
possible resolution, affirming the need for teachers to cultivate multiple curricula that
meet bureaucratic demands as well as the personal needs and capacities of our
increasingly diverse student populations” (p. 39). He introduced the idea of a “second
classroom,” one that teachers can co-construct on the margins of the mandated curricula.
The second classroom was built around student identities, interests, values, and
knowledge, though often without recognition by the school institution. Campano (2007)
conceptualized this second classroom as an other space, where students were literate and
knowledgeable beings even within a school system that had deemed them deficient.
Campano (2007) argued that to truly do service to students, we must work “both within
and against dominant curricular practices” (p. 109), taking a stance similar to what Delpit
(2006) advocates. Understanding the schooled (and often cognitive) way of literacy,
while simultaneously resisting it, is essential to thinking about the literacies that might
also be privileged in the library, another pedagogical and ideological (Campano, 2007)
space that can offer students the opportunity to be literate in ways that traditional
classrooms might not (or cannot).
In another such study occurring in an other space, education scholars Blair and
Sanford (2004) presented an ethnographic case study of six classrooms, with the purpose
of examining preadolescent and adolescent boys’ use of literacy during non-instructional
times. Although this study did take place in the traditional classroom space, it was outside
of the instructional day, and therefore was open to different student activities. Here, Blair
and Sanford (2004) rejected achievement scores as a valuable way to “measure” literacy
and sought to study the ways in which adolescent boys actually engaged in literacy when

40
given more freedom of time and space. This study took place in a classroom, during
recess and partially on computers. Positioning literacy as social and seeking to counteract
the notion that boys are “failing” at school (Blair & Sanford, 2004, p. 453), they
contended that their male participants exhibited a great amount of agency—they resisted
many school-based practices by transforming the assigned work into something more
personally fun, engaging, meaningful, humorous, active, and purposeful” (p. 453). In
doing so, Blair and Sanford (2004) positioned the use of student-selected texts and visual
texts as a platform to connect socially with one another around shared interests, which
contrasted with the texts that were assigned to them during classroom instruction. In other
words, the boys used digital texts, sports magazines, and comic books with agency, to
engage in literacy and to solidify their membership in a social group. Blair and Sanford
(2004) argued that exploring other spaces (in this case, the classroom at other times) can
bring to light the way that boys’ literacies are complex and fluid, whereas only studying
the literacy practices of the instructional day might reify notions that the boys in the study
were “failing” at school.
Blair and Sanford (2004) explicitly focused on preadolescent and adolescent boys
in their piece, making a deliberate distinction for showing the particular communication
patterns of males, and therefore taking up a gender-as-difference perspective
(Commeyras et al., 1996). Blair and Sanford (2004) began their piece by positing that
masculinity is fluid, and how boys were in the traditional instruction of the classroom is
not necessarily how they were in other spaces, which was consistent in theories of
identity that emphasize fluidity. However, though Blair and Sanford (2004) did attend to
gender, they also dichotomized it in statements such as: “boys can read, but are selective

41
in what they read” (p. 459), and “we need to recognize the distinctly ‘boylike’ flavor of
their lives, their humor and interest in action” (p. 459). Thus, while they framed gender as
fluid and multifaceted (Moje & Luke, 2009), they also made statements that positioned
boys as a monolithic group. This is the very danger that Commeyras et al. (1996) point to
in their theoretical piece on gender and literacy, where taking up a gender-as-difference
perspective has the very potential for “obscuring the ways in which gender itself is a
constructed social practice” (p. 463). My perspective on identity construction would
prompt me to probe more around how literacy and boys are connected in this piece, and
the various and conflicting ways that the boys do select texts, communicate with one
another, and utilize time and space outside of instruction to construct their own
masculinities through literacy.
A significant difference between this study and my dissertation work is the focus
on older students (sixth graders), which can be coupled with much of the literature that
focuses on literacy and identity markers (in this case, gender) in predominantly older
students. Underlying the focus on older children is the potential for furthering the
assumption that students first learn to read, and then read to learn (Hernandez, 2011).
This contradicts the findings of other literacy researchers who have worked with young
children in classrooms (Comber, Thompson, & Wells, 2001; Dyson, 2003; Vasquez,
2007) as well as esteemed practitioners (Collins & Glover, 2015), who have argued that
children make their own meaning and engage with text critically even before they are
conventionally reading. By focusing on young students, I seek to extend the conversation
around the fluidity of gender and literacy (Commeyras et. al, 1996) to very young
learners, augmenting the work that has been done in this area with adolescents and adults.

42
This dissertation therefore merits a place in this body of literature, both in integrating
space, literacy, and implications for identity as spatially constructed, as well as the
emphasis on young children’s navigation of these elements within a non-classroom space.
Literacy Coaches Working in Other Spaces
While the literacies and identities of children have an established place in literacy
scholarship, there is a dearth of literature on school librarians that considers their
identities as spatially constructed. In this section, I have selected two studies featuring
literacy coaches to explore more deeply in hopes of addressing the perspective of
educators who are in other institutional spaces of instruction. In a study on literacy
coaches, Rainville and Jones (2008) set up the purpose of their work by contending:
“growing empirical research in the field of literacy coaching does not sufficiently explore
the complexities that people in such positions must negotiate as they move from
classroom to classroom, working with different teachers, students, and materials in each
place” (p. 440). Like librarians, there’s also little empirical literature around the identities
of literacy coaches. For librarians, there is literature exploring their responsibilities,
whereas “how-to” books that describe “essential knowledge” of the field dominate the
literature on literacy coaching (Rainville & Jones, 2008).
Rainville and Jones (2008) drew from a larger study on three literacy coaches and
focuses, in this piece, on one coach named Kate. The study followed Kate in three
contexts—a male colleague’s classroom, a fifth-grade study group, and a female friend’s
classroom. Rainville and Jones (2008) traced Kate’s positioning of herself in the different
contexts and through social interaction. Kate was defined (at the time of the study) as a
white, middle-class mother of three, who taught Special Education, second grade, and

43
third grade before becoming a literacy coach. The school site, Muriel Avenue School,
was a K-5 elementary school, in a fairly rural town. Most children attending Muriel
Avenue School were native English speaking children, and approximately 88% of third
grade students were proficient or above on state literacy assessments. Rainville and Jones
(2008) used Gee’s (2005) conception of situated identities to understand how and why
individuals shift the ways in which they perform their identity in different situations.
Several years after Rainville and Jones (2008), Hunt and Handsfield (2013) argued for a
clearer picture of how literacy coaches experience this position though spaces,
relationships, conflict, and emotional responses. Hunt and Handsfield (2013) utilized
small stories from their literacy coach participants to illuminate the inherent power
struggles that came up when literacy coaches worked with teachers in their own spaces,
coding the coaches’ reactions to the situations through words like “uncomfortable,
insecure, and mad” (p. 67). Through these small stories, Hunt and Handsfield (2013)
traced the context, interactions, and the various materials that the coaches worked with,
offering a glimpse into the emotional responses of the coaches. Both studies, in fact,
argued that identity positioning is constructed through conversation, which was laden
with power, though this power shifted to different people at different times. For this
reason, the spatial positioning of a literacy coach was a type of other space—it was not a
traditional classroom, and was often a mix of informal and formal spaces.
Data collection occurred over four months, and methods included participant
observations lasting 30 minutes or more, video-recorded observations, field notes, artifact
collection, and two interviews with each literacy coach (Rainville & Jones, 2008).
Multiple readings of the data were conducted, and coding categories were developed that

44
identified the type of interactions that Kate participated in. Gee’s (1999) discourse
analysis method was also utilized, seeking to uncover power and positioning within the
conversations. To conduct their study, Hunt and Handsfield (2013) utilized positioning
theory, drawing distinctions between the idea of role and position, arguing that positions
are interactional and recognize fluidity in contexts. The study took place in a large
elementary district in a Midwest suburb. 93.6% of the student population in the district
was white, with 50% low-income. The district had recently moved to implementing a
workshop model for the teaching of literacy, including balanced literacy, job-embedded
professional development, intervention programs, and accountability. This study included
seven literacy coaches, with at least 15 years of teaching in the district. All seven were
observed in the professional development meetings, and three were also individually
interviewed.
Rainville and Jones (2008) illustrated that with the first teacher, her friend, Kate
seamlessly shifted from a more informal, friendly attitude to taking on a professional
identity, as someone with expertise. This was contrasted by Kate’s work with Mr. Blue,
who openly disagreed with some of Kate’s suggestions, “ultimately telling her he would
rather have her just complete the running records for him” (Rainville & Jones, 2008, p.
445). Because Mr. Blue positioned himself as someone with knowledge and power, Kate
repositioned herself, which aligned with Gee’s (2000-2001) arguments that we define
ourselves in relation to others. Mirroring the Rainville and Jones (2008) piece, as well as
the body of theoretical literature on identity (Gee, 2000-2001; Moje & Luke, 2009), Hunt
and Handsfield (2013) also demonstrated how fluid identities are—for instance, how a
coach was with one teacher may not be how they were with another. Through their

45
framework, they argued for the need to “[push] researchers to observe the small, in-themoment interactional moves that literacy coaches and teachers use as they work together”
(Hunt & Handsfield, 2013, p. 53) in order to better understand the fluidity in identity
across multiple times and spaces.
As both studies demonstrate, literacy coaching was complex work that “involves
far more than having a knowledge base in how teaching and learning work in literacy
classrooms with children and teachers” (Rainville & Jones, 2008, p. 447). Across these
moments, their interactions with others worked to craft a particular identity, often one
where they resisted being positioned as an expert, despite the nature of the role to do so
(Hunt & Handsfield, 2013). Coaching was work that was laden with power, where
coaches responded to varying contexts and individuals. Hunt and Handsfield (2013)
explored power openly. Through the microanalytic lens of “small stories” (Hunt &
Handsfield, 2013, p. 55), they aimed to disrupt the traditional narrative of the “role” of
literacy coaches, which predominantly attends to responsibilities, tasks, and actions. Hunt
and Handsfield (2013) explored these micro-narratives of their participants, arguing that
the small stories could better illuminate the complexities of the experience and add
richness to our understanding of these experiences. Similarly, a strength of Rainville and
Jones’ (2008) work is that it is story-rich, in that thick description was used to support
claims about Kate’s identity positioning, so much that there’s an emotional response and
connection to Kate as the reader understands her confidence wane in specific spaces.
Rainville and Jones (2008) articulate a theoretical framework to attend to how
power and positioning circulated in different ways and in different contexts that Kate
found herself in, although the issues that arose between Kate and Mr. Blue could be

46
further analyzed from a gendered perspective, one that unpacks how expertise is
positioned in relation to gender. For example, analyzing the shifts, contentions, and
layered positionings (Moje & Luke, 2009) that Kate took up in the various spaces that she
traversed could be further probed and expanded in this piece. How she positioned herself
as having expertise, for example, is both in relation to the space but also in relation to the
other people with whom she worked, such as Mr. Blue. Kate’s language patterns both
promoted her own authority and expertise, while simultaneously deferred authority
(Commeyras et al., 1996), depending on who she was with. Literacy coaches, therefore,
are in unique positions as their spatial arrangements, and subsequent implications for
identity, differ quite dramatically from those of other school staff. On the other hand,
Hunt and Handsfield (2013) drew quite explicitly on the work of identity and positioning
theorists such as Gee, Moje, and Luke, and others to theoretically ground their analysis.
Because the field of literacy coaching is situated in literacy studies (and not the field of
librarianship), there is much to be gleaned from their theoretical frameworks, as they
have definitions of identity that do attend to the notion of identities as socially
constructed. For this reason, this is a valuable body of literature to draw on that can offer
a more nuanced perspective on identity studies undertaken in the library and with school
librarians.
Contextualizing Libraries and Librarianship
School libraries, as we know them today in North America, are about a century
old. As previously argued, they function in tandem with, and yet quite distinctly from,
classroom spaces. The legacy of libraries has its own tradition, which will be the focus of

47
this next section. Just as conceptions of literacy in schools have evolved over time, so
have the institutions of school libraries.
Historical Context of Libraries
Although libraries are thought to have originated as democratic institutions—
Dressman (1998) described them as “literary gardens”—they actually originated as
children’s reading rooms, meant to help young immigrant children assimilate to
American life. Early in their history, school libraries largely “were compiled of books,
pamphlets, and newspaper clippings on a specific subject matter, upon request” (Michie
& Holton, 2005, p. 2), particularly in rural areas. As libraries gained prominence, texts
were ordered hierarchically with the Dewey Decimal System, with popular fiction
entering the school library space much later (Dressman, 1997). To this day, this
organizational legacy of school libraries still remains, as does the feminization of the
profession. The American Library Association (ALA) founded in 1876, for example, still
retains the responsibility to prepare and certify school librarians. Libraries are often
physically constructed in the center of universities and even elementary schools, a
cornerstone of the larger school institution, of which information (and physical texts)
flow in and out (Leander et al., 2010).
As Dressman (1997) explained, the purpose of the school library has always been
connected to the larger school context, but the spaces have remained distinct. He stated,
“the school librarian is ‘softer,’ and is focused not on the transmission of culture as
knowledge but on the inculcation of ‘good taste’ in reading materials” (Dressman, 1997,
p. 274). However, school libraries have not been free from the shifts in education

48
priorities and federal policy, seen clearly through the many iterations of standards for
elementary school libraries.
School library standards first appeared in 1925, when the ALA and the National
Education Association (NEA) prepared optional elementary school library standards,
establishing a foundation for individual states to develop their own local library standards
(Michie & Holton, 2005). By the 1950s, libraries gained more attention, with “funding
for school libraries first [becoming] available through the National Defense Education
Act (NDEA) of 1958, which was passed by Congress in response to the launch of Sputnik
by the Soviet Union during the previous year” (Michie & Holton, 2005, p. 2). This
opportunity signaled a shift in national priority, and an ideological change in what role
the library might play in educating young children. However, this certainly did not mean
guaranteed funding for libraries, which played a secondary role to classroom instruction.
The NDEA funding hit a roadblock, in large part because “some school administrators
and librarians did not see libraries as having a primary instructional role, but rather as
having a supportive role for principals and teachers” (Michie & Holton, 2005, p. 3).
Much of this sentiment still remains true today, although library programs have become
more uniform in their design. In 1960, the American Association of School Librarians
(AASL) set forth updated standards—the Standards for School Library Programs
(Michie & Holton, 2005). Soon after, The Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA) of 1965 provided funding for library resources (books and instructional
materials). As technology began to make its way into schools, libraries shifted to
integrate digital literacies and media education. New standards (Information Power:
Guidelines for School Library Media Programs) again entered the library space in 1988

49
(Michie & Holton, 2005). An emphasis on using information became the focal point in
school library discussions in the latter part of the 20 th century and encouraging students to
be independent researchers became a focal point of library education. AASL’s most
recent iterations of standards, Standards for 21st Century Learner (2007) and
Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (2009) positioned
libraries as central spaces for students to experiment with new media. These shifts are not
only significant, as they reflect larger changes in public education and the social context,
but changing national priorities.
The more recent rise in technology and electronic communications, coupled with
the integration of these concepts and skills into school standards dramatically shifted the
field of librarianship. Luke and Kapitzke (1999) stated: “in the last decade, the ‘librarian’
was reinvented as an information manager, media specialist, resource consultant,
knowledge navigator, virtual librarian and cybrarian” (p. 476). This conception shifted
the library from a contained space (Leander et al., 2010) that houses books and
information, to one where information flowed more freely and through multiple
mediums. Luke and Kapitzke (1999), however, critiqued the teaching of information
literacy as still within a linear, formulaic, skills-based cognitive science paradigm,
especially as the library institution simultaneously became much more of a nebulous
space. Furthermore, the increased accountability of the early 2000s altered literacy
education entirely, with libraries playing a part of this. With increasing standards,
assessments, and accountability measures shifting the landscape of elementary schools,
“21st century” skills came to dominate the rhetoric around education. Consequently,
formal expectations for school librarians began to rise as well, as evidenced by NCLB’s

50
“Improving Literacy through School Libraries” (LSL) program (Mardis, 2005). This
altered the library space dramatically, as standards and expectations for library instruction
began to narrow the literacies that could be privileged in these “literary gardens”
(Dressman, 1998).
Just as NLS shifted the way that many literacy studies scholars approached the
field, the changing information landscape and highly technological environment of 21 st
century schools also significantly redefined the role of libraries. For NLS scholars
(Lankshear & Knobel, 2011), this typically meant a focus on multimodality and the many
ways to access and engage with text, while library science relied more heavily on
concepts of “digital literacies” (Gainer, 2012). Many argued that traditional print
literacies—the legacy of school libraries—“are not sufficient for students immersed in
the mediascapes and infospheres of classrooms and libraries, homes, cafes and new civic
spaces” (Luke & Kapitzke, 1999, p. 471). While digital literacies have been integrated
into library science, these are still rooted in a linear, hierarchical model of teaching and
learning (Luke & Kapitzke, 1999).
The Positioning of Librarians
While socially situated perspectives on literacy are often concerned with theories
of identity and how identities are constructed through language and literacy (Moje &
Luke, 2009) in various spaces, the librarianship discourse relies much more on theories of
roles and professional duties. Before the year 2000, for instance, the literature on school
librarians largely emphasized librarians as teachers, positioning the library as an
instructional space that could further the work of the classroom. In fact, librarians were
called everything from a teacher-librarian to a school library media specialist (Sunseri,

51
1994), pointing to the lack of coherence about the role of a librarian and the way in which
this role has evolved over time. Drawing upon the approximately 12 studies that were
conducted on the role of a school media specialist between 1969 and 1999, with only a
few focused in elementary school libraries, Everhart (2000b) stated, “a day in the life of a
school media specialist is varied, complex, and consequential” (Everhart, 2000b, p. 53).
This mirrors the ambiguity and contention that still surrounds the role of a school
librarian. As Everhart (2000b) demonstrated, there was a disconnect between what school
librarians were tasked with doing and the scholarly research base. In other words, at this
time, scholars seemed to know a lot about what librarians should be doing, but little about
what they actually did.
For example, Walter (2008) presented a study investigating to what extent
librarians identified as teachers. As Walter (2008) contended, the 1990s were a time
when teacher identity became a focal point; however, librarian identity really hadn’t yet
been explored. Making a convincing argument for the importance of studying teacherlibrarian identity, he argued that being a librarian was much more than learning skills and
procedures. Walter’s (2008) qualitative research methodology—a new way of studying
school librarians at the time (which was previously done so through surveys)—looked
toward the personal narratives of six focal librarians to better understand their
experiences. He presented several findings, tracing themes around the importance of
administrative support, the multiple demands on librarians, the lack of professional
training for the role, and the impact of misperceptions on the participants (Walter, 2008).
For example, while Walter (2008) did discuss the role that public perception has in
constructing a librarian identity, this was not elaborated on beyond a discussion of

52
stereotypes and was not framed within a literacy studies context. As Moje and Luke
(2009) remind us, while identities may appear stable, they are often conflicted and
layered. For this reason, the definition of “identity” that Walter (2008) took up in these
pieces has the potential to disregard the belief that identities are always in the making
(Moje & Luke, 2009). A more nuanced perspective of identity might help take the
analysis within this study beyond an identification of stereotypes. For example, focusing
on how librarian identities may be conflicted, both resisting stereotypes while
simultaneously taking them up, would add complexity to this work. In my work with
Amanda and Deborah, I attended carefully to the multiple ways that they both engaged
with the library space, and what this means for the various ways in which they
constructed, deconstructed, and reconstructed their professional identities.
In the age of information, teaching students how to access and synthesize
information has become a key tenet of library instruction. School librarians, while still
taking on an instructional role, have been expected to support student academic
achievement as expectations for schools have increased. Lance, Rodney, and HamiltonPennell (2000) conducted a follow-up study to a longitudinal study published by
Colorado State Library, where they focused on the roles of the library media specialist
(LMS) and investigated the impact of school library media centers on student
achievement. The findings “establish that the relationships between many facets of welldeveloped LM programs and academic achievement are positive and statistically
significant” (p. 39). This mindset, set forth and continued from the standards movement,
positioned the role of the school librarian as a support and extension of the instruction
happening in classrooms. They did, however, acknowledge that this success depended on

53
the presence of a full-time, licensed library media specialist (LMS) and support staff.
Although not the purpose of this particular piece, I argue that unpacking this statement of
the need for a licensed library media specialist (LMS) furthers potentially stereotypical
notions around where expertise is located. In taking an identity perspective to this work, I
argue for the need to examine how labels, certificates, and other notions of gatekeeping
Gee (2000-2001) might impact the identities of those who work in the library.
More broadly, Phillips (2014) presented a literature review looking at ten years of
research on leadership, specifically within a Library Information Science (LIS) context.
To do this, Phillips (2014) drew from a wide range of the literature on libraries, including
schools, public libraries, law libraries, and international libraries, in an effort to come to a
holistic definition of librarian leadership. Through reviewing the literature, Phillips
(2014) pulled out the top cited leadership qualities, which were innovation, creativity,
imagination, vision, and commitment. Ultimately, through synthesizing this literature on
LIS leadership, Phillips (2014) found that while leadership was described as essential for
libraries to adapt to change, school librarians were typically not seen as leaders, despite
the leadership training that they may have received (Mardis, 2013).
In a similar piece, Johnston (2012) asserted that researchers and theorists alike
were calling librarians to take on leadership roles as far as integrating technology into
schools, hence the rise in the term “school library media specialist” in recent years. In
2009 for example, AASL reiterated that librarians should be technology integration
leaders within their school. This, paired with the call for students to develop information
literacies, conveyed clear expectations for librarians. Johnston (2012) presented a study
of leadership within librarianship, although across multiple forms and settings. She

54
utilized a distributed leadership framework where leadership is shared, and multiple
stakeholders work together to support students. However, despite the literature calling for
this shift, most librarians receive little guidance in how this actually is done, and research
has left this area unattended. In framing her study, Johnston (2012) created a binary
where one was a leader, or one was not. While support from others in the context was
mentioned, for example, there was no mention of the fluidity in leadership. That is,
Johnston (2012) didn’t take up the fluid conception of expertise that Rainville and Jones
(2008) relied on, where expertise and leadership manifested differently in different spaces
and with different colleagues. I approach the reading of this study with an identity
framework that positions identities as shifting and non-linear (Moje & Luke, 2009),
which allows me to conceptualize leadership as a position that might be taken up
differently in different spaces, rather than something that one attains and subsequently
maintains.
Church (2008) argued that the term of school library media specialist emphasizes
changing literacies, as well as a more nuanced type of learning and preparation for the
field. School library media specialists, for example, who receive their preparation and
certification from the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) and
AASL-recognized programs must demonstrate their content knowledge of informational
literacy, as well as their skills in integrating these competencies into library curricula. As
a result, the library media specialist of today is expected to take on a more instructional
role in the teaching of information literacy to students, as well be an expert and partner
for teachers (Church, 2008). However, Church (2008) contended: “although standards
and best practice demonstrate that library media specialists should play an active role in

55
curriculum and instruction in the school, principals are typically not aware of the
instructional potential of the library media specialist” (p. 2). Principals, she found,
typically think about the librarian in a more traditional sense, as someone who organizes
materials—“manages the circulation of the library” (Church, 2008, p. 11)—and who also
serves as an information resource for students and teachers. This pointed to a divergence
in the fields of librarianship and instruction, as well as the need for more research into
how school librarians construct their own professional identities. By framing
librarianship within descriptions of tasks and roles, opportunities for looking at their
complex and varied work is limited, as does the potential for viewing librarians as having
agency in constructing spaces for multiple literacies in the library. Therefore, there is
richness in bringing a lens of identity to the literature on librarianship, which can
complicate a definition of identity as synonymous with roles, titles, and responsibilities.
The Identities of School Librarians
Because literature on the identities of school librarians, from a socially situated
literacy perspective, has a limited presence in the field of librarianship, in this final
section I review two bodies of literature that begin to bring these concepts together while
positioning the library as a site for identity construction. A literacy scholar, Dressman
(1997, 1998) employed both spatial and identity theory to examine how librarians
constructed identities around “taste,” while Kimmel (2011, 2012) began to theorize
librarian identity within the field of librarianship.

56
Identity Construction in the Library
Mark Dressman’s work is highly relevant to my own, for the way that
librarianship is addressed through an identity lens, uncharacteristic of the literature in
library academic journals (this piece is in an early childhood journal). Dressman (1997)
argued that school libraries have been neglected in the educational literature, and he
offers two pieces (1997, 1998). The first is an empirical study, and the second a
theoretical paper, although both pieces draw on a large, comparative study that he
conducted across three school libraries with very different populations and degrees of
library programs. First, Dressman (1997) focused on the “story the librarian tells,”
linking literacy in the library to the librarian herself. I built on his framing around identity
to also offer ways in which this particular study can be considered spatially. In the
theoretical paper, Dressman (1998) wrote about the library as a unique “other space,” a
space that was public within the school, but wasn’t public beyond the school. Dressman
(1998) drew primarily on Foucault, but also Soja (1996) to conceptualize the library as an
“other space,” one that was free from the accountability of classrooms and offered a
unique space for students to engage in literacy and assert their own agency in these
practices. Likening school libraries to “literary gardens” (Dressman, 1998), there was
knowledge available and organized for the perusal of children, and yet the children were
given the space to exercise agency and “command of space” (Zacher, 2009), much like in
a literal garden. Opportunities for students to explore diverse texts, therefore, were
numerous in the library, although the opportunities may not be capitalized on.
This particular body of work began as a dissertation, where Dressman (1997) set
out to conduct an ethnographic study of three librarians in a major southwestern city in

57
the United States. In each library, Dressman (1997) selected a third-grade focal class.
Dressman (1997) argued that the librarians had discursive channels through which they
“socialized” student readers (p. 276), one of the channels being social class. The
discourse of “taste preferences,” he argued, was highly classed. For the upper-middleclass school, the “taste preferences” of the librarian and the students were much closer
than at the working-class schools. The first school library that Dressman (1997)
examined was Crest Hill, a neighborhood school comprised of mostly white students
whose literacy skills met or exceeded grade-level expectations. Crest Hill had the same
librarian for 20 years—she ran no established program, but instead, the hallmark events
were “storytime” or “book talks.” The librarian, Barbara Henry, asked literature-based
questions, where “the course of the conversation was extremely linear and aimed toward
a clear, conventional interpretation of the story” (p. 281). This resonated with Heath’s
(1982) findings that middle-class home story practices more closely mirror the
expectations of literacy behaviors in the school. The success of students was, in part,
contributed to the parents and students using a shared way of constructing their world
through language.
Chavez Elementary, the second library site, was an old residential area between
train tracks and a river, comprised primarily of a working-class community of Mexican
American immigrants. Due to low test scores, most students were drilled on tests in their
classrooms. The librarian, Mary Strauss, constructed a proactive curriculum to counteract
the test-driven environment. Most prominent, her “Author Fan Club” was a read-for-pay
program, where students earned prizes for reading certain amounts of books by one

58
author (on their level). Mary told a story of upwards mobility, “bootstrapping” her way
into the middle class by acquiring a “taste” for the right books.
Roosevelt, the third site, was a new school of mostly working class, Mexican
American students, but also had white and African American students. Louise Currie, the
librarian, claimed that the home lives of her students were “just empty” and the library
was made to resemble a middle-class living room. Dressman (1997) argued that the
décor, the incessant labeling, and direct instruction may have been Louise Currie’s way
of providing working-class students with access to the dominant culture, which was also
discussed by Delpit (2006) as access to the culture of power. His critique—and one that I
share—was that Louise had a simplified view of the complexity of language, relying on
autonomous notions of literacy acquisition and focused on acculturating students to
“proper” text consumption. She believed literacy could be transmitted directly to students
(Street, 2005), not understanding that what message is “sent” will not always be the same
as it is “received.” This was an essential component of Dressman’s (1997) analysis,
where he studied the literacy practices within the library but through the lens of
understanding the librarian as someone actively constructing that environment as a result
of their own identity.
Dressman (1997), keeping with his belief that you can’t separate the librarian’s
literacy practices from their own experiences, also was forthcoming about his own
experiences in and with libraries from childhood to adulthood. This was in line with
Peshkin (2000), who argued that it is imperative “to show the way a researcher’s self, or
identity in a situation, intertwines with his or her understanding of the object of the
investigation” (p. 5), as we bring ourselves to our work. Although Dressman (1997)

59
stated that he conducted interviews with each school librarian, the details of these
interviews are unclear. Because Dressman (1997) was invested both in the way how the
space of the library is engaged with, as well as implications for the identities of the
librarian and students, understanding the ways in which he probed the librarian identity,
and the extent of his observations over varying times and spaces (Sheehy, 2010), would
bring both trustworthiness to the study, as well as a greater understanding of how his
conclusions were drawn. For example, attending to how students and the librarians
entered and exited the space, and reflecting on the uniqueness of the space in their larger
school institution, would bring the reader of the study to a greater understanding of the
nuance and complexity of each library space, as they were contrasted with one another.
This is why reflective researcher memos (Maxwell, 2005) are essential to my data
collection and analysis.
The library is a more public place than a traditional classroom, where students
may have greater mobility, and yet less frequent access. For this reason, the library is a
highly unique space in the school, and one that can be explored through a spatial lens
while still rooted in the tenets of identity studies. A key tenet of spatial theory is that
space involves culture, social interactions, and the passage of time, which converges and
intersects in complex ways. This fits with spatial scholars, like Soja (1996), who argue
that space isn’t objective, but is rooted in the social, cultural, historical, and political. In
fact, “whereas space was once thought of as empty, available, and waiting to be filled up,
recent theorizing about space has brought to light that space is a product and process of
socially dynamic relations” (Leander & Sheehy, 2004, p. 1). Just as we come to
understand words in relation to others, so do we come to understand spaces in relation to

60
other spaces. Dressman (1998) advocated for the library to remain as an “other space,”
one that didn’t take the form of the classroom. This fits with Amanda’s assertions that the
library should offer opportunities for leisurely reading and time for creative exploration,
which she believed had been taken out of the classroom. Students, for example, spent
much less time in the library, and the way in which the time was spent diverged from the
classroom—which had a completely different history, set of norms, and standards with
which to comply. Libraries were, in fact, never intended to be standardized classrooms,
and while much of the literature (Uecker et al., 2014) calls for libraries to be seen as an
extension of the classroom in a standards-based era, Dressman (1998) argued that this has
consequences. Rather than positioning libraries as spaces that were “subservient or
complementary to standard curricular objectives, and in particular to the objectives of
literacy programs” (Dressman, 1998, p. 281), he advocated for the possibilities of these
“other spaces” for the inclusion of other types of literacies.
Privileged students, who belong to the culture of power, often find that the
discourses between their homes and schools reflect each other closely (Heath, 1982),
allowing them fluid mobility between the two spaces. Leander et al. (2010) position
spaces as inextricably connected, from a nexus-like perspective, rather than as discrete
containers, bound by geographic borders. For the students at Crest Hills, their home and
school literacy practices mirrored each other. This was a less visible transition than for
the students at Roosevelt, who crossed from their home lives into a library that literally
resembled a middle-class living room. Moje (2004), in her work with urban youth, has
said: “the multiple spaces of their lives conjured up or enabled multiple ways of being…
multiple tools for enacting those ways of being, and ultimately, multiple identities to be

61
enacted” (in Leander & Sheehy, 2004, p. 30). At Crest Hills, knowledge flowed in and
out of the library, and between librarian and student with ease. For the students at
Roosevelt, the knowledge valued by the librarian was a particular kind of knowledge; one
that Louise Currie believed could be transmitted to the students, not realizing that
“literacy practices cannot be quarantined from the ‘real world’” (Leander & Sheehy, p.
39). Student identities at Roosevelt, therefore, were shaped by (and helped to shape) the
particular values within the space as they traversed it. Dressman (1998) contended that,
across the three library sites, the students exercised their agency very differently but they
did nonetheless, often subverting notions of what they were supposed to read or visiting
the library when the librarian was at lunch so that they could access the books that they
wanted. In both studies, then, the adults had to “acquiesce to those readers’ desires” at a
certain point (Dressman, 1998, p. 283). This pointed to the significance of these “other
spaces” for students to explore with literacy and use both literacy practices as well as the
space to engage in experiences that were meaningful for them, or perhaps to escape from
experiences that they didn’t find relevant or meaningful. I argue that employing a spatial
theory can add a more multi-dimensional perspective to identity studies, by considering
the ways in which space both reflects the identities that enter it, as well as constructs the
identities therein.
School Librarians as Collaborators
Intersecting and juxtaposed with Dressman’s (1997, 1998) body of work are
pieces by Sue Kimmel, a library scholar and researcher. Although Kimmel’s (2011,
2012) body of work was primarily housed in library scholarship journals, she has called
for more research into the identity work of school librarians and began to bring the

62
positioning of librarians together with theories of identity situated in the NLS field. The
purpose of these studies was to illuminate the conceptions of school librarians that were
most prominent in her site. Kimmel (2011, 2012) offered two articles, drawing on a
larger ethnographic study that brought these concepts together. This offered a perspective
on how school librarians have shifted to take on a more integral and collaborative
position and bridge the gap between literacy scholarship and the identities of school
librarians.
Kimmel (2011) opened this article by positioning collaboration between librarians
and teachers as essential work and fruitful for both parties involved. There was, indeed, a
plethora of literature calling for meaningful collaboration between school librarians and
classroom teachers, but this collaboration has been severely understudied. She
thoughtfully pointed out that just because schools have implemented common planning
time does not mean that effective collaboration was occurring. For example, Kimmel
(2011) stated:
There have been few to no studies illuminating the actual work of
collaboration or how language is used on site to enact collaboration between
school librarians and teachers. Instead, much of the literature takes for granted
that collaboration occurred if two or more people met and subsequently conducted
an activity. (p. 2)
While we can learn from similar analysis in other disciplines like literacy coaching, there
is reason to take it up within librarianship, particularly as the field continues to transform
and the expectations on school librarians increase. Gee’s (2000-2001) identity framework
and discourse analysis that Kimmel (2011) took up effectively foregrounds discourse, as
she argued that identities are constructed through language. To investigate identity,
Kimmel (2011) conducted a year-long ethnographic study of one school librarian, and a

63
team of three 2nd grade teachers. The school site was small, urban, and primarily served
African-American students on free/reduced lunch. Each month, grade levels had two
hours of planning time in the library. This small piece of the larger ethnographic study
traced eight planning meetings, and all were audiotaped with verbatim transcriptions. The
second piece (Kimmel, 2012) attended only to the interviews (one per teacher) and then a
focus group. In the interviews, Kimmel (2012) used a semi-structured interview protocol,
where she asked about the teachers’ experiences planning with the librarian (herself).
Kimmel (2012) believed firmly that it matters—in regards to collaboration—that
the librarian was not in a supervisory position. While surely this is essential for
attempting to neutralize power relations, identity scholars (Janks, 2009; Moje & Luke,
2009) would contend that this removal of power is impossible. Throughout the
interviews, Kimmel (2012) found that when the teachers named the most important
things that a librarian brings to planning, the teachers stated: content/material knowledge,
legwork (ideas and resources), and support. Ultimately, it was the “stuff” coupled with
the “having [the librarian] there” to navigate the stuff that mattered to the teachers. In
addition, Kimmel (2011) found that the following school librarian archetypes emerged:
“the specialist who provides release time for teachers; the school librarian as helper,
resource provider, and instructional designer; and a stereotypical ‘shhhh librarian’ who is
the ‘story lady’” (p. 9). Interestingly, these themes varied between participants. For
example, one teacher, Dianna, was comfortable with the librarian acting as a specialist,
and less as a co-teacher. Others expressed surprise at the ability of the school librarian to
collaborate instructionally, though ultimately were more open to this role.

64
Kimmel (2011) clearly outlined the purpose of the first study, which was to
“explore the various roles or identities of a school librarian as they shape and are shaped
in collaboration with teachers” (p. 1), and she took up Gee’s (2000-2001) theory of
identity to illuminate the discourses around the school librarian. Kimmel (2011) was
transparent about her data analysis—detailing the three phases, and the exact page
numbers of transcription that were analyzed. She utilized thick description, quotes from
all of the participants (including herself), and provided context about the topic of
discussion at hand to bring the reader along. However, the second piece (Kimmel, 2012)
did not include observations. Observations would augment her findings around language
and identity, as it related to collaboration, by adding complexity. How one speaks, for
instance, may differ from how one acts. Observing how the teachers decided to take up,
or not to take up, the knowledge and resources generated in the collaborative sessions,
would help to illuminate the layers in their own identities, which may be conflicting. I
take the stance that interviews alone may not have the capacity to reveal the tensions in
the very, very complex work of educating children, and have opted to include both
methods in my own proposed work.
The librarian in this study was Kimmel (2011) herself, and she therefore was a
participant at all levels of data collection and analysis. However, no mention of Kimmel’s
(2011) own identity, as a researcher and school librarian who works daily with the school
staff, was mentioned. For example, interviewing was introduced, but it was not made
explicit who did the interviewing. As the researcher, we are led to assume that Kimmel
(2011) herself conducted the interviews. In the field of literacy studies, a widespread
notion is taken up that research cannot be separated from the researcher (Henstrand,

65
2006). A component of strong qualitative research is examining—continually—the role
of the researcher (Peshkin, 1988) and to bring greater complexity to this study, an
explication of researcher role, as well as discussing how it impacted the study, is needed.
In the second piece, Kimmel (2012) provided much more elaboration on her own role and
subjectivities throughout the research process. However, power was left unexamined in
this study as a component of her subjectivities. Power is always implicated in language
and literacy (Delpit, 2006; Freire, 1983; Janks, 2009). The collaborative sessions that
Kimmel (2012) engaged in, then, were not free from these power dynamics whether they
were interrogated or not. For a more complete picture, Kimmel (2011; 2012) might
expand her analysis to complicate how the identity of her participants, and herself, was
constructed through social interactions and relations of power (Moje & Luke, 2009).
Ultimately, Kimmel’s (2011; 2012) work has added tremendously to the literature on
school librarians, and in particular, how their professional identities were constructed.
Conclusion
While the variance of the librarian role is significant, little is known about the
professional identity of librarians, whether told in their own voices and/or chronicled
through scholarly research. More than ever before, school librarians are shifting to school
media specialists, library and information science specialists, teacher-librarians, and
many other positionings. The push to integrate digital literacies also appears with force.
Another discourse surrounding school librarians, however, emerges as Hunsinger (2015),
an award-winning charter school librarian, positions librarians as “equity warriors,”
working to close “word gaps” and the “digital divide” in high-poverty areas. There is a

66
problematic disconnect between what librarians are tasked with, and the dearth of
literature exploring the diversity of their actual experiences, particularly when they called
to take on more significant instructional and accountability-assuming positions (Uecker et
al., 2014). Those studies that do explore the experiences of librarians remain limited to
static notions of roles, tasks, and responsibilities, and frame the library as a physical place
within a school. Therefore, conducting this literature review has posed challenges in
bringing together very distinct paradigms on literacy, identity, and space.
To add to the existing bodies of literature (within literacy studies and library
science), I draw from spatial theory, integrating tenets of identity studies, to better
understand the ways in which school librarians construct their own social identities in the
spaces that they traverse, analyzing the literacies that circulate in the library from a more
particular framework. In doing so, I complicate the ways in which identity is defined in
librarianship literature as one-dimensional, linear, and static, and how libraries are
positioned as containers (Leander et al., 2010). In opening up the definition of literacy
beyond activities such as reading, checking out books, and other related tasks, there is an
opportunity to think more deeply about how students and librarians experience the
complex space of the library.

67

Chapter III
METHODOLOGY

A case study aims to explore “the messy complexity of human experience”
(Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 3) through looking at a small unit of social space for an
extended period of time. In this dissertation, I studied an elementary school library to see
which social spaces are produced. However, to re-conceptualize the library as a unique
space, outside of accountability and yet still within schools, where multiple student
identities might be considered literate (Campano & Damico, 2007), I first explored what
literacy practices were already circulating in and through the space. To do so, I used
ethnographic methods for the purpose of coming to understand the socially situated
literacy practices that Amanda and Deborah, and four first-grade focal students, engaged
with in the library over the course of a semester. Beginning at the start of a new school
year provided an opportunity to explore how Amanda initially constructed the space for
learning, and the ways in which she, and her students, interacted with the space and each
other over the subsequent weeks. Over the course of this study, I then transitioned to
working with Deborah as the school librarian.
I approached this case study with a spatial framework, while taking up tenets of
identity, situating this within larger conceptions of literacy as socially situated and
contextual. The purpose of this case study was to examine this library as one such other
space, a “social unit” that was complex (Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 38). Through a
spatial theoretical lens, I approached all literacy activities as tied to the ways in which the

68
students and the librarians interacted with the space. By foregrounding this theoretical
framework, I employed “thick” description (Henstrand, 2006) of events that were
documentable, as well as considered the more abstract components of space that are
difficult to document and yet are inherently present through spatial mapping tools. For
example, as Sheehy (2010) reminds us, there are multiple dimensions of space, and
understanding space as something that is constructed is a cornerstone of this proposed
work. Additionally, I used notions of identities as fluid and multiple to complicate the
existing literature on librarian identities, which often center on roles and responsibility
(Lance, Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000; Johnston, 2012). Because I contend that
identities are much more complex than this existing literature offers, and understanding
the complexity of librarian identities has the potential to shift the way we view library
spaces and the role of libraries in educating children, I threaded tenets of identity
throughout the entirety of my work and recognized the ways in which it was embedded in
spatial theory. For this reason, my work did not seek to intervene or fix students, as this
served to position student identities, and the contexts in which they occur, as bounded
(Wissman et al., 2015). Instead, I followed Wissman et al. (2015), who advocate for more
fluid research methods, as well as a broader notion of what might constitute a research
context.
Therefore, while case study methodology gave me a solid framework to examine
a unique and understudied space, I acknowledged the need to think beyond one bound
case. In particular, spatial theory helped me to work against positioning the library as a
container that was bound by four walls. Rather, I extended my observations outside—into
the halls, through transitions, to ultimately disrupt the boundaries of my case. How

69
students prepared for their library time, for example, revealed the ways in which their
literacy practices overlapped or diverged from those that they use in other spaces.
Additionally, I conducted an observation within each of the first-grade classrooms to
consider the differences across the spaces, and how students took up similar or different
identity practices in their regular literacy instruction. The library space extended into
other spaces, just as the classroom space extended into the library.
Conducting qualitative research, such as a case study, inherently means that “our
researching selves are essential within the case” (Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 56). In fact,
the very doing of qualitative research entails the researcher’s presence in the work, and
therefore, is never neutral. Similarly, Erickson (1977) has argued that what is essential
about qualitative research is that “its primary concern is with deciding what makes sense
to count” (p. 58). In embarking on this type of research, I did not aim for neutrality, nor
did I propose that neutrality was possible or even desirable. Additionally, this study was
deeply situated within one particular context, and did not lead to universal claims about
what sorts of materials or pedagogy should occur in all libraries to improve student
achievement. There is no space that is like any other, no child like any other. However,
the findings presented in this dissertation do have implications for the potential of other
spaces for inclusive literacy practices. For as Henstrand (2006) describes: “As both a
student and teacher of literature, I had been schooled in the idea that no reality is the
same for all people; the only reality I can claim is that of my own personal interpretation”
(p. 14). Therefore, this work provides a detailed, complex, and nuanced account of my
interpretation of one library space. In doing so, I demonstrate the possibilities that might

70
occur in the library, as a space where both the school librarians, and four focal students,
made sense of themselves as readers, writers, learners, and human beings.
Research Questions
1. What are the ways in which a school library is produced in one urban elementary
school?
2. How do two school librarians, and four first-grade focal students, create spaces
for literacy in the library, and what is the nature of those spaces?
Overview of Research Design
Because I embarked on this study with interest and passion for this research site, I
learned quickly that my analysis had already commenced (Horvat, 2013), in that my
knowledge of the school was driving my project and it was precisely this knowledge that
opened up the space for me to pursue these inquiries. For example, I was already familiar
with some of the literacy events that occurred in this dissertation site even before data
collection began, as well as the flow of a typical session (Dyson & Genishi, 2005),
though there is still much to learn. Qualitative research, where I studied the literacy,
identity, and spatial experiences of my participants, best suited these inquiries, because as
Connelly and Clandinin (1990) assert: “humans are storytelling organisms, who,
individually and socially, lead storied lives” (p. 2). Investigating how my participants
narrated their experiences in the library and with literacy was one way to begin to
understand the various and conflicted identities that they brought to the space. Although I
did have a prior relationship with Amanda, and was familiar with this school library, the

71
space was constantly shifting, as Amanda shifted within it, complicated by the addition of
Deborah. This greatly altered the space and the literacies that “counted” in the space for
the students that both Amanda and Deborah taught. For this reason, this particular site
had a rich amount of information to offer as I grappled with how scholars and
practitioners might come to value literacies in other school spaces.
As a case study researcher, I was particularly interested “in how children,
teachers, and other educational participants experience the world around them” (Dyson &
Genishi, 2005, p. 19). To understand this, I chose a small, yet complex, social unit to
study in-depth using ethnographic methods, which included “watching” the social
performance of participants, and “asking” them about their knowledge and experience
(Erickson, 1977). A case study is one interpretation of a particular phenomenon,
occurring in a particular context, and with particular participants. My case study,
therefore, was designed to include a participant with whom I had a relationship with, and
to be conducted within a school in which I had personal and professional ties. However,
because research does not always go according to plan, Amanda soon shifted out of the
library space, which will be described in more detail in the section that follows.
Furthermore, case studies do not provide generalizable knowledge, and they don’t aim to
provide quick or easy fixes to educational problems (Dyson & Genishi, 2005).
The nature of studying a complex case, then, often required multiple methods of
data collection (Marshall & Rossman, 2011). To collect data during this case study, I
utilized observations, semi-structured interviews, and artifact analysis as my methods.
During observations, I attended to how the space was arranged, which parts of the space
the children used, and the ways in which they used those spaces. Tracing the rhythms of

72
space and time (Sheehy, 2009) of the instruction in the library during these observations
provided a method for me to concretize the ways in which the students and librarian
engaged in literacy during specific activities. Therefore, I approached the library not as a
static container, but as positioned within a “nexus of relations” (Leander et al., 2010, p.
336) to other spaces in the school. Therefore, I attended to how individuals entered and
exited the space, understanding that they bring their own identities to the space and that
this produced tensions, depending on how their multiple identity markers were read
within the space.
To augment my observations, I conducted semi-structured interviews for the
purpose of probing further into the literacy practices and identity construction that
Amanda, Deborah, and four focal students took up in the library space, and how the
library space influenced those practices. These interviews were semi-structured, as I was
not looking for “specific” answers or any particular data. My protocols were meant to
prompt reflection but were designed to be fluid, just as identities are fluid. Finally, I
gathered artifacts that were relevant to my study site (Ghiso, 2015), such as schedules,
standards, and other logistical information that was posted around the room. Additionally,
I collected examples of student work that was created in the library site. Some of these
examples were finished pieces, while others were components of ongoing projects.
Research Site
Situated in a historically African-American neighborhood, the context for this
study was highly diverse. Approximately 40% of the students across the school were
African-American, 22% and 25% were Hispanic and white, respectively, with under 10%

73
Asian. Just over 40% of students qualified for free lunch (Center for New York City
Affairs at The New School, 2016).
Contextualizing the School
City Partnership School began in 2011, as a joint endeavor between the local
school system and a neighboring college of education. City Partnership School was
designed as a community school and offered enrichment and comprehensive services in
efforts to address child development in a holistic manner (Luter, Lester, & Kronick,
2013). City Partnership School was a lottery school, meaning that parents must apply, but
it was non-selective. Because it gave priority to certain districts, it did aim to maintain an
ethos of being a neighborhood school while educating for a global society. Additionally,
the school offered multiple enrichment and wrap-around services, aiming to educate the
whole child and serve the community, aligning with the mission of community schools
(Luter et al., 2013). Part of City Partnership School’s mission was to provide a rich and
inclusive community that celebrated its diversity, a clear value of the school. Teachers
communicated with families frequently and strove to construct curriculum that was
multicultural and inclusive in its orientation by inviting family members to share
experiences, offering diverse text selections to students, and utilizing the resources in the
community to provide a range of experiences and information for students. For example,
students attended multiple field trips per year, often for enrichment in the arts, sciences,
music, and math. Additionally, the urban neighborhood in which City Partnership School
was situated had many children’s book authors and illustrators, and efforts were made to
integrate these locally authored texts into the curriculum and library collection.

74
City Partnership School exemplified racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic class
diversity. This was by design, as efforts to integrate students across racial and social class
lines aligned both ideologically with the mission and vision of City Partnership School
and its partnering university, and is also supported by research indicating that there are
benefits to integration for both low and middle-class students (Kahlenberg, 2001). In
particular, there is evidence that apart from family socioeconomic status, the
socioeconomic status of school peers was the most significant factor in the academic
achievement of low-income students (Schwartz, 2010). Many languages were spoken at
City Partnership School, many traditions were celebrated, and many students were first or
second-generation immigrants from countries such as the Dominican Republic and Puerto
Rico.
The literacy curriculum that City Partnership School employed had its roots in
balanced literacy, which integrates phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary
development, and comprehension through a variety of formats and literacy activities
(Calkins, 2000). The primary teachers at City Partnership School utilized interactive
read-alouds, shared text, word study, minilessons, independent reading, guided reading,
and small-group conferring formats to teach literacy in the workshop style format
(Calkins, 2000). Professional development for teachers was a priority of the school and
drew from its university partnership to do so. Teachers had monthly meetings with
literacy coaches, math coaches, science experts, and graduate students specializing in a
variety of other content areas. Additionally, teachers had opportunities to lead
professional development meetings for the staff and were encouraged to attend offcampus sessions as well. Amanda, as the full-time school librarian, also had opportunities

75
to attend professional development conferences and workshops, most recently one about
teaching history through children’s literature.
Contextualizing the Library
The library at City Partnership School was situated on the top floor of a four-story
building. Amanda taught each grade level in the library two to three times per week,
depending on the alternating schedule. As the school librarian, she had library standards
in which she was expected to follow, set forth by the school system which were aligned
to the Common Core State Standards, but otherwise had freedom in how to address these
standards. Because of this flexibility, Amanda wanted to use this opportunity to integrate
inquiry and project-based learning opportunities into the school library. In fact, she
framed her role around enriching and supporting the literacy work occurring in the
classrooms. Because Amanda was a veteran classroom teacher, she was eager to use this
new role to advance her own knowledge around literacy, texts, and instruction. However,
Amanda also positioned her role as diverging from the classroom in significant ways.
When I asked her about the role of literacy in the library, she stated: “Making it aside
from academic reading… I mean, that’s what I’d like my role to be.” In another example,
Amanda elaborated more: “Well, there’s no free, free reading in school. You know, there
really isn’t.” Amanda’s purpose, therefore, as the school librarian, was to open the space
for students to engage with texts creatively in a culture of education where she deemed it
lost, and to encourage this enjoyment of reading that she believed as both essential and
often pushed out of the classroom space. It was this tension that both excited Amanda,
while simultaneously worried her. This contention in both the library space, and her
position therein, is what initially drew me to this work.

76

Participants
As already discussed, Amanda was a veteran classroom teacher in the urban
school system in which City Partnership School is located. A long-time native of the tristate area, Amanda was of Latina descent and was bilingual. Because of her racial and
linguistic markers, Amanda was afforded some “insider” status with the community
served by City Partnership School, much of which was also bilingual. Additionally,
Amanda had relationships with many of the staff at City Partnership School and could
often be heard speaking in Spanish with the administrative staff in the office before
school began.
When City Partnership School first opened, Amanda became a founding teacher
with the principal at the time. Then, she transitioned to the school librarian. Amanda’s
curricular flexibility increased with her transition from a classroom teacher to the school
librarian, and so did her desire to use the library to engage students in thematic, inquirybased teaching. When Amanda took on the role of the school librarian, she and I had
several conversations about what inquiry and project-based learning might look like in
the library. I offered to collaborate with Amanda, and she graciously opened her space
and her thoughts to my pilot research. The more time that I spent with her, and in the
library, the more invested and interested in this work I became. The instructional and
curricular flexibility that Amanda now felt, without a formal curriculum and no real
constraints from the administration, allowed her to consider what the library could offer
to her students, and the different spaces for literacies that it might make room for.
Amanda had a clear investment in creating the space within the library for all students to

77
identify as literate (Campano & Damico, 2007) and to experience the space in a positive
manner, even when it is difficult, which is why I was so drawn to embarking on this
study with her.
For example, during my pilot study, I conducted multiple interviews with
Amanda to probe what she viewed as her purpose in the library, and what her beliefs
were about literacy, libraries, and teaching. Because she often discussed the library in
relation to the classroom, as a space that could be designed to counteract the standardsbased and (often) scripted activities, this theme remained prominent throughout the
interviews. Although Amanda did express uncertainty about her formal role as the
librarian with, “As the first year in here, I’m thinking that’s what it should be…” she did
have strong notions about what the literacy program should look like:
You know, recreational [reading] shouldn’t be, ‘I’m an E… I’m going to read
E books’ or ‘I’m an A, I’m going to read A books for pleasure’ because A books
are not pleasurable. You know? It should be, you know, take home read-alouds
and have [my] mom read me books and let me act them out and let me… enjoy
this book even if I can’t read every word. (11/16/2015 INT, p. 1)
Amanda defined literacy in a way that varies from other spaces in the school, and is
constructed through her experiences (most notably, as a veteran classroom teacher). She
described being excited that for the first time in her career, there was no teacher’s guide,
despite being left to “figure it out.” It is only through deep investigation into her talk,
beliefs, hopes, and frustrations that this more nuanced depiction of the library emerged
and the complex tensions that Amanda negotiated in creating inclusive spaces while in a
new and unfamiliar space (Ellsworth, 2005).
To my disappointment, however, Amanda’s time in the library was short-lived.
During the third week of my data collection, a new teacher at City Partnership School had

78
quit, and Amanda was asked to take her place in the library. She did so, for the second
time, as she had also filled a maternity leave replacement role for several months during
the year prior. Immediately after her transition from the library to the classroom, I
interviewed Amanda about this shift, to which she responded:
I’m torn with that because how I feel is that it’s just saying, well anybody can
go in there and do that. I don’t necessarily think that that’s how the principal feels
per say. I feel like she was really excited about putting somebody full-time into
the library. We had a part-time person before me. I feel that in her head she thinks
it’s an important place and it’s like the center of the school, but at the same time, I
feel conflicted about it because it’s the second time it’s happened to me.
Sometimes it's like saying, “Yeah, so you're great for the classroom,” which is a
compliment, I guess, but yeah, we’ll just stick a sub in the library. It’s tough to try
not to think that that’s what they think, but that’s how I feel sometimes, even
though I don’t necessarily think that they’re thinking that. If that makes any sense.
(9/29/2016 INT, p. 2)
As Amanda demonstrated here, there is a tension between her language that
positions the library as a space that is “the center of the school” and yet “well anybody
can go in there and do that.” As she shifted from the library to the general classroom, I
continued to be reminded of how emotional the work of teaching, learning, and research
is at all levels.
Amanda’s transition left the library in need of a school librarian. Deborah, a
frequent substitute at City Partnership School, transitioned into the role of the school
librarian, and remained in that position for the rest of the year. While I continued to
explore Amanda’s identity in the classroom space, Deborah also agreed to work with me
in the library, and over the course of my data collection, I came to know her as a partner
in this work.
In my conversations with Deborah, she spoke of her initial desire to teach home
economics while growing up in the Caribbean, before realizing how much she enjoyed

79
teaching younger students. An African-American woman of Caribbean descent, Deborah
also discussed her strong religious faith. Deborah often wanted to guide the first-grade
students to appropriate reading content, telling them that books about Freddy Kreuger
were the “dark side of life” by being too violent (1/20/2017 FN, p. 4). As a teacher,
Deborah viewed her role as supporting students’ emotional and moral development.
Early on in our work together, I asked Deborah about her feelings regarding being
the librarian, to which she responded: “I think it gives me more flexibility to do certain
things because okay, I read to them, they respond. Then the second time, I read to them…
they browse to take a book out” (12/15/2016 INT, p. 3). Deborah spoke more about
integrating holidays and projects in the library, such as writing about what students are
thankful for around Thanksgiving, celebrating women’s history, or studying biographies
during African American History Month. With the older students, Deborah explained that
“I try to bring in what’s happening in the world to school because that’s how you are
going to be living. You are not going to live in a box” (12/15/2016 INT, p. 7). With each
assignment or activity that students engaged with, Deborah was sure to display what
students produced in the library space.
While a temporary space, Deborah demonstrated the ways in which she made it
her own. In discussing how much she enjoyed being in the library, she explained:
Yeah, I really like it up here, but then I know, I don’t know when they’re going
to get the teacher still… so even though I don’t know, I’m working with the
thought that they can tell me anytime and really, if they telling me anytime, I
know I have done my best up to that time. (12/15/2016 INT, p. 10)
Although to Deborah the space was always in a sense temporary due to her position as a
substitute in the school, her language (such as “they can tell me anytime,” and “I don’t

80
know when they’re going to get the teacher”) also revealed the ways in which the space
was contingent for her, too.
In addition to studying that language and literacies that both Amanda and
Deborah took up in the library, and the implications for their identities, I also included
four first-grade focal students. This sampling is best described as purposeful and
theoretical (Marshall & Rossman, 2011), guided by the theoretical framing of my inquiry
and the specifics of this case. The students were critical to studying literacies, because
inherent in my theoretical framework is the notion that identities are constructed socially
(Gee, 2000-2001). Literacy, then, is how we name ourselves in the spaces that we are in,
becoming a form of “identity kit” (Gee, 1989, p. 51). In order to understand the
complexities within the social unit (Dyson & Genishi, 2005) of the school library, then, I
investigated the literacy practices of multiple participants. I elected to include students
that fall within diverse levels of literacy proficiency, as defined by their teachers and
Amanda. In doing so, I interrogated the notion of varying levels of “success” to see what
library might offer as a different space, an other space. Specifically, did they engage with
literacy differently in the library than they did in the classroom?
The Focal Students: Mark, Nikki, Carla, and James
To select my focal students, I first spoke with the principal and the first-grade
teachers at City Partnership School. The principal, in anticipating a positive response to
solicitations for student participants, advised me to invite a small number of students to
the study. In my desire to have a range of backgrounds and experiences, I asked each
teacher to recommend three students that they thought might be willing to work with me:
a reader who they considered to be struggling, a reader they considered to be at

81
benchmark, and an advanced reader. I requested that these students also be diverse in
terms of their race, linguistic background, and gender. Six students were sent home with
letters from me explaining the study, and four students returned signed permission slips.
These four students (two in each first-grade class) became my focal students.
Mark was a male student of Hispanic descent, who was, at the time, a younger
sibling to his third-grade brother. Mark’s family was of a lower socioeconomic
background, and Mark spoke both Spanish and English at home. A highly social student
who works very hard to achieve, Mark relayed to the me the benefit of reading, which he
stated was to “get more learning in your head” (11/10/2016 INT, p. 4), augmented by the
additional transcript excerpt that follows.
Alyson: Mmm hmm. And, what does a good reader do in the library?
Mark: Reads a lot… And, and, they read hard books.
Alyson: Read hard books? What does that mean?
Mark: That means, you know, you know every book but you don’t know one
book. So you have to read that book over and over.
Alyson: And, what happens if you read the hard book over and over and over?
Mark: It will… And then you can get, you can get more learning in your head and
you can get writing more done (11/10/2016 INT, pp. 3-4)
By his teachers, Mark was positioned as a low reader, or a struggling reader, in
the sense that he was not meeting benchmark expectations in terms of his independent
reading level (Fountas & Pinnell, 2006). Despite this, Mark seemed to love reading. In
the library, he traversed space with ease, selecting different books and often trading them
in until he found one that he liked or was successful with. In this sense, Mark “browsed”
in the truest sense of the word.
Despite this engagement and browsing, Mark often seemed constrained by his
reading level, even though students were not directed to read at their levels in the library.
As this dissertation will demonstrate, however, the discourses of assessment and reading

82
levels were powerful, and nonetheless shaped Mark’s choices in what to read, as well as
his identity as a reader.
Nikki was a student in the same class as Mark. A female student of ChineseAmerican descent, and from a middle class and educated family, Nikki was positioned by
her teachers as an advanced reader and seemed to be quite proud of her reading level.
During a follow-up observation during May of 2016, she introduced me to her friend by
saying “we’re the same level. We have so much in common. Our birthdays are both in
February!” (5/15/2017 Map).
Being viewed as a proficient reader perhaps afforded Nikki certain mobilities in
what to select to read, as well as what behaviors to take up (or not). For example, Nikki
described that “I really like… I’m not really interested in books about princesses”
(11/17/2016), distinguishing herself from her peers. Nikki also didn’t always conform to
the schooled behaviors that were asked of students. For example, she often sat at the back
of the rug and stretched out during read-alouds, and she rarely participated in class
discussions. In an observation occurring during the classroom literacy block on
November 22nd, 2016 Nikki and her classmates were often directed to turn and talk with
one another, yet Nikki did not talk with her assigned partner. She was also redirected to
sit in her spot (11/22/2016 FN, p. 4). As I first got to know Nikki, I wondered if these
behaviors went unregulated because of her high reading level. Was she afforded more
leeway because she wasn’t in need of improvement?
In the second first-grade class, I came to know Carla. Carla talked to me about her
family, and how her parents met while studying abroad in Spain. These statements were
augmented by Carla’s other stories about traveling with her family over the summers; in

83
fact, a story called “All About Families” that she had written in class included an
anecdote about a summer trip to the beach. A white, middle-class, female student, Carla
reported loving school, and loving the library. During my first conversation with her, she
mentioned that she really liked the library:
Alyson: So, Carla, you said that you really like the library. How do you feel when
you come to the library?
Carla: I feel, like, excited.
Alyson: Why do you feel excited?
Carla: Because… because, I, I can’t wait till like maybe, I’ll find some new books
that I haven’t read before. Or, or, I really want to get a book that, like, I really
love.
Alyson: Mmm hmm. And when you leave the school library, when your library
time is over, how do you feel then?
Carla: Uhh… I still feel happy, because, you know. (10/27/2016 INT, pp. 6-7)
Considered by her teachers to be a student who was reading at grade level, Carla read
both independently and in partnership with her peers. She seemed to be at ease during
both.
Finally, my last focal student was James, in the same class as Carla. James was a
male student of African descent (both parents), where his mother was from Nigeria and
his father was from Guinea. James described his father as speaking both English and
French. James was described by his teachers as a reader who was advanced, in that he
was reading above his reading level. Because of this, James told me that he was
encouraged to read books at his level in the classroom, but that he enjoyed his visits to
the library because he got to see Mo Willems books. In my first interview with James on
November 3rd, 2016, where I asked him to take five pictures of anything in the library, all
five of his images were of books, with three of the five being Mo Willems books.

84
Positionality: Who Am I in Relation to This Work?
Conducting research is a process of continual inquiry. My role as a researcher in
my particular school site was complex because I wasn’t just studying the particular
phenomena of my proposed dissertation study. While this was part of my inquiry, I was
also discovering myself in the process. I was naming myself as a researcher.
My Legacy
My father, a fisheries biologist who engages in quantitative research, argues
(sometimes with me) that research is factual, objective, and neutral. Although in the past
I bought into this notion, I have since grown to take the opposite stance. This brings up
the question that Lytle (2000) poses: What counts as research, and to whom? My father
has been widely published and has surely made a significant contribution to the field of
fisheries. While this matters, this is one particular kind of research that is situated within
one particular paradigm. The notion of what counts as research then, between my father
and I, becomes quite literally a “contested territory” (Lytle, 2000, p. 692).
I come from a legacy of traditional literature, of science. More distantly, I come
from a legacy of activism, of law, of environmentalism. I come from a home that proudly
collects texts of all shapes and sizes. The legacy I hail from is one where you pride
yourself in your work. The amount of your salary doesn’t matter as much as passion and
accomplishment. I come from a legacy of “you can be anything you want to be” with the
caveat of “college is not optional.” In truth, then, could I really be anything I wanted to
be? More specifically, could I be something that fell outside of the traditional four-year
college degree, and professional career path? I knew the answer to this question, and so I

85
would never aspire to be an artist or musician. I would never aspire to be anything
outside of the expected, college-bound route.
I come from a legacy of middle-class, white progressives who always vote
Democrat, who advocate for sustainability, and who profess a belief in an inclusive
society but simultaneously live in the comforts of middle-class suburbia and enjoy
experiences such as vacations and eating global cuisine. Lam and Warriner (2012)
describe ideology as constructed from particular social, economic, and political locations.
The progressive ideology of my family, then, is highly classed and raced. My ideologies
are highly classed and raced. This is how I have arrived at where I currently am—
physically, intellectually, politically, and socially.
My father and I have competing ideologies about what counts as research, and
this constructs a “contested territory” (Lytle, 2000, p. 692) between us. Excited to share
updates with him about my ongoing work, I sent a small outline of my study and asked
for his feedback. When I received his feedback—whose scholarship I had revered my
entire life—I couldn’t decide whether I wanted to laugh or cry. My father questioned the
contribution that my study would make to a larger body of academic knowledge. While
my logic understood that there was little overlap in our fields of study and that this
feedback was not particularly relevant for me, I still desperately craved my father’s
approval. Here I was, an adult, who stayed up in the middle of the night crafting an email
response that I thought would “convince” him that my study was justified. Despite
knowing in my head that I was, I wanted to hear that he was proud of me. Needless to
say, his feedback in that moment did not say those words.

86
For the first time in my life, I have begun to experience dissonance with my
parents. As Kamler (2001) recounts in her own work, the process of pursuing doctoral
work changes you. My doctoral work has changed me. I am no longer the “good girl”
(Miller, 2005) who agrees with everything my parents say and do, privileging their
opinions above all else as I have in the past. I speak my mind, I advocate for my work
and myself, and this results in conversations (in this case, an email exchange) that are
uncomfortable. The power dynamics within my legacy have shifted as I have shifted. As
Janks (2009) contends: “we bring who we are and where we come from to the processes
of production and reception of spoken, written, and visual texts” (p. 58). I brought
myself, my changed self, to the email exchange, only to be met with resistance.
My Researcher Self
My legacy of seeking approval is not something that ends with my family, much
as I wish that to be the case. I am constructed from my different legacies, just as I am
deconstructed and reconstructed with each new position that I take up. In Moje and
Luke’s (2009) metaphor of identity as position, multiple “laminations” that we take up
construct our identity over time and across spaces. My identity, while not the “good girl”
(Miller, 2005) that I once was, is full of contradictions. As wa Thiong’o (2012) asserts, “a
reorganization of a space, the same space, can, at the minimum, bring about different
results and different perspectives” (p. 8). Just as there is still dissonance between my
father and I across spaces, there is also dissonance in my research site, which involves
many layers of stakeholders, ideologies, and priorities in and across spaces.
My research site, City Partnership School, was complex for many reasons. The
school sat at the nexus of the public school system, a college of education, and an

87
affiliated partnership office focused on improving the local schools through university
partnership. This partnership office, importantly, funded my fellowship at the school site.
With this partnership, I was the poster child for a fellow—the “good girl” (Miller, 2005)
aiming to please. I came to the lunches when invited, I wrote thoughtful thank-you notes,
and I prepared copies of and shared my materials when asked (even when I didn’t have
the time). I did not say a negative word, and I always did as I was asked, even if it meant
restructuring my day to fit something in. With this partnership office, I approached
everything with rose-colored glasses, because I was “making a difference.” Just as I
sought approval with my father, I sought it here as well. Of course, this relationship was
laden with institutional power (Janks, 2009). Because this partnership office funded my
work in City Partnership School, I must “consent to their relations” (Janks, 2009, p.
36)—I really didn’t have a choice in sharing my work or participating in additional
events.
And yet, when I physically entered City Partnership School, I was positioned in
another way. With the teachers, including my participant Amanda, I tried to position
myself as an ally. While I did enter the site with academic power, I was not an outside
person coming into the school community—I had my own history in this site. As a matter
of fact, I was allowed to be in the site as a researcher because of the relationships and
trust that I had gained over the past two years. Many teachers openly voiced their
frustrations with the school culture to me, and I kept their frustrations in confidence. I
helped in any way possible, which was often to be a sounding board and to validate their
concerns. It was not long ago that I, too, was in the position of being a teacher and so I
sympathized. Walking into these spaces, with these teachers, was a completely different

88
world than entering the partnership office where, again, I embodied the “good girl”
(Miller, 2005) who did as she was asked.
However, although I desired to identify as an ally with the teachers, it was not that
easy. I was a representative of the university in many ways, and this complicated the
layered positions that I could take up. This was a label that I was continually aware of as
I strengthened my relationships with the teachers, by making time to connect with them,
and occasionally getting together outside of school. I have gone on field trips with
teachers, both in relation to my curricular work but more importantly for connection with
them and their students. Aligning myself with the teachers, however, was complex. The
school administrator, the gatekeeper of the school, was someone that I needed on my side
to continue my work in this site. As I dropped by her office to say hello, gave quick
updates, I talked about progress, inquiry, and excitement. I sought her approval, her
permission, to enter this space. Then, I went upstairs to see the teachers, and the
discourse changed. Jamaica Kincaid (1988) writes about tourism in Antigua, about
visiting other places and then returning to the ordinary comforts of home. While I did
have relationships with the teachers in City Partnership School, I must acknowledge and
examine how power was also tightly woven into this relationship when I moved in and
out of their school space. I was not a full-time teacher at the school, after all. I made short
visits for specific reasons—in other words, I was the form of a tourist that Kincaid (1988)
speaks of. While several of the teachers kept me privy to the inner happenings of the
school and did not attempt to mask their frustrations, I then left the space to return to the
university setting. This positioned me in certain ways, as having the privilege to work
across the boundaries of the academic and practitioner space and outside many of the

89
daily pressures that the teachers feel. So, while I worked to align myself with the
teachers, I was not sure that I ever truly could, given the complex layers of power that I
navigated between City Partnership School, the university, and the partnership office.
I was positioned—even within one building—in multiple ways during a short
visit, depending on whom I was talking to and what particular space that I entered into.
As Lytle (2000) contends, “the positioning or location of teachers as researchers
interrupts the easy distinctions often made between ‘insider’ and ‘outsider’ and
destabilizing the boundaries of research and practice” (Lytle, 2000, p. 699), and I found
myself in this very in-between space, constantly sliding one way or the other on this
continuum. I was a teacher advocate in one space, and then the “poster child” in another,
where I suppressed these frustrations and put on a smile. I was both an insider and an
outsider even within the same physical building. To navigate this in-between space, I
kept confidences and I maintained connections in any way that I can.
Who was I in relation to this work? What were my motivations? These are
complex questions. I was motivated to create these spaces for connection because I had
relationships with teachers that I care about. However, I was also motivated to maintain
those relationships so that I could do my dissertation work at City Partnership School.
Finally, I was motivated to please the partnership office so that I continued to receive
funding. My identity in this work was therefore a complex tapestry of my legacies, my
multiple and contested positions, and the many ways in which I asserted myself (or did
not assert myself) as I created spaces to connect with the people with whom I worked and
cared for. My work was continuously a site of dissonance for me as I struggled to weave
my past experiences with the complexity of my research site. This site was where

90
multiple and overlapping institutions met, and so it was a contact zone that I navigated at
all times (Lytle, 2000) depending on who I was with and the nature of the work. Primary
in this navigation was staying cognizant of the complexity of my work, and not taking for
granted my relationships on both sides of the continuum. Given my legacy, one that has
now become more complex than I knew it before, this in-between space began to feel
normal, expected. I was no single way, and within each new context was a continual
negotiation (Ghiso, 2015) of relationships, power, and the work at hand.
Data Collection
With my own researcher identity in mind, then, I embarked on a dissertation study
that would inform my understanding of the library as a site for literacy practices and
identity construction, understanding that my own identity was implicated by this work.
To begin, Dyson and Genishi (2005) discuss the importance of starting a case study by
getting a feel for the research site in which you are entering, while building trust and
gaining access to a complex world, whether it be a classroom, community, or school
library. Because I conducted my pilot study in this same site, I already had a context for
the space. In reality, my previous experiences in this site were what brought me to my
research questions. However, the beginning of every new school year changes and brings
with it new groups of children. The experiences that I had in this space were not the
experiences that I would continue to have, because space shifts and changes (Soja, 1996)
as new individuals come in and out, new knowledge is gained, and new materials enter
the space. Space is constructed through a series of social processes, and is positioned at

91
the nexus (Leander et al., 2010) of many other spaces in schools, all which are in flux.
Therefore, embarking on this dissertation study was simultaneously familiar and new.
While I knew the teachers at City Partnership School, and I knew Amanda, I
didn’t know the students as well, nor did I know Deborah. For that reason, I commenced
my proposed study by immersing myself in the library with the students I worked with in
order to contextualize the space and “attune myself to its rhythms” (Dyson & Genishi,
2005, p. 30). I also collected preliminary documents and information, such as the library
schedules, school schedules, expectations, and standards. I additionally created
documents such as my own sketches of the space, and the flow of the library sessions
(structured as either “browsing” or “response” sessions). Although in the following
sections I described my data collection methods in depth, it’s essential to keep in mind
that “the straightforward quality of the prose belies the complex decision making”
(Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 61). For this reason, my study remained flexible and
modifications were made as the study unfolded.
Participant Observation and Fieldnotes
Humans are influenced by their settings, and the spaces in which they traverse, so
I collected all data in this particular space. Observations served as the cornerstone of this
case study. While in the research site, I took up the role of “observer as participant”
(Marshall & Rossman, 2011, p. 143). While acting as the observer as participant, I
engaged in the systematic noting of behaviors, events, and languages (Marshall &
Rossman, 2011, p. 139). Because I actively took up a spatial theoretical framing (Soja,
1996), I attended closely to the ways in which Amanda, Deborah, and their students
utilized the space. Where in the space did they physically go? What did they do in the

92
small spaces that they created within the larger library space? How did they enter and exit
the space? How were these “boundaries” blurred? I attended specifically to any literacy
practices that seemed unexpected, and that seemed to disrupt the expected and narrowly
defined definition of what a literate child is.
The First- and Secondspaces were relatively straightforward to trace during these
observations, as they were the expected practices and discourses that were permitted and
valued in the library space. However, I also examined the Thirdspace, which were the
interruptions in the practices that are valued. These were utterances by a student,
racialized seating arrangements, or other moments of discomfort (Sheehy, 2009) where
the social space was destabilized. Although Ballenger (2009) does not use an explicit
spatial framework, she similarly found that it was often in these “puzzling moments” that
new discoveries about student engagements with literacy and identities were made.
Observing how Amanda, Deborah, and my focal students interacted during these
“puzzling moments” was something that I analyzed spatially by sketching and otherwise
documenting embodied positioning, language, and use of materials (Leander, 2002).
Where students choose to sit or stand, who they interacted with, and what materials they
took up during their library time was significant for understanding the ways in which they
exerted social agency in constructing the space. For example, when students were called
to line up at the end of their library session, what did they do? Did they continue reading,
or did they talk with their peers? At what point did they close their book? These instances
pointed to the way that students read the library space and their own positioning within it.
These observations were documented both in my fieldnotes, and (as discussed in the next
section) also during interviews as they connected to patterns of discourse.

93
As Dyson and Genishi (2005) state, fieldnotes are the foundations of a case study,
and qualitative research in general. I preferred to record fieldnotes by hand, as it allowed
me to fluidly move around the space and was also less intrusive when interacting with
young children. In these fieldnotes, I recorded the nature of the event, who was involved,
and where and how long the events lasted (Corsaro, 1981). Through my observation and
corresponding fieldnotes, I provided detailed, “thick” description (Henstrand, 2006) to
better interpret the nuanced patterns in the language and actions of my participants.
Additionally, I stayed mindful of identity as a performance (Gee, 2000-2001), and
constructed through language, documenting both verbal and nonverbal events. Drawing
on Geertz, I took up Henstrand’s (2006) conception of “thick” description, who argues
that when taking fieldnotes:
I was always conscious of recording sufficient details to ensure that my writing
would be rich with description. As I observed social situations or conducted
interviews, I recorded words verbatim. When that was not possible, I recorded
key phrases and returned to the text later on the same day to complete the
dialogue and add description. (p. 14)
Of course, these were taken quickly while I was in the field and were in a rough state.
Therefore, as soon as possible after leaving the site, I elaborated the hand-written notes
into full fieldnotes, which I then used for analysis (Marshall & Rossman, 2011, p. 140).
In other words, I turned my observations from the field into textual objects (Emerson,
Fretz, & Shaw, 2011). These descriptions were essential to my case, for in theorizing
around the Secondspace discourses and Thirdspace interruptions (Soja, 1996), I first
needed an adequate documentation of Firstspace (Soja, 1996) talk and action.
While in the field, I took notes on a double-sided protocol. One side was used to
note my low-inference observations, with the other used for my own interpretations while

94
in the moment. Additionally, I made every attempt to note emergent codes during the
observations, which I revisited multiple times throughout the collection and analysis
process. As Emerson et al. (2011) contend, there is not one right way to take fieldnotes.
Fieldnotes are one person’s interpretations of what they have seen. Therefore, they are
“one account made by a particular person to a specific other at a particular time and place
for particular purposes” (Emerson et al., 2011, p. 16). Assuming that there is one best
way to document one account subsequently assumes that one interpretation is better than
others. Although two researchers may witness the same event, they will likely remember,
interpret, and thus document it uniquely. For this reason, I remained conscious of my
own role in shaping the ethnographic data that I collected (Luttrell, 2000). These
observations worked in tandem with the interviews, as they both contextualized what is
said during an interview, while also offered an opportunity for me to reflect on what I
might return to during the interviews.
Participant Interviews
Marshall and Rossman (2011) assert that the success of good qualitative research
depends on “building trust, maintaining good relations, respecting norms of reciprocity,
and sensitively considering ethical issues” (p. 118). For this reason, I did not take
interviewing, in particular, lightly. In fact, Fontana and Frey (2005) contend that
interviewing is “historically, politically, and contextually bound” (p. 115). Therefore, I
didn’t seek neutrality, especially in the highly emotional interviews with Amanda after
she transitioned to the role of a third-grade teacher. Because I was a visitor in this library
space, I positioned Amanda, Deborah, and the children as experts (Bogdan & Biklen,
2007) in using the space and engaging with one another. In other words, I aimed to

95
foreground their experiences and knowledge. I conducted interviews in order to
understand how Amanda, Deborah, and the small group of focal students, experienced
and utilized literacy in the library space, and what implications these literacies had for
their identities as literate beings. Both what was said, and what was communicated
nonverbally, was essential to collect during the interviews.
I conducted three semi-structured interviews (approximately 40-45 minutes in
duration as per the library schedule) with Amanda, two semi-structured interviews with
Deborah, and four semi-structured interviews (approximately 20 minutes in duration)
with each of my focal students. The first interview, however, began with Amanda
conducting a tour of the library. As she introduced the space to me, she also conveyed her
experiences, ideologies, and beliefs about the space. This method of interviewing was a
way to see how Amanda narrated her space. Just as with the library tour, it was essential
that the rest of the interviews remained semi-structured, because I was not looking for
“specific” answers or needing to find any particular data. My protocols were meant to
prompt reflection but were designed to be fluid (just as identities are fluid). I designed
interview protocols according to Spradley’s (1979) framework, which included both
broad questions and moves to more narrow and nuanced questions. With that said, I also
gave myself permission to diverge from the protocols should the opportunity or need
arise. For example, I left myself time and flexibility should unexpected leads appear
during an interview (Marshall & Rossman, 2011).
For both Amanda and Deborah, I was interested in hearing about their
experiences in the library as well as their life accounts (Fontana & Frey, 2005, p. 20). As
I sought to understand their identities and how the space had impacted this,

96
contextualizing their current practices within a larger career and network of relations
(Leander et al., 2010) was needed. It was not just their current positions (Moje & Luke,
2009) that I was interested in—both as teacher and librarian—but it was the evolution of
the positions that the women had taken up within their profession that had led them to
where they currently were. For this reason, I also chose to interview Amanda right after
she transitioned to the third-grade classroom. These “laminations” (Moje & Luke, 2009)
were part of what makes their positioning conflicted. I also asked Amanda and Deborah
to reflect on their own definitions of literacy, and how they saw literacy as enacted in the
space of the library to complement my observations.
Dyson and Genishi (2005) assert that, with children, “even the most formal
interviews—scheduled in advance and with some guiding questions—are conversational
and narrative in style” (p. 76). The interviews were designed to deepen what I learned
from the classroom observations, as well as helped me to gain the perspectives of
multiple participants. When interviewing students, it was essential that my protocols were
even shorter and structured more informally than the protocols that I used with Amanda
and Deborah. Clark and Moss (2011) adopt a multimodal approach to working with
young children, arguing that young children express their views and experiences in
multiple, creative ways when given the space to do so. In their approach, Clark and Moss
(2011) utilize children’s maps, photographs, and drawings to learn more about children’s
lives. Vivian Paley (1997) has also explored this notion of voice, visual arts, and stories
with children. In her classroom, students engage in visual arts, and connect to fictional
stories and characters, to explore their own identity in very profound ways (Paley, 1997).

97
To begin my work with the students, I invited students to photograph five things
in the library. This was open-ended, and I then used these photographs to invite students
to tell me more about why they may be drawn to these particular places within the
library. Using these photographs as a platform for conversation, I discovered the ways in
which the students create social spaces for themselves within the larger library, and what
that meant for how they used the library space. During the second interview, I asked
students to draw, map, or otherwise represent the library, as well as whom they were in
the library. Allowing children to draw their own experiences provided insight into how
they saw their own social worlds and present their own social selves. During each
interview, I left space for fluid questions and conversation that arose from their
photographs and representations. Then, building on their photographs and
representations, I also asked the students about their own experiences and feelings in the
library, and how they felt about the library space in relation to their classroom space (see
Appendix F for student interview questions). This resembles Leander’s (Leander &
Sheehy, 2004) work with older students, who were invited to draw open-ended
representations and descriptions of a smaller school, situated within a larger institution.
The student sketches revealed the ways in which they read the two social spaces, in
particular, the patterns of race and privilege that circulated through the spaces (Leander &
Sheehy, 2004) in different ways.
After asking my focal students to consider similarities and differences between
the library and classroom spaces, I asked them to reflect on the ways in which they read
and write in the library to unearth the way that they see themselves as taking up different
literacy practices in different spaces. These representations and questions provided

98
insight into how students constructed their identities as readers and writers in the library
space through language and social interactions (Rogers, 2011), and the implications that
this had for the classroom. While the initial interviews with focal students were
conducted individually, the third (for Carla and James) and third and fourth (for Nikki
and Mark) were conducted together. While I wanted to understand the thoughts and
processes of each individual focal child, I was also interested in the social interactions
and dynamics that arose from interviewing the children together. Each interview that I
conducted was fully audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. Additionally, I took notes
during the process to capture the nonverbal elements of the interaction (Fontana & Frey,
2005). In particular, capturing context clues was essential, and I attended to features such
as the intonation and gesture that the participants use when communicating (Corsaro,
1981).
Artifact Collection
To augment the observations and interviews that occurred in the library space, I
also wanted to document what already existed. Collection of documents and artifacts was
an essential component of this study in efforts to see what was conveyed about literacy
through the textual and artistic elements of the space. I positioned these artifacts within
Soja’s (1996) Firstspace; that is, the observable elements of space. In collecting these
elements, I analyzed the literacies that were privileged in this space more deeply and
identified tensions in the ways in which literacy circulated. This consisted of a collection
of schedules, materials on the wall, library standards, lesson plans, teacher-created charts,
and other pertinent materials. In addition, I also collected examples of products that my
focal students created (maps, responses to reading, and art projects). Ultimately, all work

99
produced in the library, whether formal or informal, completed or incomplete projects,
was collected (Bogdan & Biklen, 2007; Dyson & Genishi, 2005; Ghiso, 2015).
Also, text excerpts from the texts that the teacher read assisted my analysis, as I
took the stance that text selection matters in teaching literacy, and these selections had
implications for how students engaged with the texts. I took photographs of the space
(excluding people). For example, how the books in the library were organized was
essential to my examination of the library. In studying how the students interacted with
the texts in the library, concrete visuals of the environment served to anchor these
interpretations as I began to analyze the data. Within spatial perspectives, materiality
certainly has a role to play in how the space gets constructed and negotiated, (Soja,
2010), albeit one role of many.
While artifact collection was central to my case study, I also engaged in artifact
production as another source of data. For example, drawing on Leander et al. (2010),
Wohlwend (2008) conceptualizes a kindergarten classroom as a nexus of practice, where
material and social histories construct identities and students use objects to mediate their
environment. Wohlwend (2009) argues that students construct “play spaces” (p. 62)
around objects (in this case, toys) that carried cultural capital in the classroom. To study
these play spaces, she used mapping as a methodological tool to organize reports from
children, her own field notes, and data from videotaping. She calls for more research to
"map discourses, identities, practices, and meanings across a sequence of time-spaces that
weave in and out of pretend and real-world contexts” (Wohlwend, 2009, p.
80). Similarly, Leander (2002) has demonstrated the significance of documenting
students’ spatial positioning during observations. Noting students’ embodied positions

100
during observations, and marking the various movements (such as swiveling, standing,
etc.) that they make, can demonstrate how students use the space to interact with others
and what the nature of those interactions might be (Leander, 2002). Therefore, in taking
up a spatial lens, I created maps during observations, marking where both Amanda,
Deborah, and my focal students gathered, from where they selected books or other
materials, and what sorts of literacy practices they took up, and where they took them up
in the various spaces within the library.
Because I take an inclusive view of literacy, I believe that the world (and the texts
therein) can be read (Freire & Macedo, 1987). Indeed, the library is textually and visually
rich and complex. What is spoken, drawn, written, and enacted in the library all
converges to create the constructed curriculum (Dyson & Genishi, 2005). Signs,
documents, and other documents are “potentially quite rich in portraying the values and
beliefs of the participants in the setting” (Marshall & Rossman, 2011, p. 160). For
example, Amanda’s creation of a graphic novel display, and subsequent pride in students
expressing their interest in graphic novels, demonstrated her beliefs about what texts
count in the library, and who had access to those texts. Similarly, Deborah’s integration
of Thanksgiving and African-American history writing pieces, and subsequent display of
the pieces, illustrated her desire to showcase student work. This documentation of “the
constantly changing collection of children’s books and print on the walls” (Wohlwend,
2011, p. 251) was important both for understanding the library space (part of which is
material), as well as the implications for identity. It was essential to note that the
collection of artifacts will not interrupt the flow of a typical lesson or other events in the
library (Marshall & Rossman, 2011). Ultimately, although I entered this study with a

101
plan, I also followed Luttrell (2000) who argues for the need to adopt “what I call ‘good
enough’ methods, whereby researchers view their fieldwork as a series of ongoing
realizations that lead to complex choices and decision making” (p. 50). Flexibility, and
the freedom to pursue inquiries that arose while I collect the data, were also constructed
into this design.
Data Analysis
Like Dyson and Genishi (2005), I viewed the data analysis process as something
that was ongoing and began well before data collection had completed. It was the
ongoing assemblage of many complex puzzle pieces (LeCompte, 2000) that continued
through my initial collection until I had reached data saturation. Therefore, it was not an
isolated event, but was a recursive and inductive process that began when I started
collecting my data and was something that I returned to throughout the dissertation study.
In fact, Corsaro (1981) argues that analyzing data throughout the collection period can
help focus your study as you continue. As he states: “I pointed to the importance of using
information gained at one phase in the research process for later phases of data collection
and analysis” (Corsaro, 1981, p. 144). What doesn’t seem important now may turn out to
be later. For example, many scholars suggest that analysis can begin even during the data
collection period (e.g. Bartlett, 2007; Horvat, 2013). In describing the methodology for
her study, for example, Bartlett (2007) argues that we might confirm or discredit hunches,
which ultimately can shift the direction of our inquiry and might help us to continue
thinking though the complexity of our learning. Therefore, I engaged in analytic memo

102
writing (Maxwell, 2005) each week during my data collection period, and these became
an essential part of my analysis.
When data collection had officially ended, to ensure that I took adequate time and
truly approached my data analysis as an inductive, iterative process, I first organized all
of my documents, photographs, memos, and samples of student work. My next step was
to take one read through everything, writing another researcher memo (Maxwell, 2005)
about my initial reactions, connections, and emerging themes. Driven by curiosity (Dyson
& Genishi, 2005), I uncovered “new spaces” for inquiry in the developing case and asked
“new questions” about what I had learned (Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 81).
Coding the Fieldnotes and Spatial Maps
Although my data analysis was an inductive process that I would return to
throughout the duration of the study, I spent time at the completion of data collection
carefully reading through my whole data set chronologically (Dyson & Genishi, 2005). In
other words, I gave myself time to immerse myself in my complete corpus of data
(Emerson et al., 2011). Developing a set of codes, as Dyson and Genishi (2005) contend,
is a method for directing myself, and readers of my eventual dissertation study, to
potential meaning. Essential to the more formal coding of my fieldnotes, however, is the
understanding that data is never objective. Because I selected it, I had already engaged in
interpretation and evaluation about which data was worth attending to (LeCompte, 2000).
Aligning with my research questions and theoretical frameworks, I read through my
fieldnotes multiple times, “looking to identify threads that can be woven together to tell a
story (or number of stories) about the observed social world” (Emerson et al., 2011, p.
171).

103
I began the coding of my fieldnotes with open coding (Emerson et al., 2011;
Dyson & Genishi, 2005), where I “brainstormed possible kinds of relevant information”
(Dyson & Genishi, 2005, p. 85), and began to categorize my pieces of data. Of course,
much of my data set already had emergent codes and interpretive comments, so I
revisited these during this first period of open coding as well, becoming more focused
with each read. During this first open coding period, I was sure to refrain from excessive
categorization and organization and strove to code for ideas and themes (Emerson et al.,
2011). Examples of initial codes that arose for me were “notions of literacy” that my
focal students took up, which meant everything ranging from selecting books based on
the “level” that they thought that they were, or different types of engagements with books
that they took up. Simultaneously, I coded for “mobility across space,” where students
both traversed the physical space of the library and took up various discourses of literacy
(see Appendix C for codebook excerpts).
Once my initial reading of the entire data set was completed, and initial codes
were made, I sorted my data set by participant. Because I was interested in how identities
are constructed through literacy and space (Leander & Sheehy, 2004), each participant’s
interview and observation data was grouped together to allow me to have a more in-depth
view at their multiple, and perhaps conflicted, experiences in this space and how their
identities were implicated by these experiences. The process of indexing my fieldnotes
was essential to my own organization. For each data set, I kept a list of codes (and page
numbers) with where they appeared.
Additionally, I also coded specific chunks of data in more focused ways (Emerson
et al., 2011), line-by-line. For example, in examining literacy practices in one section of

104
my fieldnotes, I decided to look for evidence of smaller literacy practices that made up a
larger event. After looking at multiple chunks of interesting data line-by-line, I also
engaged in memo writing to “explore a general pattern or theme that cuts across a
number of disparate incidents or events” (Emerson et al., 2011, p. 187). In this way, the
process of my coding was recursive—a movement from looking at individual events,
synthesis, and back again.
Because I employed a spatial theoretical framework, however, my analysis of
space also took a more complex approach than just thick description and coding
fieldnotes. Sheehy (2010), drawing on Jacklin (2004), explains how she used space/time
rhythm maps to trace patterns of pedagogy in the classrooms where she researched. She
argues that the enactment of each of these pedagogies is important, as they produce
certain kinds of space. For example, teacher-led, initiation-response-evaluation (IRE)
teaching leads to certain kinds of student talk and engagement, and certain kinds of
literacies as privileged in this process. On the other hand, less constrained student
browsing of books produces a quite different type of social space. In my own work, I
took up this notion of rhythm maps (Sheehy, 2010) as a component of my fieldnotes,
noting instructional practices such as: teacher-led discussions, student inquiry-led
activities, worksheet activities, or book browsing. Then, in the same map, I noted how the
class experienced these pedagogies through their reactions and responses (noting my
focal students in particular).
During my data analysis process, I color-coded moments of excitement, moments
of spatial movement, and other reactions. These maps, where I noted the movement and
embodied positioning of students, then provided a visual tool for tracing and analyzing

105
the ups and downs of student engagement in literacy in the library, over and across time.
Schmidt (2017) takes up the notion of “hacked landscapes”, where she argues that
artifacts are not fixed, but can be pieced apart to uncover tensions. Piecing apart moments
of my spatial maps, then putting them together with my fieldnotes to focus in on smaller
increments of time, produced a new type of artifact that lent itself to analysis, which
helped me get at new slices in my data with a fresh perspective.
Therefore, I used coding only as long as it assisted me in finding “coherence”
(Luttrell, 2000, p. 503), rather than as a rigid structure. My theoretical framework
informed the ways in which I coded data, and the analysis process as a whole. Therefore,
many of my codes aligned with theories of literacy, space, and identity and the ways in
which they overlapped and intersected. Both the spatial and identity theories that I
employed guided my analysis, helped to unify and make sense of my data, and provided a
rationale for my research methodology (Henstrand, 2006). Therefore, I gave myself
permission to deviate from this plan. In other words, I was not “rigidly confined to one
procedure” (Emerson et al., 2011, p. 173).
Discourse Analysis
When studying language and literacies from a critical lens, scholars often turn to
discourse analysis as both a theory and a systematic method for studying the complexity
of language and discourses in social organizations, as our social worlds are constructed
through language, discourse, and literacy (though there is no singular method). Rogers
(2011) reminds us that “critical approaches to discourse analysis recognize that inquiry
into meaning making is always also an exploration into power” (p. 1), and for my work, I
was interested in the power of the library space in constructing notions of who is literate,

106
and who is not (and the potential for fluidity between). Discourse analysis, then, was a
fruitful method for this work, as Wohlwend (2008) contends that “layering discourse
analysis onto ethnographic data collection is a highly effective way to examine the social
practices and situated language that affect children’s participation” (p. 129) and can
therefore complement data gleaned from my observations.
In my data analysis, I found myself relying largely on spatial analysis, though
complimenting my spatial thinking with discourse analysis of particular interview
transcripts. To use discourse analysis in this selective manner, I drew primarily from
Gee’s (2005) method of discourse analysis, with elements from multimodal discourse
analysis (Rogers & Wetzel, 2013) to code interview data and engage in artifact analysis.
This, first, required that I transcribe all of my interview data, which I did verbatim. Like
my fieldnotes data, the first step was to read my transcriptions in their entirety—to “sit”
with the data to think about “themes, images, or motifs” (Gee, 2005, p. 153) that seemed
to be connected and resonate in the library context.
I attended to speech through the process of discourse analysis, because I believe
that identities, relationships, and social contexts are constructed through communication
(Gee, 2000-2001; Rogers, 2011). For this reason, I wanted to pay particular attention to
both the broader Discourses around literacy that my participants engaged in, as well as
the discourses (the language-in-use) that my participants used to convey engagement
within the Discourses. However, I followed Gee (2005) that “speech always has far more
detail in it than any recording or transcription system could ever capture” (p. 106). In
fact, language alone was not enough to demonstrate membership in or knowledge of a
Discourse. I know that my transcriptions were not be able to document the various

107
discourses that my participants engaged in, which is why my interviewing also included
fieldnotes of multimodal communication.
As one such example of how I included the nonverbal elements of discourse in
my data, I looked to Rogers and Wetzel (2013). Because they argue that discourse is
more than just spoken language, and encompasses a variety of multimodal tools, Rogers
and Wetzel (2013) draw from multimodal discourse analysis, which recognizes the
multimodal activities involved in interactions, representation, and ways of being. As they
demonstrate, marking movement (such as gazes), gesture, and linguistic choices also
convey meaning, particularly when paired with speech. When discourse analysis is
conducted only with transcripts of what is verbally said, some meaning is inherently lost.
In an account of a teacher and child reading together, they demonstrate how attending to
elements such as a “shared gaze” (Rogers & Wetzel, 2013, p. 94) in a discourse analysis
transcript drew the child’s attention to illustrations in the text and supported the child in
focusing on the meaning of the story. To construct a multimodal transcript, Rogers and
Wetzel (2013) begin with the verbal mode, where subsequently the “nonverbal action is
inserted as closely to the verbal discourse that overlaps it” (p. 141). With this form of
transcript, nonverbal exchanges—such as turn taking, gesturing, or a child popping out of
his/her seat—can be analyzed alongside their verbal counterparts (Rogers & Wetzel,
2013). The construction of these multimodal transcripts was especially important as I
interviewed my focal students, who were engaged in drawing and speaking with me
simultaneously. Therefore, it was imperative that I attended to these nonverbal
exchanges, weaving verbal transcriptions with the fieldnotes taken during interviews, in

108
every attempt to construct multimodal transcripts to analyze for a richer collection of
data.
To employ discourse analysis, as I engaged in analysis of both the aforementioned
multimodal transcripts and written artifacts, I attended specifically to issues of identity,
relationships, the politics of language, and the activities that occurred in the space (Gee,
2005). Because speech was often conveyed in chunks, I organized the portions of my
transcripts, or textual artifact, into lines or stanzas that I then examined more deeply.
Once textual chunks were organized, I employed tools of inquiry to code for situated
meanings (Gee, 2005) of words and phrases, as well as attend to the larger social
practices (Gee, 2004) in which these situated meanings were located. Situated meanings
were key words and phrases (and corresponding linguistic details) that, given my
knowledge of the research context, were relevant. For example, codes such as “inquiry”
or “project-based learning” had situated meanings that are embedded in Amanda’s larger
social practice around teaching literacy in a student-centered and inquiry-based manner.
Codes such as “browse” and “respond” also had particular meanings to this library site,
referencing specific behaviors, and were taken up by Amanda, Deborah, and the students.
Social practices, when approached critically, examine social relationships in terms
of their implications for status, solidarity, social goods, and power (Gee, 2011). Coding
such situated meanings and social practices operate dialectically, as both inform the
other. In fact, Gee (2005) states that this method “is a reciprocal and cyclical process in
which we shuttle back and forth between the structure (form, design) of a piece of
language and the situated meanings it is attempting to build around the world, identities,
and relationships” (p. 118). These situated meanings, therefore, were important, as they

109
helped trace larger patterns of social practices that became present through my
interviews, observations, and artifact collection. These social practices, in turn, helped me
theorize around how Amanda, Deborah, and the focal students were engaging in literacy
throughout the library space, and how they were subsequently constructing their identities
in relation to these literacy practices.
Therefore, my engagement in discourse analysis felt much like the deconstruction
of a large puzzle, and then the subsequent reconstruction. To understand identity, I first
located patterns of discourse and practice that operated in the library. To locate these
patterns required that I attended to the smaller units of language that make up (with the
nonverbal elements) a larger discourse. Again, like the coding of fieldnotes, this was not
a plan or a method to which I was bound. Gee (2005), in fact, asserts that he doesn’t
intend that his method of discourse analysis be followed step-by-step. Similarly, as I
began to analyze artifacts, I remained cognizant that “social space is not simply acted into
but is dynamic and relational, produced through social-material relations of practice”
(Leander, 2002, p. 204), and thus, artifacts helped me understand the construction of
social space in the library. Therefore, these artifacts were interpreted in relation to the
space and their social practices, and not removed from them. Artifacts, then, might be
deemed as inappropriate or appropriate, and powerful or not powerful in the library as
compared to other spaces in the school (Leander, 2002). One example of this might be a
graphic novel with a sophisticated level of text, which was deemed appropriate for
browsing in the library and yet at an inappropriate level for reading in the classroom. The
graphic novel, then, must be analyzed in the context that it is selected and used (in this
case, the library), not as an isolated artifact. How children take up, talk about, and use

110
these artifacts, if at all, has implications for how the social space of the library is
constructed.

Interpretive Validity
As a qualitative researcher engaging in a case study, I made no attempt to
generalize, but rather, to ensure that my research was valid and trustworthy. A case study
is both particular and general (Dyson & Genishi, 2005) and while I did not seek
generalizability, I do hope that implications for other school spaces can be drawn from
this work. Connelly and Clandinin (1990) speak of the need to listen closely, as this gives
the practitioner’s story validity. It is for this reason that I elected to engage in multiple
observations and interviews with each participant. Multiple sources of data ensured that I
had collected a wide range of information and insights. I viewed my research as a process
of shared narrative unity (Connelly & Clandinin, 1990), where my caring relationship
with Amanda and Deborah is what allowed me to be privy to their own beliefs and
frustrations. This caring relationship could also be described as taking up an “ethic of
care” (Campano, Ghiso, & Welch, 2016), where research is done with (not on)
participants, and in a grounding of mutual care, respect, and love.
Role of the Researcher
I take the stance that all ethnographic research involves both power and
interpretation. I align myself with Luttrell (2000) who argues: “I don’t believe that
researchers can eliminate tensions, contradictions, or power imbalances, but I do believe
we can (and should) name them” (p. 500). I could not separate myself from this work, as

111
my own identity and legacy has implications for the ways in which I was positioned (and
position myself) in the research site. Who I was as a researcher, and the multiple and
overlapping identities that I took up during this study, influenced what questions I asked,
where in the room I gravitated toward, and how I interpreted that data that I collected
(Dyson & Genishi, 2005).
Because the nature of my work was a qualitative case study, where I had strong
ties to my participants and the site, I took care to show my own researcher self (Peshkin,
2000) and how this impacted my work. In fact, my identity influenced every step of my
study design, and continued to influence the ways in which I collected and analyzed data.
Connelly and Clandinin (1990) assert that as scholars engage in reflective research, our
stories are often changed or restored; in this way, my data collection and analysis was be
simultaneous, complementary, and recursive. As stated before, one of the tools that I
employed in reflective research was the analytic memo. Although Maxwell (2005) asserts
that analytic memos can be used for a variety of purposes, I typically used memos as a
reflection tool to assist me in deconstructing my own analysis, remaining aware of how
my subjectivities impact my role, and to provide a space (that is different than my
fieldnotes) where I could work through what I was seeing, thinking, and feeling. My
researcher memos varied in their length, formality, and content (Maxwell, 2005). I strove
to write memos consistently, to both augment and complement the fieldnotes that I took
more systematically. When I collected my data, these researcher memos assisted me in
reflecting back on the entire process, as well as how my own identity influenced the ways
in which I read and interpreted the data. As Maxwell (2005) states: “not writing memos is
the research equivalent of having Alzheimer’s disease; you may not remember your

112
important insights when you need them” (p. 12). Therefore, as I began to pour through
the data and explore emerging themes, utilizing researcher memos helped me document
my thoughts, reactions, and insights in the moment.
Presentation of Findings
The rest of this dissertation study is devoted to presenting two analysis chapters,
and one implications chapter. The first data analysis chapter is devoted to exploring the
library as a space of tensions, and a contested space with many circulating discourses.
The second analysis chapter explores the pockets of more fluid literacy practices that
students took up, highlighting moments of play. The final chapter will discuss
implications, both for practitioners invested in school libraries, as well as future research.
I hope to posit through this work that inciting true collaborations where school librarians
are equal partners in professional collaborations may indeed be a first step in successfully
positioning librarians as professionals who share in the complex work of educating our
students.

113

Chapter IV
NEGOTIATING COMPETING LITERACIES IN THE LIBRARY

“They [low readers] were so engaged in the book that it kind of confirmed in my head
that there should be a time in the day where they’re not locked into a level. There should
just be a time in the day where because they want to have this book in their hands, that
they can choose that book. I couldn’t imagine going back from that.”
(9/29/2016 interview with Amanda, p. 5)
I open with this quote from an interview with Amanda, who framed the library as
a space that was distinct from assessment-based reading. This was contrasted with
Mark’s statement of, “I like reading books. And, my mom said if you read books you get
more smarter with writing. And more, more like, like you can read to students, and you
can read to your brother, and to your other brother, and to your sisters” (INT,
11/10/2017). Here, Mark made a clear connection between reading books and becoming
smart. He discussed books as a form of enjoyment, but beyond that as a tool for
“becoming” something—becoming a reader. These statements demonstrate the inherent
tensions that circulate within the library, where it is both a space to experience reading as
a social activity, and yet a space that is still entrenched within larger discourses of
assessment and accountability, often resulting in decreased library time, or the
disappearance of libraries in some schools altogether (Everhart, 2000a).
Carla, James, Mark, and Nikki, through the snapshots that I collected, all
demonstrated these tensions to varying degrees. While they often relied on autonomous
notions of literacy, where literacy learning unfolded in a linear way through a series of
neutral skills (Street & Street, 1995), these notions have also been informed by “schooled

114
literacies” (Cook-Gumperz, 1986) where students learned the appropriate behaviors,
embodiment, and attitudes that were marked as desirable in schools. Importantly, these
cognitive and schooled notions often overlap and connect to one another. Despite this,
there were also instances of playfulness in the library, where the space began to “crack”
and gave way to a construction that was more fluid (Soja, 1996), interrupting expected
and normalized literacy practices. Detailed in this chapter are the unique browsing
periods, where students engaged in movement with one another and with texts. However,
read-alouds and response periods, where bodies were disciplined according to traditional
school expectations, were also layered on the space, as students navigated the discourses
of what “good reading” looked like (Enriquez, 2014). In other words, the library might be
conceived of as a fast-changing palimpsest (Huyssen, 2003), where space and literacy
practices were produced and reproduced socially through events and across time (Mills &
Comber, 2015).
City Partnership School’s Library
City Partnership School, as introduced in previous chapters, was situated within a
historically African-American, urban community. The library sat on the fourth floor of
the school, which often left its visitors breathless as they climbed the narrow flights of
stairs. The library at City Partnership School, in many ways, resembled a typical school
library. It was a large, inviting space. There were several parts of the library: one side had
tables and chairs, and the other side (separated by a long bookshelf) was surrounded by
rows of books. There were shelves of books, a favorite being the “spinny shelf” (a shelf
which spun around to display books), which housed series such as Dork Diaries (Russell,

115
2009) and Critter Club (Barkley, 2013). There was an alphabet rug that faced the
librarian’s chair and an easel, with two beloved “comfy chairs,” where students were
permitted to sit during browsing periods in a first-come, first-serve basis. The alphabet
rug was wrapped in shelves of books, from low shelves displaying Mo Willems (a
favorite author), to rows of fiction books in alphabetical order. To the far right on the
shelf was a “donated books” section, which Amanda conjured up after receiving
donations from families. Because they were not library books, students were permitted to
read them in the library or even borrow them without having to check them out.
Each class at City Partnership School visited the library at least twice per week,
and sessions alternated between “browsing” and “responding” sessions. Each session
began with a read-aloud and discussion, after which students were either directed to
respond in writing to what they had read, or they browsed and checked out books for the
week. Deborah, the school librarian during the time of most of this data collection,
inherited many of these practices from Amanda, who had in turn inherited them from the
previous librarian. In this way, the library was a space that was networked across
individuals and other spaces, given the various histories (classroom teacher, substitute
teacher) that each individual brought into the space to shape what was possible. While
each librarian made the space her own, the grooves of the institutional norms were wellworn, as were the discourses that were actively being invoked and reproduced in the
library. Therefore, the library was a conflicted space as each librarian navigated the
tensions between their own vision and the institutional norms.
In following Wohlwend (2008), I position the browsing sessions of the library as
“multimodal literacy” (p. 135) events, and often playful events at that. While I take the

116
stance that all literacy events are multimodal; I viewed the browsing periods as unique in
that students were given permission to traverse space, unlike during the other literacy
times (sitting on the rug during read-alouds and sitting at the tables during reading
responses). Students did not have the flexibility to traverse space in the same way during
the read-alouds and reading response times, though at times they did it subversively. Of
course, while the browsing sessions had a shared or situated meaning (Gee, 2005), one
that conveyed the particulars of browsing (texts, movement, and space) within this
context, students also constructed very different experiences within them. I recognize that
“children are part of multiple social and cultural worlds before entering school spaces”
(Yoon, 2014, p. 112), and therefore, the library space is just one space that is layered
upon many, and situated within multiple, overlapping, and at times diverging social
worlds where various notions of literacy circulate and compete.
This view, of course, is intimately tied to my positionality. My many literacy
experiences have, over the course of my life, laminated (Moje & Luke, 2009) into my
identity as a reader, teacher, and researcher. As a researcher, I looked forward to the
browsing sessions, which I found joyful. I found pleasure in watching students connect
with texts, with one another, and to read in a manner that was free from assessment.
The Library as a Networked Space of Materials and Social Processes
While the library may always be positioned as a distinct space—in relation to and
yet separate from the classroom—my analysis of the library at City Partnership School
reveals how complex and contested the space was. Rather than framing the library as an
isolated space within a school, I seek to follow Leander et al. (2010) in positioning the

117
library as a networked space, one that was connected to the classroom, but also to the
community, and to the “other spaces” (Foucault, 1986) in the school. As Foucault (1986)
goes on to describe, these spaces are penetrable. Because of these networks and
connections, the pressures of the larger school institution began to seep in, for example,
in the disruption of the space to prioritize testing schedules, or the remaking of the library
space to accommodate the impending classrooms as City Partnership School grows
(personal communication, 6/3/2017). However, students also brought their own notions
of literacy into the library, integrating cognitive and autonomous notions of reading and
reading levels with the more fluidly designed space. Therefore, the library was both a
product and a social process (Leander & Sheehy, 2004), and was constantly in the
making as some networks gave way to others, and new networks formed. In the making
and remaking of these networks, competing notions about literacy emerged, which
circulated throughout the space to varying and shifting degrees.
In this chapter, I take up notions of spatial mapping as an analytic tool in efforts
to see how the library space was networked as materials, bodies, and ideologies
interacted and became layered to produce different spaces. In the maps that I include, I
concentrated on parts where movement and embodied positioning occurred close
together, with the student as a hub of activity. That is, even when students did not move,
they positioned their bodies in particular ways. Mapping can place humans and human
activity within the physical and material space (Powell, 2016) in ways that traditional
ethnographic fieldnotes may not. Each student and librarian had lived experiences that
were spatial, and mapmaking can serve as a way to begin the conversation about these
lived experiences (Powell, 2016). This image of the library as a layered palimpsest

118
(Huyssen, 2003) was constructed as materials, bodies, and ideologies collided,
overlapped, and laminated dialectically across the multiple dimensions of space (Soja,
1996).
The Transformation and Repurposing of Spaces
Human interaction and organization of materials and physical space was
something that Amanda was highly conscious of in the beginning of the year, as she
prepared the space for new groups of students. Before school started back up for a new
year, Amanda had expressed her desire to get the space organized for the students, and
her excitement at being back in the library, hoping that this year she would find her
stride, as last year, she spent three months in the middle of the year substituting in a thirdgrade classroom as a maternity leave replacement. During these initial visits, as we
moved around the library, she showed me a larger area of donated books, many donated
by families of City Partnership School, and other places. She expressed that while she
loved having all the additional resources at the school, the library seemed to be a
“dumping ground” (8/31/2016 FN) where people brought lots of leftover items to, such as
books given by families or stuffed animals leftover from discarded character building
curricula. Ultimately, because the library had room for these additional items, they were
brought there, yet this ultimately created more work for her in terms of organization. It
was a space created—in part—by the leftovers of other spaces, and her subsequent
organization and reorganization of those materials.
To put these Firstspace materials (books) to use—they were of varying topics,
levels, and newness—Amanda had an idea. She couldn’t inventory them and put them in
the library with books owned by the school, but she could offer them to students who

119
couldn’t check out books (for lots of reasons such as no returned contract, or books that
were still checked out). She had cleaned out a shelf and had gathered several bins to
organize the books by topic (Fairytales, Beginning Readers, Lego and Superhero Books,
etc.) We spent some time organizing these books and creating labels for the bins. This
way, Amanda said, students could still take a book home if they weren’t allowed to check
out library books. Because they were donated, she said that she didn’t mind if students
forgot to bring the books back (8/31/2016 FN, p. 2).
As evidenced by the bins, the donated books were organized both by genre, as
well as by level of difficulty. For example, there was a book labeled “chapter books” and
“easy readers,” as well as “superheroes and Lego books,” “rhythm and rhyme,” and
“realistic fiction” (see Figure 1). While this organization scheme was practical in nature,
the scheme also illustrated the complexities in organizing books. While the majority of
the school library was organized by genre, displaying sub-genres and topics within both
fiction and nonfiction texts, the parsing out of the “donated books” into level of difficulty
signified how natural it is to organize books by perceived age or level—indicating the
strength of cognitive notions of literacy.
This creation of a “donated books” section began to break down barriers that may
have served to include or exclude students in the library. For example, there was often a
stigma attached to not being able to check out books, whether it be overdue books or not
having the library contract (where students and families agree to return books and pay for
those lost or damaged) signed. While the “donated books” section materially produced a
particular kind of space, the section also constructed a social space where all students had
access to books, despite material library constraints. In other words, Amanda used the

120
material texts to construct a social space of inclusion and access, as a way of resisting the
contract system in place. More specifically, these actions resisted the structures in place
that determined who was eligible to borrow books, thus transforming the space from a
“dumping ground” of donated books to an inclusive space that all children could
equitably access.

Figure 1. Image of the “donated books” shelf.
While Amanda may have viewed the library as a “dumping ground,” she
repurposed the unwanted materials into something different, resisting the library as a
space for discarded materials. This demonstrated that the materials themselves were fluid
and could be interpreted in many contrasting ways (e.g. perhaps these “unwanted”
materials were significant to students). It was the interaction between the materials
themselves, and Amanda’s repurposing of the materials, that produced a new kind of
fluid space, one that sought to provide more equitable opportunities for those that reside

121
within (Soja, 1996), in this case, the students. The materials had significance, but so did
the actors (in this case, Amanda). Amanda’s actions in this instance demonstrated her
commitment to the school library as a space of access, working around the bureaucratic
systems that in many ways served to reproduce who had access to literacy.
Borders Between Library and Classrooms are Permeable
Movement and embodiment across space was not divorced from the materials that
made up the physical space and with which students interacted. Books, of course, are
typically what we envision when we picture a library. Books shaped the library space at
City Partnership School, as did the decisions to organize other materials, such as student
work and the display of library expectations. While learning standards were inherently
language and discourse, putting them into writing served as a way to concretize and make
visible the expectations—it made the library standards tangible. Historically, school
libraries have had their own standards, which have been deliberately kept separate from
classrooms and often removed—despite recent moves to connect these—from direct
accountability measures. However, the influx of reading aloud and reading responses to
City Partnership School’s library suggests that school curriculum and standards were
entering the library space, gradually shaping it into an extension of the classroom, where
standards were continually revised to encourage more rigor. As an institution, City
Partnership School had a continual need to assess students and provide measures of
student outcomes due to the culture of accountability that schools face (Olivant, 2015).
One way that this was evident was in the displays of student work in public spaces of the
school. In the hallways at City Partnership School, student work and subsequent
evaluations (in the form of rubrics or peer/teacher feedback) were found (see Figures 2

122
and 3). Connected to this, then, was the decision by Deborah to display student work also
in the library to demonstrate that learning had occurred.

Figure 2. Carla’s writing, displayed in the
hallway.

Figure 3. Student work displayed in the
library.

In Figure 3 above, from fourth grade students, Deborah neatly displayed each of
their individual responses, in addition to writing out the prompt, where students were
directed to write about something they were thankful for. These instances were reflective
of a product approach to writing (Badger & White, 2000), one heavily guided by the
teacher and focused on reception of a text, in this case, a read-aloud.
As Deborah explained, reading responses were an integral part of how she
facilitated her library sessions. When I asked her about this, she discussed the
Thanksgiving display (Figure 3). During an interview, she explained:
‘Please, give me an idea,’ was my last prayer in bed and then when I got up, I
got up with that, ‘Oh, the Cornucopia, they can write how thankful they are and
then when I correct it, I’m going to get the big fruits from out of the...’ [the office
assistant] helped me get the copies from the computer, and they wrote their own,

123
after I corrected it, on there and then the fruits are coming out of the Cornucopia. I
talked about, it didn't just that, we talked about being thankful. Okay, and we
went deep… (12/15/2016 INT, p. 7)
Here, Deborah’s statements about her “last prayer” indicated a desire to design
learning experiences that her students would enjoy, and simultaneously referenced the
pressures that she felt to display learning in concrete ways. She described her discussion
with the children as “deep,” but also navigated the tension between these deep thoughts
and wanting to display finished work that was “corrected.” Therefore, it was not that the
librarians necessarily brought notions of “schooled literacies” (Cook-Gumperz, 1986)
such as listening appropriately to read-alouds, reading levels, and formal reading
responses into the library deliberately. Although this may have indeed been the case, it
was also that the constant schoolwide need to assess student work influenced what was
possible in every space of the school, even those spaces that were not classrooms. This
organization and displaying of Firstspace materials can construct spaces, like libraries, as
homogenizing spaces, privileging certain Secondspace discourses and literacy practices
over others (Mills & Comber, 2015) to mirror other school spaces. For example, the
desire to display work across an entire school, as a tangible marker of student success,
connected with the overarching need to visibly demonstrate student learning, an emphasis
in New York City public schools for the past decade (Goodnough, 2002). Constructing
multiple spaces that mirrored the classroom, however, has implications for equity, where
students who adhere to the expected and privileged practices might be reinforced, while
others are marginalized.
The discourses and practices of the classroom entered the library. The library
was situated within the larger school institution and the institution itself was formed by

124
networks of materials, discourses, and social practices. Therefore, the library was a space
that, in many ways, resembled a classroom, both in the physical organization of the space
but also in the expectations for movement, although the library had pockets of fluidity
that were distinct from the classroom. The absence of the physical levels—a Firstspace
material—afforded fluid practices, despite the Secondspace discourses around reading
levels that entered the space with force. The physical and material space of the library at
large was organized in such a way that divided the room into two parts—the read-aloud
and browsing section, and the work and response section. Similarly, time was divided
neatly into these two sections, serving as another “organizing center” in which events
were structured (Hirst, 2004). Time, therefore, cannot be separated from space (Mills &
Comber, 2015). Library sessions followed a predictable pattern and structure, quite
literally broken into 45-minute sessions. However, within that, Deborah organized time,
albeit more fluidly. In fact, Deborah conveyed to the students that browsing was “your
time” whereas “responding is my time” (2/8/2017 FN, p. 2). Therefore, she often would
wait until students were quiet to conduct the read-aloud, saying that “browsing is your
time, and I don’t care if you waste your time” (2/8/2017 FN, p. 2). This strengthened the
binary between browsing as a fluid, student-driven time, and reading responses as a time
of tangible production. The structure of time here, as it related to materials and the
production of something—or lack thereof—produced different kinds of space.
The borders between these physical spaces and the social and ideological spaces
that they produced, as well as the activities demarcated within each space, outlined by
Deborah and others were both real and significant. They were both existing in real ways,
but they were also permeable and not fixed. These borders are typically where we expect

125
to find difference (Schmidt, 2017). As such, the reading response, or “work area,”
reflected schooled practices. The browsing area was slightly more fluid, constructing
read-aloud experiences that resembled those conducted in classrooms, and yet
simultaneously offered an open space for other types of literacy engagements, as fleeting
as they might have been. I took up Schmidt’s (2017) notion of “hacked landscapes,”
which she argued is a process of deconstructing something (such as an artifact) and
reconsidering how the parts of the artifact might have alternative meanings. As I sought
to “hack” the landscapes of the school library (Schmidt, 2017), I selected two artifacts (a
photograph and a map, both produced by me) that I had interpreted/constructed to convey
the space. Rather than seeing the space then as linear or cohesive, I pieced apart the
materials and movement in order to uncover tensions.

Figure 4. Picture of the empty library.

Figure 5. Map of the browsing area.

A common theme—the library as a schooled space—arose across both the image
of the browsing area and the map. In Figure 4, the rug area—a Firstspace notion—was
deliberately set up to organize student bodies, and in the map of the rug during a read-

126
aloud (Figure 5), student bodies became physically organized in the squares of the rug.
The physical organization of the space, therefore, did exactly as it was intended, to
organize and manage student bodies.
On the other hand, Mark drew a map that had a different organization of space
(see Figure 6) during one of the interviews that I conducted with him. Mark’s map
demonstrated that students have understandings and interpretations of space that may
diverge from mine, as the researcher.

Figure 6. Mark’s map (1/12/2017).
In Mark’s map, as he described, there was the Smartboard, books, posters
(“READ” poster), the comfy chair, and the couch (1/12/2017 INT). Because Mark
enjoyed Elephant and Piggie books, he highlighted one in particular called Waiting is Not
Easy! (Willems, 2014). Rather than complete his map in a linear fashion, as I expected,
Mark demonstrated how representing space is complex, and does not necessarily unfold

127
in a narrative structure, although narratives of his experience were certainly embedded in
his view of the space (Powell, 2016). For example, Mark started at the bottom with the
bookshelf, moved toward the middle of the page to draw the “READ” poster and Waiting
is Not Easy! (Willems, 2014) book, and finally drew the larger squares (with “k” and “o”
written on them) to depict the rug. In this way, perhaps Mark saw the library not as a
space organized in a particular way, but as a space filled with things that he was able to
engage with, and things that he equally loved and avoided. Importantly, Mark chose not
to include the “work area” of tables and chairs, highlighting both commonalities but also
raising questions, one being whether the “work area” was seen by children as part of the
library. To Mark, space was produced through physical objects and materiality, but that
materiality also worked to open new possibilities for the discursive Secondspace. Just as
materials circulated within physical spaces to construct space and organize people within
those spaces, people also had agency in producing space, and these dimensions operated
in a dialectical manner. Powell (2016) contended that our selves become embodied as we
interact with other humans, and with non-human materials. How students organized their
bodies on my map (Figure 5) is contingent, in part, by what was possible in the physical
organization (Figure 4).
The read-aloud experience as an extension of classroom disciplinary
practices. While materials mattered in shaping what was possible in the library, materials
weren’t all that mattered, as both librarians and students had agency in taking up
discourses, embodiment, and movement in conjunction with those materials. Deborah
emphasized the need for students to listen to read-alouds and discussion, and then
whatever time was left was reserved for browsing and reading responses. During one

128
read-aloud (12/9/2016 FN, pp. 2-3), Deborah did a lot of redirecting of student behaviors.
To the class, she discussed the importance of staying focused and not attending to
students that played on the rug. To the student who was playing, Deborah said, “he’s
going to make you not have enough time to respond” and reminded them that this day
was their response day. Because of this, if they ran out of time, Deborah asked, “on
Monday [next library session], guess who is not going to be able to browse?” This
statement had an impact on students, who quickly reverted to listening, as they did not
want to lose out on their browsing time. As Deborah read the story, she used phrases such
as “give me a minute,” and “listen” to hold student attention. Here, situated within the
influence of accountability discourses, Deborah also exercised her agency to construct a
particular kind of social space—one that more closely resembled a classroom. In
constructing the library as a space that in many ways mirrored the classroom, Deborah
demonstrated how powerful the discourses of accountability and schooled literacy were
in working to shape a space.

Figure 7. Read-aloud map (12/9/2016).

129
In focusing in on just one aspect of the library experience in efforts to illustrate
space as produced through the movement of bodies, I created a spatialized narrative
(Jones, Thiel, Dávila, Pittard, Woglom, Zhou & Snow, 2016), one which moved away
from my focus on my focal children in efforts to see the read-aloud as a spatialized
practice that included many individuals. Although Figure 7 does not show movement of
bodies, I did aim to capture movement as it related to disciplinary practices, as well as
embodiment as children attempted to respond to the text. In tracing movement, I
demonstrated the ways in which students were disciplined (here, overtly disciplined) as
they moved throughout the library. During this period, student bodies stayed relatively
motionless, as they were expected to stay still on the rug and listen—a disciplinary
practice entrenched in institutional norms (Enriquez, 2014). From the map above, many
students attempted to participate, although few were called on. Significant movement
seemed to arise in the form of redirection and physically removing students from the
designated read-aloud space. Mark and Nikki, the focal students in this class session,
were seated at the back of the rug. Mark raised his hand once to answer a question,
stating his favorite part of the book.
During this read-aloud, bodies stayed predominantly still, though there were many
student voices buzzing. In fact, Deborah—visibly frustrated—did so much redirecting of
student talking that the class ran out of time for the read-aloud. At 9:15am, she asserted,
“there’s no time to go over there!” while motioning to the bookshelves, and several
minutes later, students were called to line up. Freedom of movement, here in this
moment, was scarce. Space, however, was still produced whether it be through movement

130
or lack thereof. There was power in opening up the freedom to traverse space, as well as
by shutting those opportunities down.
Due to interruptions, Deborah posed the question, “do you know what’s bad?” at
the end of the story. Deborah here alluded to her disappointment that students had
interrupted so much that they ran out of time. “When kids act out, we waste time. I keep
telling you that,” she reminded students, while also informing them that they would have
ten minutes taken away from their browsing time the following Monday. Rather than
reserving time for browsing, Deborah used browsing time as a way to maintain her
control of students, a reward or consequence for not following the outlined expectations
of the library. The notions of browsing time and listening time were positioned at odds in
this event, wherein the ability to browse was contingent on listening and sitting quietly.
This library session felt more like traditional school—students seated, quiet, listening to
instruction—than the more fluid browsing sessions. Sheehy (2004) characterizes spaces
such as this as “thick” space, where students and teacher exchange ideas in a “well-trod
path” (p. 9), often driven by teacher direction. Students quite literally stayed seated, with
traditional participation structures, for the duration of this library session. During other
times, “thin” space (Sheehy, 2004) was possible, where students had more agency in
determining what happened with texts, bodies, and social structures; therefore, ideas
didn’t always travel as expected. Even in the library, these “thin places” were fleeting,
because the library itself was entrenched within larger accountability discourses.
These networks of space (Leander et al., 2010), where the classroom discourses
entered the library to varying degrees, didn’t just “happen”—they were formed as a result
of the intersections of space and power (Mills & Comber, 2015). When the sources of

131
power and agency shifted, the networks also shifted. In other words, the library didn’t
just “become” more like the classroom randomly, and it didn’t simply take up
autonomous notions of literacy. It began to mirror the classroom purposely after
decisions and actions occurred over time in a way that policed the space and time. Yet,
these decisions and actions weren’t always strategic. Sometimes, notions of schooled
literacies, such as what read-alouds should look like and how student bodies should be
arranged, were so entrenched in our culture of schooling that they may have gone
unexplored or unnoticed—they became invisibly networked in.
The library practices are networked to the classroom. Meanwhile, still
teaching in third grade, Amanda brought the values and commitments that she had
developed as a school librarian, into the classroom with her, demonstrating how people
shape space significantly through their ideologies and beliefs, which then become
networked into a new space. Amanda’s identity, as a long-time teacher, influenced how
she constructed the library space. When I asked her about this, she responded:
Oh, I’m sure. Yeah, I’m sure it does [influence her as the librarian]. It’s hard to
even balance out what is being in the library as opposed to being a teacher,
because you have librarians that are not teachers, and then you have teachers that
are put in the library but they’re not librarians or certified librarians, so that’s
where I fall. I’m not a certified librarian, so I think it’s that combination of being
the teacher and teaching things in a teacher way at the same time as the technical
library stuff and putting it all together. I definitely think having the teacher part
comes out, for sure. Even when I’m not teaching something because we’re doing
an activity that’s not a teaching activity, I feel like it still comes out. (9/29/2016
INT, pp. 2-3)
Conversely, Amanda also expressed how much her newly found librarian identity
extended into the classroom space where she was for the remainder of this study. In that
way, the library wasn’t a contained room that was left open to other networks, but the

132
library also shifted and moved across space (Sheehy, 2010). When asked about this
reverse, Amanda replied:
I think my love for books and just when it’s read-aloud time, I feel like in third
grade they don’t do as much read-aloud as the lower grades, which is awful, but
whenever we do have read-alouds I feel like that comes out. I think that I
probably always had that even before I went into the library, so I never thought
about it until I was in the library how perfect of a place that was for me.
(9/29/2016 INT, p. 2)
Although no longer in the library, Amanda’s commitment to reading from an
equity stance still emerged. Noticing that her new third-grade students didn’t experience
as much reading aloud, Amanda integrated her love of reading aloud into the curriculum.
In doing so, she provided students with access to a greater diversity of literacy
experiences (one centered around enjoyment of a text), that diverged from the emphasis
on reading solely at one’s independent level. In addition to the library as a space that
shifted, Amanda’s transition demonstrated that the library was still a liminal space, and
one that could quickly be minimized when other when other—more pressing—needs
arose. Amanda, as a veteran teacher with a long history in the school (as one of the
founding teachers), was deemed as needed in the classroom, rather than the library. While
the library still had someone in there full-time, the implication was that the library as an
instructional space was less important than the classroom, particularly in third grade
where testing began. The library, then, while always being conceptualized in relation to
the classroom and yet distinct from it (Dressman, 1997), remained a secondary space.
Ultimately, Amanda was moved to fill an essential position, and then the library was
filled after that. Because the library was a networked and fluid space that succumbed to
change without much notice, notions about what literacy looked like in the library were
complex and malleable.

133

Traversing Space as a Way to Perform as a Reader
The competing notions of literacy that circulated in the library carried significant
implications for students. For Mark, who wanted to be a reader so desperately, having
confidence in his ability was critical, and this confidence wavered across the school
spaces that he traversed. As I observed him in the classroom (11/22/2016 FN, p. 6), for
example, I noted how often he seemed to avoid reading. That is, much of his time was
spent abandoning books, talking with his classmates, and wandering around to various
parts of the room despite verbalizing his desire to read. He spent time sifting through
books and searching until he found the right one. To engage with literacy and with one
another, students often switched seamlessly through literacy modes (Wohlwend, 2008),
like reading, walking, and chatting. Mark exemplified this as he moved around the room
to read, converse, and engage in play seamlessly, and in relatively short periods of time.
In fact, there were many instances (e.g. 11/22/2016, 12/13/2016, 1/10/2017, and
2/8/2017) that I noted where Mark moved around the library (or classroom), abandoning
books, selecting new books, and seemingly trying to find something that he could read
successfully. I opted to observe Mark in several different environments, including his
own classroom. Not only was the Firstspace, or physical space, different, but this
observation also occurred during his regular literacy instruction, which meant that the
discursive Secondspace also diverged. Here, I describe one event (Barton & Hamilton,
1998) in Mark’s classroom, where language and literacy were significant in producing
space.
During a lesson on the differences between fiction and nonfiction texts in his
classroom, Mark sat quietly and participated fully, raising his hand each time a question

134
was posed. When asked what “carnivores” ate (as it was positioned in the read-aloud
book as an “expert word”), Mark was called on and answered, “trees and plants.” His
teacher re-read the sentence and prompted him to listen again, and he was more
successful the second try in answering, “ooooh… animals” (11/22/2016 FN, p. 2). Here,
during the lesson, Mark made visible how he embodied the practices that help to establish
himself him as a “good reader” and shed an identity as a “struggling reader” (Enriquez,
2014), such as raising his hand and responding to the questions posed by his teacher. As
Luke (1992) argues, these practices—monitored by the teacher—became ascribed to his
body, as both teacher and student produced and reproduced these practices. Of course,
this was commonplace in classrooms, but the library was also entrenched with these
notions. What Mark deemed a “good reader” did not get abandoned at the library door
but entered with him across both classroom and library spaces.
Later during this classroom session, the students transitioned to independent
reading. Mark pulled out his book baggie of A and B books and selected a B level book
about bugs. As I walked over to him, he struggled to read the sentence “six legs on a
bug.” After reading the word “legs” incorrectly, Mark abandoned the book and picked a
different one. He quickly flipped through it, and also put the next one down. He picked
up a third book and held it over his head briefly, and then fanned his face with it. He
turned to the other student at his table and talked quietly with him. The next time I turned
to Mark, he had a fourth book—turned to a page with an octopus on it—and was
counting the legs. As I moved closer, he selected a final book about weather. While he
paused over the word “foggy” he read the sentence on the page. Turning to me, he smiled
and said he wanted to read it again.

135
Mark, like his classmates, was a student who did not have the freedom to move
around the physical space during his regular literacy block due to institutional norms. At
times during this period, Mark took a long time to get read with his materials (11/22/2016
FN, p. 3). The entire class was expected to practice behaviors such as sitting still and
focusing on one text, and students were occasionally redirected to sit “in their spots”
(11/22/2016 FN, p. 4). However, the stakes for performing these behaviors were
particularly high due to Mark’s status as a struggling reader. For example, Mark was
more likely to be positioned as deficient if he deviated from this, whereas students with a
higher marked success had more leeway. Therefore, while he demonstrated behaviors
such as flipping through books, holding books over his head, and talking across the table
(11/22/2016 FN, pp. 5-6), Mark also demonstrated efforts to ascribe the preferred
behaviors by sitting still, in the star position. In the library, however, Mark was permitted
to exercise this freedom of movement, as he traversed multiple social circles and reading
environments with ease. In other words, he took advantage of the flexibility (Zacher,
2009) offered to him in the library that was not offered in the classroom. As a struggling
reader in the classroom, Mark was able to temporarily shed this identity marker while in
the library (Zacher, 2009), where his mobile practices were more acceptable.
In the library, Mark’s experiences were similar in some ways, but different in
others. While Mark still exhibited behaviors such as abandoning of books, this was
treated as part of the practice of “browsing,” which signaled freedom to select and engage
with texts as one pleased. Like in the classroom, when Mark found success, he seemed
proud. For example, on January 10th, 2017, Mark spent the library period browsing. First,
he listened to a peer read, then wandered around on his own. He then read and looked on

136
with a different student, before finally selecting and then settling in across the room with
an Elephant and Piggie book on his own, all within a 13-minute time span (see Figure 8).
However, what was most interesting to me was what happened when the class was called
to line up. Mark, still reading the Elephant and Piggie book out loud, walked to the bin to
put it away. Before doing so, he read the rest of the book aloud to himself (Figure 8,
2:10pm), indicating a desire to finish the book.

Figure 8. Spatial map of Mark browsing (1/10/2017).
Mark, who did settle on a book that he could read successfully, sustained these
practices in the moment. Without knowing that he was being watched, Mark took up the
embodied position of a reader even in a space where he was not evaluated on these
practices. As a social learner, Mark engaged in literacy with his classmates in privileged

137
ways, despite being marked as struggling. For example, during a final observation on
May 15th, 2017, Mark joined a group of students on the rug during a browsing period, and
they crowded around him as he held a Mo Willems book. Later during this same period,
he selected a book while sitting on the bench, and yet didn’t ever open the book
(5/15/2017 Map). While not engaging directly in reading, Mark was successful in
positioning himself as a reader.
Together, these experiences laminated to construct a conflicted identity (Moje &
Luke, 2009), one that was not the same from day to day, or even from minute to minute.
The various social situations that Mark encountered intersected as he constructed a
flexible identity (Zacher, 2009) for himself. As Enriquez (2014) contends, “the
production and interruption of reading identities matters” (p. 109), as the stakes for being
deemed successful or struggling are high. These layers of identity were, in part,
constructed and made possible for Mark, but also for Nikki, Carla, and James by the
various spaces within and across the library, classroom, and school and the ways in which
literacy was taken up across these spaces and through these networks. Some spaces, like
the library, offered pockets of more fluid reading practices and access to a diversity of
texts, which may matter for the identity practices of students like Mark.
Approval-Seeking for “Being a Reader”
Despite pockets of fluidity and pleasure in reading, there was a clear connection
between students being invested in and concerned with their reading levels, and the
approval that they sought for participating in the expected behaviors. Therefore, selecting
the “right” books and using the right strategies was something that many of these students
took up even outside of the classroom. Receiving praise and validation for his behaviors

138
was more pronounced for Mark than with other students, perhaps because his reading
ability was not consistently praised and was even at times, challenged. Nikki, on the other
hand, seemed to not be concerned with her literate behaviors, unfazed by the approval or
disapproval of others.
For Mark, participating in discussions was something that a good reader did.
Often, I saw Mark raise his hand whenever a question was posed. He typically sat in the
front of the room and displayed attentive behaviors, such as looking at the librarian and
having his hands in his lap. Leander (2002) states that studying how students position
their bodies in space is essential, and “in particular, the embodied spaces that participants
are constructing with one another reveal much about the social spaces and figured worlds,
claimed or implied, that they are jointly acting ‘into’” (p. 244). Mark desired to be “read”
as a strong reader, and so he performed and positioned himself in ways that were
privileged in the school setting (e.g. raising his hand, sitting quietly, participating during
read-alouds, etc.), even when he was unsure of the answer.
During an observation on November 9th, 2016, Mark listened intently to the readaloud with his hands in his lap (11/9/2016 FN, p. 2). Several times, he looked back at me
sitting in the back of the room and appeared to seek my approval for his behaviors. When
directed to respond to reading by writing and drawing about a part of the story that they
liked, Mark drew a picture of the bear putting his tail in the hole (see Figure 9 below). I
noted during this observation that Mark was highly social as he responded to reading and
talked frequently with his peers. Overall, Mark seemed to enjoy the social aspects of
literacy in the library, and particularly loved being read aloud to. This intensive
engagement during read-alouds can be contrasted with the great amount of time spent

139
wandering around the library during independent browsing time, and his tendency to flip
through multiple books during his classroom reading (11/22/2016 FN, p. 6). Perhaps this
was because he didn’t have to do the most difficult work of decoding, and could simply
enjoy being read to, whereas his struggles were foregrounded in the latter example.

Figure 9. Picture from Mark’s reading response (11/9/2016).
Later in the school year (2/8/2016 FN, p. 1), Mark continued to exhibit schooled
literacies and was validated by his teacher for going right to the rug and sitting in star
position. During this same observation period, Mark was still highly attentive on the rug,
and I noticed that he had received a ticket (2/8/2016 FN, p. 2) for his behavior. Therefore,
his desire to display schooled literacies (an overcompensation for his lower reading level)
was justified. Simply earning a ticket in front of peers validated Mark for making the
choices that are set forth and reinforced by the larger school institution. Mark had been
successful in “reading” what was expected in the various spaces of the school and
altering his behaviors to match those behaviors. These behaviors were consistent with his

140
responses in our interviews, where Mark stated, “I like reading books. And, my mom said
if you read books you can get more smarter with writing” (11/10/2016 INT, p. 7).
Again, on January 10th, 2017, Mark demonstrated how he adhered to schooled
literacy practices, though still would break from this, as one might expect a first grader to
do. For example, he turned around to laugh when a student behind him made a joke and
stretched his legs out in front of him as he listened to the story (1/10/2017 FN, p. 3).
Importantly, Mark read the social context when making the decision to stretch out on the
rug. His ability to toggle back and forth between what was expected, and yet play on/with
this line, showed his desire to be perceived as a reader. In a similar vein, on January 25 th,
2017, during a read-aloud, Mark proceeded to interrupt Deborah as she was reading Frog
and Toad, shouting “he [character] should…!” Deborah laughed and responded by
saying, “You keep telling him what to do, it’s a story! It’s already written. If you rewrite
the story maybe you can tell them what to do” (1/25/2017 FN, p. 2). While an
interruption to the story, Mark still demonstrated how he was highly engaged. However,
the discursive space of the library—one that often resembled schooled read-alouds—
accepted yet did not privilege Mark’s engagements with this story.
On the other hand, Nikki seemed less concerned with how she was perceived. In
the library on January 25th, 2017 (1/25/2017 FN, p. 2), Deborah asked Nikki if her nose
was bleeding, as her nose was red and irritated, and she had her head down (she was not
bleeding). When Deborah turned back around, Nikki pointed at her mockingly. Unlike
Mark, who overemphasized his schooled literacy behaviors (desiring approval), Nikki
often produced responses to texts that resisted traditional narratives (Sipe & McGuire,

141
2006), as in the case described next around a Frog and Toad Are Friends (Lobel, 2003)
text.
On December 9th, 2016, Nikki was seated in the back of the rug, as she usually
was. While she did raise her and, she was not called on. Nikki demonstrated many
characteristics of an engaged reader, as she drew on background knowledge and had a
sophisticated way of approaching texts. As a student who was not as social as others,
however, at times Nikki’s responses weren’t validated by the teacher. However, on
January 25th, 2017, Nikki responded to the Frog and Toad Are Friends (Lobel, 2003)
book, where the character was banging his head with, “he’s gonna lose brain cells!” and
Deborah responded, “well, you don’t know that” (1/25/2017 FN, p. 3). In an analysis of
writing instruction, Schneider (2001) discusses the ways in which some teachers, often
inadvertently, direct student voices to topics that are more “appropriate.” Despite Nikki’s
engagement and integration of her own background knowledge of brain cells, her
response here went unvalidated, and almost unwelcomed, as a response to the text.
Levels, behaviors, and receiving validation for those behaviors were never
separate from the library, as all spaces within the larger school were networked in such
ways that beliefs and values about reading levels moved in and out of the space. Leveling
of books and reading may not have been the starting place for how students selected texts
in the library, but the influence of leveled texts was certainly still present. This, too, was
because students internalized their reading levels (Kontovourki, 2012) as one indicator of
their identity. As the children entered the space, so did the levels to which they were
assigned. Perhaps it was not so much what students did with a book that “counted” in this
space, but it actually began with the book that they had and/or could access. For instance,

142
so much attention was paid to text selection, that often the interactions with the text
themselves were lost. To think that literacy was “in the book” reproduced the notion of
literacy as something that developed in a trajectory and could be obtained. In this way,
the Firstspace materials themselves had power in framing the discursive spaces that
students took up. This is an issue of equity, both as students have different levels of
access to physical texts (based on their ability level), as well as the freedom to engage
with texts as they pleased.
The Library as a Liminal Space for Competing Ideas about Literacy
The library at City Partnership School was a space that was often transformed into
what was deemed as most needed, such as a space for additional enrichment classes,
parent meetings, or a testing center. In fact, it remained a library only so long as
something else didn’t take precedent over the work of the library. The library, as it was
traditionally known, could quickly dissipate. I anchor these observations in the belief that
spaces are not objective or static but are constructed through the interactions and social
structures that govern space.
As contested spaces, libraries have shifted and transformed according to social,
political, and economic climates, though they have been removed from many of the overt
accountability systems imposed on classrooms (Olivant, 2015). Rather, libraries have
most typically been positioned as spaces that support and strengthen the formal literacy
instruction within schools (New York City School Library System, n.d.), despite more
recent moves to begin holding librarians accountable for student outcomes through
assessing students. While garnering more recent attention as an instructional space,

143
particularly as notions of what literacies are valued in schools has shifted, school libraries
have still been dissolved of the responsibility to directly produce student outcomes, and
therefore, have the potential to take much broader views on literacy. However, the
constraints on schools, and discourses of schooled literacy, narrow these possibilities.
The library is therefore a contested space, one that sits at the intersection of competing
discourses and pockets of freedom, which open and close. This is compounded by strains
put on school libraries by policies and funding, which often mean budget cuts and
difficulty staffing school libraries (Everhart, 2000a), especially in underserved areas.
With that said, the multiple iterations of library standards—and the space of the
library itself—is reflective of shifting national priorities, ideologies, and events. Libraries
as we know them today have, since the early 20th century, been an integral part of school
institutions, providing opportunities for students to explore texts, pursue inquiries, and
recently, explore digital and multimodal literacies. The role of school libraries has always
been fluid, for example, 1918 saw the first iteration of school library standards (Michie &
Holton, 2005), with many versions and revisions to follow for decades to come.
Libraries, like schools at large, are contested spaces, both fluid and constrained.
While the library is thought to be a space that is free from assessment, however,
“book levels” and assessment discourses nonetheless enter the library with force,
demonstrating the complexity of the library as a set of relations. On one hand, the library
offered a space for James to act out Mo Willems books with his friends (1/10/2017 Map),
while in contrast, the library had the potential to close opportunities for student choice,
play, and resistance. For example, at times the content of what students were permitted to
read was regulated. During a browsing period on January 20th, 2017, Deborah explained

144
to the students that even though a book may be on their level, that didn’t mean that it was
appropriate:
If you see violence that much, you’re going to grow up violent. Now don’t go
home and say I said you will… I said if you see lots of violence. Be careful what
put in mind! I like beauty of life, but those kinds of books aren’t. They’re the dark
side of life! So don’t go there. Not for you! You’re in first grade! Magic Tree
House, Flat Stanley, those are good. (1/20/2017 INT, pp. 4-5)
Whereas utopias are spaces with no real place and might be what we envision a
library to be, Foucault (1986) defines heterotopias as contested spaces, real spaces. The
library, therefore, is a heterotopia, one that continually shifts as different ideas about
literacy and learning enter and exit. As Schmidt (2017) describes, “I moved from reading
for cohesive, linear arguments to seeing complexity, tensions, and social structures” (p.
101). I again take up her notion of hacking across products, deconstructing each and then
looking across artifacts for both moments of dissonance as well as themes.
Book Choice as a Social Construct
Just as assessments, accountability systems, and ways of leveling and sorting
children influenced how literacy practices were taken up in the library, the notion of book
choice and book selection has implications for this work. The material notion of book
choice, while present in the classrooms, did not exist in the library space. As the library
and classroom were both networked spaces, and were networked to each other, the
fluidity of policies, accountability, and assessment-based discourses were ever-present in
the networks. Even after Amanda’s shift to the third-grade classroom, I continued to
observe her teach in several of her classroom sessions, seeking to see how she might
construct the classroom space in overlapping and diverging ways. During one
observation, students were book shopping, and the differences between the book

145
shopping and browsing periods were striking. There were several students clustered
around one area, three girls and one boy. The girls were clustered around the same bin,
and I noticed that one of them selected a Geronimo Stilton (Stilton, 2004) text from the
“Level T” bin.
What struck me was that during the book shopping, students were expected to
select books quietly, calmly, and within their level only, or occasionally within a span of
levels (Allington, 2011; Goldberg & Serravallo, 2007). Because book shopping happened
during instructional time, students were not allowed to disrupt others while doing so. This
was quite different than the browsing periods in the library—where students dashed to
look at books, to save the space where they hoped to sit, and to congregate with their
friends. Book shopping in the classroom practically, then, did not have the level of
movement or noise that the browsing periods have had because classroom teachers were
expected to complete assessments in a timely manner and demonstrate student progress.
Although browsing sessions, as facilitated by both Amanda and Deborah, did
offer choice and were distinct from book shopping in classrooms, the manner in which
browsing was approached varied between the two constructions, demonstrating how
people (bodies and beliefs) produce a space. Deborah, for example, was concerned with
ensuring that students selected books that were appropriate. During a library session on
February 1st, 2017, for example, Deborah brought to students’ attention that they were
consistently selecting joke books. She said:
Everyone just takes the joke books. Nobody take them today. Let’s see by
March if you can read all the other ones… along the shelves. You need to read
three or more. Take them out, and bring them back. You should be reading the
books, not taking the joke books. (2/1/2017 FN, p. 4)

146
Later during the period, she told me that she planned to get certificates for
students who read a certain number of books. Deborah here demonstrated her value of
reading volume and appropriate content, positioning the library as a space that should
support traditional literacy learning. For James, however, this had clear implications.
James, in my first interview with him (11/13/2016 INT, p. 3), mentioned how much he
loved the joke books. After this incident in the library, I asked him what he thought about
not being able to select joke books anymore. He said, “I wanted to read the Valentine’s
Day joke books yesterday…” (2/2/2017 INT, p. 6). When I then asked what he thought
about them being off-limits, he responded, “I thought that… that I would choose another
book” (2/2/2017 INT, p. 6).
This decision by Deborah to monitor book choice—to organize access to
Firstspace materials—signified her conception of the library as a space that had
guidelines for children in terms of reading level and content. For example, on December
13th, 2016, I observed a browsing period where Deborah informed a student that the book
they selected was not on their level, because they were only in first grade. A few minutes
later, I again heard her ask a student, “what level are you on?” (12/13/2016 FN, p. 2).
Months later, on April 27th, 2017, Deborah again prompted students to “pick books on
your level” (4/27/2017 Map). The way that Deborah and Amanda perceived their own
role in the library had implications for what students were encouraged, and sometimes
permitted, to do. It both opened and closed different conceptions of Secondspace for
students. Both Amanda and Deborah shifted the space, just as their identities were
constructed from the various positions that they had taken up over time and their own
beliefs about literacy (Moje & Luke, 2009).

147
Amanda took a slightly different approach to the way that she monitored book
choice in the library, adamant that it should not be a leveled space. In specifically
discussing the differences between book shopping in the classroom and the way that
browsing was structured in the library, Amanda responded with the following:
The fact that in the library, they can read together and they don’t necessarily
have to read with their reading partner, right? Browsing days and check out days,
you’re not only looking for books but you can sit and read and you can sit and
read with whoever you want. You can stop reading with whoever you want and
go and read with somebody else, and then you can stop. You know what I mean?
Again, I don’t know would that be all tied into choice, just choice in general,
choice in what you read, how you read, where you sit because they’re not
assigned places. You know what I mean? (12/9/2016 INT, p. 9)
Amanda, positioning the library as a space of choice, stated that “I think all that
put together is big, you know?” (12/9/2016 INT, p. 9). That is, the library was intended to
be a space that offered choice (New York City School Library System, n.d.) and didn’t
monitor the types of texts that students read. Deborah, on the other hand, viewed her role
slightly different, and therefore, the space was enacted differently in the daily browsing
sessions. Despite the Firstspace materials being consistent, the discursive spaces that
were afforded to students shifted across space, time, and individual construction of space.
Therefore, the way that book choice was embedded in the library was fluid and largely
dependent on who was making those decisions, as well as the extent to which the
students, who also had agency, adhered to these directives. Even more so, those decisions
were constructed within larger schooled discourses about what counted as reading, what
students should be reading, and what made someone a reader. The library was not a
container (Leander et al., 2010) where these discourses were isolated, but it was
networked to the other school spaces in which these larger discourses circulated. The

148
library continued to a space of possibility—of text selection, of what literacy was, and
who could be marked as literate. However, this was complicated.
Discourses of Leveling Seep into the Library
Part of what made the library a complex space was that it is not only the librarian
who determined what was appropriate or privileged for students to read. Whether
Amanda or Deborah invited reading levels or notions of reading proficiency into the
library, they seeped in regardless, because the circulating discourses entered in to less
official school spaces (Dyson, 1993).
One way that students brought in traditional ways to gauge proficiency was
through the reading levels that City Partnership School’s teachers used to ensure that
students were reading books at their level. Reading levels at City Partnership School were
assigned by assessing all students multiple times per year. The assessment determined
what level of text students could read with independence (Fountas & Pinnell, 2006) and
directed students to select books within that level. To administer this assessment, teachers
listened to students read orally. The assessment considered multiple criteria of “being a
reader” including the text structure, print and illustrations, complexity of topics, and use
of vocabulary (Kontovourki, 2012). Based on their results, students were given the choice
about which text to select within a particular level, however the choice was managed as
they were not given free rein to select across levels. As Kontovourki (2012) described,
leveled texts were an important element of schooled literacy, although have often not
been included in debates around assessments in schools. In libraries, this was even more
pronounced, as libraries themselves were not leveled in this manner.

149
Mark traversed a great amount of space during typical library sessions,
“browsing” in the truest sense of the word. Mark, in these browsing sessions, relied
heavily on the notion of reading levels to help determine what he could read, and this
often drove his book choices. On January 25th, 2017 (see Figure 10), Mark exhibited
abandoning of books until he found something that he was successful with. In addition,
he removed himself to go to the bathroom, which was consistent with other instances of
removing himself from the library (e.g. going to the nurse). During this session, Mark
began by reading Knuffle Bunny (Willems, 2004) out loud to me. Next, he brought Danny
and the Dinosaur (Hoff, 1958) to me, saying “I can read this, it’s a first-grade book!”
(1/25/2017 Map). He moved across the room a couple minutes later to where Nikki and I
were sitting. He held up a book, and asked Nikki if she could read it. She replied with,
“Yeah, I’m a level J,” and Mark replied with, “Well, I’m a level D.” A few minutes after
that, he climbed behind a shelf. Later, the students were called to line up and he stood in
line with his selected book (1/25/2017 Map). Again, there was an emphasis on levels and
“proving” what he could read. As with Nikki and other students at City Partnership
School, reading levels were a way in which “being a reader” was defined. For that reason,
Mark emphasized his reading level often. Being a reader was anchored around literally
decoding the text. While there was evidence elsewhere of Mark talking with his peers and
browsing book covers (e.g. 11/9/2016, 12/13/2016, 1/10/2017, 1/25/2017, 2/8/2017), his
fixation on reading levels took precedent. To Mark and Nikki, being a reader was not
divorced from the reading level to which you were assigned. Like third grader Bill in
Kontovourki’s (2012) analysis, both Mark and Nikki demonstrated their interest in
progressing through reading levels, boasting about which level they had “attained.”

150

Figure 10. Spatial map of Mark and Nikki’s browsing (1/25/2017).
As Mark and Nikki utilized social space and crafted identities in the library, it
became evident that the larger school institution was still present in each interaction.
Leander (2002) argues that “in school settings, achievements of identity are not only
shaped at the level of any identity group but are also laminated with the construction of
the school space-as-institution” (p. 239). Even in a space like the library that was (in
theory) free from notions of reading levels, it was still situated within the larger school
and those ideas and values permeated the space. Both Mark and Nikki relied heavily on
reading levels as a tangible way to “mark” someone as successful or not. While reading
levels came up with Carla and James, it was not to the same extent as in my
conversations with Nikki and Mark. Even though the library didn’t use or refer to levels
in the same ways as the classrooms at City Partnership School, Mark and Nikki actively
brought the notion of reading levels into the library, simultaneously bringing classroom
literacy ideologies and discourses (Secondspace discourses) with them as they entered the

151
space. The result was a complex and contested idea of what literacy in the library meant
in practice, as students navigated the tensions between fluid browsing and the constraints
of reading levels. As I describe below, these dominant ideologies about reading levels
have implications for student identities as readers and writers. Moje (2004, in Leander &
Sheehy) reminds us that identity, ideology, and ways of thinking about literacy cannot be
considered apart from space. Therefore, the intersection of reading levels and the library
space provided me with a unique time-space (Leander & Sheehy, 2004) with which to
examine Nikki and Mark.
Identities as informed by reading levels. Because Mark and Nikki made
attempts to regulate the reading levels of each other, they played a significant role in
producing reading identities for one another (in concert with the librarian, other students,
and materials). For Nikki, having a “high” reading level was a tangible marker of
success, one that she mentioned frequently, and with pride. For example, even as I probed
Nikki about what makes a strong reader, she brought up reading levels. During my
second interview with her (11/17/2016 INT, pp. 5-6) this very notion came up.
Alyson: I’m wondering… What does a good reader do in the library, do you
think?
Nikki: Umm… reading books? And loves sitting down.
Alyson: And loves sitting down? And what about in your classroom? What does a
good reader do in your classroom?
Nikki: Well, we have leveled books…
Alyson: Mmm hmm.
Nikki: Level A is the easiest, and level Z is the hardest.
Alyson: So, does being a good reader in the classroom have something to do with
levels?
Nikki: Yeah, I’m on level I.
Alyson: Whoa… So, are you a good reader in the classroom?
Nikki: Yeah!
Alyson: What makes you a good reader in the classroom?
Nikki: I’m the highest level.

152
For Nikki, her performance of schooled literacy, and her high reading level,
positioned her with power. The reading level that she obtained had become part of her
“identity kit” (Gee, 1989) and a tangible one at that, as reading levels had become often
physical markers (on books, folders, and other material). Like Mark, Nikki equated being
a reader with sitting down and reading a book (dominant notions of what it means to be a
reader). In fact, the image that she drew at the beginning of this interview pictured
multiple children smiling in the library, with one student having a speech bubble that
said, “I love books!” (see Figure 11). Here, Nikki demonstrated the tensions between
different stances toward reading, a cognitive, linear progression as measured by reading
levels and yet the desire to enjoy reading all at the same time. These discourses were not
mutually exclusive, but operated in tandem, circulating constantly though at times,
affording more power to one over the other.

Figure 11. Picture of the library from Nikki’s interview (11/17/2016).
Despite these tensions, I considered ways in which the literacy practices of “other
spaces” may have fostered opportunities for students to engage in literacy in various

153
ways. For Mark, the library could offer a space where he could be a different type of
reader. While he was marked as “low” in the classroom by nature of his independent
reading level, perhaps the fluidity of the library allowed him to interact more playfully
and to read on his own terms. Mark wanted desperately to be a reader, and his behaviors
were a clear reflection of that. When he wandered in ways that appeared aimless, I
believe he was actually constructing a readerly identity. On December 13 th, 2016, I traced
Mark’s movements across a browsing period. He moved from the bench, to the nurse, to
multiple bookshelves, traversing a great amount of space in the process (12/13/2016
Map). Similarly, on January 10th, 2017, during a browsing period previously described,
Mark selected an Elephant and Piggie book and read it on his own. This book he stuck
with, and even walked to the bin as he read it to ensure that he finished the book before it
was time to leave the library (1/10/2017 Map).
This traversing space, and conflicted identity positions that he took up, created a
lamination of his past, present, and future literacy engagements (Moje & Luke, 2009).
Because Nikki—and others—made it clear that he was not a successful reader in the
conventional sense, Mark had a conflicted identity. That is, he didn’t select books based
on anything other than reading level. Mark also marked himself as a particular kind of
reader—a first grade reader—because he could read a “first grade book” (1/25/2017
Map). In my last interview with Mark and Nikki, they argued about what level Mark was,
and therefore, what kind of reader he was (2/16/2017 INT, p. 4), as they reproduced
dominant notions of what made a reader successful:
Mark: I can read anything.
Nikki: No, you can’t! (Quietly) He’s a level A.
Alyson: Nikki, just him.
Mark (to Nikki): I’m not a level A. I’m a level C.

154
Alyson: But what…?
Nikki: I’m a level J.
Mark: I’m a level D!
Alyson (to Nikki): Can you let him finish? (To Mark) What are you doing in this
picture that makes you a good reader?
Mark: Because I’m a level H.
Nikki: You’re not a level H.
Alyson: But what are you doing in this picture?
Mark: Umm, grabbing a book.
Alyson: What kind of book?
Mark: Well, I’m a level O.
Nikki: No you’re not.
Alyson (to Mark): Just ignore [her].
Nikki: He’s a level C.
Mark: No, I’m not! I’m a level D.
To Nikki and Mark, being a reader could be measured, and it was indeed
measured through reading levels (though there are certainly other ways that this is done
in schools—pages read, books read, etc.). In the above interview, Nikki regulated who
Mark was as a reader, and it was based on his reading level. This discursive construction,
of course, mattered in how Mark viewed himself. Nikki, here and elsewhere, actively
took up the discourse of leveling to regulate what Mark could read, in effect positioning
herself as having a higher ability than Mark. Wohlwend (2007) argues, “however, we
may not be taking into account the potentially deleterious effects of children’s agentic
behavior” (p. 74). While Nikki exercised her agency in the ways that she regulated Mark,
she also demonstrated the ways in which she was disciplined by the discourses of
schooled literacy, or the Secondspace discourses that circulated and re-circulated
throughout the space. These discourses resulted in some students having more or less
status, and while both children bought into the schooled literacy discourses, Mark was
most implicated. Mark read the social space of the library and the way that he was

155
positioned within it (Zacher, 2009), and worked to position himself with more power
(e.g. to display those behaviors that might compensate for his reading level).
A few lines later in this same interview (2/16/2017 INT, p. 5) when asked if he
liked Elephant and Piggie books, Mark replied “I can read them. They’re a level E. No,
those are level E’s.” Kontovourki (2012) contends, “seen in this way, practices like
leveling can be understood both as products of power and as permeated by power, which
students take up or resist but whose stakes are nevertheless high” (p. 128). Mark both
took up the notion of his reading level, and yet at the same time he resisted being
constrained to a level, bolstering his level with each statement that he made during this
excerpt. Mark demonstrated, through these shifts, that discursive space was not unitary.
There was space for inquiry and choice in texts, and yet there was also space where
Mark’s identity as a reader was increasingly implicated by assessment-based discourses.
Situated within the contested space of the library, Mark showed the complexities of his
readerly identity.
Although not marked as a proficient reader in the way that Nikki was, Mark
garnered social capital in the sense that he was praised for his behaviors—the reading
strategies and attitudes that he employed began to compensate for his struggle to decode
the texts. As a social being in the classroom, Mark had mobility across different spaces.
While reading levels were an important and tangible marker of reading proficiency, they
were not the only way to mark a student as a good reader. For example, his earning of
tickets on February 8th, 2016, demonstrated the validation that he often received for
adhering to expected practices.

156
These interview excerpts demonstrate how powerful the notion of reading levels
was, and the regulatory power that reading levels wield, even within spaces where
reading levels were not the norm. In fact, the reading levels that were assigned to students
became part of the readerly identity that students constructed. The levels regulated what
students thought they could read and the materials that they selected (Kontovourki,
2012), even in a space like the library. Just as Wohlwend (2007) analyzed the ways in
which the girls’ claims as injured positioned Kevin as an offender and themselves as
victims, Nikki’s claims about Mark’s reading level actively continued to position herself
as a strong reader and him as a weaker reader. Nikki “impinged on the identity claims of
others” (Zacher, 2009, p. 276) in the continual back-and-forth about reading levels, using
Mark’s position and boasting about her own in relation to it. In doing so, she garnered
more power and positioned Mark as less powerful than her. However, Dyson (1993)
reminded us that these social stances were not static and were constantly negotiated.
Perhaps this is ultimately why Nikki and Mark talked about reading levels often, as
Nikki’s regulation of Mark as a reader helped to preserve a social balance between the
two of them. Nonetheless, the discourses around reading levels, assessment, and ability
were networked from the classroom to other school spaces, shaping readerly identities as
they were constructed across a collection of school spaces.
Discourses of Reading Strategies Networked Across Space
Despite its flexibility, the library resembled the classroom in that traditional
discourses around reading were present and worked to shape the space through their
continual recirculation. Like many others, to Carla, being a reader was often tied to
autonomous and skills-based notions (Street & Street, 1995) about what reading was,

157
where reading was primarily about decoding the word and not giving up when a word is
difficult. The different engagements that Carla did take up, that might contrast with these
notions, will be discussed in the chapter that follows. In fact, when discussing what it
meant to be a reader in the library, all four children named reading strategies and
behaviors emphasized across multiple school spaces, where the layering of these
strategies, discourses, and behaviors produced a palimpsest of a complex lived space
(Huyssen, 2003). What was defined as reading in their classrooms and other school
spaces permeated the library (sometimes temporarily and sometimes permanently)—the
library wasn’t exempt from assessment discourses because it was inherently networked to
the other spaces. However, the students were also not exempt from assessment
discourses, as over time, they internalized these discourses. As they moved in and out of
the library, so did the discourses about what counted as reading. As Soja (1996) explains,
this is one reason why attending to Thirdspace cracks is essential, as without those
cracks, discourses that can produce or resist more equitable spaces go unchallenged.
These Thirdspace interruptions will be explored in greater depth in the chapter that
follows.
Carla was someone who loved books and had a wide range of interests in texts,
and therefore, had an “ideal” orientation toward reading, one that fit with the expectations
of schooling. When asked, Carla discussed being a reader as following the expectations,
strategies, and attitudes/behaviors that she had been taught in school. Kontovourki (2012)
argues that “the body may be read as a text that is written upon and socially (re)produced
according to the particular practices and discourses to which it has been exposed” (p. 5).
Carla did such by reproducing particular ways of “being” in the library, disciplining her

158
body and taking up the same language, that she had learned in her classroom and across
the school context. She noted that, “a good reader… they read in their heads,” a good
reader “doesn’t give up on words,” and “it’s like they try their best? It’s kinda like they
don’t give up”? (12/8/2016 INT, p. 5). When I probed Carla about what it meant to be a
good reader across the classroom and library, she mentioned “they look at the picture” to
help them figure out the word. When I asked who could be a good reader in the library
and classroom, Carla answered “anybody” and giggled (12/8/2016 INT, p. 6).
In her response, Carla seemed to find my question humorous and unnecessary, as
she stated matter-of-factly that it was possible for anyone to be a reader. Simultaneously,
Carla effectively named strategies that she had been taught in the classroom as what “a
good reader” did and began illustrating the kind of person who embodied a reader (Gee,
2005). However, she also utilized and circulated the discourse that everyone can be a
reader, something that was emphasized within the context of City Partnership School, as
well as more broadly in the balanced literacy approach and curriculum that City
Partnership School adopted (Calkins, 2015).
In addition to her statements about what constituted a good reader were the
behaviors that Carla exhibited that indicated these beliefs. For example, there were many
instances of Carla sitting still as directed, both across the various spaces in the library as
well as in the classroom. For example, on November 10 th, 2016, during the read-aloud
Carla exhibited the behaviors of a model student, demonstrating her understanding of the
expectations of a proficient reader (Siegel, Kontovourki, Schmier, & Enriquez, 2008).
Regardless of whether these were the expectations of this space, which they were not,
Carla naturally embodied them as a product of internalizing schooled literacy discourses.

159
Her performance as a reader was therefore reflective of the larger identity practices that
laminated (Moje & Luke, 2009) over time to make these ways of “being a reader”
normalized.
James was also marked by his classroom teacher, by Deborah, and by his peers as
a proficient reader, both by nature of his reading level as well as his general demeanor as
a good student. During my second interview with James, I asked him to draw a picture of
the library (see Figure 12), and like Carla, he began by drawing different types of books.
As he did so, saying that he was making the books up as he went, I asked him how he
decided what to add. He responded that “my brain helped me” (12/15/2016 INT, p. 2).

Figure 12. James’ drawing of the library (12/15/2016).
Like Carla, James positioned reading as the cornerstone of his library experience,
although gave himself permission to imagine the possibilities of new kinds of books, and
books that he had yet to explore. However, his experience in the library was always
deeply connected to books (the materials) and rooted in the enjoyment (the social spaces)

160
that he found with these books. In my first interview with James, he used language such
as “the library has, also, books that I never read” and “I haven’t looked at all of the
books” to approach the library as a space rich with possibility for exploring new topics
and new texts. However, he simultaneously used language such as “my brain helped me”
to discuss reading in a way that was directly linked to learning, a more dominant way of
positioning reading and literacy. While the library may offer more freedom of
exploration, it was never divorced from a schooled definition of reading as a cognitive
skill that individual readers make sense of in their heads, as opposed to a social process
(Street, 2005). It was a space that could never get outside of these discourses—it was
always inextricably connected to them. Later in the conversation (12/15/2016 INT, p. 4),
as James continued to add to his picture, I asked James about what it meant to be a good
reader:
James: Because if they don’t know how to read the words, they can look at the
pictures.
Alyson: And that will help them? What else does a good reader do in the library?
How about one more thing.
James: [adds “they imagine the book” to drawing]
Alyson: Nice. And what about in the classroom? When you think about a good
reader in the classroom, do they do these same things? Do they do anything that’s
different?
James: Sometimes they imagine the book, and sometimes they also look at the
pictures.
Alyson: Do they do anything else in the classroom that maybe they don’t do in the
library?
James: [adds “they read with friends” to drawing]
Alyson: So, in the classroom they read with friends? Nice. My next question is,
who can be a good reader in the library?
James: All my friends.
Alyson: Can anybody be a good reader in the library?
James: Everyone in the school.
James named strategies—look at the pictures, imagine the book, and read with
friends—consistent with the approach to reading taught in his classroom (Calkins, 2015).

161
Similarly, he marked all friends and students as “good readers,” though some distinction
was made between his friends and the entire school. While this was constructed by
James, my own positionality and framing of the question equally helped to construct this
meaning for James, demonstrating the ways in which I inherently also adhere to schooled
literacy discourses, as they are powerful forces. To James, the library was a democratic
space that was open to everyone. He named cognitive notions of literacy and schooled
literacy behaviors, and yet also discussed reading as something that was open for
everyone to take pleasure in. Perhaps this was because his own experiences have been
that the library offered more freedom to read the books of his choice—Mo Willems—
than the classroom, where he was expected to read his “just right” books as a common
part of schooled literacy practices (Kontovourki, 2012). During my first interview with
James, he said that he didn’t get to pick Mo Willems books in the classroom because
“I’m a higher level than some people” (11/3/2016 INT, p. 6), whereas the library
conversely offered him this choice. This was complicated, of course, by the notion that
books were at times “off-limits” and more heavily regulated, such as the joke books
(2/2/2017 Map).
Mark, despite moving around the library with ease while browsing for books until
he found one to linger in longer, was still well aware of the literacy behaviors and
practices that were intimately tied to being a “good reader.” Because Mark was not
perceived as proficient in the way that Carla and James were, he was even more
conscious of these practices. I asked Mark what he would choose to read if he could read
anything, and he responded: “I would pick one… I would read some again. And, I would
buy one more book. If I don’t know one, I should do it tomorrow. And if I do know it, I

162
will still read it again, because it’s my first time” (10/13/2016 INT, p. 8). Regardless of
where he was, Mark conceptualized reading in a traditional way. During the same
interview, I asked him if he liked reading, to which he replied he did because “they show
me the letters” and when prompted, elaborated with, “I learn letters because the book…
The book, umm, we spell out the words. And we listen to the sounds of the words”
(10/13/2016 INT, p. 8).
To Mark then, the library was a place for reading, and reading was learning to
sound out the words and to read a high volume of reading. This was unsurprising given
Mark’s tendency to rely on cognitive notions of reading that further a linear trajectory of
autonomous skills that then lead to an accumulation of “reading,” despite sociocultural
stances to literacy that resist these definitions (Luke, 2012; Street, 2005). Given my status
as an adult researcher working with Mark, and my likely positioning as a teacher figure, I
read Mark’s statements as listing, therefore recirculating, many of the ideas that he had
been taught about what reading is. In other words, he said what he thought I wanted to
hear. This, of course, requires continual reflection on my role as a researcher, and the
ways in which I—as a teacher figure—subconsciously took up notions of schooled
literacy practices and reinforced the very responses that Mark produced (Kontovourki,
2012). I, too, was an active agent in shaping and producing the space. I brought these
discourses and ideologies with me, just as librarians and students did. While I didn’t alter
the physical or material space, my body and my presence worked to produce and
reproduce it.
In the image below (see Figure 13), where I invited Mark to draw the library, he
first drew the clock (in black) on the wall, bookshelves (in pink and gray), and keyboards

163
(in blue) stacked on top of a shelf. When prompted to draw what it looks like to read in
the library, Mark drew himself holding two books in the bottom right corner (see Figure
13). When asked about what it means to read in the library, Mark named the things that
he had been taught (reading hard books, reading a lot, re-reading) and positioned himself
as someone who was growing in his reading levels (“I’ve been to level C”). When I
probed Mark on what would happen if he did the reading activities that he had been
taught, he said, “you can get more learning in your head and you can get writing more
done” (11/10/2016, pp. 3-4).

Figure 13. Mark’s drawing of the library (11/10/2016).
For Mark, adopting and displaying both the schooled literacy practices that were
valued in the library (listening to read-alouds, browsing and reading quietly, and selecting
the books deemed appropriate), as well as demonstrating pleasure in reading, was
essential to positioning himself as a strong reader. By embodying these practices, Mark
attempted to visibly engage with texts in the ways that schools decide (Enriquez, 2014),

164
demonstrating the immense regulatory power of schooled literacies. Holland, Lachicotte,
Skinner, and Cain (1998) remind us that one’s identity and social positioning within
cultural institutions, like schools, influences the extent to which individuals ascribe to the
values promoted by the institution. For Mark, who wielded less power as a conventional
reader, the dominant values of literacy, and behaviors that embody these values, were
foregrounded. In other words, he actively took up these discourses, and was often
positively reinforced by doing so. Equity matters in this work, as Mark was not afforded
the same mobilities—the same fluid practices—as his peers who were marked as more
proficient.
The library browsing sessions offered pockets of choice and fluid practices, where
students weren’t necessarily expected to have the same literacy experience. For that
reason, Mark had some freedom to browse, more so than in the classroom where he
wasn’t expected to only read on his level. However, Mark, Carla, and James all
positioned the library as “school,” where these pockets of more fluid practices were
situated within larger notions about what literacy looked like (reading a book cover to
cover, and using strategies to figure out words), and were often fleeting. The library was
a space that was inherently networked to various other spaces and discourses within the
school.
Conclusion: Library as a Space of Contradiction
For many students, the library was a space of play, and yet at other times, this
play was closed down. This play will be detailed more fully in the chapter that follows.
Deborah exercised agency in the space, leading and facilitating read-alouds and

165
prompting students to engage in literacy in various ways. At other times, students took
over and used the space in the ways that allowed them to construct social spheres with
more playful tendencies. For some, like Nikki, this meant individual spaces to read. For
others, this was highly social and playful. Regardless, the library shifted across these
times and events, trading and shifting power simultaneously. The library was a space
where individuals constructed spaces for themselves, and simultaneously constructed
identities in the process. However, “a social stance, though, can only be negotiated, not
assumed. That is, when language users position themselves in a certain social place, they
also negotiate the positions of others” (Dyson, 1993, p. 58). For James, the way that he
socially positioned himself was contingent on those around him.
Ultimately the library was an “other space” (Foucault, 1986), distinct from the
classroom space and yet contingent on the classroom space all at the same time. Because
the library still operated within the larger school institution, the constraints on schools
permeated all school spaces, including the library. As Schmidt (2017) contends, borders
are markers of difference. While the library may be a space where more choice, play, and
inquiries are possible, even these moments are fleeting. The next chapter of this
dissertation will explore these themes through the interactions between my focal students,
their relationships with one another, and their relationships with the library space. In the
chapter that follows, I will highlight the ways in which these moments are produced even
within the larger accountability practices.

166

Chapter V
FLUIDITY WITHIN A CONTESTED SPACE

Alyson: “Do you ever play with your books?”
Carla: “Sometimes, so like, I don’t throw them around because that wouldn’t be
respectful. I just like, try to be funny with them. Like, ‘hello, I’m a monster!’” (motions
book opening like a mouth) (2/3/2017 interview with Carla, p. 4)
In the quote above, Carla demonstrated an inherent tension that she feels in the
library—the need to be a respectful and diligent reader, and the youthful desire to play. It
is this tension that I explore in this analysis chapter. The previous chapter explored the
library as a networked space, one that was malleable and often shifted according to
broader institutional pressures. These networks constructed the library as a liminal space
that morphed in response to pressures and yet simultaneously retained principles of
choice and inquiry. Often, the moments of possibility where students did take up notions
of choice, and demonstrated agency therein, occurred in the Thirdspace “cracks” (Soja,
1996), where the normalized pattern of library sessions were disrupted, even if
momentarily.
The library was not a container, rather it was situated within the larger school, and
those larger discourses flowed in (and out) of the library space (Leander et al., 2010).
Sarah Pink (2008) has argued: “ethnographic places are not simply made in the moments
that they are lived. Rather, they are crafted over longer periods of interaction and
intellectual activity” (p. 190). In this case study of the library, I positioned the library as
constructed over multiple moments in time and through interaction with multiple
individuals. Therefore, while I have argued that the library at City Partnership School

167
was largely an extension of the classroom, I also documented pockets of more fluid
literacy practices and possibility that opened and closed, where students constructed a
different a different kind of space, one that was often unexpected. Like the library, these
pockets, too, were contingent rather than permanent openings.
Soja (1996) argues that theorizing the Thirdspace must be left deliberately open;
“we must always be moving on to new possibilities and places” (p. 82). The very notion
of Soja’s (1996) Thirdspace arises from the unexpected. Other scholars in the fields of
language and literacy (Gutiérrez et al., 1995) have similarly framed Thirdspace as the
intersection of official and unofficial spaces. Nonetheless, it was a critical and flexible
site of continual change and was where discourses of power became concretized into
practice. To think spatially means to move beyond the concrete towards recognizing
spaces as also conceived (Leander et al., 2010; Soja, 1996) and having the ability to
shape what is seen as possible as an interrelation of materials, bodies, and language. To
think highlight different aspects of discursive space, then, I seek to privilege Thirdspace
because of its potential to critique and re-imagine the possibilities of space, in larger
efforts to shed light on how space produces and reproduces injustice (Soja, 1996).
As in the previous chapter, to examine literacy practices across space, I took up
the artifacts that I had from this dissertation study (interview transcripts, spatial maps,
and student-created products) and examined them both as products that narrated entire
literacy events (Jones et al., 2016), as well as looked at individual parts of the artifact. As
in the previous chapter, I took up “hacking” (Schmidt, 2017) as an analytical method,
where I pulled apart moments and artifacts, in efforts to reconsider potential meanings
through the lens of disruption. Schmidt (2017) also hacks across artifacts, in that she

168
takes themes that seem common and looks across those individual moments. In this
chapter, I traced instances of Thirdspace, which often took the forms of student play and
their traversing of space, in order to identify and construct larger patterns across themes,
individual students, and in library sessions. In doing so, I sought to find the tensions and
complexity across moments where students exhibited agency, engaged in play, and
ultimately produced different kinds of discursive space.
Importantly, I position all focal students as agentic, who—quite expertly—
managed and constructed social relationships (Dyson, 1993) across time and space as
these pockets of more fluid literacy practices opened, closed, and morphed. Studying
space also necessitates studying how individuals interact with one another in the space
(Leander, 2002). Therefore, in this chapter, I looked particularly at the spaces of
possibility that emerged in the library.
Library as Possibility: “The Library Isn’t a Leveled Space”
The library maintained its own unique discursive space and culture that could not
be reduced to a mirroring of classroom reading practices. Like the classroom, the library
was not a static room contained within four walls, but was produced by distinct materials,
energies, resources, information flows, as well as individuals and the histories that they
brought (Leander et al., 2010). Situated within a larger institution held accountable for
student outcomes, and yet not directly responsible for them, the library was left open to
possibility yet remained fraught with contractions. This was evident right from the
beginning of the school year, as Amanda began to welcome new students.

169
To illustrate the ethos of the school library during a particular slice of time, I
spatially narrate one event (Jones et al., 2016) where more fluid practices circulated. On
September 22nd, 2016 the students participated in browsing for the first time, illuminating
how this event differed from book selection in the classroom. One student ran over to a
favorite area, the “spinny” shelf, and shouted excitedly, “these books are so cool!” Six
students sat quietly on the bench, each reading their own book. Two girls shared an
Elephant and Piggie book on the rug. Amanda looked at them, asking, “are you taking
turns being Elephant and Piggie?” with a smile on her face. The students looked up,
cheering “yeah!” (9/22/2016 FN, p. 5-6) as the room filled with voices. Overall, students
moved around the space with ease. Another student, for example, approached the two
reading Elephant and Piggie to read them a joke aloud from her joke book. Other students
milled around the spinny shelf looking at books. Two other students sat in the comfy
chair together, reading their own books (a Lego book, and a fairytale) and yet pausing
periodically to discuss with one another in hushed tones. During this short event, the
speeds, rhythms, and frequencies of movement changed and varied (some students ran
and shouted with excitement, while others read quietly) both across the Firstspace and
Secondspace, as students engaged with available materials and with one another in a
dialectical manner. The students in this event weren’t merely situated passively in the
space but created different energy flows through their movement and language practices.
As I walked around, taking notes, Amanda approached me, mentioning how much
she loved to have the students browse. She said that if it were up her, she would have
students browse the entire time, hinting at the flexibility that she had in the space, but
only to a certain extent. I, too, noticed the sense of the space that oriented students

170
towards specific ways of engaging with texts (Jones et al., 2016), where Amanda had to
do little management. She agreed, noting that the students “need this time” (9/22/2016
FN, p. 6). This sentiment was echoed months later, when Amanda reflected back on her
time in the library after she was moved back into the position of classroom teacher, when
she gave students the time to do what they wanted. We discussed the need for students to
just “be kids,” and she elaborated:
I even had Legos, wait, I had Legos. They would build, right? If you wanted to
say, ‘Alright. How can we take that and make it so every area is academic?’ I’m
sure I could have. I’m sure I could have put a task card with the Legos, where it
said, after you create something, write a piece about it, or write a story that goes
with the, you know… I’m sure there’s a way to tie all of this into academics. I
also like the idea of letting kids be kids. After six hours and 20 minutes of a day
of having to be students, that it’s okay. They’re not going to lose intelligence
because they got to play for 40 minutes or 30 minutes, because by the time they
get set up it was half an hour of their day, once a week, or once every two weeks.
You know what I mean? (12/9/2016 INT, p. 11)
Amanda then brought up how a fourth-grade teacher had asked her to help a
student pick books on his “level,” and she seemed conflicted by this. Amanda explained
to the teacher that she didn’t have the books in the library leveled. She also explained that
she wanted the library to be a space where students deliberately did not read on their
levels—instead, she noted that she believed students should have choice in the library.
Selecting an easier book that they loved, for instance, Amanda stated was equally as
powerful for students as reading one on their level, as they were expected to do in the
classroom. These sentiments about what students should read were political (Janks,
2009), reflecting Amanda’s larger beliefs and priorities about what she counted as
literacy, and what role the library might play in supporting students’ literacy
engagements. While the library physically wasn’t leveled, this statement conveyed much
larger ideological and political notions about the possibilities that the space held, and yet

171
did not hold (Jones et al., 2016). While the physical material—the Firstspace—mattered,
it was larger notions of access to the materials that produced more equitable space. While
the library could never be completely removed from the assessment discourses, Amanda
made it clear that to others that the library could not be reduced to a classroom.

Figure 14. Map from the first browsing period (9/22/2016).
During this same event, the first session where students were invited to browse,
the fluidity of the library space unfolded right before our eyes. As evidenced by the
movements mapped in my fieldnotes (see Figure 14), early in the browsing period
students congregated around the bookshelves, making selections. As time progressed,
students engaged in much more movement, leaving groups of peers to join others, and
traversing the library space to select new books. For example, a student ran up to
Amanda and I, holding The Diary of a Wimpy Kid (Kinney, 2007), exclaiming, “this is
words and comics!” Importantly, this student was permitted to do this, and not

172
admonished for running or shouting, as the space was left open to exploration. A group of
boys looked at Lego books, and more boys soon joined in, using their literacy practices to
negotiate social relationships. Other students sat in the other comfy chair, reading.
Amanda looked through the bin of Elephant and Piggie books, held one up and said, “I
don’t know this book!” She began reading it to two girls who stood next to her. Soon,
more students joined in until Amanda had a cluster of students around her (see Figure 14)
and the Mo Willems book bin. Other students periodically came up to Amanda and
showed her things in the books they were reading, to which she listened and responded.
Beyond engagement with the physical texts, Amanda had worked to construct a
library where students had flexibility of choice, where they were permitted to read and
socialize at leisure. She did this through available materials, arrangement of the physical
room, but also in how she set the tone for movement, noise, and bodies—the larger social
context produced in part from the physical arrangements (Jones et al., 2016). All these
visible choices conveyed her beliefs about reading, and ultimately, the purpose of
libraries. It was a pleasant, warm, and friendly place in these moments, and in many that
followed.
The ability of students to engage in these movements, encouraged by Amanda’s
passion for children’ literature, helped to construct a browsing session that buzzed with
children’s murmurings, relaxed movement, and fun. While students were permitted and
even encouraged to move, in tracing these movements, the spaces within the library that
are favored by students began to emerge (Schmidt, 2017). Namely, these were the
comfortable places to read, and the spaces with the popular books—the series displayed
on the spinny shelf and the beloved Mo Willems shelves. This first browsing session set a

173
tone for the rest of the year, and I found myself looking forward to my visits. As such,
my own positionality—as a researcher, as a teacher, as a reader—was ever-present in this
work and must be continually examined (Peshkin, 1988), as my presence continually
shifted the space and my interpretations of the space. Because I enjoy visits to the library
in my personal and professional life, I often romanticized the library, particularly as it
related and contrasted with other school spaces. These attitudes influenced my noticings
and representations of the library, the study participants, and my own research
experiences. I consistently sought to interrogate my “readings” of the library in light of
these multiple positionings.
Selection of Books Shaping the Library
Each of my focal students expressed an enjoyment in choosing books in the
library, some because of their favorite authors and others because of the possibilities
afforded by a wider selection. Selecting books, nonetheless, was essential to the
experience of the library. While book shopping in classrooms followed a relatively
predictable structure, one where students read books within appropriate levels of
complexity and received instruction, the library sessions were varied both in their
structure (responses or browsing) and in their ethos.
For example, on February 1st, 2017, I observed James’ interactions with his peers,
and with texts, during a browsing session. Notably, James chose to read only Elephant
and Piggie books during this session, and he read many of them. When dismissed to
browse, James selected one book, and read it to himself while sitting in the comfy chair.
In fact, he read the book aloud, and did the voices for each character. He continued like
this for about five minutes. When he finished with the first book, James switched it for a

174
different Elephant and Piggie book and did the same. Upon finishing the second text, he
moved to the bench, where several of his peers were reading a different book with the
same characters. James watched them for several minutes, though he didn’t say anything.
Deborah, moving through the room, asked James where his book was, as he was standing
with nothing in his hands. He then turned to the other students on the bench, asking “can
I read that when you are done?” Shortly after, they handed James the book. He moved
across the room, back near the comfy chair (although not in it, as another student was).
Two students listened to James as he read aloud while performing the character voices.
When he finished, he got another book, seemingly paying them no mind (2/1/2017 Map).
James expertly used the time and space to engage with texts by his favorite author, and
his desire to engage with these texts—Firstspace materials—often necessitated and
brought on his movement (importantly, this was not the case for all students). Carla, on
the other hand, performed less movement in many of the browsing sessions that I
witnessed. On January 10th, 2017, for example, Carla read Cat in the Hat (Seuss, 1957)
with a partner for about 15 minutes when seated on the bench, and moved only when
called to line up, where she walked to the line, holding hands with her partner (1/10/2017
Map). While James moved freely, Carla often preferred to produce a calm and quiet
social space in which to read. Both ways of being a reader in the library were accepted, as
the social and discursive spaces produced were not unitary but allowed for multiple
relations with text.
Interested not only in my own observations of how, what, and when students
selected texts in the library, I conducted interviews with each focal student in efforts to
understand how the students perceived their opportunities for text selection in the library.

175
In doing so, one clear realization stood out—that each child loved coming to the library
to read books, though this manifested differently. The texts they loved, and their reasons
varied, but the physical books nonetheless were part of what made the space special, as if
offering them multiple ways to reimagine their identities in relation to the books. While
the direct freedom from assessment, and shifting openness of the library, allowed for
various types of engagements with texts, as I examine in this chapter, “love of books”
still operated within traditional notions of reading which tend to see reading as decoding
and interpreting print, despite advances in the field with multimodal texts (Bearne, 2005).
For some students, like Carla, the library offered a wide selection of old favorite
books and new discoveries. Carla was a reader who performed in the ways that
traditionally accepted and encouraged in the culture of schooling, very consistently
displaying the behaviors taught and expected in school as she engaged with books, both
individually and with her peers. Carla mentioned Mo Willems books (especially the
pigeon books), Critter Club (Barkley, 2013), and Starring Grace (Hoffman, 2001)
(10/27/2016 INT, p. 6) as current favorites. For James, the library was a space where he
could revisit the books that he was passionate about, not necessarily desiring or needing
to expand his interests. James, too, professed to “love reading”, and especially Mo
Willems books. Each day over the course of my data collection, James selected Mo
Willems books to read, and often acted out the dialogue so characteristic of these specific
texts. While each of these students, then, demonstrated an emotional response to reading
as they brought their own personal and social factors into the transaction with the text
(Rosenblatt, 1969), this was revealed in different ways.

176
During an interview with Carla that I conducted on October 27 th, 2016, I first
asked her to take photographs of the library (see Figures 15 and 16) in efforts to
understand which books and spaces in the library she gravitated towards and why. Of the
five images that Carla took, two were of books that she expressed enjoyment in reading.
By focusing in on the book titles, Carla positioned books as central to her library
experience. That is, the library was the library in large part because of the Firstspace
materiality, but also in the Secondspace discourses that became produced through the
materiality, as Carla referenced below.

Figure 15. Carla’s picture of the spinny
shelf (10/27/2016).

Figure 16. Carla’s picture of the Mo
Willems book (10/27/2016).

After reviewing the images that she took, I transcribed the following with Carla.
First, I asked Carla if she liked the library (she did) and why, to which she responded,
“because it’s a nice, calm, and pleasant place” (10/27/2016 INT, p. 4). I probed her then
to consider the differences between her classroom and the library:

177
Alyson: Now I’m wondering, what is different when you think about your
classroom and the library? What’s different?
Carla: Uhh… well, my classroom doesn’t have this much books.
Alyson: Do you wish that they were more similar?
Carla: Uhh… yeah, cause I want a bigger room. And I want more books to read.
Alyson: Mmm…
Carla: Cause I really like reading. (10/27/2017 INT, p. 5)
Here, Carla described books as integral to her library experience, specifically
“more books,” hinting at her desire to select what she reads from a collection—a
collection that diverged from the bins of books in her classroom, from which she was
assigned a level. She didn’t reference volume of reading here, but rather, reading as
something that she wanted to do—it was driven by interest, not assessment. This
sentiment was partially produced through her interaction with me, however, as my
language as the researcher positioned the library as different than the classroom—an
“other” space. However, Carla also constructs a narration of the space from her
perspective, with language such as “nice, calm, and pleasant,” consistent with the quiet
spaces to read that she often constructed on her own or with a partner while in the library.
Like Carla, James also loved coming to the library, and in fact, described having
even more specific interests in texts than Carla. When I asked him about the library, he
always turned to the books, speaking about specific authors (Mo Willems) and characters
(Knuffle Bunny and Trixie) that he connected with. My work with James began by
asking him to take photographs of the library and talk around those photographs
(11/3/2016 INT). All five of the photographs that James took were of books, whereas
Carla also documented the rug and smartboard. When asked why he took these particular
pictures, he responded, “because I like it,” and “because I like Mo Willems books” (p. 2).
When I commented that all of his pictures were of books, he said “because… I think

178
about what the books I picked” (p. 3). Like Carla, James characterized the library by the
presence of books, and in particular, by the presence of specific books. By continuing to
physically gravitate towards these texts, and making statements such as, “the library has
so many books” (11/3/2016 INT, p. 4) and “the library has, also, books that I never read”
(11/3/2016 INT, p. 5), James demonstrated the relationship between his socially-situated
literacy practices and the physical and the material space. His engagements with the
materiality of the library, and access to it, shaped the discourses that he took up.

Figure 17. James’ picture of Knuffle Bunny Figure 18. James’ picture of the joke books
Too (11/3/2016).
(11/3/2016).
I asked James what he saw as the difference between the library and classroom,
and then opened up our conversation more broadly:
James: It’s different because the library has, also, books that I never read. And in
the classroom, I have books that I always read.
Alyson: Why do you think that there are some books in the library that you don’t
read?
James: Because I haven’t looked at all of the books. (11/3/2016 INT, p. 5)
Alyson: Is there anything else that you want to tell me, James? Before we finish?

179
James: I want to tell you that when I’m in the library, I always get to see Knuffle
Bunny books, Mo Willems books, every kind of book.
Alyson: And what do you think about that?
James: I think about that… That I’m happy. (11/3/2016 INT, p. 8)
The library is something that James looked forward to because he got to engage
with these texts as he pleased, whereas in the classroom he was encouraged to read more
challenging texts (detailed in the previous chapter). In referencing Knuffle Bunny, Too
(Willems, 2007) and Mo Willems, James positioned these texts as old friends that he
looked forward to revisiting by choice. These multiple visits to Mo Willems were
confirmed as I observed him spending months returning to Mo Willems texts and asking
his peers to swap with him so that he could read them again. This was not only evident
during the browsing period on February 1st, 2017 but others as well. For example, on
November 10th, 2016 James again spent the browsing period reading Mo Willems books,
and even play fought with another student over book (11/10/2016 Map).
These events, surrounding the Mo Willems texts, were not incidental, but part of
James’ production of space—the space that he desired to produce in the library. In
referencing “I always get to see Knuffle Bunny books” (11/3/2016 INT, p. 8), he made it
clear that the library had a level of comfort or familiarity for him, because he “always”
got to see these books. This comfort was remade each time he revisited the library and
these texts. The material objects were a focal point for James, and therefore, integral to
his experience as a reader in the library. Because James’ readerly identity was
constructed across multiple spaces within the school, the library mattered as a space
where he could engage with texts differently, affording him access to texts based solely
on enjoyment. As we consider which students are encouraged to select books based on

180
interest, and which are most constrained by the discourses of reading levels, equity merits
a place in this conversation.
Nikki was also a reader who was enthralled with books. Though she mentioned
Mo Willems as one favorite author, Nikki’s affinity for books was more dispersed across
authors and genres. Whereas other students in her class carved out social relationships
during their browsing periods, leisurely reading and engaging with texts, Nikki seemed to
be more solitary. Rather than roaming and picking up/abandoning books, she would often
immediately choose somewhere to sit, and read books cover to cover before exchanging
them. For example, January 11th, 2017, Nikki read two different Fly Guy (Arnold, 2006)
books on her own as students around her browsed; similarly, she claimed the comfy chair
quickly and read Scaredy Squirrel (Watt, 2008) on February 8th, 2017. During the
browsing sessions on December 13th, 2016 and January 25th, 2017, Nikki read quietly for
a sustained amount of time (over ten minutes).
Wanting to unpack Nikki’s literacy practices, during my first interview with her
(10/20/2016), I asked if she liked the library and why, to which she responded “yeah.
Because… I like to read Mo Willems books” (10/20/2016 INT, pp. 1-2). However, in
addition to the texts themselves, other Firstspace objects and the physical organization of
the objects also influenced the ways in which Nikki felt about the library. For example,
Nikki not only loved to read Mo Willems books, but she preferred to read them on the
comfy chairs. This pairing of the text with the environment, Firstspace notions, seemed
significant to her. Both the materials in the library, and the arrangement of those
materials, helped to produce a Secondspace in which Nikki could engage with the books
that she pleased, in the way that she pleased.

181
Nikki noted the differences between the library and her classroom in our first
interview (10/20/2016 INT, p. 3):
It’s that [in the classroom] you don’t have that much bookshelves. And we
don’t have, like, lots of like a place to read and a place to sit. Well, we do have
chairs. But, that place is for you to read, and we don’t have browsing time.
In her characterization, Nikki linked the material and embodied reading practices
of the library to the books themselves. The way that Nikki engaged in the space,
therefore, was shaped by the physical and social aspects of the library, but the social
space was simultaneously shaped by her decisions and behaviors about how she might be
a reader in the space. For example, the decision to sit in the comfy chair by herself during
each library period was a choice constructed out of the materials available to Nikki, as
well as her own desires for the space. The library was both a process of continual
negotiation by Nikki and her peers, as they made and remade those choices, but it was
also a product of those interactions (Leander & Sheehy, 2004). Nikki not only engaged in
shaping the space around her by carving out moments of solitude in the comfy chairs or
selecting different texts, but the space that she constructed had implications for other
students as well. The multiple discursive spaces produced across library sessions were
networked, as Nikki’s actions set other social interactions in motion. My analysis of
Nikki, and other focal children, aims to “recognize children and youth as subjects who
enact agency in creative ways as they figure out who they can and cannot be in different
contexts” (Jones et al., 2016, p. 1152). Nikki’s claiming of particular texts or places to sit
not only spoke to her own identity as a reader, but these practices also opened and closed
opportunities for other students as they shaped and reshaped space together.

182
Each student demonstrated an affinity for, and comfort with, the school library,
quickly citing their love of books. Carla and James, for example, foregrounded books in
their images while Nikki discussed books as a cornerstone of the library. As Schmidt
(2017) contends, any photograph speaks volumes about the photographer, who selects,
and positions the camera in relation to the materials. In positioning particular books and
places in the library as essential to their library experiences, each student made a
statement about what he or she valued. In part, they also claimed who they were as
readers in this space, as they hinted at what the space offered—an opportunity to read
how and what they love.
Sharing stories with one another. Because Carla and James described their
desire to share books with others, I posed the question to both (1/19/2017 INT) about
their favorite part of library, and these were their responses (p. 8):
Carla: [Pauses] I like reading independently… because… Actually, I like reading
to someone because then they get to hear my special story that I really like. And
then I, I get to… then they can share their special story with me.
James: I like to read with friends…
Carla: Me too.
Alyson: You like to share your stories with them, and maybe hear new books?
James: And even people who feel like they don’t want to read these stories, and
they want to have somebody else’s stories… and they just fight over… they can
both read the stories together instead of one person reading the story.
Within these responses, a love for sharing books with others emerged, rather than
reading independently, as students were typically expected to do in school settings. The
library experience, for Carla and James, was inherently social. While they did engage in
partner reading in their classrooms, it was prescribed in a way that the library was free
from. Therefore, while I have argued previously that my focal children held dominant
notions of what “counted” as reading (e.g. readers use strategies), the excerpt

183
demonstrates how this was also fluid, as students moved away from the desire for reading
to be an individual act. This was evident when Carla shifted her thinking in the moment
(transcript excerpt). This was an example of student agency, for “as Rockwell (1999:
122) argues, the larger social processes of children’s lives always ‘penetrate the space of
schooling,’ although, I would add, they are not always recognized, acknowledged or
responded to” (Dyson, 2001, p. 15). As Carla demonstrated, students enacted agency in
bringing spaces of play and imagination to the library, though assuredly some forms of
play were valued more than others. According to Carla, “sharing special stories” was one
reason she enjoyed the library, as a space to connect with her friends in meaningful ways.
Her comments signaled the importance of the library’s discursive space, where beyond
specific materials, what engagements are possible was linked to what behaviors, attitudes,
and embodiments the students took up. In constructing particular types of discursive
space, some more privileged than others, students were able to garner spatial capital.
For Carla and James, as proficient readers according to school assessments,
partner reading and engagement with texts was a welcome form of play, what I argue in
later section of this chapter constitute a Thirdspace. While still a conventional reading
activity, this format allowed students to dialogue playfully (Cohen, 2011) without the
presence of assessments or even adult interactions. As noted previously, James could
often be found reading Mo Willems books, reading them aloud and acting them out.
During a browsing session on November 10th, 2016, James started out reading a Mo
Willems book to himself, and then transitioned to reading it with a partner. Several
minutes later, James stretched out on the floor as he continued reading with his partner.
He got up to get another Mo Willems book, chatting briefly with another nearby student.

184
That student, his original partner, and James all returned to reading in their original spot,
each with a different Mo Willems text. The students then began play fighting over the
books, seemingly to determine who could read what by raising their voices and gesturing
boldly. They quickly reverted back to reading and walked to the line together when called
to line up (11/10/2016 Map). This literacy event will be described later in the chapter
with more depth.
In a browsing session on December 16th, 2016 (see Figure 19), I observed Carla
interacting with peers in ways that both negotiated the use of physical space, as well as
constructed a particular kind of social space. Carla, originally seated in one of the comfy
chairs, shared the chair with another student. They seamlessly switched between reading
their own books, and then transitioned to show each other pages. When her chair partner
got up to get a new book, Carla stretched out on the chair as a way of “saving” the space
for her friend. In other words, she carved out a space to be a reader, and to be social, all at
the same time.
In this way, Carla and her peer “claimed” physical space in efforts to carve out the
social space in which they desired to read. This fluidity allowed Carla to exert agency in
producing space. While physically saving the chair for her friend, Carla and her peer
simultaneously negotiated the social space, exerting their power in sitting where—and
with whom—they wanted. However, Carla did this playfully (Cohen, 2011), so as not to
disrupt the quiet and calm environment that surrounded her and not to deviate from what
was expected of her. No other students had access to the chair because Carla and her
friend wanted to read together, demonstrated how sharing texts and stories with her
friends shaped the social space, but often dialectically impacted the physical space.

185

Figure 19. Spatial map from Carla’s browsing (12/16/2016).
Dyson (2008) argues, in terms of student writing, that “not only were children
socialized into practices, but they also exercised agency and recontextualized official
practices, giving them relevance and meaning in their ongoing lives” (p. 152). Carla and
James were socialized into particular notions of reading, where reading meant using
strategies and staying focused. However, they also took up reading with friends
agentically in a space where this was permitted, producing a new kind of peer culture.
They stayed within what was deemed appropriate and what was expected, but also used
this opportunity to engage with their peers and with texts in playful ways (and in ways
not always permitted in the classroom), though neither pushed these boundaries too far. I
argue that through a more fluid space (Leander et al., 2010), students were permitted (and
perhaps implicitly encouraged) to be more agentic in constructing their readerly identities

186
with their peers. However, while students were afforded more freedom to engage with
texts in the library, certain literacy practices were valued over others. Carla and James
adhered to the schooled literacy practices privileged within the current culture of
accountability (Olivant, 2015).
While children exhibited patterns in their reading preferences and engagements,
these were not overly deterministic. For example, on January 10 th, 2017, Carla utilized
the browsing period during the library in a very different way than described previously.
While seated next to a peer, Carla read Amazing Grace (Hoffman, 1991) on her own—a
text that she referenced as a favorite during an interview. She demonstrated some
movement in selecting books but was largely independent. This was different than I had
seen her in the past. Perhaps her connection to the text prompted this desire to engage
with it on her own. This shift suggests the flexibility of the space, in the sense that
students created different spaces within the larger space. Furthermore, it demonstrated
Carla’s ability to use the library’s fluidity to her own advantage, shifting her own fluid
literacy practices across time (Moje & Luke, 2009). Some days (12/16/2016), she chose
to engage in playful literacies with her peers, while at other times (1/10/2017), Carla
opted to produce a solitary, quiet space in which to engage independently with a book.
Other times, Carla constructed a space that was somewhat in-between social and solitary,
where she chose to read quietly with a partner, but didn’t traverse the library space until
students were directed to line up (11/10/2016 Map). Carla demonstrated across time, that
discursive Secondspace is not stagnant, nor are the literacy practices that construct it.
The significance of Mo Willems books. While relying on my theoretical
framework in looking for potential themes across my data, I also examined my data

187
inductively (Marshall & Rossman, 2011) for unexpected patterns. While a general love of
books and sharing those books with others was obvious, all of my focal students
mentioned one particular author over and over—Mo Willems. In fact, the beginning of
the school year, while Amanda was still in the library, set the tone for Mo Willems texts
as central to student experiences in the library. During the first browsing session, for
example, Amanda and students crowded around the Mo Willems bins, prominently
displayed at student eye level. Holding up a book, exclaiming “I don’t know this book!”
(9/22/2016 FN, p. 7), Amanda invited students to engage right from the get-go. I began to
wonder about the significance, then, of Mo Willems texts, and how this particular author
informed the ways in which students engaged in the library and what texts they gravitated
toward.
While James described a penchant for Mo Willems in particular, he was certainly
not the only child in this class, school, or in general to love the texts. Mo Willems, as an
author, deliberately writes his texts with students in mind, attempting to honor and
engage their personalities and their intellect. In an interview, he stated “I respect children.
I never will write a book that isn’t on their side” (Cooper & Schutt, 2007, p. 27), in
response to questions about the popularity of his texts. The texts at James’ level (J and K)
might be categorized as beginning chapter books, such as the Henry and Mudge (Rylant,
1996) series or the Frog and Toad (Lobel, 2003) series, where students were required to
consider multiple characters, larger amounts of dialogue, and more complex plots. On the
other hand, Mo Willems texts are shorter, often using all capital letters, exaggerated
punctuation, and speech bubbles for a playful and lively effect. The Elephant and Piggie

188
series texts, written entirely with speech bubbles—short phrases, words, or utterances—
lend themselves to animated voices, expressive reading, and acting out.
As Dyson (1995) would contend, student identities are shaped by the literacy
resources at their disposal, but it was also the social interactions that mattered in these
identity constructions. For James, the texts that he selected (whether leveled texts in his
classroom or the Mo Willems books in the library) matter. His ability to select the texts
that he wanted gave James a reason to interact socially with his peers and to play in ways
not permitted in the classroom. In other words, the Firstspace materials themselves
impacted the social moves that James took up. In turn, the library mattered to James,
because it was a space where he could consistently select Mo Willems books without
penalty.
The nature and design of the Mo Willems texts notwithstanding, Amanda
influenced what seemed like a school-wide obsession. When I noticed the extent to which
Mo Willems books were selected during every browsing session—made easy due to the
prominent bins placed within arm’s reach—I asked her about this, even after she had
been displaced as the librarian. She responded with:
I don’t know how much of it is my influence, but I can definitely say with
100% certainty that I’ve noticed my whole year last year and even in classrooms
in general when I do read alouds. If I’m reading a book that’s not just a good book
but a book that I personally love more than life itself, the... like it definitely
transfers to the kids, for sure. I wouldn’t doubt if my love for Mo Willems
transferred if not to the whole school because I think everyone knows how much I
love him. That goes back to when I first, first, first, first, first knew about Knuffle
Bunny. (12/9/2016 INT, p. 4)
In the library, pockets of freedom (often from reading levels) emerged, where the
texts that students choose were based on desire, foregrounded before assessments or
proficiency scales. Although the materials themselves (the Mo Willems texts) produced

189
this love and engagement, Amanda was also an active agent in encouraging this reading
practice. After all, students in part gravitated toward the books because she professed a
love for them and displayed multiple bins of the books prominently. Because the library
was a deliberately unleveled space (New York City School Library System, n.d.), there
was an openness to privileging the emotional response to a text, rather than only
“counting” cognitive reading trajectories as measured by text leveling. This
foregrounding of emotional responses remained complicated, however, as these sorts of
engagements existed, but often fell by the wayside as student selection of texts was
regulated by both level and content, by both peers and librarian. In other words, the
discourses of assessment, specifically reading levels, seeped into the library, as I discuss
in later sections of this chapter.
The Affordances of Freedom of Movement
Each of my focal students exercised mobility as they navigated the discourses of
the school library, using the pockets of fluidity in the library to their advantage. Leander
et al. (2010) prompt us to see spaces of learning as intersections, rather than parking lots,
and ask questions about how the mobility afforded to certain students can be read through
the lens of equity. Carla and Mark, for example, both demonstrated a tendency to move
around the library, although this movement—and their identities as readers—was
perceived differently because their positioning by others also took into account ability
levels. Carla was a reader who was free to move about the library; however, she was not
viewed as “off-task” when she did this, demonstrating how differently student actions can
be read, depending on their status in the space and also within the school, where students’
reading proficiencies and behaviors were scrutinized. Mark, on the other hand, was

190
labeled as a struggling reader, and therefore his movement was sometimes read as
avoidance. Carla, a “benchmark” reader who exemplified the behaviors of a good reader
(Cook-Gumperz, 1986), had freedom of movement. Where readers who were marked as
less proficient may have felt restricted or less welcome within school spaces, Carla
traversed these boundaries with ease. Just as Zacher (2009) found, those students marked
with more privilege—whether it be racial privilege or privilege based on ability and
behavioral markers—often had a greater command of space and were comfortable in
multiple spaces. Carla, in fact, was afforded both. In an interview on October 27 th, 2016
(p. 6-7), I asked Carla how she felt about the library:
Carla: I feel, like, excited… because, I, I can’t wait till like maybe, I’ll find some
new books that I haven’t read before. Or, or, I really want to get a book that, like,
I really love. So uhh, yeah.
Alyson: Mmm hmm. And when you leave the school library, when your library
time is over, how do you feel then?
Carla: Uhh… I still feel happy, because, you know.
Alyson: Because you get to go do something else?
Carla: Yeah.
During interviews Carla expressed being happy across multiple spaces and
seemed to believe that the library and the classroom were not that different (save for the
number of books), with socially-situated language such as: “I feel, like, excited” and “I
still feel happy” to describe her literacy practices When I asked Carla who could be a
good reader in the library, Carla answered “anybody,” and when asked who could be a
good reader in the classroom, again she responded “anyone, again” (12/8/2016 INT, pp.
5-6), linking the two spaces through their commonalities and discussing the space as open
to all readers. Because she positioned herself, and was seen by others, as a good reader,
Carla was able to feel validated and successful in the classroom and in the library. For all
students, language was a source of power (Luke, 1992), where the way people talked

191
about Carla’s ability, or Mark’s ability, over time played a large role in their own
identities as readers.
Carla didn’t differentiate her reading practices across the spaces, and her smaller
positioning shifts often went unnoticed because she was “wide-awake to the expectations
and opportunities for literacy learning” (Siegel et al., 2008, p. 89). Carla was undoubtedly
social, and yet she knew how to manage these social behaviors so that she was still
marked as a “good girl” (Miller, 2005) and as a strong student. Carla demonstrated
evidence of reading quietly with a partner (11/10/2017 FN), reading playfully with peers
(12/16/2017 FN), and reading alone (1/10/2017 FN). Carla shifted the ways in which she
read seamlessly, although each of her behaviors were accepted in the library, so she was
given this freedom. However, Carla also shifted her positioning within the space
instantaneously. On January 12th, 2017, for example, she was chatting with friends at the
rug after a transition. When Deborah arrived, however, asking for attention, she quickly
turned around and sat in the position that Deborah requested (1/12/2017 FN, p. 3). Carla
knew when and how to be social, maneuvering herself physically depending on what was
expected and/or permitted. The social spaces that she produced were not static. However,
as I describe later in this chapter, a schooled demeanor can be paused to allow room for
students to be silly.
Mark knew how and when to be social, too, with the goal of finding success as a
reader despite the potential of others to perceive his movements as being “off-task.” For
Mark, different positioning across spaces often worked in his favor. For example, during
a browsing session on December 13th, 2016, Mark first spent ten minutes visiting the
nurse. When he returned, he selected a joke book, and read it alone while sitting on the

192
bench on the side of the room. Several minutes later, he walked to the other side of the
library, joining a group of students on the floor (12/13/2016 Map). Similarly, on January
11th, 2017, Mark first selected an Elephant and Piggie book when dismissed to browse,
and then quickly abandoned it to move across the room. Once he moved, Mark settled
near a friend and listened to him read. Switching again, Mark proceeded to wander
around the room, settling down with a different Elephant and Piggie book and reading it
cover to cover. When called to line up, Mark walked to the bin and finished the final
pages before putting the book away (1/11/2017 Map).
During a return visit to City Partnership School on May 15th, 2017, after leaving
the field, I again traced Mark strategically traversing space. He started by talking with
me, and then shortly after, visited the restroom. Upon his return, he joined a group of
students who were reading on the rug. When the space became crowded and noisy, he
inched away to read on his own. As Deborah redirected the now even larger group on the
rug, Mark walked over to the bench, holding a book and yet not reading it (5/15/2017
Map). Mark adeptly read the expectations set forth in the library and adjusted his
behavior accordingly. His movements were not random “placeless” acts, but were
products of Mark’s own desires, identity, and his reading of the expectations set forth in
the space. For instance, as he noticed the rug area becoming loud, he swiftly removed
himself, likely anticipating redirection (which he had experienced firsthand over the
course of the year). Mark engaged in producing space through the intersections in his
movement, selection of materials, and social connections with others during library
sessions.

193
Mark took up multiple positions in the library; sometimes he was playful yet
conscious of the watchful gaze of adults, other times he advocated for his reading level,
and still displayed the schooled literacies that were expected of him. Holland et al. (1998)
argued that in taking up analyses of identity, it’s important “to respect humans as social
and cultural and therefore bounded, yet to recognize the process whereby human
collectives and individuals often move themselves—led by hope, desperation, or even
playfulness” (pp. 6-7). That is, as individuals we have laminated identities and cultural
practices that are strong, and yet these are also not fixed. Carla adhered to the “good girl”
persona (Miller, 2005), and yet also broke from this; Mark loved to browse, and yet
sometimes became entranced in a single book. Students themselves had the power to
construct their own social worlds, by engaging or disengaging with different discourses,
and their subsequent positioning within these worlds.
Carving Out Solitary Space
Nikki’s production of space often diverged from that of the other students. Rather
than traversing multiple spaces, like Carla and Mark often did, Nikki selected and
cultivated spaces where she remained for most library periods, demonstrating that
production of space didn’t always mean continual movement, because discursive space is
fluid. Just because Nikki remained physically still, however, she still actively constructed
the space around her through her choices. She remained networked through her social
relations and materials, directing her flows of energy (Leander et al., 2010) for the
purpose of producing a quiet and calm space for herself.
Leander (2002) reminds us that space cannot be analytically extracted from the
activity that occurs within it. Turning my eye to the movement and activity that Nikki

194
took up in the library was essential to understanding how she read and constructed the
library. Diverging in other ways from her classmates, Nikki carved out space to read
alone, whereas Mark moved through space while creating new networks. Each of the
students took up or resisted discourses about literacy that were already in circulation
throughout the space, emphasizing some discourses over others.
On February 13th, 2017, I observed Nikki sitting in the comfy chair reading on her
own—a negotiation between her and the other students in the room. When dismissed to
browse, she hurried over to the chair to reserve that space for herself. She remained in
that chair for the remainder of the period, moving only when she desired a new book. In
overlaying portions of these fieldnotes with pieces of the multimodal map from January
25th, 2017, in efforts to see new patterns (Schmidt, 2017), the recurring nature of Nikki’s
movements and engagements became visible—the hurrying over to the comfy chair to
remain for most of the browsing session. Nikki seemed to know what the physical
arrangement of the comfy chair might provide for her in terms of a quiet space and made
both conscious and consistent efforts to take advantage of the opportunity to construct her
own reading experience. However, during the earlier read-aloud on January 25 th, 2017,
she had appeared slightly disengaged. When she entered the library, she sat down and
immediately began talking with friends. When the read-aloud began, she didn’t sit crisscross. Unlike Mark, who did sit criss-cross quietly, Nikki didn’t receive the external
validation—she didn’t get the tickets that the para-educator handed out to students (Mark
did receive a ticket). Yet, because she was constructed as a reader with a higher level,
these external validations were not consequential. This Secondspace interaction (through
the use of the Firstspace tickets), between Nikki and the para-educator created a

195
discursive space that afforded some students validation, and not others. Nikki did often
engage with me during my visits, and often asked what I was writing down, or in the
instance on December 13th, 2016 (see Figure 20), showed me what she was reading.

Figure 20. Spatial map of Nikki in the comfy chair (12/13/2016).
Furthermore, Nikki, unlike most other focal students, did not interact with her
classmates often. For this reason, most browsing sessions consisted of her carving out
space to read independently. However, Nikki also conversed more with adults than with
her own peers (11/9/2016 FN. p. 2). At times (e.g. 11/9/2016, 12/13/2016, 2/8/2017),
Nikki came over to me to chat—something that I didn’t often see her doing with her own
classmates. Dyson (2003) contends that socially, children use language and literacy to
participate with others and organize their social worlds (Dyson, 2003). For Nikki,
however, instead of using literacy to connect socially with others, she saw it as an
opportunity to read on her own. Importantly, the networks within the library allowed her

196
to make that choice, offering a physical environment with many different areas and
formats to be a reader.
Constructing Spaces of Play
As Holland et al (1998) argue, play is a central part of the social and cultural
worlds of children. While reading levels are an important part of the literacy experiences
that students have in schools, play offers them an opportunity to exercise agency and
shape their literate lives in new ways. Through play, the Thirdspace (Soja, 1996)
interruptions in the library became evident. Children’s play requires that adults relinquish
some degree of control, and thus free play is discouraged in most official school spaces.
Cohen (2011) draws on Sutton-Smith to argue that play is “imaginative, spontaneous,
unpredictable, flexible, and powerful” (p. 177). In Cohen’s (2011) study, students were
given more freedom and power to resist rules and expectations through pretending. As I
discuss in the next section, instances of play were a key characteristic of the more fluid
browsing sessions in the library. Rather than dismiss them as interruptions or “cracks”
(Soja, 1996), however, I foreground the Thirdspace to consider how the library might be
different.
Browsing as a Form of Play
The browsing sessions at City Partnership School were a time of greater mobility,
freedom in material selection, and heightened noise as students explored multiple modes
of literacy (Rowsell & Wohlwend, 2016). Using books to play fight, acting out scenes,
and crawl on the floor are all variations of play that I observed in the library at City
Partnership School throughout the duration of this study. Browsing periods were self-

197
directed, as students were simply told to “browse.” This phrase had a situated meaning in
the library (Gee, 2005), which connoted particular behaviors (select books, read them
calmly as you wish). However, it was also contextualized within the broader social
practices of reading for enjoyment. As Cohen (2011) found in her study of young
children’s play, play can be a mechanism for students to construct their own social
worlds, where they can take up different kinds of language and movement. While I have
argued in previous chapters that the library often conformed to dominant notions of
schooled literacy, the possibilities of play still existed in the library browsing sessions,
even if those possibilities were fleeting due to the discourses that travelled across the
artificial boundaries within a school.
During browsing sessions, Carla and James typically switched fluidly between
reading independently and reading with partners. Carla often stayed in the same physical
place, although she also chose to traverse space. James, on the other hand, exerted more
mobility across the physical room, as he moved about to shift between Mo Willems
books, using the material texts to guide these social practices. During an observation on
November 10th, 2016, James switched seamlessly between various “kinds” of reading.
In this scene, James was highly mobile within a small amount of physical space
and engaged playfully with his peers and with the texts. For example, he used the texts as
a way to partner read with other students around him, and even engaged in play fighting,
pretending to argue over who got to read which book. Irrespective of play fighting being
discouraged in the library, James engaged in this activity for a short period of time before
returning to his object (the Mo Willems book). Therefore, while one interpretation of this
movement in the broader context may be that James was wrapped up in the social aspect

198
of literacy and perhaps got “carried away,” “hacking” (Schmidt, 2017) this moment
suggests the potential for intentional resistance, where James knew that using the book in
these unofficial ways was not permitted, and yet engaged nonetheless. The play may have
“ended” as students were called to line up, however, the social interactions continued
even as students were called to line up.

Figure 21. Spatial map of Mo Willems play fighting (11/10/2016).
Of course, it’s important to note that while the students exhibited playful manners,
they do not necessarily characterize these literacy engagements as play. In an interview
(2/2/2017, pp. 3-4) with James, I decided to ask him directly about these episodes, having
seen him engage in what I had deemed play:
Alyson: James, do you ever get to play in the library?
James: No.
Alyson: So what do you do? What are some things that you normally do?
James: I read, and I respond, and also… I color.
Alyson: So, when you go to the library, do you feel like you get to do whatever
you want?

199
James: No…
Alyson: No? Who decides what you get to do?
James: Ms. Walter [Deborah].
Alyson: Hmm… What about during the browsing?
James: I still have to listen to Ms. Walter’s [Deborah] words.
While the students didn’t label these browsing sessions as play, given that play
was discouraged, there was a contrast in the browsing periods with the other ways that
students took up reading practices while in the library. When students were permitted to
browse after the read-aloud, there was often an influx of movement and noise, as students
were permitted to make active decisions in the moment about what to select, where to go,
and who to read with. As the browsing sessions began and movement and noise became
heightened, some of the decision-making power that adults held was relinquished. There,
the “unofficial culture” of children’s worlds became clearer (Hall, 2011) as playfulness
was able to overtake the established order of how things in schools are “supposed” to go.
These Thirdspace cracks in the expected discursive space, offered an opportunity for
students to be subversive, if they chose to do so. Importantly, these Thirdspace
interruptions often arose because of the power of the Mo Willems books for the students
in this study.
“Careful” Play—Carving Fluid Spaces
The library, as a space networked to a variety of books, notions of choice, and a
democratic history (albeit a segregated history of inequitable access), many times offered
a space of increasing flexibility for readers of all ability levels. The library became a
space of choice because of the variety of books offered; conversely, it sometimes became
an extension of the classroom as accountability discourses (such as reading levels), and
the restructuring of the library to accommodate assessment schedules, shifted these

200
networks of space. As James browsed, for example, he often engaged in multiple literacy
practices across the timeframe—talking with peers, acting out books, and reading alone.
Some of these practices also flowed into the classroom, for example, “acting out” the Mo
Willems books was a practice that didn’t fit within the norms of independent reading. In
other words, some literacy practices and discourses were welcomed across spaces, and
some were contained (or attempted to be contained), lest they disrupt the practices in the
classroom that students and teachers were expected to adhere to.
In observing this play, I considered Bahktin’s notion of carnival, a chaotic,
joyous, and often subversive time. As I examined the play fighting that James engaged in
as a “way of breaking down barriers, of overcoming power inequalities and hierarchies”
(Cohen, 2011, p. 178). The library might have offered a space for students to resist
reading hierarchies and traditional notions of adult authority, as the students were not
leveled in this space. Through play, they could rethink who can be a reader, using their
own socially-situated literacies to “sneak in” moments of play even during the official
reading time.
In my second interview with James, I asked him (December 15 th, 2017) to draw
what it looked like to read, and he drew a person smiling. He also included aspects of
“good reading”—such as looking at the pictures, imagining the book, and reading with
friends (see Figure 22). To James, sharing books with friends was not mutually exclusive
for displaying the expected behaviors, but in fact, often overlapped. Despite these two
realms often being treated as dichotomous in school, James demonstrates the complexity
of these overlapping practices in the library. When I asked him why he drew someone in
that way, he responded that “Because he already finished it [the book] and he was

201
excited” (p. 3). When I asked him if there was anything else that he wanted to draw, he
said “I want to add one more thing. And he was excited because he shared it with his
friend” (p. 3). I continued to probe, asking James if he shared books with friends in the
library, and he responded with “I like reading with friends but sometimes they don’t want
to read with me” (p. 3).

Figure 22. James’ picture of the library (12/15/2016).
James desired literacy to be a social experience, even if it didn’t always transpire
that way. At times, James wielded less power in the library space, where he sat on the
periphery of social interactions, more so than he did in the more structured space of the
classroom (Wohlwend, 2008). Despite this, the space offered the possibility for these
interactions, the “sharing with friend” and being “excited” in a way that other school
spaces did not. In the library, he wanted a different type of literacy experience—a social

202
experience—than the classroom, where the possibilities were often narrowed by
assessment and instructional expectations.
The notions of schooled literacies were nonetheless powerful despite small
pockets of play, silliness, or other ways of “being” a reader. Ultimately, no matter where
he was, James stated that “I still have to listen.” For example, even in this same
interview, as I asked James to draw a picture of himself in the library, he drew himself
reading. When prompted to talk more about his picture, James retold the main parts of the
Knuffle Bunny (Willems, 2004) book that he drew (2/2/2017 INT, p. 3), a comprehension
strategy emphasized in his classroom literacy instruction. For James then, what the
library meant as a space is that it was a space for reading, but that within this
categorization, there were multiple possibilities. Perhaps this was a “schooled” response
that he though I wanted to hear, and it’s also quite possible that James had fully
internalized the notions of schooled literacies, such as independent reading and retelling a
story. As I conducted this interview with James, we were in the classroom as Deborah
was facilitating a reading response activity with students. In the background (2/2/2017
INT, pp. 2-3) at various places, you could hear her complimenting their careful work and
working behaviors. Therefore, as James considered what it meant to be in the library and
what it meant to be a reader, real and observable schooled literacy practices were
circulating in and through the discursive space of the classroom, which was also informed
by the physical desks and reading response materials. Yoon (2014) has found that while
children use play to negotiate their social relations, these practices are often tense, and
perhaps in James’ case, not recognized or valued as play at all.

203
James, a student marked as an advanced reader, was able to engage with literacy
in multiple ways, constructing the experience he desired, without sacrificing his status.
Diverging from many of the activities described above, on February 1 st, 2017, during a
browsing period, James chose to read on his own. That said, he did do some partner
reading, and I traced movements around the room (to switch books and ask peers for
books). For example, often he would approach other students and ask to trade books or
would engage in conversation if a student came up to him. Even more so, he went off by
himself several times to read. He did the Mo Willems voices on his own, playfully. As an
observer, I read James’ movements as purposeful, both in selecting the materials that he
wanted, but also in producing the space that he needed to interact with those materials
while still being positioned as a successful reader.
Therefore, while I have argued that the library offers the potential for social
literacies, this shifted over and between time. Here, James took advantage of the literacy
materials at hand—namely the Mo Willems texts—to participate in literacy with his
peers. Dyson (2003) further argues that students bring their own agency to texts, and
therefore, school literacies can play out in interesting and yet complex ways. The
interaction between the materials and the social practices here gave James a way to forge
new relationships with his peers through multiple modes (Rowsell & Wohlwend, 2016)
of making meaning.
James, like Carla, demonstrated the ability to toggle freely between playful
tendencies and then revert back to what was expected. This was due to his behavior, but
also his ability, as James was marked by his teacher as an advanced reader. During an
observation of the literacy block in the classroom on December 12 th, 2016, I watched

204
James while he was book shopping. To his friend, he said “I can read all the books in
here. I can read all C/D books.” Later, he then said, “This one [Humpty Dumpty] is so
easy but it’s a J!” (12/12/2016 FN, p. 3). James was clearly aware of his reading level,
and this marker of his ability/proficiency allowed him more movement and the ability to
play. For example, because he was a higher level than most students in his class, James—
in many ways—didn’t need to worry about how his small instances of play would impact
his overall positioning as a strong reader. James, by nature of his reading level, was
afforded more access to a diversity of literacy practices. The disciplining of bodies in the
library and other spaces, according to schooled literacies, was not applied equitably
across students (Leander et al., 2010). In this way, the discourses of reading levels, and
who was considered a “good reader” were intimately connected to what students are
permitted or encouraged to do in various spaces across the school setting.
Because of the privileges afforded by his status, James had command of play. He
switched seamlessly between the expected or approved behaviors and moments of
playfulness, where these expected behaviors were challenged or contradicted for short
periods of time. These moments might be thought of as Thirdspaces or counterspaces—as
“spaces of resistance to the dominant order arising precisely from their subordinate,
peripheral or marginalized positioning” (Soja, 1996, p. 68). While James did counter the
expected or approved behaviors, demonstrating a certain amount of resistance, he did so
with caution, and never to jeopardize his status. For Soja (1996), these interruptions and
cracks in the expected are moments of learning and transformation, deliberately open for
learning about the possibilities of student agency. James provided fleeting glimpses at
what a library that was free from levels, and truly open to student choice, might look like.

205
In particular, during a Martin Luther King, Jr. activity response (1/12/2017 FN, p.
3), James turned in his paper after completing it appropriately, raised his hand, and
listened to the discussion. However, during other moments or cracks in space and time,
James engaged in playful behaviors (e.g. reciting the alphabet on the rug, talking with his
neighbor, and playing with his pencil). Just as Carla “saved” space or “carved out” space,
James did the same thing—and used this carved out physical space to engage with his
peers in a social manner. I took these instances of play and examine them alongside other
browsing periods, such as the play fighting that James engaged in on November 10 th,
2016 with his friend over the Mo Willems book. In doing so, new patterns of movement
and new meanings emerged (Schmidt, 2017), in this case illuminating repeated patterns,
as James demonstrated the desire for play, and yet did so without deviating far from the
expected or privileged ways of being a reader. This ultimately indicated the comfort that
Mo Willems books brought to James, offering him a mechanism for engaging in the
Secondspaces as he pleased.
To further illustrate these tendencies, on January 24th, 2017, I observed James
doing a reading response to a Frog and Toad (Lobel, 2003) book. He traded crayons with
his table mates and announced, “this is frog, this is toad!” (1/24/2017 FN, pp. 3-4) with
enthusiasm. Again, he demonstrated playful tendencies but stayed within the boundaries
of what was appropriate and welcome in school, adept at reading these subtleties. Like
Carla, James did exhibit playful behaviors, but not to the extent of losing his positioning
as a good student and as a strong reader. James’ reading response also demonstrated what
was desired by Deborah, as he filled up the entire space with a detailed and colorful
picture and wrote a sentence as directed. During that same observational period, James

206
chatted with peers and was slightly silly when the class was called to line up, but then,
reverted to expected behavior when the class was corrected as a whole. Siegel et al.
(2008) position students as agents capable of designing meanings, and crafting identities
across the various spaces within a school. I took this similar stance to my study of James,
positioning him as an active agent across time and space, and yet still operating within
the discourses of accountability that traveled into the library.
As Dyson (2003) argues, children engage in literacy and play in ways that are
fluid, integrating their own knowledge with their notions of schooled literacy. James, in
exercising his agency, moved seamlessly from interacting with peers—and acting out
texts—to removing himself into a quiet space to engage in literacy on his own. This
speaks to the importance of looking at the various ways that children play and the ways in
which they use social space to help them do this (e.g. sometimes carving out space for
him to be on his own, while other times it was using the space and moving about the
space to talk with others). The space created during one browsing period, both through
the materials as well as the discourses, was not necessarily the space created during
another—spaces are fluid across time as well (Leander, 2002).
And yet, this play is managed. Over the course of the time that I spent at City
Partnership School’s library, I noticed how often students who did not conform to notions
of schooled literacy were removed from browsing time, at least temporarily. Browsing
became a time of freedom, but a conditional time of freedom. As discussed in the
previous chapter, Deborah constructed a firm boundary between “her time” (reading
responses and read-alouds) and “student time” (browsing sessions). Leveraging the
browsing sessions, as these were loved by students, Deborah was able to construct a

207
predictable structure, where browsing sessions were held as a reward for students
behaving appropriately during “her time.” Constructing this dichotomy, and setting forth
consequences for students, ensured that Deborah retained most decision-making power
during library sessions. In this policing of the library browsing time, the ability to read
for enjoyment became contingent on adhering to the schooled behaviors. Deborah used
“time-outs” as a way to reclaim power within the discursive space of the school library,
therefore empowering the adult and not the child. Rather than disrupting traditional
power structures, the browsing “time outs” reinforced them, calling upon the discourses
of schooled literacy to police student behaviors.
Students were aware of the expectations and subsequent consequences for not
following those expectations and policed themselves and one another accordingly. For
example, at the beginning of library class on January 10th, 2017, a classmate was already
sitting on the bench, presumably in time-out. As Deborah began reading, the student
called out that only students listening would be able to browse. Validating that this was
indeed the case, Deborah responded with “I’m glad you know that” (1/10/2017 FN, p. 1).
Setting clear expectations and outlining consequences seemed key to Deborah’s
organization of the social space. Later in the session, in fact, two students were put in a
“time-out” on the bench, and therefore sat out of their browsing time for that session. On
February 8th, 2017, another student was asked to sit even further from the rug—at the
back tables—also as a consequence for making noises during the read-aloud. These
instances were not uncommon, and students were repeatedly asked to sit out of browsing
as a result of their behaviors. (e.g. fieldnotes 12/19/2016, 1/10/2017, 1/24/2017, and
4/27/2017). Deborah was explicit about using the browsing time as a mechanism for

208
behavior management, for example, verbally reminding students that “whoever does it
[talks out] again will sit out of browsing!” (5/15/2017 FN). These actions clearly
delineated what she considered “her” time, and what was student time. Student time,
however, had the potential to be interrupted by a time-out, so the discursive spaces were
delineated clearly.
Spaces are constantly in the making, and Leander et al. (2010) remind us that
“new movements of ideas, objects, and bodies—are especially difficult to sustain as they
come into contact with old space/‘thick place’” (p. 339). In the library, new forms of
literacy practices, such as browsing, did circulate. However, when integrated with the
powerful notions of schooled literacy practices that simultaneously existed in the space,
they were often not sustained.
Resisting Schooled Literacies in a Malleable Space
Despite the management of student bodies and activities, the pockets of freedom
that existed in the library were not only taken up in playful ways but were also a space of
resistance. For example, despite not raising her hand with the frequency that Mark did
Nikki seemed less concerned with how she was perceived. In an observation of the
classroom literacy block, when redirected by her classroom teacher to get in her rug spot,
she talked back, responding with “I am in my spot” (11/22/2016 FN, p. 4). Similarly,
Nikki responded to some of my requests for her participation with irritation. For example,
during an interview that I conducted with her and Mark (1/12/2017 INT, pp. 13-14), I
struggled at times to elicit answers from Nikki, who did not seem concerned with
garnering my approval.

209
Alyson: Okay… I think it might be time to finish up, but I have one more
question.
Nikki: Ugh!
Alyson: Nikki, you answer first.
Nikki: Actually, just do him… (walks away).
Alyson: Mark, want to answer first?
Mark: Okay…
… Alyson: Nikki, can I ask one more?
Nikki: (across the room) First you have to find me!
Alyson: No, Nikki, if you hide I can’t bring you up again.
Mark: She’s right here, I see her.
[Both students return to tables]
In this instance, Nikki cleverly avoids answering my questions, preferring to
move around the library on her own terms. The space was, as she saw it, hers to explore.
She seemed to view her time with me as an advantage and used that time to engage as she
pleased. Unlike Mark, Nikki didn’t need to perform in ways that might “prove” that she
was a strong reader, because her reading level did that for her—it made her ability
visible. In my last interview with Nikki and Mark, Nikki similarly “co-opted” our time
together in the library, using agency to use the time as she wished. As I asked her to come
back to the tables with me, she replied: “We’re not in trouble, we’re in the library! My
teacher doesn’t even know we’re doing this” (2/16/2017 INT, p. 10). As Campano,
Ghiso, and Welch (2016) contend, children’s actions that may be initially seen as “off
task,” such as the way I initially read Nikki’s reply to my request, were actually forms of
agency, where children actively engaged in shaping and re-shaping the space to their own
preferences or desires. Because we were in the library during a time where it was not
being used for instruction, it was left open for Nikki to do this spatial construction in
various ways. By stating that her teacher didn’t know we were doing this, Nikki
positioned our activity as secretive or subversive—it was a Thirdspace crack to her

210
seemingly normal or routine school day, despite being a deliberately planned part of my
research agenda.
This moment of agency and resistance was an unexpected Thirdspace that
manifested differently for Nikki and myself. As she perceived our time as an interruption,
it was her subversion of my authority that produced a crack in the discursive space for my
research. The moment that I describe next—where Mark and Nikki resisted my adult
directives—was a space of confusion and frustration. In other words, this was a
“cracked” space that went against the typical flow of a library session and one that was
complex for me as a researcher. However, it wasn’t simply the fact that Nikki and Mark
were with me, and not their classroom teachers, that made this moment unexpected and
left more room for student agency. Because we were in the library and not the classroom,
Nikki and Mark undertook different kinds of interactions, as the library had looser
parameters as a more malleable space. In a sense, the space and the time gave them
permission to be different and yet, this particular space and time was fleeting.
The conversation between Nikki and Mark was difficult to follow due to their
verbal resistance of my directives, as well as their physical embodiments. During this last
interview with them (2/16/2017), both Nikki and Mark took control of the space, walking
away from where we were seated at the tables to roam around on the rug area (where
browsing takes place). Both students began jumping on the various letters of the alphabet
rug while singing the alphabet song to themselves. Then, as I tried to bring them back,
the following interaction transpired (2/16/2017 INT, pp. 12-13):
Alyson: Okay guys, back to the tables. Time to finish up.
[Nikki and Mark continued to play on the rug, got a book and started looking at it]
Alyson: Hey Nikki and Mark, I’ve got to take you back [to class] if you don’t
come back to the tables.

211
[They laid on the floor and continued reading a book. I walked over to pick the
book up, and Mark wedged his finger in it]
Nikki: But, it says “please open this book!” We have to open it.
[We all laugh]
Alyson: We have to finish up, I’ve got to get you back to class!
[Still opened the book and read it together]
Mark: Let’s go in the page with the dirty monsters.
[Nikki continued reading the book as Mark looked on]
Mark: Who wants to read everybody’s book?
Nikki: We have to go on the page until it says “Stay on this page!”
Mark: Whaaa!
Alyson: Okay, one more page and then we have to close it.
Nikki: But we have to stay on this page! Because the book is almost ending. Also,
the banana (on the page).
Mark: (laughs)
Nikki: So, we have to stay on this page!
[I moved to close the book]
Nikki: No, don’t close it!
Mark: Yeah, but…
Alyson: Come on. We’ve got to finish captioning your picture, please.
[Mark grabbed a Mo Willems book]
Nikki: How about Cupcake Jones?
Alyson: Mark and Nikki, quickly please.
Mark: What is this book?
Alyson: Mark, we’re going to finish captioning yours, and Nikki I’m going to ask
you…
Mark: Can we please open this book?
Although both Mark and Nikki were involved in this interaction, it was Nikki who
took the lead over the conversation and used the book as the platform with which to
engage in that resistance through language such as “we have to open it,” “we have to go
on the page,” and “no, don’t close it!” In fact, the language of the text itself served as a
tangible, material, Firstspace tool that Nikki expertly utilized to resist my directives.
Although at first glance this could be considered as “disobedient” behavior in the sense
that Nikki didn’t listen to my requests, Nikki adeptly used her literacy practices, and the
affordances of the otherwise empty library, to get what she wanted—more time with the
book. Nikki took an official literacy material, the book, and used it in an unofficial

212
manner (Dyson, 1993). She connected the world of the library with the social world that
she and Mark constructed in this moment and in this space. She agentively mobilized her
literacy practices, reading the pages of the book to support her claims, and therefore,
attempting to outsmart the adult (me). Physically, both Nikki and Mark participated in
laying on the floor, wedging their fingers in the book, and selecting new books. In doing
so, both students made a space of resistance through their interactions with the book, with
each other, and with me. In other words, social spaces were constructed, and Mark and
Nikki “[were] active subjects who shape and are shaped by spatial encounters” (Schmidt,
2017, p. 106) through their use of the material and physical space.
In analyzing this transcript spatially, my interaction with the children emerges as
a Thirdspace “crack” or “interruption” (Sheehy, 2010) to how I anticipated the interview
would go, thus bringing into relief the power relations and assumed linearity of my
research “plan.” At the time, I didn’t know how to get Mark and Nikki to do what I
wanted—the space felt unruly and disorderly—which was to answer my questions. It was
only by reflecting on this incident that I saw it as a Thirdspace (Soja, 1996) that
transformed, where the power that I (as a teacher figure and researcher) held shifted to
the students, who used their literacy practices to own the space and refused to answer the
interview questions I had prepared. Simultaneously, they used their bodies to construct
their positions (Leander, 2002); in laying on the floor, Nikki and Mark produced an
informal space that matched their verbal resistance. Furthermore, Mark and Nikki
subverted my adult authority by using play as a cultural tool (Yoon, 2014). The
hierarchical roles of adult and students, where adults often guided conversations with
children, shifted in this moment.

213
Nikki and Mark were able to exert power in this interaction because they
purposely and effectively read the social context, one where the teacher was absent, and
used it to their advantage. Zacher (2009) suggests that “youth might, in a sense, draw
maps of their racial identities, map their sense of who they are, racially speaking, by
marking similarities and differences” (p. 275). I positioned Mark, Nikki, James, and
Carla as students who were very deliberately, albeit subconsciously, crafting their own
identities as readers across spaces in City Partnership School, to varying degrees of
privilege. By traversing space in ways that were not “permitted,” including laying down
on the floor and wedging fingers in the book in efforts to keep it open, Nikki and Mark
made statements about who they were as readers—what they liked to read, how they
wanted to read, and that they didn’t need permission to read. Zacher (2009) also nudges
us to consider what relationships are constructed through the actions of the students and
the social space. In this instance, Mark and Nikki produced a camaraderie, where they
both disobeyed my requests, and left the space of the library open to their own desires.
Identities as Constructed Across Networked Spaces
The spaces that individuals traverse and produce, whether they be spaces of fluid
practices or laden with constraints, have implications for identity. In fact, simply access
to sites like school libraries can offer students opportunities for agency, an increasing
equity concern in the midst of dwindling education budgets and assessment-laden
systems (Stahl & Schweid, 2013). Nikki’s resistance (described above) was both
indicative of her existing identity and agency, and yet she continually carved out a
readerly identity at the same time. Drawing from Moje and Luke (2009), I conceptualize

214
identity as a lamination, whereby identities “thicken” over time as individuals take up
multiple positions across spaces. Each focal student’s identity practices in the library
were also reflective of the many different positions that they have taken up, or have been
imposed on them, across their classrooms, homes, and communities.
Identities are Not Monolithic
As Ghiso (2015) reminds us, identities are not monolithic. For example, while
Carla did exemplify schooled literacy behaviors and a desire to please those who might
evaluate her academic performance (Miller, 2005), there were evidences of Carla going
against this and even acting silly. For example, on January 12 th, 2017, while students
completed a MLK dot-to-dot art piece, she looked up and said, “we’re all drawing a
portrait of Mr. C.” I asked who that was, and she responded that it was the recess teacher
(1/12/2017 FN, p. 2), clearly making a joke as her peers at the table laughed. Later in the
period, this happened again—Carla sang to me “cat will cry, mother will call the FBI”
and we both laughed (1/12/2017 FN, p. 3). Carla, in these moments, demonstrated a
“silliness” that may not be described as adhering strictly to schooled literacies. However,
because Carla was already marked as a good reader, she was allowed, or even afforded,
these moments. In other words, she had enough “laminations” of a good girl persona
(Moje & Luke, 2009), that should she step out of this for a moment, it was not enough to
implicate how she was positioned. She was able to straddle the line between approved
classroom behaviors and play.
Like Carla, Mark desired to be marked as a proficient reader, although he
encountered challenges with this. As discussed in the previous chapter, for Mark there
was a clear connection between the schooled literacy behaviors that he employed (e.g.

215
raising his hand consistently even if he didn’t have the right answer), and his desire to be
perceived as a reader. His desired identity shaped and reshaped the behaviors that he took
up. For example, in a small word study group during his regular literacy block, Mark
originally put his thumb up to indicate whether the word was real or nonsense, but
quickly looked at his peers with sideways thumbs and changed his response. As it turned
out, Mark was initially correct, but was clearly influenced by how his classmates had
responded (11/22/2016 FN, p. 4). However, Mark’s identity was fluid, and at times, he
acted against expectations or impulsively. As Deborah explained, “Mark is good but he
chats some,” several minutes later pointing out however that “he’s going to be a very
good student” (5/15/2017 INT, pp. 1-2).
Yet, on February 8th, 2017 Mark again showed just how conscious he was of his
ability, and how much this impacted his identity as a reader. During the library browsing
session, Mark first read an I-Spy (Wick & Marzollo, 1992) book, quickly abandoning it
and chatting with me instead. A few minutes later, he brought a book called The
Rainforest Race (Bergen, 2008) over to me, saying “I’m a level D, this is an E.” I
prompted him to try reading it (which was difficult), and he quickly abandoned the book,
getting up from me and going to put it away. Despite the low buzz of noise as the
students around him browsed, he then sat, reading on his own, swapping for another book
a couple minutes later. Soon after, Mark brought Frog and Toad Are Friends (Lobel,
2003) over to me, asking me to read it to him. He slid next to me on the bench, and I put
my notes to the side as we shared the text. I read it, pausing at words that he knew and
asking him to fill them in. Upon finishing the chapter, Mark hugged me and said, “thank
you!” (2/8/2017 Map). Mark exhibited agency in trying to read, and because he was

216
already connected with me, and used the space and these connections to have a
meaningful literacy event.

Figure 23. Spatial map of Mark’s mobile reading practices (2/8/2017).
Although Mark did “act out” at other times, he did so judiciously. Therefore, he
was conscious of “acting out” only when it would not impact how he was perceived (or
how he believed he was perceived). The spanking episode noted in the map above (see
Figure 23) fell outside of what is not only expected in the classroom and library, but it
also demonstrated a disruption in Mark’s employment of schooled literacies. This
Thirdspace (Soja, 1996) was a space of risk, of uncertainty. While spatial analysis in
general attends to the continual movement and instability of space (Leander & Sheehy,
2004), the Thirdspace dimension in particular privileges the interruptions that so often are

217
dismissed. For Mark, this space that he constructed was unsafe, as he risked being seen,
found out, and punished for his actions. Of course, while these actions produced cracks in
the social space, it was Mark who used his agency to do so.
A similar “crack” in the social space occurred when students used the space to
create moments of play at the disapproval of Deborah. On December 13 th, 2016 for
example, one student told Deborah that a group of students were playing, and she
responded by moving to the group and saying, “I hope you aren’t playing over there”
(12/13/2016 FN, p. 2). Therefore, even the fluid spaces that were produced during the
browsing period were not stagnant—and the potential disruptions transformed the space
in a myriad of ways. At other times, Mark merely seemed distracted during read-alouds,
and this was a possible explanation for the “readerly behaviors” that he did not display.
For example, during the initial read-aloud December 9th, 2016 Mark whispered things to
himself while on the rug and was asked to move. Yet, other times, he followed directions
precisely, such as during line-up times (12/9/2016 FN, p. 4). During an observation on
12/13/2016, I observed Mark wander around the library, selecting books—first, a joke
book—and then switching the book several minutes later. During this same browsing
period, ten minutes were spent making a visit to the nurse. While not disruptive, Mark
seemed to have little direction when it came to selecting texts and reading high volumes
of texts, a value that was promoted in his general literacy instruction and by many
literacy experts (Allington, 2011). Because Mark did not yet obtain those tangible
markers of reading (e.g. be at the benchmark reading level), he performed the behaviors
that he thought would mark him as a strong reader.

218
However, this speaks to Mark’s identity, and the fact that he was trying to locate
and construct his identity as a reader. His seemingly “wandering” activity was reflective
of his larger attempts to find where he fit in the library, and more broadly, within the
school. His identity was not monolithic or static (Ghiso, 2015), as he often displayed
conflicting identities as a reader, depending on what he was expected to engage in. The
pockets of fluidity in the library both shaped and reshaped Mark’s identity, just as he
simultaneously traversed the space to engage in literacy as he pleased—the relationship
between Mark and the social space was dialectic (Leander et al., 2010). For example,
Mark emphasized how he was helpful in the library, which perhaps might have earned
him praise in other ways. In the first interview with Mark (10/13/2016 INT, p. 5), he
described how much he enjoyed helping people:
Mark: Yeah, but I like, really, helping people.
Alyson: Do you? How do you help people in the library?
Mark: Well, if [student] wanted a book and somebody slipped on it… I got it
before she slipped on it.
Alyson: Oh.
Mark: She almost slipped.
Alyson: So is that why the return bin is so important?
Mark: Yeah.
By pointing out the ways in which he was helpful in the library, Mark positioned
himself as someone who was valuable and perhaps even needed in the library space.
Furthermore, Dyson (1993) argues that students interact with one another in a myriad of
playful ways, and “such performances involved the risk of rejection, but they also
potentially offered the respectful attention and responsive participation of others” (p. 72).
When Mark walked over to Nikki (1/25/2017 FN, p. 3) and asked, “can you read this,
Nikki?” he was inviting Nikki into a playful conversation. Given their back and forth

219
around reading levels and reading proficiency, Mark invited Nikki into a discussion
where he asserted his own ability and opened the space to receive her approval.
Conclusion: Choice, Play, Mobility
As Wohlwend (2008) states, “reconceptualizing play as a multimodal literacy recenters play in school curriculum as a valuable semiotic system in its own right and
revalues play as essential to ‘new basics’” (p. 135). Perhaps browsing shouldn’t be seen
as a “reward” but rather, as a literacy event that was valuable in its own right. Students
both adhered to schooled literacy practices, and yet also broke from these—power was
wielded spatially (Wohlwend, 2008), keeping some practices or individuals on the
periphery of social space.
While Mark, Nikki, Carla, and James each constructed the space of the library
differently and for different purposes, their experiences converged and diverged. The
library was a unique space, amorphous—part of the larger school and as similar to the
classroom (with an emphasis on reading levels) and yet distinct (with allowed freedom of
movement and choice in readings). While the library was distinct from the rest of the
school context, there were elements of the larger school institution that continued to shift,
shape, and complicate the library space and what students were able to do there, because
the discourses of other school spaces were inextricably networked to those of the library.
Talk and action in time-spaces laminated present, past, and future events (Leander
& Sheehy, 2004); this, in turn, opened multiple positions that students could take up
within social space. Ultimately, for each student, this produced amorphous space.
Different roles were available to students in the classroom than in the library, and yet

220
these roles must still be continuously examined. Leander et al. (2010) ask, “how could
school places be made more affectively malleable to become more equitable?” (p. 340).
Understanding how children use and construct space in various ways is a first step toward
this vision.

221

Chapter VI
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS

Like most research, the findings of this dissertation study indicate the immense
questions that still linger about literacy and the space of a school library. It is one small
sliver in exploring what it means to be a first-grader in an urban elementary school
library. The library is full of possibilities—possibilities for success, for enjoyment, and
for forming relationships with others while carving out identities for oneself. However,
the library is also full of contradictions. It is a space that shifts in response to
accountability measures, that is in danger of seeing decreasing funds and qualified staff,
and a space that ultimately has the potential to disappear as educational policy changes.
The library is a malleable space, one that is laden with tensions and yet simultaneously
offers many possibilities for student agency.
Conclusion: The Library as a Networked Space
The findings of this dissertation illustrate that, first and foremost, the library at
City Partnership School was networked space, one that was inherently connected to the
discourses circulating within other school spaces. The production of the space was
therefore an amalgamation of physical materials, social processes, and literacy practices
that overlapped, intersected, and informed one another. Individuals used their languages
and literacies to produce a variety of discursive spaces, some of which resembled the
classroom, while at other times disrupted a schooled vision in favor of a more fluid one.

222
Notions of “schooled literacy” (Cook-Gumperz, 1986) were powerful in shaping
the library space, particularly emphasized within the discussions around leveled texts,
assessments, and expected behaviors that permeated the library. These networks became
part of the curriculum; both in how the librarians took up literacies in the library, but also
how Amanda then carried these notions with her into the classroom, demonstrating that
networks flowed in both directions. Her decision to move away from an overemphasis on
reading levels once in the classroom, for example, produced a new type of book
shopping, and potentially one where students had more choice.
As a networked space, the library at City Partnership School was often contingent
on the larger accountability discourses that circulated across the school. In many ways,
the pressures of the larger school institution seeped into the library, which therefore
shifted in response to larger school needs or priorities. This was perhaps most clear with
Amanda’s transition to the third-grade classroom when a new teacher was needed, but it
happened in smaller ways as well. Many times, when I would arrive at City Partnership
School to collect my data, the library was a testing center for the day, or was hosting a
parent breakfast meeting. This meant that the library sessions were held in the classroom,
essentially an extension of the typical literacy block. Consequently, the library often felt
like a secondary space, one that could quickly dissipate when more pressing needs or
priorities arose.
However, while accountability discourses were powerful in shaping the space of
the library, individuals were also active agents in constructing various discursive spaces.
Librarians, students, and other actors in the library (including myself as the researcher)
created spaces for literacy by the organization of the Firstspace, Secondspace, and

223
Thirdspace, all which operated dialectically. For example, in the creation of a “donated
books” section of the library, where Amanda organized physical materials and created
inviting labels for the newly organized shelves, she simultaneously produced a space of
access and equity, where all students were permitted to borrow library books regardless
of a missing library contract or overdue books. When students like Carla saved physical
space by stretching out on the comfy chair, they were also simultaneously constructing a
social space, one where they could enjoy a book with a friend. Mark’s emphasis on
reading levels, and desire to be perceived as a reader, were in part brought into the library
as a result of it being inherently connected to the other school spaces. Importantly, these
discursive spaces were not unitary. Often, the partner reading described above was a
calm, seemingly enjoyable time. Other times, highlighted in my conversations with Nikki
and Mark, the social space created in the library was focused around regulating one
another’s reading level. Ultimately, these discursive spaces were shifting and fluid.
Within these fluid social spaces, the library was often a space of enjoyment,
where traditional notions of reading practices were disrupted. Utilizing the Mo Willems
books—among others—in quite expert ways, students acted out voices, dramatized, and
engaged in play fighting over the books. In doing so, they resisted what “typical” library
reading looked like, using their agency to construct spaces that resisted adult authority in
favor of an unofficial culture (Hall, 2011). During one particular interview with Nikki
and Mark (2/16/2017 INT), they resisted my interview questions, played with the book,
and instead constructed a space that was more informal and resistive of traditional
reading practices. I characterized this event as a Thirdspace interruption, where instances

224
of subversion arose, though it did so in a playful manner, one that expertly used the
book—a Firstspace material—to guide social moves.
In some ways, students were able to resist adult decision-making power and open
up discursive spaces for play because of the lack of leveled texts and assessments in the
library. Even though Secondspace discourses permeated the space with force, the lack of
the physical levels—a Firstspace notion—was significant in opening up pockets where
more fluid practices, and equitable reading opportunities, were possible.
In examining the spaces where students took up notions of play, clear
implications for constructing transformative spaces emerged. One of Amanda’s learnings
in transitioning from the role of the librarian to that of a third-grade teacher was that there
was power in less regulated reading choices for students. She recounted to me how she
moved away from having reading be solely based on levels in the classroom, after
recognizing how powerful choice was for students in the library (9/29/2016 FN).
Amanda’s realization here was probably not unlike those of many classroom teachers,
who would not expect that assessment-based discourses would enter a school library (a
non-leveled space) so forcefully. Given this finding, there are opportunities to reflect on
the implications of reading levels, and perhaps to shift practices across both classroom
and library spaces. For example, perhaps instituting a “browsing” time in the classroom
and considering the power of text selection and choice in the readerly identities that
students construct across school spaces would be beneficial.
For the library in particular, the potential to construct it as a transformative space
is clear. While this dissertation demonstrates the ways in which the library functioned
similarly to the classroom, other library spaces diverge from this. Public and academic

225
libraries, for example, often function as spaces of exhibits or art installations. Organized
in this way, libraries might open new possibilities for text selection and installations that
move away from artificial and contrived holiday displays. For school libraries, spaces
might be promoted that encourage tinkering, play, and open-ended learning with a variety
of materials. In this conception, library time is no longer simply reading with a book.
Instead, students can make meaning from a variety of different tools (from computers to
lazer cutters) to pursue their own inquiries. Further implications for library spaces will be
described more deeply in the sections that follow.
Implications for Policy
Funding for Library Programs
In an educational climate of increasing budget cuts, choices about what to fund
are essential. Unfortunately, libraries are positioned as secondary to the larger
educational system and are often not a priority in funding. The Elementary and
Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965 initially spurred funding for library materials
(Michie & Holton, 2005), first recognizing how essential to learning and exploration
access to texts was. Despite this, the threats to libraries continue to be real, as Rodgers
(2017) reports that “10 percent of the nation’s public schools and 51 percent of its charter
schools don’t have libraries” (p. 16), with urban areas like Los Angeles reporting new
budgets that would lay off library staff. Without funding, the libraries don’t have a
librarian, and even if students do get to visit the library and check out books should a
library exist without being staffed, they likely aren’t experiencing the flexible browsing
sessions, nor do they receive instruction around digital literacies and digital citizenship.

226
As I have argued in this dissertation, the browsing sessions at City Partnership
School are significant, as they offer fluidity of selection, movement, and engagement for
students. It has been made evident that those are the favorite for both students and the
librarian, as they are used as a reward and students are visibly and audibly disappointed
when they do not occur, or when it is not a browsing day (e.g. fieldnotes 11/10/2016,
12/13/2017, 1/10/2017, 2/1/2017). Should libraries not receive funding and not be
staffed, students will subsequently miss out on opportunities to browse in this manner.
Library Standards
Implications for programs being cut and de-funded are that students will only
experience literacy instruction in their classrooms and will therefore miss out on these
“other spaces” (Foucault, 1986) where literacy happens. After all, libraries were designed
to be spaces where students not only engaged with texts and information, but also had
opportunities to pursue their own inquiries. Over time, policy—specifically in the form of
library standards—shifted and shaped the instruction in the library dramatically. Library
standards for elementary schools first appeared in 1925 (Michie & Holton, 2005) as
optional, with the intent to help school libraries foster curiosity and independence in
students. Just as the 1950s and the launch of Sputnik incited many changes for American
education, notably the “back to basics” movement, library standards were no exception.
As stated in previous chapters, 1958 brought about funding for school libraries through
the National Defense Education Act (NDEA), moving the libraries from a flexible hub
for student inquiry to more structured spaces where students would learn research skills.
Continual revisions occurred in 1960, 1969, 1975, 1988, 2007, and 2009 (Michie &
Holton, 2005).

227
Each iteration of school library standards brought about new paradigms about
what types of learning the space might be for, and how it should be used to ensure that
students were prepared to meet the increasing demands of a more global, diverse society.
These most recent versions of the standards, for instance, focused on informational
literacies, independent research, and media integration. These shifting standards
emphasized the importance of the space as a central hub in schools, one where students
not only engaged in instruction, but were also given the freedom to explore their own
inquiries through multimodal texts. This points to the importance of school libraries, and
yet they are in danger of significant shifts, and disappearing altogether in some
communities.
Therefore, library standards not only must continue to exist and be implemented
across our schools, but they must be critically examined to ensure that students are indeed
able to engage with a variety of literacy practices and texts in ways that support equity.
For example, while the NYC Information Fluency Continuum (n.d.) positions the library
as a “public forum” where students can pursue inquiries, the language in the standards
also constructs a binary between what an “information-literate” student is, and what they
are not. The “information fluent” reader, for example, privileges appropriate information
and develops in a linear fashion, according to the standards, which outline the concrete
steps that it takes in order to become information fluent. While encouraging inquiry, the
process is simultaneously presented as a trajectory (New York City School Library
System, n.d.), contradicting the very notion of inquiry itself. For example, the NYC
Information Fluency Continuum (n.d.) prompts students to make connections between
texts, explore texts, and use technology to locate information. This standard argues that

228
“an independent learner responds to and creates literary and artistic expressions, uses
effective strategies for personal exploration of ideas, and reads on his or her own by
choice” (New York City School Library System, n.d., p. 34). However, this is contingent
on a diverse collection of texts, one that has an equitable representation of student
backgrounds and knowledge. While possible and perhaps even likely in an elementary
school library, the limited browsing periods and liminal nature of the space complicate
this.
Policymakers, along with practitioners and researchers, must continue library
standard revisions, adapting the language of the standards in efforts to meet the
increasingly diverse populations of students in this country, and to provide with them
with the texts, skills, and attitudes ready to succeed in schooled literacy. Ultimately, it is
not enough to continue having standards, but they must undergo careful examination to
ensure that that libraries maintain their core democratic principles. This requires deeper
and more critically-informed connections and collaborations between policymakers,
researchers, and practitioners.
Implications for Librarian Preparation
As the positioning of the school librarian continues to change and shift within the
larger context of education, so much the ways in which school librarians are prepared for
the field. Historically and currently, the American Library Association (ALA) has been
responsible for the preparation and certification of school librarians, though specific
requirements can vary between states (Church, 2011). These requirements for licensure
have many different components, including administering programs, engaging in
collaboration and leadership, understanding informational literacy, and understanding

229
curriculum and pedagogy. The inclusion of curriculum and pedagogy, presumably,
emphasizes that the school librarian plays an active instructional role in 21 st century
schools (Church, 2011). In 2011, there were 39 nationally recognized school librarian
preparation programs.
In efforts to preserve the library as a space where students can be the readers that
they desire, librarians are needed who are able to provide a diversity of experiences and
protect the democratic principles so essential to library experiences. As evidenced by the
four focal students that I worked with, the diversity of experiences that they had while
browsing in the library mattered to them. Students clearly favored browsing over reading
responses, as one child anxiously asked on December 13 th, 2017, “can we browse now?”
(12/13/2017 FN, p. 1). One emphasis in school librarian preparation programs is around
understanding and implementing digital literacy practices for students. As Preddy (2016)
explains, digital literacy is an increasing consideration as we prepare students to interact
with online global communities. While classrooms can certainly embed critical stances to
literacy, including critiques of texts, often the responsibility for teaching ethical ways of
engaging with technology is left to school librarians and/or media specialists. Preddy
(2016) further states that “many policymakers lack awareness of the importance of digital
citizenship, not fully realizing its existence and not fully realizing it must be intentionally
taught” (p. 5). A closer connection between research and policy may help to narrow these
discrepancies and demonstrate the importance of supporting quality librarian preparation
programs.
Despite these calls for greater emphasis on digital literacy, the findings of this
dissertation illuminate how often the literacy practices in the library center around the

230
material book. Students at City Partnership School did not experience digital learning,
and yet, there continues to be an increasing call for librarians to do this work across the
field. There is not agreement across the field—in research or in practice—about what role
libraries play in literacy instruction. This discussion is even more complex when taking
into account Amanda’s transition from the library to the classroom. In the beginning of
the year, Amanda had an idea to teach coding in the library, but this dissipated as she
transferred out of the space. The interests, priorities, and passions of people leave residue
in lived spaces (Huyssen, 2003), while others transition out. The individuals who traverse
space, therefore, are powerful in shaping those spaces. This dissertation shows how
central the ideologies of the school librarian are in the space that is produced with the
children, and ultimately, the types of literacy instruction and activities that the children
have access to.
With increasing cuts to library programs and a dearth of candidates entering these
positions, the opportunities for these spaces to continue creating opportunities for student
inquiries are potentially becoming scarce. As classroom instruction continues to narrow
in response to increasing accountability and assessment pressures (Olivant, 2015),
alongside decreased funding for library programs, the diversity of literacy experiences
that students can encounter in our nation’s schools also decrease. This includes the
emphasis on digital literacy skills, called for in the field and yet simultaneously relegated
to space that experiences cuts, shifts, and competing priorities. More than ever, a policy
climate that protects libraries from disappearing is needed. To do that, more information
about the transformative power of library spaces is required.

231
Implications for Research
I have argued that school libraries are spaces where students have agency and
actively use this agency to construct spaces for themselves to be readers independently,
as well as in social relationships with others. Despite arguing for the significance of
school library spaces, libraries are still increasingly subject to decreased budgets, low
staffing (Everhart, 2000a), and are often devalued in school spaces. If libraries continue
to close or transition to part-time spaces (Everhart, 2000a), it may decrease the likelihood
that research into these spaces is feasible, at least from the literacy studies field. Those
libraries that are flourishing, and where students are active in producing spaces for
themselves, have implications for education, literacy studies, and library science at large.
Broadly, libraries can demonstrate the transformative potential of schools when people
work together across a collection of spaces.
As stated in earlier chapters of this dissertation, most of the scholarly literature on
school librarians has focused on the librarian, and not the student experience. Within this
emphasis on the librarian, attention has been paid to descriptions of the roles and tasks
that librarians perform (Lance, Rodney, & Hamilton-Pennell, 2000), and occasionally
how this shapes their perception of the job. This focus on tasks, roles, and perceptions—
while valuable—leaves out the very significant and unique experience that can only be
documented through sustained time in the field and in-depth observation (LeCompte &
Schensul, 1999) of the phenomena that is taking place. If we want to understand how
student identities are constructed across spaces, more research into the student experience
in these multiple spaces is essential.

232
Expansion to Other Sites and Perspectives
Therefore, taking an ethnographic methodology to other library spaces around the
nation, and across various demographics of students, may demonstrate how the library is
connected to their overall school experiences. Researching with librarians and students of
varying social class, racial, linguistic, ability levels, and age backgrounds would help
make this understanding clear. While library science has its own tradition of research,
often using interview data with librarians and exploring their roles, more ethnographic
work exploring the human experience (LeCompte & Schensul, 1999), particularly the
interactions of children (Corsaro, 1981), is needed. Additionally, library science has
predominantly focused on libraries serving older students. Despite this dearth of
information, early childhood literacy experiences are deeply essential to identity
construction (Wohlwend, 2011), as students discover what they want to read, how they
want to read, and in the process, what kind of reader they are going to be.
However, while expanding methodologies and populations of study are critical,
the theoretical stances with which this work is approached are equally as essential. Most
studies that look at school libraries are not approached from a socially situated literacy
perspective. Therefore, literacy in these studies is often defined in more traditional ways,
whereas a New Literacy Studies (NLS) framework defines literacy practices in social and
cultural frameworks (Street, 2005), taking into account language and discourses. In order
to see the potential of the library as a space for alternative forms of literacy engagements,
there must be a widening of perspectives on what “counts” as literacy. A spatial
perspective (Soja, 1996) seeks to further disrupt these seemingly straightforward
practices, asking us not to dismiss interruptions to the seemingly normal discursive space,

233
but to privilege it in efforts to rethink the possibilities of space. Looking at identities as
multi-layered and complex, constructed over many experiences over time (Moje & Luke,
2009) also complicates the literature in the field, where professional titles and
descriptions of roles may not be sufficient to understand the human experience.
Dressman (1998) conducted one such study that took up the library as a site, and
examined multiple sites from a spatial perspective, adding another layer of analysis to
library science. In doing so, Dressman (1998) examined the human experience, both of
students as well as librarians, to offer different perspectives about how a library can be
produced, and the important choices that librarians make in these productions. Dressman
(1998) began this work, illustrating how people, materials, and spatial practices can open
up, and close down, opportunities for literacy. For this dissertation, I followed Dressman
(1998) by taking up a literacy studies framework, specifically a spatial literacies
framework, and applied it to libraries as a site for research in efforts to understand (in
new ways) how the library was being constructed.
While this work has illuminated future directions and needs for research, it has
only scratched the surface. Extending my dissertation work to other library sites and
“other spaces” (Foucault, 1986) for literacy beyond libraries, is promising in painting a
more robust picture of what happens in these spaces, and the significance of these spaces
for the teachers and students who inhabit them. Ultimately, understanding the power of
libraries as spaces for literacy, identity, and inquiry has implications for how these spaces
get enacted through policy and practice. This, in turn, has the potential to inform other
spaces that have often been neglected as spaces for literacy research, such as hallways
and school cafeterias, but spaces which nonetheless shape the educational experience of a

234
child. In considering the entire school as a networked institution with many linked
spaces, there is room for further exploring the transformative potential of schools when
committed people work together across multiple spaces.
Implications for a Spatial Lens
While new research sites are needed, approaching this work from a spatial
perspective also adds complexity and nuance to the work. In positioning the library as an
“other space” (Foucault, 1986), one distinct from and yet networked to other spaces
within the school, there is the potential to produce new ways of knowing that continue to
deeply interrogate power, literacy, and knowledge. The library as a heterotopia, one
where information never stops building over time, can therefore be a space of resistance
despite always being connected to the dominant order of schooling. Heterotopias, by
definition, are permeable spaces, largely because of their inherent relationships to other
spaces.
Taking up a spatial perspective in this work ultimately helps to illuminate how the
equally important dimensions (Firstspace, Secondspace, and Thirdspace) contribute to the
production of knowledge, power, and space. In advocating for a focus on Thirdspace,
Soja (1996) prompts us to think about the interruptions to discursive space, such as
through the instances of play, might be reframed. In taking up this perspective, I was able
to focus part of my analysis on the instances of play that I observed, which was not
necessarily something that I expected to find from this work. Breaking down the binary
notion of the library as a contained room, positioning it instead as a networked space with
permeable boundaries, foregrounded the ways that students used the fluid space and time
to their advantages and towards their desires.

235

Exploring from a Gender and Race Lens
With having only several focal students, this work could also be expanded to look
more deeply at the gendered and racialized experiences of students (Miller, 2005),
particularly at different age groups. For example, gender-focused research often
demonstrates that girls are less reprimanded than boys in school settings. Although
James, for example, was discussed as someone who was smart and made good choices,
he was redirected for “not having a book in his hand” and for moving around the room
(2/1/2017 Map) despite doing so in efforts to get the book that he wanted. Neither Nikki
or Carla were redirected for these same issues during the duration of my data collection.
It could be that Deborah perceived movement of male students differently, as she
implicitly bought into the discourse that female students need or desire less movement. In
other words, the students and librarian adopted the dominant notion that there was a
“correct” way to be a reader and organize the body in ways that signified this (Luke,
1992). As many literacy scholars have demonstrated, there are particular ways of “doing
girl” and “doing boy” (Wohlwend, 2012), and children learn these practices, in part,
through school (Yoon, 2014). While these practices may not have been initially learned
in the library, they are taken up and reproduced, both by librarians and students
themselves. Amanda’s statement that “this is so funny, but these [one shelf] are all girl
books” (9/8/2016 FN, p. 9) for example, demonstrated the subtle ways in which dominant
notions of what girls and boys like become concretized over time. Bringing these lenses
to a new space (the school library) will undoubtedly enrich and complicate the current
narratives, where girls like Nikki are able to resist books typically marked for girls, and
boys like James are permitted to engage in play. In understanding and explicating why

236
young girls choose, or do not choose, to take up “good girl” (Miller, 2005) personas, we
may begin to disrupt dominant discourses about who can be a reader, and how they
become marked as a good reader.
Similarly, the intersections of gender and race merit a more substantive
exploration and conversation. Both Mark (of Hispanic descent) and James (of African
descent) were marked and read in particular ways. James, despite being an advanced
reader, was still reprimanded by Deborah for moving about the library (2/1/2017 Map)
while others were not. Understanding how and why boys of color were constructed in
particular ways in the library demands additional attention. Conversely, the fact that
Carla was a white, middle-class, female student who embodied a “good girl” (Miller,
2005) persona with almost no redirection from adults merits interrogation, as it was not
only her reading level that afforded her more flexibility in the space, but her gendered
and racialized identity as well.
Nikki, while positioned as an advanced reader, yet one who often resisted
“schooled literacy” behaviors (Cook-Gumperz, 1986) like sitting still and raising her
hand, often seemed to be viewed as odd by adults at City Partnership School. Gender
identities are not universal, but are fluid (Wohlwend, 2012); Nikki’s interest in non
“girly” texts was one example that began to uncover the many ways in which girls are
encouraged to be girls. Students can both reproduce these gender norms, or they can
challenge them (Yoon, 2014), and Nikki’s case study begins to illuminate the small but
significant ways in which she attempted to resist dominant gender norms, both in text
selection as well as resistance to “good girl” behaviors, such as not participating in readalouds and not sitting as directed.

237
More examination into these focal students from a lens that positions gendered
and racialized identities as complex and fluid is needed and would add to the initial
findings in this dissertation study. Subsequently, to understand how students navigate the
library according to their gender and race (and other identity markers such as class,
ability, and language), a studying of space is necessary, as these identity markers are in
part produced through interactions across spaces (Leander & Sheehy, 2004).
Ultimately, the lack of research exploring the role of school librarians in
constructing spaces for inquiry, choice, and enjoyment may in fact lead to decreased
funding and career opportunities for school librarians, which in turn impacts student
access to texts and literacy engagements (Everhart, 2013). Therefore, implications for
further research are to continue expanding school library research from a diversity of
perspectives in efforts to bring more tension and complexity to the conversation. Rather
than “descriptive assessments” (Nitecki, 2011) and other work exploring roles and
responsibilities of school librarians, I also argue for news ways of positioning literacy to
be integrated into this conversation, as more critical and sociocultural stances would
enrich conversations within the field of library science.
Implications for Practice
Supporting Libraries as a Learning Space
Perhaps most significantly, there are implications for schools in considering how
City Partnership School’s library might offer insights to libraries and “other spaces”
(Foucault, 1986) broadly. While research and policy can help to make overarching
decisions about the future of school libraries, it is the day-to-day decisions that most

238
implicate how the space can be constructed, and the experiences that students will
therefore have. As school budgets continue to dissipate, programs like the library (along
with art, music, etc.) are seeing budget cuts nationwide. These cuts have significant
implications for the students, librarians, and other school staff to which these spaces
matter, particularly for those in underserved communities.
In urban areas, physical space is often a concern. At City Partnership School, the
library was occasionally needed as a testing space, and at times was shared with
additional classes, like music. While these decisions may be unavoidable, at City
Partnership School, there were consequences for the students to whom the library was
important, for example, on February 3rd, 2017 when library had to take place in the
classroom, due to a testing schedule. It was clear that both Deborah, and the students,
were visibly unhappy about this change, as it means that browsing was pushed off until
the following session (2/3/2017 FN, p. 2). Given the large-scale constraints of our
educational system, libraries are typically constructed as non-essential—they can by
physically moved or restructured at a moment’s notice. While perhaps unavoidable, there
are implications for this continual shifting of the space, particularly for the librarians and
students to whom browsing is a coveted time.
Therefore, rather than construct the library as an extension of the classroom, one
that is easily dispensable when other priorities (such as testing) come into play, the
library should be thought of as a valuable learning space in its own right, one which
complements the classroom but cannot be replaced by the classroom because the goals
and ethos are inherently different. Positioning it as an “other space” (Foucault, 1986), the
library does hold power, but this power is fluid, shifting across time and space as both

239
students and the librarian construct identities as readers, which in turn shape—and are
shaped by—the affordances and constraints of the space. Because students don’t have to
discipline their bodies in the same manner as in the classroom, the spaces they traverse
may be more fluid, as they are often permitted to make those choices based on their
preferences. These movements and affordances, however, are not only in jeopardy
because of school policies and priorities, but accountability discourses as well.
Where classrooms continue to narrow across the country due to assessment and
accountability pressures (Olivant, 2015), school libraries have the potential to be a more
fluid space (Leander et al., 2010), one that allows for activity. In other words, the library
doesn’t have to be a passive space, but rather, one that encourages innovation—both in
expanding ways of teaching, but also considering new ways to be a reader and to engage
in literacy. Implications for libraries are to allow for these shifts, and embrace the
evolution of literacy materials, such as digital materials and popular culture texts, instead
of limiting what can count as a text, and what counts as successful reading (for example,
encouraging volume of reading per certificates, evidenced on 2/1/2017). The library as a
space should not mirror the classroom, but rather complement it. It is up to school
administrators, teachers, and the librarian him/herself to ensure that the library is
designed to serve the teachers and students in that specific context. Ensuring that the
library is a space of transformation, where all students have access to texts and reading
engagements, requires that the space be supported.
One possible way to design a school library is to return to framing it as a
“learning commons” (Mueller, 2015), a space that is collaborative and open. Amanda, for
example, early in the year, expressed her desire for teachers to use the library as a

240
resource, one that could offer professional texts and support, rather than a space that
operated in a silo. Before being moved to the classroom, she had discussed drafting a
note to send to teachers to describe the different resources in the library that they might
wish to use (8/31/2016 FN). As libraries continue to disappear or find their work shifting,
approaching the library in a more creative and collaborate form may be a viable solution.
In doing so, new spaces for teacher inquiry and learning might also be created, where
staff from across the school can consider the many ways in which students have literate
lives.
When possible, other spaces should be used (or alternated) with libraries so that
the libraries sessions aren’t the first thing sacrificed when a testing space is needed.
Similarly, when positions within the school need to be filled, working to ensure that
librarians aren’t the first school personnel to be removed—like Amanda was—cannot
only preserve the importance of the space, but also communicates the wider significance
of libraries to students, school staff, and the community. As Amanda said, even though
she understands why this happened, she still can’t help but feel that “it’s just saying, well
anybody can go in there and do that” (9/29/2016 INT, p. 2). Documenting and theorizing
about the potential of libraries as transformative spaces may help ensure that students are
more conscious of these implications.
Continuing Professional Development for Librarians
One key finding from this dissertation was how significant and yet different the
library, as a space, was for the students who traversed it. Each student, through unique
literacy practices, constructed social and discursive spaces that varied. For James, who
felt constrained by reading levels, the library gave him time to read what he truly loved.

241
Nikki choses to carve out quiet spaces within the library to read independently. Mark, on
the other hand, was permitted to browse in the library in ways that he was discouraged
from doing in other school spaces, offering him a sense of flexibility and room for his
own agency. Rather than provide narrow parameters, such as what content is appropriate
for readers, or how a reader should maintain or control their body, ensuring that librarians
feel free to allow students to engage as they choose is paramount in constructing the
space as fluid and open. Providing opportunities for librarians to talk about their
observations, roadblocks, and solutions with one another—as teachers often do—is
something that, as professionals, they deserve.
As too often is the case, however, professional development for school librarians
is often siloed and done outside of the school site, although more attention is being paid
to the value of having professional learning opportunities, even when informal, and
structured within the school (Harvey, 2013). Therefore, professional learning
opportunities for school librarians require continual examination, both in format and
content. Luke and Kapitzke (1999), for example, contend that current work around print
literacies is no longer enough for the changing media landscapes that students will
increasingly encounter in their lives. In another piece, Harvey (2013) recounts how he, as
the school librarian, effectively took the lead on professional development around 21 st
century learning, which was housed within the school building and based on the
immediate context. Also touching on school-based professional development, as Harada
(2016) demonstrates, student learning can be positively impacted when teachers and
librarians have opportunities to collaborate to support student work. School librarians, in
fact, are often uniquely positioned to be integral parts of school professional learning

242
teams. Harada’s (2016) work demonstrates how librarians, when able and encouraged to
collaborate with teachers and students, can add depth and support to student research
projects, particularly around retrieving information and evaluating sources.
Librarians can play a significant role in demonstrating to teachers and students
how to access, examine, and engage with different sources of information. However, this
requires ongoing professional development, as well as opportunities for librarians and
teachers to share with, and learn from, one another. Particularly in a context where
inquiry is often edged out of other curricular areas, the library could function as a
collaborative and transformative space where inquiry is more feasible and where
librarians and teachers might work together towards common goals. Indeed, this was a
commitment that Amanda felt compelled to explore by inviting teachers to share and use
the professional resources located in the library (8/31/2016 FN), which unfortunately was
postponed due to her shifting role.
Change can bring about tension, and the library as an institution is rapidly shifting
as notions of what literacy, inquiry, and research mean also shift. Thus, more professional
development around how to engage with these new literacies is needed for librarians, so
that they can prepare students for this evolving social world. Simultaneously,
constructing formats for librarians to share their own knowledge, inquiries, and successes
with school staff may assist in forging connections and encouraging deeper
collaborations across spaces. A renewed focus on critical practices, new knowledge, and
pedagogy for school libraries is not only called for (Luke & Kapitzke, 1999), but has the
power to transform the space.

243
Continue Expanding Notions of Reading
More broadly, I believe that this dissertation introduces implications for literacy
paradigms both inside and outside the library. As Luke and Kapitzke (1999) contend,
libraries are sites “par excellence” (p. 467) for exploring new literacies, as the notion of
“being literate” can be reinvented in the library through multiliteracies, critical literacies,
digital literacies, and visual literacies. The exploration and integration of new literacies
into libraries subsequently requires a reshaping of our paradigms about what counts as
literacy and reading.
What is the impact of these narrow reading paradigms on students? For example,
the infiltration of reading levels into the library, spurred by both students and the
librarians, solidifies and strengthens traditional notions of schooled literacy (CookGumperz, 1986), rather than constructing the library as a space where many engagements
are possible. Only through rethinking who we mark as “literate” can we truly understand
the possibilities of the space.
This dissertation pushes back on notions of literacy as solely constructed through
text and illustrates how powerful other forms of literacy can be, such as those constructed
through play (Dyson, 2003; Yoon, 2014). After all, the library was originally positioned,
and it still positioned, as a space for inquiry (New York City School Library System,
n.d.), a space that deliberately does not mirror the classroom. However, pressures that
come from accountability and assessments have made this very unlikely in practice—and
these pressures are both brought in by librarians, but also by students, who very quickly
enter and adopt those discourses.

244
By approaching literacy in the library from a sociocultural and critical approach,
for example, it becomes possible to understand and reframe the variety of ways in which
students engage in literacy. Positioning literacy as socially constructed (Barton &
Hamilton, 1998; Heath, 1982) not only emphasizes and values the communicative nature
of language, but also pushes back on literacy as only being an interaction between the
reader and a text. A critical stance (Janks, 2009), too, resists dominant notions of literacy,
focusing on how literacy might begin to disrupt binaries between who has power and who
does not, and who “has” literacy.
In approaching literacy from a sociocultural and critical stance, browsing sessions
have the potential to become positioned as essential to students’ literacy development,
evidenced in James’ enjoyment with Mo Willems book and Mark’s ability to feel
successful with books in the library. As we widen what “counts” as literacy, the library as
an “unleveled space” might emerge, constructing a Thirdspace grounded in choice and in
children’s unofficial culture of play (Hall, 2011). While I have discussed the importance
of librarians to receive training around new and emerging forms of literacy, I also argue
that exposure to other paradigms, some of which may challenge librarians, is needed
(Luke & Kapitzke, 1999). While this may destabilize the traditional power dynamics
between librarians as possessing knowledge and students as receiving knowledge (Luke
& Kapitzke, 1999), new stances toward what literacy is can shape and reshape the space
in ways that allow for greater student voice and agency.
In a rapidly changing world, where definitions of literacy evolve, taking up these
different perspectives—and different research methodologies—may nudge educators to

245
consider literacy in more complex ways. The more complex the phenomena of study is,
the more nuanced and complex theories and methodologies we must explore.
Limitations of this Study
I selected a case study for this dissertation because I believe in the value of
exploring one case in depth in order to unpack the messiness of one school site (Dyson &
Genishi, 2005). My work adds to a body of research on how literacies might be
considered as occurring not just in school, or in homes, but as circulating throughout
many unexplored spaces. Even in studying one space, I drew implications for school
libraries, and other spaces in schools, from this work.
One clear limitation of this study is that I did not collect data for an extended
period of time. Should I have been in City Partnership School for several years, I would
have had access to spatial changes over a longer period of time and might have seen more
significant shifts. Examining how new staff members and new students, for example,
positioned themselves within the space over several years would add great depth and
complexity to this work.
Because this work is situated in early childhood, the study also does not address
growing concerns for older students as they prepare to transition to university education
and academic library systems (Cahoy, 2002). Additional research into the impact of the
library space on older students, their literate identities, and the role of school libraries in
supporting older students would strengthen the implications of this work. This study is
unique because both Amanda and Deborah were trained as teachers, and not school
librarians. For this reason, their approaches to the work and space may diverge from a

246
librarian formerly trained in library science or as a school library media specialist
(Johnston, Huber, Dupuis, O'Hair, O'Hair, & Sandidge, 2012). The experiences and
expertise of Amanda and Deborah should therefore not be taken to stand for all school
librarians.
In conceptualizing space as a network of relations (Leander et al., 2010), a final
limitation of this study is the singular focus on a school library. In future work, I would
like to explore different school library sites to examine connections and divergences in
how literacy in the library is conceptualized, and subsequently how students and
librarians identify in the space. Ultimately, this study should not function in isolation, but
should position the school as an entire organism. With this dissertation as a starting point,
there is a need to think about links across spaces so that this study alone doesn’t function
in isolation. This study has lessons about the potential of libraries to offer meaningful
experiences to students, despite the many constraints and tensions in place.
Conclusion to Chapter
Ultimately, the library is a space of immense possibility, and yet simultaneously
rife with contradictions. As our educational context continues to shift, the library,
alongside classrooms, must also shift as the world around it increasingly changes. As
information and access to information changes, libraries as institutions must be reframed,
at times, meaning that they become places and multimodal spaces (Luke & Kapitzke,
1999).
Libraries will likely continue to be liminal spaces, where competing ideas about
literacy, learning, and children circulate. More work in understanding these spaces is

247
needed, as is an educational climate—and political climate—that privileges spaces such
learning spaces. Ultimately, students are who we are serving in school libraries. By
allowing play, giving students space to resist schooled literacies (especially if they must
adhere to these in their classrooms), and accepting and privileging a wide range of ways
to “be a reader,” we can construct library spaces that enrich the lives of the students we
intend to serve. Not only that, but we can view schools as collections of spaces, that when
considered in tandem, might open other spaces for inquiry, student choice, and literacy.