A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art: A Literary and Visual Analysis of Themes in the
Works of Ashley Bryan

Teffeny Y. Edmondson

ABSTRACT

Current social, political, and cultural events, both nationally and globally, remind us constantly
of the need to identify books that celebrate positive images of diverse populations and build inclusion. For some time scholars in the fields of Library and Information Science (LIS) and children’s literature have advocated for and sought to develop collections reflecting the varied experiences and identities of young readers. This includes collections for African-American children
who often do not see themselves positively reflected or represented in literature, media, and culture. This study adds to those efforts by examining if and how African-American themes are reflected in award-winning writer and illustrator Ashley Bryan’s works. Focusing only on those
works that Bryan both wrote and illustrated, this project combines close reading with synthesis
of critical scholarship and Bryan’s own insights from personal interviews conducted at his home.
Through a process of textual and visual qualitative analysis, not only are Bryan’s own perceptions of the cultural content of his work highlighted, but the African-American themes reflected
in it are also identified clearly. As a result, his works, already celebrated for their multiculturalism, can be a building block in collections that strengthen literacy representation for youth readership, particularly for African-American children.

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
It is April 25, 2007, and Ashley Bryan is the guest of honor for the Ashley Bryan Literary
Festival at the Auburn Avenue Research Library on African American Culture and History in
Atlanta, Georgia. As hHe is introduced by the library’s director, Francine Henderson, and takes
the stage as the audience claps enthusiastically. Then, the audience listens as Bryan recites “My
People” by Langston Hughes. With Hughes’ book, The Dream Keeper and Other Poems (1933)
in hand, Bryan looks toward the audience and inspires them with the following words: “The
night is beautiful, / So the faces of my people. / The stars are beautiful, / So the eyes of my
people. / Beautiful, also, is the sun. / Beautiful, also are the souls of my people” (Hughes, 1932,
p. 60). It is fitting that Bryan began speaking by celebrating Hughes’ tribute to the beautiful
darkness of African-American faces, the lighter windows of experience in their eyes, and the
shining history and depth of the African-American soul; the poem gives a voice to a people and
culture long misrepresented or excluded from the field of children’s writing and illustrating.
Tellingly, it is Bryan’s desire to share his stories, storytelling, and illustrations with his own
works that provide exigency for my study.
Since 1985, the Cooperative Children’s Book Center at the University of Wisconsin has
recorded the number of books it receives that are written and/or illustrated by people of color
annually, including those by African Americans. The organization estimates that 5,000 children’s
books were published in 2014. Of that 5,000, the CCBC received 3,500 for review. Of those
3,500, African Americans wrote only 84, and only 180 were about African Americans; that is 2%
and 5%, respectively (Cooperative Children's Book Center, 2015). Such low numbers signal the
dearth of images and experiences in children’s literature that resonate with youth of color.
Enabling children to connect their experiences with what they read, to see themselves

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

2

represented, is integral to developing a love of reading and building literacy. This lack of
representation, then, has crucial implications for those African-American children who do not
see themselves in the books they read. As a result, it is imperative that school and public
librarians pay close attention to broad cultural representations and understanding AfricanAmerican culture and identity when building youth collections. It is their role to shape
collections and curricula that reflect, inspire, and serve not just one cultural segment of their
potential readers but also all segments. Kathleen Horning (2014), Director of the Cooperative
Children's Center, contends,
[If] we want more diversity in literature, we have to buy the books. Buy them for our
schools, for our libraries . . . We must be agents of change. Otherwise, we are all
participants in “cultural lobotomy.” And it won’t be technology that threatens the
existence of books. It’ll be their complete utter irrelevance in the real world that never
was and never will be all white. (p. 18)
Horning urges librarians to “[read multicultural books]. Know them well enough that they
become the go-to books when making recommendations or creating bibliographies. Sharing them
with children of all kinds, not just because they are multicultural, but because they are good
books” (p. 18). If they cannot do so, then librarians are failing the complex populations they
serve by not helping readers to see, know, and read books that reflect the varied world in which
they live.
Horning’s words have clear applications for a study such as mine—one that is focused
around the following research questions:
• What are the themes reflected and represented in works written and illustrated by
Ashley Bryan?

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

3

• What is Ashley Bryan’s perspective on the cultural content of his work?
Answering these questions takes Bryan’s work beyond the categorizations of just “good” or
“award-winning” books. It is not only that his work celebrates the presence of children of color,
or that it is multicultural, meaning consciously representative of elements from different cultures.
Instead, it is because they are “good books” that, because of their content, expose youth readers
to the importance of cultural diversity and inclusion in an engaging way—especially when it
comes to African-American culture.
Ashley Bryan’s cultural background informs his work. In my interview with him, Bryan
spoke of family and travel experiences that shaped his identity and art. The second of six
children (four boys and two girls) born to parents who imemigrated from Antigua in the British
West Indies, Bryan grew up in the Bronx, New York. Ashley Bryan’s parents saw how much he
liked to draw and bought him a desk with cubbyholes and drawers for artwork and supplies
(Bryan, 2009b). After high school, Bryan applied to one of the leading art schools, but in 1940,
African Americans were not granted admission. He recalls, “The interviewer stated that mine
was the best portfolio that he had ever seen. However, he also informed me that it would be a
waste to give a scholarship to a colored person” (Bryan, 2009b, p. 21). Bryan did not give up,
and his teachers did not either. They encouraged him to take a “blind” entrance exam for
Coopper Union School of Art and Engineering, which was tuition free (Bryan, 2009b). After his
acceptance and two years at Cooper Union, his schooling was interrupted when he was drafted
into the segregated army during World War II. He participated in D-Day and Omaha Beach
during the invasion of Normandy with other members of an all-black army battalion (Pavonetti,
2002).

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

4

Yet, during his army years, he did not stop drawing; he kept a sketchpad and art supplies
in his gas mask (Bryan, 2009b). He returned to Cooper Union to finish his art degree in 1946 and
won a scholarship to Skowhegan School of Art in Maine (Pavonetti, 2002). After returning home
from art school, Bryan attended Columbia University as a philosophy major. His experiences
both in society and at war fueled his desire to know answers to such questions as “why man,
knowing the overwhelming tragedies of war, chooses war?” (Schneider, 2009). He received his
degree in 1950 and, later, studied in France and Germany as a Fulbright Scholar. Although he
lived and worked in a Bronx studio apartment close to his family for many years, in 1973, after
teaching at Queens College and Lafayette College for some time, Bryan transferred to Dartmouth
College, where he served as Art Department Chair until 1989. He is now Professor Emeritus of
Art and Visual Studies (Pavonetti, 2002).
As he sought to be educated and educate others, Ashley Bryan tried for many years to
enter the children’s book world to no avail. In 1962, however, Jean Karl, founding editor of
children’s books at Atheneum publishing, heard of Ashley Bryan’s work and came to his studio
in the Bronx. Karl was excited by the different styles Bryan used to illustrate various texts, as
well as his varied approaches to text. Showing his work, Bryan explained to Karl that he was
inspired by the cultures of the world and celebrated those influences in his illustrations (Bryan,
2009a). Karl was so impressed that she sent Bryan a contract to work on his first book, a
collection of poems entitled Moon, For What Do You Wait? (1967) by Rabindranath Tagore
(Bryan, 2009a). Bryan was in his forties at the time. From 1962 until her death in 2000, Jean
Karl was Bryan’s editor. It was she who suggested that Bryan use his illustrations of African
folktales to produce a book in which he told the tales in his own words. In doing so, Bryan
reached into his past, to Langston Hughes and other African-American poets, to storytelling, and

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

5

to the tales told by his Antiguan grandmother. He “hoped [his book] would open the ear to the
sound of the voice in the printed word, so that even when reading [his] stories silently, readers
would hear the voice of a storyteller” (Bryan, 2009b).
Since then, Ashley Bryan has become a distinguished author and illustrator, winning
numerous awards for his work, including three Coretta Scott King Book Illustrator Awards. In
1981, he won for Beat the Story-Drum, Pum-Pum (1980). In 2004, he won for Beautiful
Blackbird (2003a), and in 2008, he won for Let it Shine: Three Favorite Spirituals (2007). He
has also won six Coretta Scott King Honor Book Awards—in 1983 for I’m Going to Sing: Black
American Spirituals (1982); in 1987 for Lion and the Ostrich Chicks and other African Folk
Tales (1986); in 1988 for What a Morning! The Christmas Story in Black Spirituals Selected by
John Langstaff (1987); in 1992 for All Night, All Day: A Child’s First Book of African American
Spirituals (1991); in 1998 for Ashley Bryan’s ABC of African American Poetry (1997); and in
2017 for Freedom Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley
Bryan (2016). In 1990, he won the May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture Award (ALSC). For this annual
event featuring a selected author, critic, librarian, historian, or teacher considered a significant
contributor to the field of children’s literature in any country, Bryan delivered a paper (American
Library Association [ALA], 1999). In 2009, Bryan won the Laura Ingalls Wilder Award for
Lifetime Achievement (ALSC), an award honoring an author or illustrator whose books,
published in the United States, have made a substantial and lasting contribution to literature for
children over a period of years (ALA, 1999). In 2012, Bryan won the Coretta Scott-Virginia
Hamilton Award for Lifetime Achievement; this award, given in memory of beloved children’s
author Virginia Hamilton, is presented in even years to an African-American author and
illustrator who has made a significant and lasting literary contribution with the body of his or her

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

6

published books for children/or young adults (ALA, 2012). Most recently, Bryan’s Freedom
Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley Bryan (2016) was a
2017 John Newbery Honor Book.
Purpose of the Study
The idea for this study came from my experience serving as children’s librarian at Atlanta
Fulton Public Library and as coordinator of the Ashley Bryan Literary Conference at the Auburn
Avenue Research Library on African American History and Culture. I had the opportunity to
observe Ashley Bryan recite the poetry of Langston Hughes and Eloise Greenfield to librarians,
children, and teachers. I have also observed how poetry plays a significant role in his retellings
of African tales, such as Beautiful Blackbird (2003) from the Ila-speaking people of Zambia. As
evidenced by my research questions, the purpose of this study, then, is to identify and examine
not only the themes reflected in Ashley Bryan’s writings and illustrations, but through
interviews, to elicit his personal perspective on the cultural content of his work. My analysis will
contribute to the growing body of research about African-American authors and illustrators for
youth.
A number of highly respected scholars have written on Bryan and his work. According to
Rudine Sims Bishop, Professor Emerita of Education at the Ohio State University and scholar of
African-American children’s literature, Bryan’s uniqueness of style and content is part of the
appeal of his illustrated works. From mosaic in the style of stained glass to block and stamp
printing, to storytelling and artistic influences from Africa, Japan, the Caribbean, and other
cultures, Bryan’s blending of myriad artistic styles and cultural elements differentiates him from
many writers and artists. Bishop, in fact, notes that it is difficult to separate Bryan’s roles as
storyteller, poet, musician, and artist from his finished art since, collectively, these roles help to

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

7

create his unique style (Bishop, 2007) His prose relies heavily on the musical components of
poetry—rhythm, rhyme, onomatopoeia, repetition, and alliteration (Bishop, 2007). Yet, what sets
Bryan apart from his counterparts most is his engaging and unusual way of using musical
components of poetry to tell the stories analyzed in this study.
Further explaining Bryan’s unique contributions to children’s literature, Henrietta M.
Smith, Professor Emerita at the School of Library and Information Science of the University of
South Florida, notes that “Ashley Bryan’s role as a storyteller is very evident in his many
collections of African folktales. The rhythmic beat of the text summons the reader to read these
stories aloud, with the ‘uh-huhs’ in place. These books are consistently designed with a
combination of ancient block prints and colors that reprints the earth tones of “Mother Africa”
(Smith, 2000). As Smith explains, the rhyme and phonemic sounds are what engage young
readers, and his use of ancient block print enhances their appeal (Smith, 2000). But, although
Ashley Bryan’s work has long been praised for its multiculturalism—its conscious representation
of elements from different cultures—by professional journals dealing with children’s literature
and library services, as well as award granting bodies, this study pointedly examines his writing
using textual analysis of prose and visual analysis of illustrations in an effort to determine what
themes, as identified by scholars of African-American literature and the literature of the African
diaspora, are incorporated and reflected in selections of Bryan’s work.
I use a synthesis of scholarly and critical commentary on Bryan’s works combined with
his own commentary, including my personal interviews and conversations with him, to provide
context for the analysis of his works. I will include a textual analysis of themes and visual
analysis of paired illustrations for each selected work.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

8

Need for Study
Ashley Bryan’s work spans four decades. Those interested in reinforcing multicultural
representation and collections in the library profession—including children’s librarians, school
librarians, library professionals, and researchers—will find, as I have found, that visual and textual analysis of his work adds to the body of knowledge regarding examinations of themes included in works by African-American authors and illustrators. While Ashley Bryan’s work is
important within the larger area of African-American children’s literature (which includes such
fellow pioneers as Walter Dean Myers, Virginia Hamilton, Jerry Pinkney, and John Steptoe),
there are also new authors and illustrators in the profession such as Javaka Steptoe, Gregory
Christie, Christian Robinson, and Christopher Myers, who, influenced by their predecessors,
continue to shape both the profession and the available body of work. A study of Ashley Bryan’s
use of elements from oral tradition in his prose and illustrations reveal story and visual influences drawn from many different multicultural sources; his stories and illustrations, then, may be
thematic exemplars through which to examine new voices.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

9

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
In order to identify African-American themes relevant to a study of the works of Ashley
Bryan, I first looked at major scholars of African-American literary criticism. Angelyn Mitchell
(1994), an Assistant Professor of English at Georgetown University, who specializes in AfricanAmerican literature, gathered works by these key figures in one edited volume, Within the
Circle: An Anthology of African-American Literature from Harlem Renaissance to the Present.
In my perusal of various original work and edited volumes in African-American literary
criticism, Mitchell’s collection stands out in its focus on works that have definitively “influenced
subsequent African-American criticism” and critics “who have initiated movements [in AfricanAmerican literary criticism] or who gave such movements definitive formulation” (Mitchell,
1994, pp. 1–2). Mitchell’s idea of “definitive formulation” is important to my study; many of the
critics she includes enlighten readers to key themes that are central to African-American
experience and literature across time periods. A scholar such as Ralph Ellison (1953) questioned
the persistent stereotypes of African Americans as beast or imbeciles that were rooted in slavery.
Robert Stepto (1979) lit a path toward the need for faithful representation of African-American
experience. These critics and scholars, as well as others, called on African-American artists to
resist creating art shaped by others’ racial visions, to create works that undermine negative
portrayals of African Americans, and to allow the richness of African-American voices to tell
their own stories. I argue that these elements are strongly reflected in Bryans’ work, along with
other elements reflecting his own cultural background and the cultures he has studied.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

10

African-American Themes
During the Harlem Renaissance new voices in African-American literature, such as
philosopher and critic Alain Locke (1925), called for a “New Negro” artist who would change
African American’ perceptions of themselves (Locke, p. 22). Locke argued:
[For] generations in the mind of America, the Negro has been more of a formula than a
human being—a something to be argued about, condemned or defended, to be “kept
down,” or “in his place,” or helped up,” to be worried with or worried over, harassed or
patronized, a social bogey or a social burden. The thinking Negro even has been induced
to share this same general attitude, to focus his attention on controversial issues, to see
himself in the distorted perspective of a social problem. His shadow, so to speak, has
been more real to him than his personality. Through having had to appeal from the unjust
stereotypes of his oppressors and traducers to those of his liberators, friends and
benefactors he has subscribed to the traditional positions from which his case has been
viewed. Little true social or self-understanding has or could come from such a situation.
(Locke, 1925, p. 22)
Much of Locke’s writing during the Harlem Renaissance, then, centered on overturning negative
perceptions of both African-American subject matter and African-American artists themselves.
Locke was asking artists to rise above servile images created by white Americans about black
Americans, such as the Mammy or the Uncle Tom figures; his central idea was to “rise from
social disillusionment to race pride” by reclaiming images of blackness from the depths (Locke,
1925, p. 27). According to Locke, race pride would be more of a positive achievement than
feelings based on others’ skewed perceptions of the race. He also sought recognition and
documentation of African-American artists’ achievements, urging artists not to fear

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

11

discrimination that shackled their minds and to be soul-searching, creative, dynamic, selfconfident and sure of their craftsmanship (Locke, 1925, p. 27). Locke’s call for a stronger
purpose in the field is important to the study of Ashley Bryan because Locke’s work suggests
that African-American artists’ creative expressions could lead to racial equality and esteem for
African Americans’ contributions to American society. I will argue that Bryan’s work portrays
“race pride” by sharing the cultural richness and positive achievements of African Americans
and positioning them as a part of (not apart from) larger American community and success.
Bryan does this by sharing the poetry of Langston Hughes in the book Sail Away (2015) and the
poetry of Nikki Giovanni in the book The Sun is So Quiet (1996).
Just one year after Locke wrote The New Negro, poet and essayist Langston Hughes
(1926) penned “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain.” In it, Hughes concerned himself
with the way that African-American artist faced negative perceptions and criticism about their
work from both their own people and white people disdainful of their very identities. According
to Hughes:
So, I am ashamed for the black poet who says, “I want to be a poet, not a Negro poet,” as
though his racial world were not as interesting as any other world. I am ashamed, too, for
the colored artist who runs from the painting of Negro faces to the painting of sunsets
after the manner of academicians because he fears the strange un-whiteness of his own
features. (1926, p. 55).
Hughes’s ideas are extremely relevant to a study of Bryan, as I contend that close analysis of
Bryan’s illustrations and writings not only shows him intentionally revealing aspects of AfricanAmerican culture, but also, in his manner of doing so, reflecting a strong sense of racial pride

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

12

and pushing the boundaries of a literary field still limited in its attention to African Americans
and their lives.
Like Langston Hughes before her, Zora Neal Hurston (1934) bucked the “politics of
[black] respectability” (Gross, 1997) put forth by both white critics and prominent AfricanAmerican critics such as W. E. B. DuBois, who claimed that any characteristic of black life that
did not show African Americans in the best light should not be published (Gross, 1997). Kali N.
Gross (1997), Associate Professor and Associate chair of the African and African Diaspora
Studies at the University of Texas, suggests;
This need to affirm our humanity and the “heroic” aspects of our culture has in part been
accomplished to our detriment. African-American scholars have furnished a discourse
that is “respectable,” and in effect reified elitism, sexism, and heterosexism. This
scholarship has resulted in the proliferation of culturally defensive forms of analysis.
These culturally defensive patriarchal analyses operate through the canon of omission.
(1997)
In her essay, “Characteristics of Negro Expression” (1934), Hurston’s argument was that
African-American artists should be free to express themselves—all of themselves and their
experiences, not only those facets of their lives that others deemed valuable or acceptable. She
demanded celebration of not only elite aspects of African-American life and culture, but also
folklore and colloquial expression, including folk heroes originating in Africa and during and
after slavery. Hurston argued:
The rabbit, the bear, the lion buzzard, the fox are culture heroes from the animal world.
The rabbit is far in the lead of all the others and is blood brother to Jack. In short, the
trickster hero of West Africa has been transplanted to America. John Henry is a culture

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

13

hero in song, but no more so than Stacker Lee, Smokey Joe or Bad Lazarus. There are
many Negroes who have never heard of any of the song heroes, but none who do not
know John (Jack) the rabbit. (1934, p. 85)
Hurston’s idea that folklore and African and African-American folk culture and expression are to
be celebrated and shared in order to paint an accurate picture of African Americans is relevant to
my study of Bryan, for I will aim to discern in my textual and visual analyses whether his
writings and illustrations not only celebrate, but also privilege African-American folk culture and
ideas as symbols of the cultural and ancestral roots that children must know in order to know
themselves. In my research, I examine books Ashley Bryan has adapted and/or retold and
illustrated himself, as well as those books over which he has dominant artistic control.
Accurate portrayals and authenticity were also very important to Richard Wright (1937).
In his “Blueprint for Negro Writing,” he outlined what he saw as the imperative role of black
writing in the United States and the responsibility to depict Negro life fairly. Wright too spoke of
folklore and origins, arguing:
It was however in a folklore molded out of rigorous and inhuman conditions of life that
the Negro achieved his most indigenous and complete expression. Blues, spirituals, folk
tales recounted from mouth to mouth, the whispered words of a black mother to her black
daughter on the ways of men, to confidential wisdom of a black father to his black son,
the swapping of sex experiences on street corners from boy to boy in the deepest
vernacular, work songs sung under blazing suns--all these formed the channels through
which the racial wisdom flowed. (1937, p. 99)
Wright’s ideas are relevant to my close analysis of Bryan’s work in that folklore and authentic
expression molded out of human condition is at the heart of his retellings; while I am not

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

14

studying his spirituals specifically, I would argue that the rhythm and cadence of life and the
spoken word are manifested in much of his writing, reflecting the authentic lived experience that
Wright wanted in African-American literature.
As African-American literature and culture evolved, however, African-American artists
still often found themselves limited by negative images of African Americans created during
slavery and lingering in the white psyche. For example, in 1953, critic and writer Ralph Ellison
addressed the continued plight of African Americans to be recognized as more than stereotypes
to things in the essay “Twentieth-Century Fiction and the Black Mask of Humanity.” He argued
that:
Obviously the experiences of Negroes—slavery, the grueling and continuing fight for full
citizenship since Emancipation, the stigma of color, the enforced alienation which
constantly knifes into our natural identification with our country—have not been that of
white American. And though as passionate believers in democracy Negros identify
themselves with the boarder American ideas, their sense of reality springs, in part from
an American experience which most white men not only have not had, but one with
which they are reluctant to identify themselves even when presented in forms of the
imagination. Thus, when the white American holding up most twentieth-century fiction,
says, “This is American reality,” the Negro tends to answer (not at all concerned that
Americans tend generally to fight against any but the most flattering imaginative
depictions of their lives), “Perhaps, but you’ve left out this, and this, and this. And most
of all, what you’d have the world accept as me isn’t even human.” (Ellison, 1953, p. 135)
Too often in western civilization, according to Ellison, the American Negro is inaccurately
represented by writers who have appropriated their images and oversimplified “clown, a beast or

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

15

an angel.” “Seldom is he drawn as that sensitively focused process of opposites, of good and
evil, of instinct and intellect, of passion and spirituality, which great literary art has projected as
the image of man. Naturally, the attitude of Negroes toward this writing is one of great
reservation (Ellison, 1953, p. 135). Noting that literature in the twentieth century reflected not
simply “white racial theories,” but “processes molding the attitudes and the habits of mind, the
cultural atmosphere and the artistic and intellectual tradition that condition men dedicated to
democracy to practice, accept, and, and most crucial of all, often blind themselves to the
essentially undemocratic treatment to the essentially undemocratic treatment of their citizens,”
Ellison felt that it was time for African-American writers to step up and explore the full
and often troubled reality of the American experience (Ellison, 1953, p. 136). Ellison’s ideas are
germane to a study of Bryan, for a close analysis of Bryan’s work will show whether he
transcends stereotypes of blackness rooted only in slavery, whether he reclaims a history for
African Americans beyond slavery, and if he shapes a reality of human experience that is
inclusive.
Shaping that reality involves faithful attention to representing African-American voices,
as Robert B. Stepto, African-American literary scholar and author of From Behind the Veil: A
Study of Afro-American Narrative (1979/1991), identifies. Similar to Hughes, Hurston, and
Wright before him, Stepto (1979) suggests,
[T]he strident, moral voice of the former slave counting, exposing, appealing,
apostrophizing, and above all remembering his ordeal in bondage is the single most
impressive feature of a slave narrative. This voice is striking because of what it relates,
but even more so because the slave’s acquisition of that voice is quite possibly his only

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

16

permanent achievement once he escapes and casts himself upon a new larger and larger
landscape. (p. 256)
While there are other voices in a tale, the authenticity of the primary voice experiencing the
tale’s action is integral to representing that person’s identity truthfully. Stepto uses the evolution
of slave narratives to illustrate the claiming of agency and identity through voice. For example,
using Frederick Douglass’s initial Narrative (1845) and his later narrative, My Bondage and My
Freedom (1855), Stepto shows that Douglass “reinforces his posture as an article hero, while
supplanting [William Lloyd] Garrison as the definitive historian of his past” (Stepto, 1979, p.
276). Because auxiliary voices and perspectives, namely white ones, had been used to validate
the authenticity of the slave voice, Stepto argues that Douglass’s progression through his works
shows a “slave shEd.D.ing his fetter and becoming a man by first finding his voice, and then . . .
‘speaking with considerable ease.’ In one brilliant stroke, the quest for freedom and literacy . . .
is resolutely consummated” (p. 276). His journey toward and authentic representation of self,
free from others’ dictates for it, is realized only as he strategically displaces others’ expressions
of history and identity. Stepto’s example, then, seems to illustrate a path toward having oneself
accurately represented and included. Stepto’s study of voice is integral to examining Bryan, as I
will closely read Bryan’s work to identify if Bryan represents African-American experiences
authentically through use of well-defined voices.
African-American Themes in Children’s Literature
As part of my study of Ashley Bryan, it was necessary to identify prominent themes in
African-American literary scholarship in which to situate Bryan’s work, to allow discussion of
the extent to which they are reflected in Bryan’s works. In order to isolate themes that are
relevant to the study of Ashley Bryan, it was imperative that I identify the writings referencing

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

17

African-American children’s literature that can best help me do so. My search exposed me to
various historical and contemporary scholars, critics, and librarians. Wilhelmina Crosson (1933),
one of the first African-American school teachers and administrators in the highly-segregated
Boston public school system, discussed the reductive and stereotypical literary depictions of
African-American children in “The Negro in Children’s Literature.” Crosson believed that those
entrusted with selection of the best books for children should keep in mind that no AfricanAmerican child should be deprived of non-stereotypical literature of his own race (Crosson,
1933, p. 252). Crosson also felt that African-American children should be taught the
achievements of their race along with the lives of George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and
Thomas Jefferson in schools; they should be able to look up accomplished African-American
figures (Harriet Tubman, Fredrick Douglass) while the white child is looking up his, and that
way sympathetic understanding could be attained (Crosson, 1933, p. 253). Upon Wilhemina
Crosson’s recommendation, African-American parents began to realize that their children did not
receive African-American literature in school and took their children to the Boston Public
Library for junior high and high school themed book clubs for both African-American and white
authors. (Crosson, 1993, p. 253).
E.K. Evans (1941; 1942) argued for the inclusion of real people living real lives in
children’s books in “The Negro in Children’s Fiction,” “Negro Dialect Children’s Books,” and
“A Further Statement on Negro Dialect in Children's Books.” Children speaking poorly crafted
dialect seemed to reinforce stereotypes of Negro ignorance for readers, both black and white.
Paul C. Deane (1968) wrote of the continued negative stereotypes of African-American children
in “Persistence of Uncle Tom: An Examination of the Image of the Negro in Children’s Fiction
Series.” According to Deane, during the entire history of the children’s fiction book series since

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

18

1899 (the year that The Rover Boys first appeared), the image of the African-American has not
changed. He lost dialect in the 1950s, and certain descriptive or identifying words with
unpleasant connotations, such as pickaninny and sambo ceased being used. But, these are
superficial changes; his position in society, his general character, and his personality have never
really varied (Deane, 1968, p. 140). In the 1950s, when civil rights was a growing issue in the
United States, the African-American in children’s fiction always spoke in dialect. In The Rover
Boys, the Rover family had an African-American servant, Alexander (Aleck) Pop. Aleck never
lost his dialect or even modified it (“yo’ is a sight fo’ soah eyes, deed yo’ is,” he says in The
Rover Boys in the Mountains), despite having lived in the North for decades (Deane, 1968, p.
141). Paul C. Deane points out this dialect seems an element of race, not geography (Deane,
1968, p. 141). However, since the 1940s, controversy has existed over dialect in juvenile
literature. It is practically gone from series books, and since it is in these books that dialect was
almost invariably degrading—it is a source of humor, and an indication of inferiority—one is
inclined to applaud its passing. Except for removing the dialect, however, the series books of the
time still maintain the traditional image of the African-American (Deane, 1968, p. 141).
Tracing progress in depicting African-American children fighting prejudice through
literature, Augusta Baker, former coordinator of Children’s Services at the New York Public
Library and first African American in any administrative role in that library system, called for
publishers’ attention to characters and themes that spoke to African-American children in
“Guidelines for Black Books: An Open Letter to Juvenile Editors” (1969). Augusta Baker asked
juvenile editors for more stories about African-American children and city life, stories about
families and children, realistic fiction with a happy or thought-provoking ending. There is still
room for stories on all levels of African-American life; Baker recanted the stereotypes of all

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

19

African-American people living in the ghettos and slums (Baker, 1969, p. 132). According to
Baker’s “Guidelines,” books with stereotypical illustrations were unacceptable; she felt that
those seeking to advocate for more inclusive children’s literature have a right to apply a certain
criterion for acceptable illustrations (Baker, 1969, p. 132). Baker detailed books that presented
positive portrayals of African-American children in The Black Experience in Children’s Books
(1989), as her bibliography mirrored and built on multiple editions of Charlemae Hill Rollins’s
bibliography, We Build Together: A Reader’s Guide to Negro Life and Literature for Elementary
and High School Use (1941; 1948; 1967). Both K.B. Baxter and Barbara Bader discussed the
importance of African-American children being able to see accurate representation of their lives
in “Combating the Influence of Black Stereotypes in Children’s Books” (1974) and “Negro
Identification, Black Identity” (1976) respectively. Osayimwense Osa, Professor of English at
Virginia State University, and founding editor of the Journal of African Children’s and Youth
Literature, built on Nancy Larrick’s “The All-White World of Children’s Books” (1965) and
further detailed the all-encompassing whiteness of early children’s books and their
inaccessibility to children of color in the The All White World of Children’s Books & AfricanAmerican Children’s Literature (1995). Clara Gatrell Stevens (2000), library media specialist at
Freedom High School in Orlando, Florida, and National Board Certified teacher, showed how
award-winning books for African Americans could be used thematically and pictorially to
combat negative stereotypes and influences in Coretta Scott King Award Books: Using Great
Literature and Children and Young Adults (2000).
Out of the growing body of scholarship on African-American children’s literature, there
are three scholars whose work underpins the African-American experience as represented in
works of children’s literature and its position in the wider world of children’s literature—Nancy

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

20

Larrick, Violet Harris, and Rudine Sims Bishops. Each not only evokes the historical elements of
the literature, but also shows how the field has grown in depicting African Americans accurately,
with attention to what is important to them culturally.
Given Nancy Larrick’s background—she had a Ph.D. in Education, teaching experience
at Lehigh University, and publishing experience with Random House—it is unsurprising that her
scholarship centered on exploring racial stereotypes and the historic lack of diversity in
children’s books, as well as changes in the publishing and library fields. Her emblematic essay,
“The All White World of Children’s Books” (1965), exposed the disproportionate numbers of
texts published with positive images of white children and few or no positive images of nonwhite children. Larrick argued: “Across the country 6,340,000 non-white children are learning to
read and to understand the American way of life in books which either omit them entirely or
scarcely mention them” (p. 63). According to Larrick, many children’s books portrayed African
Americans as servants, as slaves, sharecroppers, migrant workers or menial laborers (Larrick,
1965). Larrick’s analysis is important in looking at the prevailing themes reflected and
represented in works of that era.
Larrick’s analysis is also important in examining how themes such as inclusion and
realism have evolved in Ashley Bryan’s works. For example, Larrick conducted a three-year
survey analyzing the output of children’s book publishers and found that out of more than 5,000
children’s books published by 63 publishers during the years 1962, 1963, and 1964, only 349, or
6.7%, included stories about contemporary African-American children and adults (Larrick,
1965). Moreover, Larrick (1965) states, “Many of the simplest picture books show Negroes in
illustrations but omit the word from the text” (p. 64). As a result, she forcefully contends that
integrating schools and American society should also mean integrating the American school

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

21

curriculum, including literature for children. A founding member of the Council on Interracial
Books for Children (CIBC), Larrick saw books as weapons in the battle for integration.
Like Larrick, Violet Harris, Ph.D., Professor Emerita of Curriculum and Instruction at the
University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, surveys how African Americans have been depicted
in literature since the seventeenth century in her seminal article, “African American Children’s
Literature: The First Hundred Years” (1990). Harris divides literature into periods, detailing
gradual developments in portrayals and inclusion of non-white children; in fact, Bryan’s personal
history places him squarely within several stages of those developments. In the nineteenth
century, the majority of African-American depictions are stereotyped, pejorative, and
unauthentic (Baker, 1961; Broderick, 1973; Brown, 1933; Sims, 1982). Critic Sterling Brown
(1933) analyzed the images of African Americans in American literature and determined which
literary depictions of African Americans were entertaining to whites and, therefore, deemed
marketable (Harris, 1990). According to Harris (1990), Brown identified seven prevalent
stereotypes of African Americans in literature: “the contented slave,” “the wretched freeman,”
“the comic negro,” “the tragic mulatto,” “the local color negro,” “the exotic primitive,” and “the
brute negro” (p. 541). These stereotypes not only existed in adult literature, but in children’s
literature as well. For example, Elise Dinsmore (Finley, 1868; 1893), a tale of a pious planter’s
daughter, abounds with contented slaves, one of whom is Elise’s faithful “Mammy,” Aunt Chloe.
Aunt Chloe epitomizes endurance, strong religious convictions, and loyalty to the slave system
(Harris, 1990). Harris juxtaposes a negative portrayal, like that of Aunt Chloe’s, with a ray of
hope—the beginnings of a new tradition with Little Brown Baby, a collection of dialectic poems
first published in 1865, the first African-American children’s book by Paul Laurence Dunbar.
Dunbar’s Little Brown Baby (1865) deals with comical situations and whimsical characters, and

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

22

although it includes stereotypes of the comic Negro, it is a celebration of African-American folk
culture and a subtle celebration of racial pride (Harris, 1990).
Many of the texts published during the period of 1900–1920 can be labeled oppositional
texts: that is, much like Little Brown Baby (1865) began to do, they are works that contradicted
common themes, motifs, or stereotypes associated with depictions of African Americans in
literature (Harris, 1990). For example, Mary White Ovington, a white activist associated with
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), wrote two books for
children, Hazel (1931), and Zeke (1931). Hazel details the life of an African-American girl living
in Boston, who encounters very little prejudice. She is pretty, intelligent, cultured, and kind. It is
not until Hazel visits her grandmother in rural Alabama that she learns the harsh reality of racial
prejudice. While Ovington oversimplifies by limiting racism only to the South, it is important to
note that her depiction of Hazel is one that defies common ideas of African-American girls at the
time Hazel is presented with intelligence and potential. Likewise, in Zeke, Ovington depicts a
poor African-American boy from rural Alabama who rises to the middle class after attending a
Tuskegee school (Harris, 1990). Educated and tenacious, Zeke offers a different literary model
for black manhood than those previously featured in literature for children and youth. As Harris
suggests, Ovington attempted to provide African-American children with truthful cultural
images, as well as to entertain them, imbue them with racial pride, and inform them of the
achievements of their race and the alternatives to stereotyped images of African Americans
(Harris, 1990, p. 545).
Between 1940 and 1970, Harris credits Arna Bontemps and his extensive body of work—
novels, biographies, poetry, anthologies, folktales, and histories—with taking African-American
literature into acceptance by mainstream culture (Harris, 1990, 54). Bontemps’s work is

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

23

significant because it celebrates African-American folk culture and language patterns, building
on work by artists like Dunbar, Hughes, and Hurston. It also represents the integration of
African-American children’s literature into mainstream culture, as well as the shift from racial
themes to the subtler use of race and emphasis on authentic depictions of African Americans
(Harris, 1990, p. 549). Harris serves as a framework to chart Bryan’s work and the extent to
which it demonstrates the most desirable presentation an African American artist can make in
works of children’s literature: celebrating the history and grandeur of his own African roots.
According to Harris
If African American children do not see reflections of themselves in school texts or do
not perceive any affirmation of their cultural heritage in those texts, then it is quite likely
that they will not read or value schooling as much. Children need to understand the
languages, beliefs, ways of life, and perspectives of others. White children and other
children need to read African American literature because notions of cultural pluralism
are becoming more important as cultural, economic, and geographical barriers are
eradicated. The task confronting educators, then is to provide all children with
opportunities to hear, read, write, about, and talk about literature especially that affirms
who they are. (Harris, 1990, p. 553)
A prominent scholar who is also important to my research is Rudine Sims Bishop, Ph.D.,
Professor Emerita of Education at The Ohio State University. In her groundbreaking book,
Shadow and Substance (1982), Sims Bishop seeks to gauge how the field of children’s literature
had responded to the directives toward authentic representation and inclusion. In exploring that
response, Sims Bishop defines three specific categories of literature that emerged as a result:
“social conscience” literature, “melting pot” literature, and “culturally conscious” literature. The

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

24

first, “social conscience” literature, encourages mainly non-African-American readers to develop
empathy, sympathy, and tolerance for African-American children and their problems (Sims
Bishop, 1982, p. 17). Sims Bishop states that these books were created from an ethnocentric,
non-African-American perspective (Sims Bishop, 1982, p. 18). Of the second category, “melting
pot books,” Sims Bishop notes, “The melting pot books ignore all differences except physical
ones, skin color and other racially related physical features. The result is that the majority of
them are picture books” (Sims Bishop, 1982, p. 33). Because the characters are the same—
except for their color—the books allow readers to see themselves in some aspect of characters
that do not necessarily look like them. According to Sims Bishop,
Culturally conscious literature . . . comes nearer to constituting a body of AfricanAmerican literature for children. They are books that reflect, with varying degrees of
success, the social and cultural traditions associated with growing up Black in the United
States. The elements that are significant to culturally conscious books: major characters
who are African-American, a story told from the perspective of African Americans, a
setting in an African-American community or home, and texts which include some means
of identifying the characters as African-American, physical descriptions, language,
cultural traditions. (1982, p. 49)
In other words, these books depict African Americans living real lives as part of not only their
own culture, but also part of the larger culture in which they live.
In her book, Free Within Ourselves: The Development of African American Children’s
Literature (2007), Sims Bishop notes that African-American picture books tend to emphasize
three main themes: love in the family; pride in black heritage, history, and heroes; and fostering
self-love and self-esteem. The focus on family in African-American picture books, however, is

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

25

broad, with a strong emphasis on elders and intergenerational relationships, on extended family,
and on family as the primary support system (Sims Bishop, 2007, p. 148). This study attempts to
the ways in which Bryan incorporates and extends these themes as Sims Bishops suggests.
Additionally, Sujin B. E. Huggins (2012), Associate Professor in the School of
Information Sciences at Dominican University, is integral to my study. In her dissertation, How
Did We Get Here?: An Examination of the Collection of Contemporary Caribbean Juvenile
Literature in the Children’s Library of the National Library of Trinidad & Tobago and
Trinidadian Children’s Responses to Selected Title, she explores the collection of Caribbean
children’s literature in the Port of Spain Children’s Library in Trinidad and Tobago. In doing so,
she not only illustrates a lack of both quality in the collection but also a lack of adequate
representation of West Indian youth. While her study focuses on the Caribbean, it is salient to an
examination of Ashley Bryan’s works, for there are shared connections between the literature
and experiences of the Caribbean and those of the African American—two traditions that shape
Bryan’s family and history. Although conversations surrounding its existence in a postcolonial
space can be challenging in the United States, the concerns that Huggins raises regarding the
Caribbean apply in the United States as well. In both cultural spaces, there are individuals
victimized by imperial ideology privileging Eurocentrism and subordinating others. In both
spaces, those subordinated often seek to conceive of and inhabit identity against a normative
Eurocentrism constantly seeking to reinforce its primacy. As a result of the scarcity of scholarly
information on Caribbean Children’s Literature, Huggins necessarily begins her qualitative work
by positioning Caribbean Children’s Literature both within and apart from the questions of
identity, migration, the journey, language, and gender inherent in Caribbean Adult Literature. In
my hopes to add to the body of work on African-American themes in Children’s literature, with

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

26

Bryan as exemplar, I not only position his texts within and apart from themes in African
American literature as a whole, but also illustrate that questions of identity and visual, linguistic,
and cultural representation are, as I have argued, key to both scholarship on Bryan and in
collection building for youth.
To ground this study and to further enrich my examination of themes in Ashley Bryan’s
work, I will consider a range of primary and secondary sources related to Ashley Bryan, both
personal and professional, and look at specific examinations of his work, including Bryan’s
autobiography, other biographies about and interviews with him, and relevant chapters, journal
articles and reviews. According to online databases such as EBSCOhost and Library Information
Science Resource, there are over 2,300 scholarly professional articles in which Ashley Bryan’s
life and works are mentioned or studied. Many offer repeated information, or are republished
works. Articles from the Journal of Children’s Literature, Language Arts, Children & Libraries,
Book Links, Horn Book Magazine, Portland Press Herald Newspaper, Bangor Daily News,
Booklist and School Library Journal were most relevant to my overview. In examining these
sources, I found many of them to be repetitive, focusing largely on widely known aspects of his
upbringing and career. Some articles were republished in multiple periodicals in different forms;
however several articles helped me gain a fuller understanding of various aspects of Bryan’s
work and informed my close examination of selected titles.
The autobiographical Ashley Bryan: Words to My Life Song (2009) gives comprehensive
information on Bryan’s childhood, family, influences, and experiences of being an AfricanAmerican, as well as his early writing and illustrating as a child, young adult, and adult. Bryan’s
own account of how he developed as a person and artist (and how his life has influenced his
work) is invaluable to an examination of his work. From his family life to his development as an

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

27

artist through kindergarten, high school, and college to his ultimate publication and teaching, the
autobiography traces his trajectory and shows the life experiences that shape his work.
Biographers and scholars have closely linked Bryan’s upbringing and experiences to the
trajectory of his career and works. In Innocence and Experience: Essays and Conversations on
Children’s Literature (1987) by Barbara Harrison, Ph.D. and Gregory Maguire, Ph.D., former
professors and co-directors at the Simmons College Center for the Study of Children’s
Literature, Ashley Bryan is featured in a segment entitled “Sing Together Children.” Bryan
explains in detail his love of spirituals, their origins, the significance of spirituals for children,
and why he focuses on black poets and realists, such as Gwendolyn Brooks and Paul Laurence
Dunbar.
Similarly, in Many Faces, Many Voices: Multicultural Literary Experiences for Youth
(1992) by Anthony L. Manna, retired professor of Teaching, Learning and Curriculum Studies at
Kent State University, and Carolyn Brodie, Ph.D., Professor of Library and Information Science
at Kent State University, Ashely Bryan discusses several elements of his work in “Deep Like
The Rivers.” These include retelling and illustrating folktales, the works of Langston Hughes, the
dialect of Paul Laurence Dunbar, the experiences of teens in Bronzeville Boys and Girls (1956)
[written by Gwendolyn’s Brooks and later illustrated by Faith Ringgold in 2006] and Bryan’s
own work with the spirit of voice in stories. Individual African-American themes are not
mentioned explicitly, but the detail with which he discusses each element, such as creating
authentic voices and capturing the spirit of voice, is a significant element of Bryan’s work.
Jeffrey S. Copeland, Ph.D. and Professor of English at the University of Northern Iowa,
interviewed Ashley Bryan in a book co-authored with his wife Vicky L. Copeland, teacher and
curriculum strategist at Area Education 7 in Cedar Falls, Iowa. In this text, Speaking of Poets 2:

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

28

More Interviews with Poets Who Write for Children and Young Adults (1994), Bryan offers
insights into his writing process and thematic intentions. According to Ashley Bryan “Artist have
always been drawn to texts and have drawn texts. They see images in these works and use them
in their painting. It is just natural that my book work would grow out of my art (Copeland &
Copland, 1994, p. 69). When asked about his writing process, Bryan shared that he always has a
little notebook with him for jotting ideas or writings. Recalling the inspiration for a specific
poem, Bryan (1994) offered:
One evening I was sitting on the veranda at our family home in Antigua. From this
veranda I looked across the bay and saw on the hillside all the lights of the villages.
These lights made long lines as they reflected across the water before me. I looked up
from that reflection and there was the full moon just as it was a cloud. The poem “Full
Moon” in Sing to the Sun comes directly from observing that special moment. I took out
my notebook and worked on the poem right away.” (p. 70)
Writing in this moment ties Bryan’s work intimately to his life, a life that includes influences
from a variety of cultural and geographic experiences. When asked, then, about his philosophy of
blending illustrative material and print, Bryan touches on theme, specifically, as it relates to
developing the poems and selecting the watercolors for one of his poetry collections, Sing to the
Sun (1992). His attention to themes such as family and the interaction between art and what is
observed in real life will be explored further in my analysis of his work.
Sharon L. McElmeel, long-time educator, literacy advocate, and respected national
consultant on teaching literature to children, features Ashley Bryan as an author and illustrator in
100 Most Popular Picture Book Authors and Illustrators: Biographical Sketches and
Bibliographies, (2000). According to McElmeel, Bryan collects African stories. Because there

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

29

are more than 900 dialects in Africa, Bryan uses translations written in French, German, or
English as his source material (McElmeel, 2000). The examination of how Bryan collects his
African stories, often using motifs from brief, skeletal ideas that are not yet stories is key to my
own work. Bryan culls this information and, in creating his works, filters it through his personal
and artistic experience. Elements that might be from different tribes or languages may be united
through his lens because they touch him in different ways. That openness to blending cultural
elements while paying homage to them individually is important because again it shows Bryan’s
celebration and inclusion of multiple cultures simultaneously.
In addition, there are two resources that particularly address the thematic content of
children’s literature and apply directly to my examination of Bryan’s works: The Essential Guide
to Children’s Books and Their Creators (2002), and Children’s Books and Their Creators (1995)
by Anita Silvey, former Editor-in Chief of the Horn Book Magazine and former vice-president of
Houghton Mifflin. While Silvey’s texts are comprehensive surveys and do not deeply examine
themes in reference to Ashley Bryan’s work, she does consider how an artist has used themes in
storytelling and folklore, defines genres, and discusses the ways in which themes often work
within those genres. Her inclusion of social and historical issues, plus an entry that discusses
thematic elements central to creating successful multicultural literature provides a more general
context for my analysis.
One work by Leonard S. Marcus, renowned historian and children’s literary critic,
features an interview of Ashley Bryan: Show Me a Story! Why Picture Books Matter:
Conversations with 21 of the Worlds Most Celebrated Illustrators (2012). On closer
examination, I found that this interview also appeared in an early collection by Marcus: Ways of
Telling: Conversations on the Art of the Picture Book by (2003). It features information about

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

30

Bryan’s childhood, living in the South Bronx during the Great Depression, teaching, writing, and
illustrating.
Alice Swinger’s interview with Bryan entitled “Profile: Ashley Bryan” (Language Arts,
1984) documents precisely how Bryan uses found motifs to create stories in the spirit of the oral
tradition. She details his process—his reliance on primary sources and his blending of old and
new forms and sounds to develop stories that embed rich cultural history in children’s lives. In
many cases, Bryan focused specifically on African tales—particularly those texts that involved
authors interesting in translating the Bible into tribal language without improvisation. In reading
the original sources, Bryan read texts with the African language on one column of the page and
English translation, searching for a motif such as redemption, joy, or perseverance that he liked.
When he found one and began to develop it, he released the spirit of the story with imagery,
sound, meaning, and rhythm. Bryan believes that everyone, given a theme or motif of personal
interest, could develop a story in a unique way, just as each storyteller in the oral tradition
interprets stories in a personal way. It also details the relationship between poetry and story. As I
analyze Bryan’s works, it will be important to build on the elements that Swinger shares,
especially how integration of motif contributes to creating a story from the oral tradition.
One interview, “Interview with Ashley Bryan,” by Sylvia and Kenneth Marantz (Horn
Book Magazine, 1988), reinforced the biographical information that I later found repeatedly
about Bryan. In it, Bryan reveals how his editor discovered him, how he maintains his joy of
painting, and how he created his illustrations for his African or Caribbean tales, The Adventures
of Aku (1976), The Dancing Granny (1977), Beat the Story-Drum, Pum-Pum (1980), and Lion
and the Ostrich Chicks (1986). The interview provided a natural segue to a narrower focus on

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

31

Bryan’s background information in my literary review beyond autobiography and mere
biography.
There are a number of works that include Bryan and are helpful in providing background
information. For example, while Sheila Hamanaka, American children’s author and illustrator,
includes Bryan’s illustrated block print work from Walk Together Children (1974) in On the
Wings of Peace: Writers and Illustrators Speak Out for Peace, In Memory of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki (1995), her aim was solely to bring together a collection of authors who would foster a
focus on peace. She does include a bibliography for further reading and, by featuring him,
positions Bryan’s work as both multicultural and healing.
Barbara Rollock, former president of the children’s division of the American Library
Association (1974-1975) and New York Black Library Association (1988-1990) and author of
Black Authors and Illustrators of Children’s Books: A Biographical Dictionary (1988), refers to
the connection between interests that Bryan developed in African art, folklore, music and
storyteller’s skills by saying, “Un cont de douce les relie,” “A tender bridge connects them”
(Rollock, 1998, p. 18). In other words, the elements of Bryan’s work are so intricately and
intentionally linked that Bryan’s life and art are reflections of one another. Rollock recounts the
first book Ashley Bryan illustrated in 1964—Moon for What You Wait? (1964). The book
contains poems by the Indian poet Tagore and marks the beginning of Bryan’s career with
Atheneum publishing house. She also includes information about Ashley Bryan’s writing and
illustrating career, as well as his teaching at Queens College of the City of New York, Lafayette
College, the Dalton School and the Brooklyn Museum, plus his close work with Head Start and
other community programs. While Rollock (1988), like Bryan in Words to My Life Song, offers

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

32

key facts about Bryan’s life and integration of his life and art, she does not delve into the themes
in his writing and illustrating.
The All White World of Children’s Books and African-American Children’s Literature
(1995) by Osayimwense Osa features Kemi Nix’s biographical sketch on Ashley Bryan entitled
“The Pied Piper of Isleford: Ashley Bryan.” It tells of Ashley Bryan’s childhood, writing, and
illustrating career, but it does not delve as deeply into those elements as the autobiographical
works. In this piece, however, Nix reinforced the image of Bryan as one who gives hope to
children needing to see themselves represented in the literature they read. He focused specifically
how Bryan created his first book as a kindergartener, how he was encouraged to go to art school
in high school, and how he was denied admittance to art school because of the color of his skin.
His is a story of achievement through challenges. In The Art of Reading: Forty Illustrators
Celebrate RIF’s 40th Anniversary (2005), Leonard Marcus includes Ashley Bryan as one of the
feature illustrators; while Bryan explains why he is inspired by James Weldon Johnson’s and J.
Rosamund Johnson’s The Book of American Negro Spirituals (1925) and gives the history of the
spirituals’ creation by slaves, his explanations reinforce information in Bryan’s autobiography
and several interviews.
Finally, Artist to Artist: 23 Major Illustrators talk to children about their Art (2007) by
children’s author and illustrator Eric Carle includes Ashley Bryan talking to children about his
illustrative process. But, Carle (2007) focuses more on the physical nature of the illustrative
process. The Coretta Scott King Awards 1970-2004 (2004) by Henrietta M. Smith includes a
brief biography of Ashley Bryan and reviews of his Coretta Scott King (CSK) award-winning
and honor books for illustrations. It is noteworthy that the CSK awards are presented “annually
to outstanding African American authors and illustrators of books for children and young adults

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

33

that demonstrate an appreciation of African American culture and universal human values” and
these books invariably “promote understanding and appreciation of the culture of all peoples and
their contribution to the realization of the American dream of a pluralistic society” (ALA, web)..
Similarly, Ashley Bryan and his autobiography, Ashley Bryan: Words to My Life Song (2009) are
highlighted by Anita Silvey in Children’s Book-A-Day Almanac (2012), a text that spotlights a
children's book and an author each day for 365 of the calendar year.
Another significant article is “Wagging the Tale Off the Page” by Lonnae O’ Neal Parker
(The Washington Post, 1998), Pulitzer Prize-nominated reporter for the Washington Post.
Writing after hearing Bryan speak, Parker describes Bryan’s event being billed as a “book talk,”
but she notes that the title is a misnomer. Instead, she explains, he actually brings books to life.
Using language, inflections, tone, and emotion, Ashley Bryan spins stories and recites poems
that are not static, but dynamic representations of themes through which children can learn about
themselves and others. Perhaps the strongest of those themes is the call to be strongly rooted in
one’s own identity—to value one’s people and heritage while also recognizing the value of
others identities as well. Parker suggests that cultural themes permeate Bryan’s work, for he
often tells his audiences to know their roots and explore the links between their own people and
other cultures of the world.
Blending cultures is also the focus of “Talking with Ashley Bryan” by Henrietta M.
Smith (2000). As I have done for my study, Smith, Professor Emerita in Library Information
Science at the University of South Florida, traveled to Bryan’s Maine home to interview Bryan
about his art and books. In her interview, she emphasizes two books, The Dancing Granny
(1977) and The Cat’s Purr (1985). Not only do Bryan and Smith discuss his inspiration for
creating the books, but also how he studied and was influenced by the work of 18th-century

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

34

Japanese artist, Hokuasi. Additionally, Bryan explains how he crafts his illustrations
intentionally for each story that he wishes to tell, using color as a vehicle in storytelling as well.
While her study’s scope lays a foundation for mine, it does not focus specifically on acquiring
information that would allow me to both visually and textually explore Bryan’s use of African
American themes.
In another article, “Illustrations of Bryan: Artist Spends Afternoon with Les Belles Artes
Club,” by Genoa Barrow (2000), Ashley Bryan spoke with audience members about his
illustrations for Lorenz Graham’s republished How God Fix Jonah (2000). Originally published
in 1946, Graham’s book of Bible stories, long out of print, was reworked and illustrated by
Bryan using historical, religious block printing. Bryan explains: “I read from the Book of
Genesis through the New Testament drawing the images suggested as I read. I now refer to these
sketches for illustrating books with Biblical themes” (Barrow, B3). In other words, Bryan not
only relied on that style of illustration for Graham’s book, but also uses it as a template for
telling and illustrating other stories with Biblical themes. The importance of this article, then, lies
in the close relationship that Bryan has created between fully developing Biblical themes such as
redemption, perseverance despite hardship, faith, and family.
In her 2002 article, “Ashley Bryan: Beautiful Language, Wondrous Words,” Linda M.
Pavonetti , Ed.D., Department Chair and Professor of reading and Language Arts at Oakland
University, discusses Bryan’s multifaceted career as a scholar, artist, illustrator, storyteller and
folklorist, poet and humanitarian. More importantly, she notes that, when writing stories, Bryan
begins with library research into African motifs that were originally collected in the early 19th
century by missionaries and anthropologists. Unlike other articles that discuss Bryan’s approach
to storytelling and illustrating, Pavonetti’s article examines both the beautiful complexity of

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

35

Bryan’s use of language and delves deeply into his scholarly approach to illustrating. Pavonetti
discusses specific texts and materials that Bryan studies, which informs any detailed analysis of
his work, as this study attempts to do.
In “Celebrating Ashley Bryan,” Darwin Henderson, Ph.D., Professor of Teacher
Education at the University of Cincinnati, provides a deeper understanding of the theatrically of
Bryan’s work—the way in which his storytelling and illustration combine to create a
multidimensional and multisensory experience for the reader. Henderson (2004) talks with Bryan
about the ways in which music, poetry and art make their way into his writing; he links this
discussion to the fact that in Africa, storytelling is theater. The rhythm of music and movement
has influence in Bryan’s illustrations, as well as spirituals and the oral tradition of storytelling
(Henderson, 2004). Bryan himself feels a strong connection to his works, as the article, “2004
U.S. Children’s Literature Award Winners” (2004) reveals. In it, Ashley Bryan ia interviewed
for winning the Coretta Scott King Illustrator Award and shares his perspective for writing
Beautiful Blackbird (2003): “In my research of African tales to retell, the motif of Beautiful
Blackbird from the Ila-speaking people of Zambia struck me at once. Here was a story in which
Black was celebrated” (p. 400). Bryan discusses his research process, and it is important to
remember Bryan’s desire for a medium in which blackness is “celebrated” (p. 400).
Finally, in a “Personal Visit with Ashley Bryan,” Cora Phelps Dunkley (2008), Professor
of Library Information Science at University of South Florida talks with Ashley Bryan about two
of his works, Beautiful Blackbird (2003) and Let It Shine: Three Favorite Spirituals (2007).
Bryan used his mother’s scissors to create the collage in Beautiful Blackbird (2003), (Dlouhy,
2015). As a result, Dunkley discusses the importance of heritage with Bryan. With Let It Shine:
Three Favorite Spirituals (2007), Dunkley learns the importance of spirituals in Bryan’s life and

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

36

heritage. This article not only gives more information on his creative inspiration for the
illustrations for Beautiful Blackbird (2003) and Let It Shine: Three Favorite Spirituals (2007),
but also offers a discussion of specific illustrations and precisely how spirituals have impacted
Bryan.
Answering the research questions guiding my study requires a firm foundation in
African-American literary history and theory and its connections to the wider Diaspora, studies
of Bryan’s life and works, and studies of children’s literature, particularly picture books. The
works included in my review of literature have provided precisely that. Rooting my literary and
visual analyses in the most integral works from this literature review will allow me to clearly
examine and articulate the prevailing themes reflected and represented in works written and
illustrated by Ashley Bryan and to note the evolution of such themes over the course of Bryan’s
career.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

37

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Methods
In seeking a methodology that would best suit the aims of my research, one clear strategy
emerged- qualitative content analysis. Three articles that were particularly helpful in articulating
this strategy were Yang Zhang’s and Barbara Wildemuth’s (2009) “Qualitative Analysis of
Content” in Wildemuth’s (2009) Applications of Social Research Methods to Questions in
Information and Library Science; Phillip Mayring’s (2000) “Qualitative Content Analysis”; and
Hsiu-Fang Hsieh’s and Sarah E. Shannon’s (2005) “Three Approaches to Qualitative Content
Analysis.” Collectively, their discussion and presentation of qualitative content analysis helped
me to develop a framework to identify visual and textual evidence.
Starting as an analytical tool in the health sciences (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p. 1277),
general content analysis was initially quantitative (Mayring, 2000). General content analysis
served primarily to record and count “text data coded into explicit categories and then described
using [numerical] statistics” (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p. 1278). Whereas quantitative content
analysis quantifies the occurrence of textual elements to “test hypotheses or address questions
generated from theories or previous empirical research” (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p. 1277;
Zhang & Wildemuth, 2009, p. 308), qualitative content analysis “goes beyond merely counting
words or extracting objective content from texts to examine meanings, themes, patterns that
manifest or latent in a particular text. It allows researchers to understand social reality”
underlying the text (Zhang & Wildemuth, 2009, 308). In other words, the aim of qualitative
content analysis is not simply to say that textual elements are there in a superficial way, but to

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

38

identify “themes and patterns” that “provide knowledge and understanding of the phenomenon
[or text] under study” (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p. 1278).
Early applications of content analysis in the United States occurred in the social sciences
(Mayring, 2000). In the 1920s and 1930s, the earliest United States’ applications came from
social scientist, Paul F. Lazarsfeld, founder of Columbia University’s Bureau of Applied Social
Research, and Harold D. Laswell, co-founder of the Policy Sciences Center (Almond, 1987, p.
265; Mayring, 2000; Sills, 1987, p. 260). Each sought to examine the social and cultural contexts
of his discipline—psychology and law/political science, respectively—for better understanding
of causality (Almond, 1987; Sills, 1987). In the 1960s, however, the methodology began to
change, as the approach’s applications to psychology, sociology, linguistics, the arts, and
humanities made interdisciplinary thinking and reasoning more widely applicable (Mayring,
2000). Rather than focusing on “simplifying and distorting quantification” (Mayring, 2000),
researchers began to focus on “sense-making” of “the volume of the material”—the
interpretation of “latent contexts and content” which were not so easily quantifiable (Hsieh &
Shannon, 2005, p. 1277; Mayring, 2000; Zhang & Wildemuth, 2009).
Similarly, visual analysis, a key element of examining art, is also rooted in “sensemaking.” Its purpose is to comprehend choices that a particular artist makes in creating the visual
aspects of the piece. Using this technique moves viewers toward greater understanding of the
work (Schmandt-Bessarat, 2007). Yet, this technique is also linked to psychology, particularly
semiotic theory—the study of the ways that signs, whether visual, aural, or multimodal, have
meaning for viewers or ‘readers’ of art (Sipe, 1998). It is in this incarnation that visual analysis
has been applied to picture books since the late 20th century.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

39

Walter Moebius (1986) was among the initial scholars to use semiology to decode image
meaning in picture books. He argued in terms of codes—of position, size, return, perspective,
line, and color, among others (Kiefer, 2015). These codes tapped into the psychology of the
viewer and conveyed meaning. Most importantly, perhaps, for my study of Bryan, Moebius
(1986) focused on the psychological meaning that readers assign to color and its intensity,
especially when associated with scale of images on the page (Kiefer, 2015). For young children
not yet adept at reading the complex interplay of image and text, the psychological importance of
color is an important factor in how they may relate to and understand text.
In Words about Pictures, Nodelman (1988) built on Moebius’s foundation, arguing that
pictures offer readers further information about stories (Kiefer, 2015). Focusing not only on
meaning, symbols, cultural codes, and other signs, Nodelman also showed the importance of
image direction, perspective, point of view, focus, light, and shadow to help create meaning for
readers. For example, he questioned what effect juxtaposition might create if words are read leftto-right, and images are read top-to-bottom. Where Nodelman differed most from Moebius,
however, was in his contention that the relationship between images and words in picture books
is always “ironic” because, while they work together simultaneously to offer and reinforce
meaning, images and words also convey meaning that the other cannot (Nodelman, 1988, p.
222). Thus, the relationship between them is naturally complex. Considering Nodelman’s
argument in reference to young readers whose command of words is not yet fully developed is
intriguing; pictures help the reader to begin to understand word meaning, but the pictures can
help to shape the way that young children understand thoughts and ideas more concretely.
In Kress and van Leeuwen (1996), the question of multimodality became central to
reading picture books. Because 21st-century literacy involves “multiplicities of images and

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

40

words in forms and formats that go far beyond the book” (Kiefer, p. 376), reading picture books
must incorporate the ways in which they represent ideas, interpersonal forms, and composition.
In Reading Visual Narratives: Image Analysis of Children’s Picture Books, Painter, Martin, and
Unsworth (2013), extended the idea of representation, as they argued that multimodality in
picture books is important in socializing children to not only literature and literacy but also to
social values and the world around them; the books help children to build understanding of the
relationship between verbal and visual meaning, influencing the ways in which they engage their
worlds.
Returning to the ways that style, color, rendering, visual characterization, and other
elements build, varying degrees of emotional engagement and visual meaning, Painter et al.
(2013) discuss the means by which the “semantic load” is shared across the visual and verbal
modes in different ways. They examine particularly the ways in which there is a “metafunction”
to the text and images that builds understanding of interpersonal systems, ideas, and words,
themselves. The reason that this trajectory in visual analysis of picture books is so key to
studying Ashley Bryan is that Kiefer (1995, p. 117) and Painter et al. (2013) furthermore argued
that considering how meaning is expressed between image and text in picture books requires
understanding that, while they are not identical, the verbal and visual components share certain
characteristics.
Both author and artist use media elements to convey meaning. Whether through sound,
words, phonemes, or morphemes for the author, or shape, color, texture, or line for the visual
artist, there is a system of composition, rhythm, and pattern that helps each artist to convey
meaning. For the texts that I am examining, Bryan is both author and illustrator. While few of the

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

41

scholars above incorporate a racial or ethnographic focus, their conclusions about the
juxtaposition of images and words provide an interesting foundation for analysis.
Data Collection
The protocols that I followed more narrowly for the visual analyses was modified version
of Mayring’s (2000) step-by-step interpretive and deductive qualitative analytical models,
incorporating Kress and van Leeuwen’s (1996) and Painter et al.’s (2013) use of traditional
visual elements in art history for visual analysis of picture books. It included the following
categories because, together, they are the elements that guide the reader’s visual understanding:
•

Shape—not only definition of geometric forms but also how they are combined to
create bodies, prints, backgrounds, and other images

•

Color—the specific hue and its vibrancy within the larger palette chosen for the
particular work

•

Line—the length, breadth, and sharpness of marks that define shapes, pages, and
scenes (for example, line style might be softer in crayon drawings versus the
bolder black lines in paintings resembling stained glass)

•

Style—the manner in which the artist portrays his or her subject and how the artist
expresses his or vision

•

Palette—the range of colors used by an artist to create a desired effect in a
specific work

•

Medium—the material or technique used by the artist

•

Perspective—the viewpoint of the artist and audience (for example overhead, at
eye level, or from ground level)

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

42

For the thematic analysis, I employed categories identified by Huggins (2012). While my
research on African American children’s literature allowed me to consider how Bryan’s works
aligned with the development of the literature as a whole, Huggins’s (2012) defined themes
allowed me to narrow my focus quite a bit more, as there is overlap with African American
themes and specific elements from the Caribbean to which Bryan is connected by heritage. The
following categories offered descriptive elements pertinent to my exploration of Bryan’s
thematic representation in picture books:
•

Family relationships – which emphasized the bond or connection that exist
between two or more family members.

•

Friendship – The stories labeled friendship were those that emphasized a strong
relationship between two or more non-related protagonists.

•

Educational – Informational books with no prevailing narrative and mistakenly
classified as fiction.

•

Individuality/Being different – Pertaining to stories where the main character was
misunderstood, shunned or exhibited unusual behaviors.

•

Folktale adaptations – identified by story structured common motifs present.

•

Coming-of-Age Story – In the stories, the protagonist undergoes a transformation
from childhood to adulthood (or significant spans of time developmentally while
facing several challenges that may incorporate other themes, for example difficult
family relationships, adjusting to new country, etc.)

•

Migration – Often coexists with aforementioned themes of coming-of-age and
family relationships, but these stories also involve the physical transplantation of
the protagonist to another country and cultural ethos (2012). Inherent in exploring

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

43

the theme of migration is the theme of cultural pride, for often the protagonist
must come to terms with his or her cultural self against the norms of a new
environment.
Huggins did identify several other themes—environmental activism, historically significant
events or people, visiting the Caribbean, adventure, personal responsibility, social issues,
perseverance, an appreciation for nature. Yet, I found that it was most important to focus not
only on those themes that linked Caribbean and African American literature, but to establish the
ways in which Bryan might incorporate African-American themes for children needing to see
their lives, their understanding of family, the resonances of their culture, and their realities
through his works.
The Research Process:
1.

Conduct and analyze personal interview/oral history with Ashley Bryan, at his home in
Islesford, Maine. Identify explicit cultural themes and visual strategies mentioned.

2. Select titles that were both written and illustrated by Bryan for analysis.
3. Conduct thematic analysis by a close reading of selected texts
4. Conduct visual analysis of selected texts
5. Complete final analysis

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

44

CHAPTER 4: DATA ANALYSIS
The dataset for this study is comprised of works written and illustrated by Ashley Bryan.
In order to identify the prevailing themes reflected and represented in Bryan’s works, it was
necessary to survey all of Bryan’s books (see Table 1)

Table 1. Ashley Bryan Books Examined: Full List
YEAR

BOOK TITLE

AUTHOR AND ILLUSTRATOR

1965

Fabliaux: Tales from the Old French

Selected and Edited by Robert Hellman
and Richard O’ Gorman,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1967

Moon, For What Do You Wait?

Poems written by Tagor,
Edited by Richard Lewis,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1971

The Ox of the Wonderful Horns, and Other
Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan
African Folktales

1974

Walk Together Children: Black American
Spirituals

Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1976

The Adventures of Aku

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1977

The Dancing Granny

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1978

I Greet the Dawn: Poems by Paul Lawrence Dunbar

Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1979

Jethro and the Jumbie

Written by Susan Cooper,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1979

Jim Flying High

Written by Mari Evans,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1980

Beat the Story-Drum, Pum-Pum

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1982

I’m Going to Sing: Black American SpiritIllustrated by Ashley Bryan
uals, Volume Two

1985

The Cat’s Purr

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

AUTHOR AND ILLUSTRATOR

1986

Lion and Ostrich Chicks, and Other African Folk Tales

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1987

What a Morning: The Christmas Story in
Black Spirituals

Selected and edited by John Langstaff,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1988

Sh-Ko and His Eight Wicked Brothers

Retold by Ashley Bryan,
Illustrated by Furrio Yoshimura

1989

Turtle Knows Your Name

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1991

Climbing Jacob’s Ladder: Heroes of the
Bible in African-American Spirituals

Selected and edited by John Langstaff,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1992

Sing to the Sun

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1993

Christmas Gift: An Anthology of Christmas Poems, Songs and Stories

Compiled by Charlemae Rollins, Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1993

Story of Lightning and Thunder

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1995

The Story of the Three Kingdoms

Written by Walter Dean Myers,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1996

The Sun is so Quiet

Written by Nikki Giovanni,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1996

What a Wonderful World

Song written by George David Weiss and
Bob Thiele,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1997

Ashley Bryan’s ABC’ of African-American
Written and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan
Poetry

1998

Carol of The Brown The Brown King: Nativity Poems by Langston Hughes

Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

1999

The Night Has Ears: African Proverbs

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2000

How God Fix Jonah

Retold by Lorenz Graham,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2000

Salting the Ocean: 100 Poems by Young
People

Selected and edited by Naomi Shihab Nye,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2003

Beautiful Black Bird

Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2004

A Nest Full of Stars: Poems by James BerIllustrated by Ashley Bryan
ry

45

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

AUTHOR AND ILLUSTRATOR

2007

Let It Shine: Three Favorite Spirituals

Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2009

Words to My Life Song

Written and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan,
Photography by Bill McGuinness

2010

All Things Bright and Beautiful

Written by Cecil F. Alexander,
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2012

Who Built the Stable: A Nativity Poem

Written and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2013

Can’t Scare Me!

Written and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan

2014

Ashley Bryan's Puppet’s: Making Something from Everything

Written by Ashley Bryan,
Photographs Edited by Rich Entel

2016

Freedom Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their
Lives and Dreams Brought to Life By Ash- Written and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan
ley Bryan

46

After reviewing all of Bryan’s works, those that best represent the union of his
storytelling and illustration were selected. As a result, I narrowed my sample to 16 books Ashley
Bryan has adapted (or retold) and illustrated himself (see Table 2)—in other words, those books
for which he had dominant artistic control. This group of texts does not include his spirituals
because, while his illustrations for them are indicative of his process and artfulness, he did not
write or adapt the spirituals themselves.

Table 2. Selected Ashley Bryan Books (Written/Retold and Illustrated by Ashley Bryan)

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

1971

The Ox of the Wonderful Horns, and Other African Folktales

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

1976

The Adventures of Aku

1977

The Dancing Granny

1980

Beat the Story-Drum, Pum-Pum

1985

The Cat’s Purr

1986

The Lion and Ostrich, and Other African Folk Tales

1989

Turtle Knows Your Name

1992

Sing to the Sun

1993

Story of Lightning and Thunder

1997

The Night Has Ears: African Proverbs

2003

Beautiful Black Bird

2009

Words to My Life Song

2012

Who Built the Stable: A Nativity Poem

2013

Can’t Scare Me!

2014

Ashley Bryan's Puppet’s: Making Something from Everything

2016

Freedom Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley
Bryan

47

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

48

Thematic Analysis

The following table outlines the results of the thematic analysis of the sixteen selected
texts. Again, the themes identified and selected in the protocol derived from Huggins (2002) are
as follows:
•

Family relationships – which emphasized the bond or connection that exist
between two or more family members.

•

Friendship – The stories labeled friendship were those that emphasized a strong
relationship between two or more non-related protagonists.

•

Educational –Informational books with no prevailing narrative and mistakenly
classified as fiction.

•

Individuality/Being different –Pertaining to stories where the main character was
misunderstood, shunned or exhibited unusual behaviors.

•

Folktale adaptations –identified by story structured common motifs present.

•

Coming-of-Age Story –In the stories, the protagonist undergoes a transformation
from childhood to adulthood (or significant spans of time developmentally while
facing several challenges that may incorporate other themes, for example difficult
family relationships, adjusting to new country, etc.)

•

Migration – Often coexists with aforementioned themes of coming-of-age and
family relationships, but these stories also involve the physical transplantation of
the protagonist to another country and cultural ethos (2012).

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

49

Table 3. Thematic Analysis

YEAR

BOOK
TITLE

Family
Relationships

Friendship

Educational

Individuality/
Being Different

Folktale
Adaptations

Coming-of-Age

Migration

Common
motifs similar
to Cinderella

Mungalo is
mistreated
by mothers.and
has a
difficult family
life.

Mungalo goes
to another
village with
horns, marries,
brings his wife
back, and
becomes chief

Cat gets Aku
ring back dog

Aku journeys
into the forest

1971

The Ox of the
Wonderful
Horns, and
Other African
Folktales

Mungalo and
his kind and
loving mother
are promised a
great white ox

Ox magical
abilities gives
Mungalo wishes of food

After Ox’s
death, the horns
bring Mungalo
good fortune
and wealth that
stay with him

1976

The Adventures
of Aku

Onyema and
her son Aku

Aku, Dog,
Okraman and

Aku is sent by
his mother to

1977

The Dancing
Granny

Granny Anika
loved to dance.
She dance in
the morning.
she was never
too busy to
dance

1980

Beat the StoryDrum, PumPum

The husband
that counted
spoonfuls,
counting servings

Five Nigerian
adaptions retold

1985

The Cat’s Purr

Cat played a
small cat drum

Why Cat Eats
Rat

1986

The Lion and
Ostrich, and
Other African
Folk Tales

Mama and
papa Ostrich
have six ostrich
chicks. Lion
claims the six
Ostrich chicks
were his children

The Masai,
Their Language
and Folklore,
Alfred C.
Hollis. Oxford:
The Clarendon:
Press, 1905.
page 198

Cat and Rat are
best of friends

Mama and Papa
Ostrich and six
chicks

Mongoose
rescues the
ostrich chicks
telling Lion,
“fur begets
feathers”

Mongoose
outwits Lion
and helps
Mama and Papa
Ostrich

African oral
tradition

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK
TITLE

Family
Relationships

Friendship

1989

Turtle Knows
Your Name

Granny teaching
Upsilimana
Tumpalarado
his name

1992

Sing to the Sun

Family life,
African American and Caribbean Island life

1993

Story of Lightning and Thunder

Thunder was
mother sheep,
and Lightning
was her son

1997

The Night Has
Ears: African
Proverbs

2003

Beautiful Black
Bird

2009

Words to My
Life Song

Ashley Bryan is
the second of

Atheneum
editors Jean

2012

Who Built the
Stable: A
Nativity Poem

Mary, Joseph
and baby Jesus

Young shepherd
boy/carpenter
apprentice
offers shelter to
Mary and
Joseph

Educational

Turtle knows
Upsilimana
Tumpalarado’s
name and
Granny

Individuality/
Being Different

50

Folktale
Adaptations

Coming-of-Age

Migration

Upsilimana
Tumpalarado is
shunned by his
playmates
because his

Collection
reflects nature,
heritage, and
original poetry

Ma sheep and
Thunder and
son Ram Lightning called rain
down when

Twenty six
African proverbs from a
variety of
tribes, including
Ashanti, Swahili, and Zulu

Ma Sheep
Thunder and
Son Ram
Lightning are
banished to the

African wisdom
passed collectively from
generation to
generation

Blackbird is the
most beautiful

Autobiography
Ashley’s tour of

Adapted from a
tale from The

Published first
book in kinder-

Nativity story
told from
perspective of
shepherd boy
who built the
stable

Bryan kept a
sketch pad in

Nativity poem,
poem by Ashley Bryan

In 1980, he left
Dartmouth and

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

BOOK
TITLE

Family
Relationships

2013

Can’t Scare
Me!

Relationship
between boy
and grandma
who told him
stories about
two- and threeheaded giants

2014

Ashley Bryan's
Puppet’s:
Making Something from
Everything

Ashley and
Elaine would
pick up cast-off
items from the
side-walk,
recreate objects,
and give them
new life

2016

Freedom Over
Me: Eleven
Slaves, Their
Lives and
Dreams
Brought to Life
by Ashley
Bryan

Slave families
on plantation

YEAR

Friendship

Educational

A poem for
each puppet
told in first
person for each
Kwesi/ stew
bones for a
trunk ribs for a
tusk

51

Individuality/
Being Different

Folktale
Adaptations

Coming-of-Age

The boy knew
no fear; he was
not scared of
anything. His
music attracts
the two headed
giant

Originally told
in Folk-Lore:
Lore of the
Antilles, French
and English by
Elise Clause
Parsons (1936)

After encountering the
giants, he
learned fear and
promised
grandma would
be good.

Migration

All puppets
shape themselves and
Ashley elected
their names
from various
countries of
Africa

Ashley brings
the hopes and
dreams of 11
slaves’ to life
with strength
and human
spirit; each has
a name, an age,
and a price

Each slave’s
story is brought
to life with
attention to the
human spirit
and dreams
offreedom.

Discussion of Table 3:
A closer textual examination of the selected books in Table 3 showed the presence of the
defined African-American literary themes to differing degrees. Of the sixteen books, there were
ten books with stories centering on family relationships, or emphasizing the bond or connection
that exists between two or more family members. In three of the books, The Ox of the Wonderful
Horns, and Other African Folktales, The Adventure of Aku, and Story of Lightning and Thunder,
the relationship was between a mother and son. But, the enduring relationship in Sing to the Sun,
Turtle Knows Your Name, and Can’t Scare Me was between grandmothers and grandchildren. In

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

52

Who Built the Stable: A Nativity Poem, Bryan not only shares the Nativity story but also focuses
on the familial bond within it; additionally, he shows a nurturing relationship between Mary,
Joseph, and the young shepherd boy, suggesting an extended familial relationship. The Lion
Ostrich, and Other African Folk Tales features a full family as well—Mama, Papa, and Ostrich
chicks. Freedom Over Me: Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley
Bryan features slave family relationships and their challenges to show their defining spirit. And
Bryan reveals close autobiographical family bonds in both Words to My Life Song and Ashley
Bryan’s Puppets: Making Something from Everything,
In my interview with Bryan, he mentioned that love of family has been a source of
continued strength and inspiration. Because his work is often done in isolation, he indicated that
family bonds, whether biological or professional, and the ways in which his works are tied to
them offers him both a closeness to the work and a connection to something beyond it. He
offered, “When you are doing your artwork and writing, it’s in relation to whatever material you
are working with. If you’re working in a different form, you have a whole ensemble of people
working. If you are directing a play or you’re doing a theatrical piece in which you have a
designer for the backdrops or the costumes, for the music, for the words, you’re working an
ensemble. Other than that you’re working uniquely on your own. Even for each aspect of an
ensemble work, people alone are working on a design of the costume, but interrelated with
everything that’s going on. The feeling of the family, I told you.”
The seven stories incorporating the theme of friendship emphasized a strong relationship
between two or more non-related protagonists. The importance of friendship and the qualities in
it that shape, heal, and nourish people are featured in Bryan’s Words to My Life Song—
particularly Ashley Bryan’s strong and supportive relationships with Atheneum editors Jean Karl

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

53

and Caitlyn Dlouhy. In five of his retellings, interestingly, the main characters and protagonists
are either animals who befriend other animals or humans. In The Cat’s Purr, cat and rat are best
friends. In The Ox of the Wonderful Horns, Ox befriends Mungalo and grants him both wishes
and food. In The Lion and Ostrich, and Other African Folk Tales, Mongoose helps Mama and
Papa Ostrich by rescuing their chicks from lion. Turtle Knows Your Name features Turtle
befriending Upsilimana Tumpalerado and Granny; unlike others, he knows Upsilimana’s name.
In The Adventures of Aku, there is a bond between Aku and his dog and cat, Okraman and Okra.
And although there are elements of a foster-familial relationship with the shepherd boy in Who
Built the Stable: A Nativity Poem, the relationship begins with an act of compassion that cements
their bond in friendship—the young shepherd boy/carpenter offering Mary and Joseph shelter
before the birth of Jesus.
According to Bryan, one holiday season, he was looking at all of the elements in the
Nativity scenes at Christmas—the child in the manger, the wise men, the shepherds, and the
angels. He told me that he asked himself, “But who built the stable?” Indicating that he wrote
that question down, he decided to tell a new story, one of a young boy who knows little of
religion or the promise of Jesus being born. The innocent act of kindness and friendship is what
stands out in the book. Bryan said that the boy, having been “told that people have turned [Mary
and Joseph] aside,” says, “My animals will welcome you. I will sweep clear a space.”
Ultimately, Bryan says, he “wanted that feeling of the child thinking the little baby’s going to be
like him”—that there was a sameness in their innocence that made him act without prejudice or
other motives.
There were three educational books—informational books with no prevailing narrative
that are often mistakenly classified as fiction. For example, The Night Has Ears: African

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

54

Proverbs contains 26 African proverbs from a variety of tribes, such as the Ashanti, Swahili, and
Zulu; they reveal elements of those tribes’ cultures. Ashley Bryan’s Puppet’s: Making Something
from Everything is a book of handmade puppets accompanied by a poem representing each, but
the focus of the book is truly the ways in which materials are repurposed to make “something
from everything.” And although Words to My Life Song is written like a work of fiction, it is an
autobiography celebrating Bryan’s life with illustrations, writing, and storytelling.
The books featuring individuality/being different include main characters who were
misunderstood, shunned, marked by unusual behaviors or characteristics, or unaware of who
their identities. The fact that this was a recurring theme in all of the selected books is worth
noting. In the Dancing Granny; Granny Anika loved to dance; she was never too busy or too
tired to dance, and Ananse thought she could be easily tricked because of it. In The Cat’s Purr,
cat played a small cat drum, an odd behavior for a cat, but he is literally his own drummer and
marches to his own beat. In Turtle Knows Your Name, Upsilimana Tumpalerado is shunned by
his playmates because his name is too long. Beautiful Blackbird tells the tale of a black bird
voted most beautiful in a forest full of red, green, blue, and yellow birds; he is so beautiful that
others want to be like him, not realizing that his beauty comes from his comfort with himself—
from within. Can’t Scare Me is a tale where a boy knows no fear, which leads him to danger and
lessons learned. In Story of Lightning and Thunder, Ma Sheep, Thunder, and Ram Lightning set
fire to the farmers’ fields when they are dry and are banished to the sky from the earth for their
actions. In Freedom over Me: Eleven Slaves Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley
Bryan, 11 slaves’ hopes and dreams are brought to life; their stories show their humanity and
how they live with strength and spirit despite difficulties. Who Built the Stable: A Nativity Poem
is told from the perspective of the shepherd boy who built the stable for Mary, Joseph, and baby

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

55

Jesus; when others turn them away, he does not. In Beat the Story-Drum, Pum-Pum, The
Husband Who Counted Spoonfuls, Tagwayi, can never manage to keep a wife because he counts
spoonfuls and focused only on material things. And in Lion and Ostrich and Other African
Folktales, Mama Ostrich and Papa Ostrich have six little ostrich chicks; when Lion claims the
six ostrich chicks as his children, though they do not resemble him at all, Mongoose steps in to
help the parents. Bryan said, “Even when a story may have an outcome where the story turns
upon the character trying to trick somebody, still the story told in a way that it will be a lively,
exciting experience and you’ll have a good time, but you also have learned from it, that you can’t
always put over your tricks on others.” Bryan’s words indicate the importance of retaining what
makes you yourself but also realizing the impact that you have on others.
Two of the stories can be considered folktale adaptations; they are identified by the fact
that the stories are structured around common motifs, such as disobedient children, similar to
Hansel and Gretel. The Ox of Wonderful Horns, and Other African Folktales includes motifs
similar to Cinderella. Mungalo is mistreated by his stepmothers and leaves his village with his
great white ox. The Dancing Granny is a West Indian story of how Anansi keeps granny dancing
while he fills his basket with food from her garden. It is important to recognize that each of the
following books is considered a retelling, and each includes some element of the motifs that
shape the original: The Cat’s Purr is Bryan’s retelling of Why Cat Eats Rat (Montserrat); The
Lion and the Ostrich Chicks is a retelling of The Masai: Their Language and Folklore (Hollis,
1905 p.198); Turtle Knows Your Name is retold from Turtle Knows Her Name (qtd. in Parsons,
1936—Saint Eustatius English Antilles); Beat the Story-Drum: Pum-Pum includes five Nigerian
tales retold; Beautiful Blackbird is adapted from a tale in The Ila-speaking Peoples from

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

56

Northern Rhodesia (Smith, 1968, p. 350-51); and Can’t Scare Me is originally told in Folk-Lore:
Lore of the Antilles, French and English by Elise Clews Parson as well.
In my interview with him, Bryan indicated that he did his research for his books in New
York while he was teaching. He went to The Schomburg Library (now the Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture), which housed the most extensive collection on black life. Each time
he happened upon a story that he loved, he would jot it down or make a copy of it. His research
was so extensive, he says, that he has enough copies to prevent him from every having to go to
the library again. Later, when books of folktales from the late 1800s and early 1900s began to be
published in the 1960s and 1970s, Bryan says he would just buy them whenever he could get
them. In fact, it is in this time period that he came across anthropologist Elise Clews Parsons’
book about folktales of the Antilles in French and English. Inspiration for several of his retellings
came from her work, including the central motif of Can’t Scare. A young kid told her the story,
and she copied it exactly as it was told. Bryan, then, took the motif and developed it in poetic
form, rooting his work in the past but capturing it in a way that translates to the present.
Another theme is the coming-of-age story; in the stories, the protagonist undergoes a
transformation from childhood to adulthood (or a span of time that allows for personal
development while facing several challenges, such as difficult family relationships, adjusting to
new country, etc.). In The Ox of the Wonderful Horns and Other African Folktales, Mungalo has
a difficult family life and is mistreated by his mothers; he sets out on his own to grow and learn
before returning home to become chief. In Can’t Scare Me, after encountering the giants, the
little boy learns true fear and promises his grandmother he will be good if she will tell him
stories of the giants. In the autobiography Words to My Life Song, Bryan is drafted into the
segregated army and keeps a sketchpad and art supplies in his gas mask as an outlet to process

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

57

what he experiences. And in Freedom over Me: Eleven Slaves Their Lives and Dreams Brought
to Life by Ashley Bryan, each slave endures hardship, but each learns the importance of strength
and the human spirit to overcome life’s challenges. According to Bryan, Can’t Scare Me
employs the popular folktale motif of the trickster. The central conflict of the story is how a child
works his way out of trouble against odds stacked against him and how, in doing so, he comes of
age, learning lessons that will help him to be a better person.
The theme of migration often coexists with the aforementioned themes of coming-of age
and family relationships, but these stories also involve physical transplantation of the
protagonist to another country or location and, as a result, exposure to different influences and
experiences. This theme is apparent in The Ox of the Wonderful Horns and Other African
Folktales when Mungalo goes to another village with horns, learns lessons, marries, brings his
wife to his old village, and becomes chief with the magical horns. In The Adventures of Aku, Aku
journeys into the forest using a magical ring and, in the middle of the forest, builds a village for
his mother and himself. In the Story of Lightning and Thunder, Ma Sheep, Thunder, and Ram
Lightning are banished from their kingdom on earth to their new home in the sky after setting the
farmers’ crops on fire. In Ashley Bryan’s own life, as he reveals in Words to My Life Song, that
he goes to war, lives in different cities and countries, and, in the late 1980s, leaves Dartmouth
and relocates to Cranberry Isles year-round; each experience changes him in some way.

Visual Analysis
The following Table 4 (Visual Analysis) continues with the modified Mayring (2000)
approach and incorporates Keifer’s (2015) model outlining the following aspects of the
illustrations:

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art
•

58

Shape—not only definition of geometric forms but also how they are combined to
create bodies, prints, backgrounds, and other images

•

Color—the specific hue and its vibrancy within the larger palette chosen for the
particular work

•

Line—the length, breadth, and sharpness of marks that define shapes, pages, and
scenes (for example, line style might be softer in crayon drawings versus the
bolder black lines in paintings resembling stained glass)

•

Style—the manner in which the artist portrays his or her subject and how the artist
expresses his or vision

•

Palette—the range of colors used by an artist to create a desired effect in a
specific work

•

Medium—the material or technique used by the artist

•

Perspective—the viewpoint of the artist and audience (for example overhead, at
eye level, or from ground level)

Table 4. Visual Analysis

YEAR

1971

BOOK TITLE

The Ox of the Wonderful Horns, and
Other African
Folktales

Shape

White
Ox
round
village

Color

Red
Ochre
Black
White

Line

Black
Ochre
Red
White
lines

Style

African
paintings based
on studies of
African
sculpture

Palette

Bold, Earthy
Red
Ochre
Black
White
Paint

Medium

Tempera
paintings

Perspective

Close-ups
showings
facial expressions
middle distance
shots

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

Shape

Color

Line

59

Style

Palette

Medium

Perspective

1976

The Adventures of
Aku

Cat
Dog

Red
Ochre

Black
Red

African paintings
based on studies

Earthy/Warm
Red

Tempera
paintings

Framing, boxing and enclos-

1977

The Dancing Granny

Swift brush
strokes

Black
and

Swift bush line
paintings

Swift bush
paintings in-

Bold constrastBlack and

Black and white
bush paintings

Close-ups
Framing, box-

1980

Beat the Story-Drum,
Pum-Pum

Hen
Frog

Black
Red

Paintings reminisce of line

African
(Nigerian)

Bold, Earthy
Black

Tempera
paintings

close-ups, facial
expression,

1985

The Cat’s Purr

Cat
and

Brown

Pencil
crayon

Pencil drawings
with brown

Single color
(varied shading)

Pencil
drawings

facial expression, framing

1986

The Lion and Ostrich,
and Other African
Folk Tales

Animals
humans
geometric
prints

Red
Ochre
Black
White

Paintings
reminisce of line
drawings

African paintings
based on studies
of African sculpture

Red
Ochre
Black
White

Tempera
Paintings

two- and threedimensional
shadow blocking

1989

Turtle Knows Your
Name

Animals
humans
geometric
prints

Yellow
Green
Blue
Red

Strong multicolored lines

African
Caribbean

Yellow
Green
Red
Brown

Watercolors

Two and Threedimensional
image framing
and boxing

1992

Sing to the Sun

Geometric
shapes

Black
Yellow

Strong
Geometric

Reminisces
of Picasso

Brown
Orange

Watercolors

Overlap light
sources two and

1993

Story of Lightning
and Thunder

Geometric
shapes triangles,

Brown
Black

Strong
Geometric

Reminisce
of Picasso

Watercolors

Tempera
Paintings

Twodimensional

1997

The Night Has Ears:
African Proverbs

Interlocking
shapes of stain

Green
Red

White
outlines

Tempera
gouache and

Blue
Black

Tempera
gouache

2003

Beautiful Black Bird

Different shapes
of birds

Black
Yellow

Clean
lines

Collage

Colored
Paper

Paper
Collage

Perspective

Close-ups
showings

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

YEAR

BOOK TITLE

Shape

Color

Line

60

Style

Palette

Medium

Perspective

2009

Words to My Life
Song

Colorful
Rectangle

Pinks
Greens

Clean
Lines

Autobiography
Photography

Photographs
are by

Photographs

Framing, boxing and enclos-

2012

Who Built the Stable:
A Nativity Poem

Squares
Rectangles

Yellow
Red

Detailed bold
lines of animals

Vibrant bright
multicolored

Orange
Brown

Tempera
paintings

Close-ups
Framing, box-

2013

Can’t Scare Me!

Stripes
Circles

Red
Orange

Black lines
underscore

Rainbow
hued

Purple
Yellow

Tempera
paintings and

close-ups, facial
expression,

2014

Ashley Bryan's Puppet’s: Making Something from Everything

Various
shapes of shells,
bones, nets,
seagrass, and
driftwood

Brown
Green
Red
White
Orange
Purple

Thread
Glue

Puppets

Shells
Bones
Nets
Sea glass
Driftwood
edited by Richard

Sea glass
Driftwood
Crab claws
Fish Net
Spoons
Shells

facial expression, framing
enclosing image

2016

Freedom Over Me:
Eleven Slaves, Their
Lives and Dreams
Brought to Life by
Ashley Bryan

Collages and
mixed media
with various
shapes of portraits

Brown
Green
White
Orange
Black
Red

Black lines

Mixed-mediacollage, pen, ink
collage photo
reproductions of
historical deeds

Red
Yellow
Blue
Green
Orange

Diluted tempera
and felt-tip pen
on paper

two- and threedimensional
shadow blocking

Discussion of Table 4
Ashley Bryan’s illustrative process has evolved over the years. As seen in my visual
analysis of themes, he has never stayed with one style. In Artist: 23 Major Illustrators Talk to
Children about Art, (2007), Eric Carle includes Ashley Bryan talking to children about his
illustrative process (2007), and Bryan tells them:
When I illustrate a story, a song, a poem, images dance in my head, I’ve studied art of
world and I’ve used different sources to illustrate my books. Some artists have basic

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

61

style, yet they make the art of each book a new adventure. I have no one style of
illustrating my books. The text inspires the style and I celebrate the sources. (p. 18)
Even when I interviewed Ashley Bryan about what inspired his illustrative process, he revealed
he simply grew up loving art. As a result, he has studied the art of the world, of peoples of the
world, and the mediums in which people have worked. He has also watched children work with
endless types of materials and found inspiration in their natural creativity. Changes in his
illustrations reflect this constant inspiration.
In Bryan’s earlier illustrations, I saw a recurring colors, a palette consisting of red, ochre,
black, and white. Because Bryan is such a skilled artist, his illustrations in this palette, most
evident in The Ox of the Wonderful Horns, and Other African Folktales (1971), The Adventures
of Aku (1976), Beat the Story-Drum Pum-Pum (1980), Lion and the Ostrich Chicks and Other
African Folk Tales (1986), are often mistaken for block prints or silk screens instead of
paintings. By “painting in this fashion, he avoids the reduction that often occurs in the translation
from painting to picture storybook illustration” (Pavonetti, 2002). Additionally, there is a
stylistic focus on African paintings based on African sculpture. The illustrations, then, are based
on his study of African sculpture, masks, and rock paintings, and they are absorbed into his own
style that is his own (Marantz & Marantz, 1988).
Bryan changed his style for the Dancing Granny (1977) and had his grandma in mind
when he used the swift brush strokes inspired by the eighteenth-century Japanese artist, Hokusai,
and his Manga series of swift brush paintings [See Image 1 & 2]. Bryan also expanded his palette
with the publication of Sing to the Sun (1982), using not only black and red but also yellow, blue,
tree orange, and brown. In Story of Lightning and Thunder (1993), he incorporates brown, black,
pinks, purples, and oranges. In The Night has Ears; African Proverbs (1997), he adds green,

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

62

yellow, and orange to brown and black base colors. In Can’t Scare Me (2013), his palette
includes red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and purple.
The changes in his palette for illustrations have stimulated questions regarding how he
chooses his colors. In Smith (2000), he answers: “Color is a word of its own. It has its own
vocabulary and defines itself in each work you do. For example, there is no red, as such. The
color it [becomes] is in the context of the painting and it takes on various qualities according to
what it is surrounded by or enriched by!” (p. 11). As with his process, his color choice reflects
the importance of experience and context.
Changes in medium are an additional aspect of his illustrative journey. I found that
Ashley Bryan used mostly tempera paint and water colors in his illustrations. Yet, he transitioned
to collage in his Coretta Scott King Illustrator Award-winning book Beautiful Black Bird (2003).
When I asked him why during my interview with him, he indicated that he was inspired by
wonderful artists of our time who are collage artists, such as Faith Ringgold, as well as Matisse
and others. He noted that he had created a story in which black was celebrated, and he said “You
know, I would like to cut and paste colors, do collage for the colored birds, rather than painting
them.” Created just after his dear editor and friend, Jean Karl, died, the change in medium also
reflected a desire for change that new editor Caitlyn Dlouhy supported. He remembers her
saying, “Ashley it would be interesting to see, from the varied ways in which you have been
working in a material you have not used; colored papers which are cut and pasted.” Bryan noted
in his interview he also has on the end papers of those books a photo of the crochet scissors that
his mother used for dressmaking and embroidery. There is a note in the books: “These are the
scissors I’ve used for all the illustrations in this collage book.” He wants children to know that
there is a lot you can do with scissors. Although children are not allowed to use very fine razors

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

63

or cutting for collage, Bryan uses them for all the compositions for Beautiful Black Bird, All
Things Bright and Beautiful, and Let it Shine. As a result, he is able to experiment with
composition and range of color.
Other stylistic focal points include the incorporation of African art, clearly inspired by
African sculpture masks and the Bushmen rock paintings; Japanese art inspired by Japanese
artist Hokusai (as previously mentioned); and African-American and Caribbean art—the art of
the diaspora that blends influences. Bryan’s illustrative style illuminates the spirit of the text in
each book. Obviously influenced by the rhythm of the text, he is inspired by each tale or story’s
origin (Henderson, 2004). Story of Lighting and Thunder (1993), Turtle Knows Your Name
(1989), Who Built the Stable: Nativity Poem (2012), Can’t Scare Me! (2013), and Freedom over
Me: Eleven Slaves Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life by Ashley Bryan (2016) showed a
focus on folk art inspired by his sister Emerald’s drawings (Pavonetti, 2002)—drawings that
included vibrant hues.
In terms of shape, there seems to be a tendency toward organic shapes, for Bryan features
few angles in his work; the shapes seem to rise from the content. In Sing to the Sun (1992), The
Story of Lighting and Thunder (1993), The Night Has Ears: African Proverbs (1997), there are
geometric shapes that resemble stained glass windows, but there is fluidity rather than harsh
angularity. In these books, I also saw a common use of both two- and three-dimensional images,
depending on the subject. For example, three-dimensional images are used for boxing images,
and both two- and three-dimensional images are used for light sources.
Bryan’s use of lines offered an interesting study. I examined the Dancing Granny (1977)
and realized the prevalence of black and white flowing and curvy lines. According to Henrietta
Smith, Professor Emerita at University of South Florida, Bryan realized the “power of the

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

64

flowing lines and fluid rhythmic curves,” just as he understood the power of fluidity and rhythm
in language. For this book, he understood that the use of this line technique best represented the
dear lady who loved dancing more than anything else. When I interviewed Ashley Bryan, he said
that knew he wanted for that figure of Granny—to keep moving. It didn’t matter how old that
granny was; she was able to spin, twirl, to do all these kinds of rhythms and motions, and the
brush paintings would portray the spirit of the dance throughout the story (see fig. 2). The same
flowing lines are used but elongated to create the trickster, Ananse, who in this tale, attempts to
use Granny’s love of dancing to his advantage (Smith, 2000); his manipulations are distortions,
and that is reflected in the lengthening of his lines (see fig.1). The Cat’s Purr (1985) also used
similar brown striking outlines and curving lines similar to the Dancing Granny (1977), as cat
marched with his cat drum—the only one doing so.
Ashley Bryan has used a variety of media in his illustrations because, for him, media
rises from content and form. From tempera paintings, Japanese brush painting pencil drawings,
watercolors, acrylic, and collage, this understanding that the story chooses the media, so to
speak, has been constant in his work. For example, Bryan’s latest book, Freedom Over Me:
Eleven Slaves, Their Lives and Dreams Brought to Life (2016), is one for which he won both the
Newbery Honor Book Award and Coretta Scott King Book, Illustrator Honor in 2017. For this
book, he alternately uses and often merges tempera painting, watercolor, collage, and photo
reproductions of historical deeds to bring each individual character to life in a way that best
represents him or her. This variation reveals, as he offered when I interviewed him, that “the text
is what you start with” and then, you wonder, “How am I going to work these illustrations?”
Form rises out of content, for part of the book’s message seems to be that each slave has not only
humanity but also his or her own name, identity, life, and spirit.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

Figure 1: Illustration of Granny Anika and Spider Ananse, inspired by Japanese artist Hokusai.
Reproduced with permission from The Dancing Granny, by A. Bryan, 1977.

65

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

66

Figure 2. Illustration of Granny Anika, inspired by Japanese artist Hokusai.
Reproduced with permission from The Dancing Granny, by A. Bryan, 1977.

In my interview with Ashley Bryan, he noted that when he is writing and illustrating his
books, he feels like they would be for all ages because he wants to entertain himself as an adult.
But there is a child in him as well, and he feels that everyone has that in common. There are
experiences that every adult survives from childhood as they grow from innocence to maturity—
belonging and feeling like an outsider, joy and grief, ignorance and understanding. He says of his
content:
If I can tap that childhood, I’m tapping the initial spirit of adventure of learning and
growing, and I don’t want ever to be lost. It has been said [that] one of the most tragic
experiences of life would be the loss of a child, and so, never let that child within you die
. . . . It is a part of me that I will not let die, and it is a very rich source in every way
because it’s at the spirit of adventure.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

67

In childhood, there is such a rich canvas for learning and experiencing how we become
who will become. That period of time shape the ways we understand and treat others. Bryan uses
rhythm, rhyme, and illustrations to tap into that open space of childhood. Yet, the intersection of
childhood and adulthood is also a rich space; tapping into the child that adults often forget allows
adults to step back and consider what might have happened to that child who so badly wanted to
learn, took joy in hearing and learning new things, and became excited about experiencing new
things that changed perspective. In that way, Bryan’s art and words can be transformative. He
says,
In my work, the cultural themes that come up, what's happening today, [are] very
common in novels and writing. Black writers are using all kinds of themes of what's
happening in life today. They're making everything open and present. You can talk about
all these aspects of life that are contemporary and what young people are feeling and
enduring as they go through the teenage stage into their adulthood. They're very
important themes. You can't overlook them.

Edmondson, T. A Fusion of Music, Rhyme, Poetry, and Art

68

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
My research explores which themes are reflected and represented in works written and
illustrated by Ashley Bryan, and attempts to capture Bryan’s perspective on the cultural content
of his work. After limiting my sample to only those 16 works written and illustrated by Bryan, I
collected data using a modified Mayring (2000) model for both textual and visual analysis, as
well as a personal interview with Bryan in his Isleford, Maine home. Collecting my textual and
visual data in tables allowed me to both see the evidence of themes clearly and track the
prevalence of themes across texts. Table 3 is centered on textual analysis at the word level, using
Huggins’s (2012) articulation of the most prominent African-American literary themes. In Table
4, I began visual analysis, studying the shape, color, line, style, palette and medium of the
illustrations to locate trends. In Table 5, incorporating Kiefer’s (2015, p. 376) terminology, I
conducted a visual analysis considering the ways in which style, color, shape, line, perspective,
and choice of media reflected subject.
While there are a variety of themes in Bryan’s work, there is a heavy focus on exploring
family relationships and individuality/being different. Bryan also tends to use bold colors more
often than not, and while he has explored and blended various artistic styles and media, the style
and medium to which he returns most often are African-textile influenced and tempera painting.
Where there seems to be the most variation in his illustrations is in his use of shape.

Summation
After collecting data and undertaking “sense-making” as the final step in my
methodological model, I can attest that Bryan’s works are not only closely tied to African-American culture and traditions, but they also reflect themes consistent with works of the
African diaspora. Both in his own words and in my analysis, there is evidence that Bryan
actively engages these themes and both wants children to see the distinctions of a different
culture and see the sameness in the human experience beyond those differences.
It is important to acknowledge that this study could have been expanded to include all of
Bryan’s works. But, the need to locate those works that best reflected Bryan’s original
engagement with a topic or theme seemed key to answering my research questions most
accurately. Thus, the choice to limit my study to books that Bryan had written and illustrated
himself made sense. Additionally, because Bryan loves what he does, has a wealth of knowledge,
and is so engaging, interviewing him was challenging. His humility is inspiring, and his joy is
infectious. While I had specific questions, they were purposefully designed to be open-ended
enough to give Bryan room to elaborate. My difficulty was that I often simply wanted to hear
him talk rather than focusing the conversation.
Further Study
Further study building on this project could take multiple forms. Most readily, the study
of whether the themes exist could be transformed into a study of what it means that they do so—
both to youth and adult readers. Additionally, because Bryan has both adaptations and
deconstructions of existing folktales from various countries, it could be informative to examine
the themes registered when Bryan translates them, whether they align with the originals, and,
later, how both the originals and their adaptations speak to a need for cultural literacy.