THE IMPACT OF DIGITAL KNOWLEDGEBASE INFORMATION SYSTEMS
WITHIN EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

By
Ernesto Peña Correa

ABSTRACT
Knowledgebase and information management systems have existed for many
years within academics and professional organizations. These technologies have greater
importance within academic’s programs due to the need and responsibility of creating
and transferring knowledge and reliable information to their communities. In today’s
global, digital, and networked economy, information technology represents a substantial
investment and constitutes a significant aspect of an organizational workload.
Current information management systems focus on knowledge acquisition,
storage, retrieval and maintenance, where Digital Resources, ELearning Systems and
technology are used primarily to handcraft material and training courses about carefully
selected topics. The integration of Digital Resources, E-Learning systems and Knowledge
based Management technology improve the capture, organization and delivery of
traditional training courses and large amounts of corporate knowledge.
In this study, we identify mayor factors associated to the adoption and use of
Digital Information Management Systems by classifying and measuring the effects
associated with these digital resources and designing an efficient and effective model of

iv

research for the adoption and use of digital systems for the administration and research of
reliable and updated information.
This research posits that the intention to use Digital Knowledgebase Resources, in
academics and professional organizations depend on their perceived usefulness,
perceived user-friendliness, learning rewards, and other external factors that can
influence an individual’s acceptance and intention to use new technologies within Digital
Knowledgebase Management Systems. The findings indicate that the evaluated
constructs of marketing and support, social factors, resources characteristics, ease of use
and learning expectations, as well as the attitude of users are elements that directly
influence the utility and intention to adopt and use digital systems and resources in the
search for reliable and updated information.
The final research model was able to predict a 65.1% intention of user to adopt
and use digital information systems and resources to search for updated and reliable
information. The fundamental variables that allowed predicting the intention of adoption
and use were the attitude (38.3%), the learning rewards (34.9%), ease of use (28.2%) and
the characteristics of the resources (25.9%). Having a high level of precision to predict
the continuation of adoption and use of digital resources in the search for reliable
information.
This study contributes to the literature by empirically establishing the direct
impacts of educational and professional organizations to support and commit to academic
communities that are striving to find the right combination for reliable information,
protocols and systems to adopt and use digital information management systems.

v

Keywords: Digital Resources, E-learning Systems, Knowledge Management Systems,
Content Management System (CMS), Learning Management Systems, Organizational
Learning Systems.

s
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Background to the Research
Knowledgebase and information management systems have been existing for
many years, but organizations, educational and professional organizations have not been
able to implement these technologies with acceptable success. These technologies have
greater importance within educational programs due to the need and responsibility of
creating and transferring knowledge with reliable information to their communities,
(Songsangyos 2012). In today’s global, digital, and networked economy, information
technology represents a substantial investment for most organizations and which
constitutes a significant aspect of organizational workload, (Saade, Nebebe, Mak, 2011).
In this constant changing economy and with new existing technologies, people are
seeking for updated information and with no doubt one of the most important factors are
to stimulate strategic goals in organizations by achieving their Knowledge Management
Systems, (Songsangyos 2012).
Knowledge management systems play a key role in professional education and
are aimed to develop a better quality and effectiveness for human resources at all levels,
developing knowledge databases, towards enhancing, information investments for
organizations (Nilsook and Sriwongkol, 2009). In Amjad, Ahmed and Naeem (2013),
discussions of results, it states that most of the professionals use these resources daily to
pursue their research activities. Internet, web resources, e-journals, HEC databases, e
magazines, e-thesis, e-books, e-mail, and e-Newspaper were the frequent and most usable
electronic resources. They also stated that researchers mainly used electronic information

1

resources for learning and research purposes. These resources are use largely for studying
particular researches, and to up-date knowledge, (Mirza and Mehmood 2012).
Database technology is the core technology of information management systems,
it is a method for computer-aided systems to store, organize and to efficiently acquire and
process data (Kai Hu, 2014). Current knowledge management systems focus on
knowledge acquisition, storage, retrieval and maintenance, where Digital Resources, ELearning Systems and technology are used primarily to handcraft training material about
carefully selected topics delivered to organization, employees and users alike (Qassim
Qwaider, 2011). The integration of Digital Resources, E-Learning systems and
Knowledge Management technology improve the capture, organization and delivery of
both traditional training courses and large amounts of corporate knowledge (Qassim
Qwaider, 2011).
Knowledgebase and information management systems are creating repositories
and databases by capturing, organizing and indexing information from private and public
domain intelligence. Educational repositories also exist to provide for managing and
acquiring information using Digital Learning Repositories, Digital Object Repositories
and or Electronic Performance Support Systems (Sunil Gupta, 2014). Knowledgebase
management systems refer to repositories, organizational information, e-resources, and
databases that systematically capture, organize, and categorizes knowledge based
information. These repositories are most often private databases that manage enterprise
and proprietary information, but public and educational repositories also exist to manage
public domain intelligence, (Sunil Gupta, 2014). It is important to understand that
Database Technology is the core for information management systems, it is a method for

2

computer-aided systems to organize, store and to efficiently acquire and process data
(Kai Hu, 2014).
In the education sector, a major trend is that online education is immerging such
that the value of the information technology investment is realized only when that
developed instructional information systems are utilized by the students, these contribute
to their learning process, (Saade, Nebebe, Mak, 2011). Retaining and sharing corporate
and educational knowledge has become a critical objective for companies and
organizations, regardless of their size and industry, the proliferation of digital resources
such as online databases and corporate intranets enable educational organizations to
create and maintain knowledge repositories for the benefit of academics, professionals
and customers alike, (Pinto 2012).
Managing knowledgebase systems has been found to be a difficult task and
continues to be so to this day and there for, the management of knowledge is information
technology dependent, and the creation and utilization of knowledge is dependent on the
individuals and their activities (Saade, Nebebe, Mak, 2011). Educational organizations
perform an important role in the knowledge-based economy, contributing to provide
professionals with creativity and innovation, enhancing knowledge production and
intellectual property development (Pinto, 2012).
For the past years, e-learning has shifted from being a radical idea to something
that is widely accepted as a mainstream in the field of learning management systems, it
has become the major concern of numerous companies and enterprises as an important
service offered by most high-level educational organizations around the whole world
(Qassim and Qwaider 2011). E-learning systems has been evolving with the World Wide

3

Web as a whole by changing to an E-learning new term and deriving from the overall
combinations of e-learning to include collaboration, content production interactive and
access to updated information, (Qassim and Qwaider, 2011).
Knowledgebase and information repositories help organizations connect people
globally with information and expertise by searchable libraries, discussion forums and
other elements, they provide a central location to collect, contribute and share digital
learning resources and designing content development for learning environments,
(Selden, 2010). They have become an integral part of corporate-wide knowledge
management programs and a valuable stimulant for social, formal, and informal learning
activities (Selden, 2010). Knowledgebase repositories have evolved from static archives
of published documents, to dynamic communities that facilitate search relevant
information within agile learning platforms, they are now tools and vehicles for just-intime learning, enabling post-training support and assessment for organizations, (Lara,
Serradell, Maniega, 2013).
In today’s instructional context, computers and information systems are use to
process knowledge for storing and transferring, hence managing information. This
computerized process of managing knowledge is presented to humans for their
interpretation. With interpretation, humans learn, gain and create knowledge, (Saade,
Nebebe, Mak, 2011). Therefore, knowledgebase management systems where individuals
are using modern computerized medias to obtain information, can be viewed as a
progressive learning, (Saade, Nebebe, Mak, 2011). Technologies enable capturing digital
data, defining and storing the data, as well as categorizing, indexing and linking objects
corresponding to knowledge units, which provides means for access and searching to

4

relevant content, presenting content with sufficient flexibility, rendering meaningfully
information across multiple contexts of use, (An and Wang, 2010). Other priorities
include gauging the effectiveness of e-learning modules created to teach important skills
and modifying them, as needed for organizations, (Gupta, 2014).
Internet and web resources are persistently persuading the growth of new ways of
learning communication; their perspective for transporting information is relatively
enormous, as they restrained effectively the physical restrictions related with print
resources, (Amjad, Ahmed, Naeem, 2013). The well-known classification of knowledge
management systems and its critical success, include organizational factors, individual
factors, knowledge management capability and organizational performance, (Yang, et al.,
2010). Varieties of best practices are employe by training organizations to facilitate
learning while also protecting proprietary information and intellectual property (Sunil
Gupta, 2014). Knowledge repositories are required to protect the integrity and relevance
towards reliable information, where organizations can do most effectively by building
copyright compliance and digital rights management (DRM), into systems so that
administrators can track content and usage, (Sun, Easley, Kim, 2015). Most current
repositories lack DRM capabilities, a major limitation that affects content creators and
holders, and stunts the growth of platforms, (Sun, Easley, Kim, 2015).
Repositories provide centralized hosting and access, they enable users to share
digital files and objects, while also allowing administrators to set permissions and
controls for access to content, protecting integrity and intellectual property content
creators, (Ashis Kumar, 2014). By restricting individual content via password
authentication and other security functionalities, content owners and creators can

5

accomplish various goals. Access controls often involve safeguarding proprietary
information and protecting intellectual property. Some repositories employ digital rights
management systems (DRM) to protect and monetize intellectual property in the market,
(Sun, Easley, Kim, 2015).
The production of large amounts of data seems to be the inevitable result to
communicate with our work, but when dealing with these data, knowledge database
technology is necessary and when applied in information management, it can make the
information management work more accurate and efficient, (Kai Hu, 2014). To ensure
quality over quantity and to protect and maintain the integrity of information contained in
repositories, organizations can often create systems of content matter experts who accept
responsibilities over specific areas or communities, these often-moderated posts, respond
to questions, when advisable, coach and mentor learners and host webinars (Sunil Gupta,
2014). Other priorities include gauging the effectiveness of e-learning modules created to
teach important skills and modifying them, as needed (Sunil Gupta, 2014).
Using knowledge management and information techniques technologies for
educating are important factors as it is in the corporate sector. It is with knowledge
management systems that education and professional organizations will be able to
increase students and employee’s retention rates, (Omona, Weide, Lubega, 2010).
Retaining a technology workforce, facing of severe staff shortages, expanding new web
based offerings and competing in an environment where organizations can cross state and
national borders can meet the needs at anytime and anywhere, (Omona, Weide,
Lubega,2010). Knowledgebase management technologies and initiatives will help
identify expert resources, shift through information about different education and training

6

strategies to share their experiences and insights into successful interventions within
organizations, (Jundale and Navale, 2009). To assure that knowledge-sharing objectives
are established and executed, organizations can create a cross-functional committee of
valued employees and training professionals. They can task repositories to become a
valued aspect of a holistic learning experience for intended internal and external
audiences, making certain that the right people can acquire the right knowledge at the
right time (Sunil Gupta, 2014).
Over the past years, a number of international initiatives that recognize the
importance of sharing and reusing digital resources among educational and professional
communities through use of Learning Object Repositories have emerged, (Sampson &
Zervas, 2013). By exploiting knowledgebase information systems and functionalities,
these would bare the potential to support the organizations and sharing of educational
community’s explicit knowledge, depicted in digital educational resources and
interactions of using digital educational resources available in LORs, (Sampson &
Zervas, 2013). There is a strong relationship among Knowledge Management Systems,
Content Management System, and Learning Management System. These systems are
environments where virtual communities, as well as learners or team members can
communicate and collaborate within these Information Management Systems (Qassim
Qwaider, 2011). Virtual communities are in need for knowledge and learning content,
they exchange development of enhanced features and new technologies integrating in
these systems and allowing new types of communication and learning collaboration,
(Qassim Qwaider, 2011).

7

Research Problem
Digital knowledgebase and information systems are enhanced, quick, and
efficient technologies for sharing, teaching, researching and promoting valuable
information among education and professional communities, among other activities,
(Dadzie, Walt, 2015). There are providing new electronic resources and development that
is highly affecting the academic and professional communities. It is important to
recognize that the use of these electronic resources has increased rapidly by researchers,
instructors, students and professional organizations as well, (Amjad, Ahmed, 2013).
The term of Digital Resources or Digital Systems refer to collections of
information originally created in digital format or converted from print format and made
available by educational institutions databases, privately own commercial organizations
or by Open Access Communities. The digital resources that can include online databases,
e-journals, e-books, web resources and other related materials are access thru the Internet
or the World Wide Web, (Dadzie, Walt, 2015).
The availability of digital resources has been enhance by the rapid technological
advances, which have brought significant changes in the way information is acquired and
disseminated, (Dadzie, Walt, 2015).
Mirza and Mehmood (2012) conducted a survey to access user’s satisfaction
regarding electronic resources and services in Pakistan Universities. The results showed
that electronic resources and services can be offered effectively, however, the users faced
problems in accessing these resources and services due to the lack of IT skills and the
dispiriting attitude among supporting staff to effectively use these resources.

8

Justification for the Research
This study examines the use of digital resources among academic and
professional communities, where researchers, instructors and students have become
largely dependent on electronic resources and adopting these resources have become
common tools in their academic activities (Amjad and Ahmed,Naeem 2013).
The study conducts and find the awareness, adoption, use and services patterns of
digital information resources by professional researchers, instructors, and students in
educational and professional communities. There is an increase in the use of electronic
resources for learning, teaching, consulting and researching. Professional communities
have started relying heavily on digital resources for information. Poor internet
connectivity and limited access to e-resources is going to hamper these needs and for
there on, it is important to give serious thoughts.
Growing use and popularity towards electronic resources of information has
somewhat started winning interest over printed resources of information especially
among education and professional communities. Space and time constraints involved
with documents are no more in place with e-documents. Popularity of e-resources have
grown for many reasons and the considerable improvement is making more objective and
well defined the use of information. It is said that the quality of academic and
professionals is highly reflective by the use of e-resources, (Pandita, 2012). Education
and professional organizations are applying electronic learning to conquer the limitations
of the existing education system. Also, ease of access to e-learning and financial
resources are reasons for applying e-learning. Progress with global changes and the
information in this new era are defining needs for educating organizations to progress

9

with these global changes, which is necessary to acquire information and knowledge
using technologies and its significant roles, (Rabiee, Nazarian, & Gharibshaeyan, 2013).
Research Objectives
1.

To identify mayor factors associated to the adoption and use of digital
knowledgebase information systems within education and professional
organizations.

2.

To research, classify and measure the effects of factors associated with the
adoption and use of digital knowledgebase information systems within education
and professional organizations.

3.

To generate and design an efficient and effective model of research for the
adoption and use of digital knowledgebase information systems within education
and professional organizations.

Research Questions
1.

Which are the elements that could measure the perceived usefulness of digital
knowledgebase information systems within education and professional
organizations?

2.

What factors can affect directly the intention to adopt and use digital
knowledgebase information systems within education and professional
organizations?

3.

Will the intention to use be relevant to the adoption and use of digital
knowledgebase information systems within education and professional
organizations?

10

Hypotheses
H1: The Academic Marketing and Support have a positive impact on the
perceived usefulness of Digital Resources.
H2: Social Factors have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of Digital
Resources.
H3: The Digital Resources Characteristics have a positive impact on perceived
usefulness of Digital Resources.
H4: The Perceived Friendliness has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness
of Digital Resources.
H5: Academic Rewards has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of
Digital Resources.
H6: The Perceived Usefulness has a positive impact on the intention to use Digital
Resources.
H7: The Attitude towards using has a positive impact on the intention to use
Digital Resources.
H8: The Intention to Use has a positive impact on to adopt and use Digital
Resources.
Conceptual Framework of Digital Knowledgebase Management Resources
Based on the hypotheses presented above, on the relevant literature in Digital
Knowledgebase Management Systems and consistent with the theoretical foundation, the
following research model was propose. The model posits that the intention to use digital
knowledgebase resources within education and professional organizations depend on
perceived usefulness, perceived user-friendliness, learning rewards, and external factors

11

that influence an individual’s acceptance and intention to use Digital Knowledgebase
Management Systems and new Technologies. From there on, we also proposed that other
external variables such as Academic Marketing and Support, Social Factors and Digital
Resources Characteristics have an impact on the adoption and use of Digital Resources
for their Academic Pursuits.
Suggested Research Model

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework
Definition of Key Terms
1. Academics Marketing and Support = Describes the means of communication in
between the academic communities. It is the adaptation of commercial activities
with the purpose to induce behavioral change.
2. Social Factors = social factors include external forces that may influence users.
12

3. Digital Resources Characteristics = pertain to those in the Digital Systems itself
that may affect users.
4. Perceived Friendliness = is the term that represents the degree to which an
innovation is perceived not to be difficult to understand, learn or operate.
5. Perceived Usefulness = subjective probability that using the technology would
improve the way a user could complete a given task.
6. Learning Rewards = relate rewards directly to the performance to ensure that the
rewards provided are those rewards deserved and wanted.
7. Attitude towards Using = Attitudinal beliefs, whereas his/her subjective norms are
determined by his/her normative beliefs.
8. Intention to Use = the influence of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use
with the attitude towards system usage, which influences one’s behavioral
intention to use.
This chapter discussed the background that motivated the investigation of the
adoption and use of knowledgebase digital management systems within education and
professional organizations, the objectives and justifications to research possible
contributions to the problems.
Chapter 2 will describe theories and models, definitions and terms and will
include reviews of literature that supports factors, constructs and included for supporting
the research.

13

CHAPTER II
LITERATURE REVIEW
In this chapter, the theories to support the suggested model in Chapter I are
discuss to carry out this investigation. Also includes a summary of the relevant literature
related to the constructs that make up the suggested research model, such as Academic
Marketing and Support, Social Factors Digital Resources Characteristics, Learning
Rewards, Perceived User-friendliness Perceived Usefulness, the Attitude and the
Intention to use that have an impact on the adoption and use of Digital Resources.
Theory of Planned Behavior
The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) is a studied model from social
psychology; it is concerned to the determinants of consciously intended behaviors. The
(TPB) is used within behavioral sciences disciplines and in a variety of situations to
predict and understand human behavior, (Martinez, Presley and Zhang, 2013). The (TPB)
is one of the most psychological theories within applied to human behavior research
which states that an individual’s behavior is controlled by his/her intention, and his/her
intention is decided by his/her attitude, subjective norm (SN) and perceived behavioral
control (PBC), (Lai, Chen, and Chang, 2014).
According to the (TPB), a person’s performance of a specific behavior is
determine by the person’s intention to perform the behavior. This intention is determine
by its attitude towards the behavior (AT), which refers to the degree to which the person
has a positive or negative expectation of the behavior in question. The subjective norm
(SN), refers to the perceived social pressure to perform the behavior and the perceived
behavioral control (PBC) defines the ease or difficulty of performing such behavior,

14

(Martinez, Presley and Zhang, 2013). Generally, the more positive the attitude and
subjective norm with respect to a behavior, and bigger the perceived behavioral control,
the stronger an individual’s intention to perform that considered behavior, (Martinez,
Presley and Zhang, 2013).
Thus, an individual’s attitude towards a certain behavior is subject to his/her
attitudinal beliefs; whereas his /her Subjective Norm (SN) is, determine by his/her
normative beliefs. In addition, the Perceived Behavior Control (PBC) is subject to his/her
control beliefs, (Lai, Chen, and Chang, 2014). Attitudinal beliefs are assessments about
behavior’s consequences; normative beliefs are assessments about what others might
think, whereas control beliefs are assessments about factors that may facilitate or not
performances of the behavior, (Lai, Chen, and Chang, 2014).
These three factors are also determine by secondary factors, the attitude is a
function of the products of behavioral beliefs, likelihood or extent to which an action will
result in a particular outcome. The subjective norms are determine by the person’s
perceived expectation of specific individuals or groups multiplied by his or her
motivation to comply with these expectations. Perceived behavioral control depends on
the perception of the availability of skills, resources, and opportunities, which are
multiply by perceived assessment of the importance of those resources to the
achievement of outcomes, (Martinez, Presley and Zhang, 2013).
Perceived behavioral control (PBC), is an important but understudied construct in
information systems, further assessment of its determinants is desirable for several
reasons, according to the theory of planned behavior (TPB), which has been defined as
the perceived ease of the performing a behavior, (Elie-Dit-Cosaque, Pallud & Kalika,

15

2011). Previous research indicates that PBC is a relevant predictor of effective system
usage, a measure that reflects success; therefore, greater awareness of the determinants of
PBC may provide insights into how to influence system usage in the workplace.
Perceived control over IT is a key factor in explaining the behavioral and cognitive
efforts that individuals make to adapt to new and or disruptive IT implementations, (ElieDit-Cosaque, Pallud & Kalika, 2011).
Technology Acceptance Model
The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is the most influential extensions of
the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA). In the literature reviewed, (Davis, 1989),
hypothesized that the attitude of individuals using or rejecting to use technology was a
major determinant of will to use the system. The attitude of the user, in turn, was
considered to be influenced by two major beliefs, perceived usefulness and perceived
ease of use, (Marangunic, Granic, 2015).
Studying the acceptance of information technology has been the focus of many
Information System Researchers. The research efforts have been in the building of
theories that can predict factors to adoption and use of techonology. The Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM) developed by (Davis, 1989) is the most widely used model for
IT adoption and has received considerable attention in information systems research,
which was adapted from the Theory of Reasoned Action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). This
Theory (TAM) identifies four variables, the Perceived Usefulness (PU), the Perceived
Friendliness (PEU), the Attitude (ATT) towards and the Behavioral Intention (BI) to use
Information Technology, and the relationships between them, (Saade, Nebebe, Mak,
2011).

16

The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is an information systems theory that
models how users come to accept and use Information Technology, (Urhiewhu,
Emojorho, 2015). The model suggests that when users are present with a new technology,
a number of factors influence their decision about how and when they will use it. These
factors are perceived usefulness of the system, perceived ease of use, attitude and
behavioral intentions of the system, (Urhiewhu, Emojorho, 2015).
According to (Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013), the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM) is a specific model developed to explain and predict user’s computer usage
behavior. Derived from the Theory of Reasoned Action (Ajzen and Fishbein 1980), the
TAM asserts that the beliefs for Perceived Usefulness (PU) and Perceived Ease of Use
(PEU) will determine technology acceptance and are the key antecedents of Behavioral
Intentions (BI) to use information technology. The first key belief (PU) is the degree to
which an individual believes that a particular system would enhance job performance
within an organizational context, the second key belief (PEU) is the degree to which an
individual believes that using a particular system would be free of effort. The TAM
model assumes that Behavior Intentions (BI) determines actual use, also determined by
Attitude (AT) and Perceived Usefulness, (Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013).
Attitude and Behavior Intentions are two internal psychological variables that
directly affect user’s behavior. Attitude refers to the degree of a person’s positive or
negative feelings about performing the target behavior. PU and PEU both have direct
relationships with attitude (AT). Attitude partially mediates the effect of PEU and PU on
BI. PEU also influences PU, furthermore, it indicates that the system usage is affected by
both PEU and PU through AT, (Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013).

17

Vroom's Expectancy Theory
Early contributions of Expectancy-value theories include Vroom's theory,
suggesting that motivation is a function of three components, expectancy, instrumentality
and valence. He defined the expectation as a particular belief that should be follow by an
expected outcome, while instrumentality is that the probability of the performance would
lead to a specific outcome and the valence of the outcome refers to the affective
orientation, (Savolainen, 2012). Vroom hypothesized that all three of these factors
influence motivation in a multiplicative manner. Thus, if even one of these factors has a
value zero, positive expectancy is completely lacking, the person will have no motivation
for the performance of a task, even though his or her beliefs about instrumentality and
valence would be high, (Savolainen, 2012).
Victor Vroom's expectancy theory describes human motivation to act as based in
perceptions about the strength of causal relationships (Vroom 1964). The theory analyzes
worker performance and its connection to rewards, the theory provides for understanding
the lack of caring comparing to the existence of available opportunities, (Hamington,
2010). The key elements of the expectancy theory predict that an individual will act in a
certain way based on the expectation and that the act will be follow by a given outcome,
on the attractiveness of that outcome to the individual, (Renko, Kroeck, & Bullough,
2012).
The theory states that the actions of an individual are, driven by expected
consequences. Deciding among behavioral options, an individual is likely to select an
option with the greatest motivation forces. Expectancy is the probability that one’s effort
will result in the attainment of desired goals, and it is base on the individual’s

18

experiences, communication, feedback, or information from other people, (Renko,
Kroeck, & Bullough, 2012).
The Expectancy theory proposes that the motivation rests on the three following
linkages, the effort, the performance and the expected outcomes to receiving satisfaction,
which exist in a perceptual chain between making an effort and achieving satisfaction.
For someone to be motivated to act, all three linkages must perceive to have a high
degree of potential, (Hamington, 2010).
Motivation is an important factor that distinguishes who make progress towards
an operating venture from those who do not. Based on Vroom's expectancy theory,
startup-specific instrumentality, valence and expectancy are key components of
motivation and closely related to those intentions, efforts, and behaviors that will
eventually lead to a positive outcome, (Renko, Kroeck, & Bullough, 2012). Vroom
describes expectancy and descrbes the perceived correlation between effort and
performance where the individual must believe that his or her effort will lead to the
expected performance, (Hamington, 2010).
Recent expectancy theories, which are a major psychological approach to
motivation, have refined Vroom's formulations, this is due to a critique addressed towards
the early theories that approached decision-making as an overly rational procedure based
on the mechanistic calculation of the values of motivational components. Modern
expectancy cites that individual’s choice, persistence and performance can be explain by
their beliefs of how well they will do on the activity to which they value the activity,
(Savolainen, 2012).

19

A person must believe that exerting a given amount of effort can result in the
achievement of a particular level of performance. However, even if expectancies change
based on direct and indirect experience or other beliefs, those changes may not be follow
by corresponding changes in actual behavior, like effort or performance. Vroom’s
suggests that in addition to expectancies, valence and instrumentality are central to
understanding motivation. Instrumentality, which beliefs that if one meets performance
expectations, he or she will receive an expected reward, (Renko, Kroeck, & Bullough,
2012).
Models of Consumer Decision Making
In the eighteenth century, Nicholas Bernoulli (Bernoulli’s Utility theory)
developed the first consumer decision-making theory. The basic assumption of this
theory was that consumers make decisions based on the expected results. According to
Bernoulli, consumers select the option, which will provide maximum satisfaction,
(Mandl, Felfernig, Teppan, & Schubert, 2011).
Extended by Neumann and Morgenstern (Expected Utility Theory, 1944) stated
that the preferences of a rational decision maker can be represented by a utility function.
They introduced four axioms, which defined a rational decision maker. These included
the completeness where a decision maker has well defined preferences, that the
transitivity preferences are consistent, that independence customer preferences hold
independently of the outcome and that continuity stated that in a given middle option
there is a point between being better than and worse than this reference option.
Herbert Simon (Satisficing Model, 1956) developed an alternative model
considering the facts that consumers stop making decisions when they find good enough

20

solutions. Simon, argued that the idea of the rational decision maker requires perceived
information processing skills and lack the ability and resources to arrive to optimal
solutions.
Since 1960s various consumer decision-making models have been developed
(Erasmus et al. 2001). Traditional economic models based on the rationality aspects of
the Bernoulli’s Utility Theory are assuming that all users are able to make decisions that
are optimal and that have derived on basis of rational and formal processes. Consumers
were consider rational decision makers who seek to maximize utility.
Due to their wide range scope, these models are often label as the “Grand
Models”. Among the best known are the Nicosia Model (Nicosia 1966), the Howard–
Sheth-Model (Howard & Sheth 1969), and the Engel, Kollat&Blackwell-Model (Engel
1968).
An assumption of economic models is that preferences remain stable and are not
adapted within the scope of a decision process. However, it is a fact, that preferences can
be extremely unstable; since the customer could change his/her mind because he/she has
detected additional features. Preferences could change over time and are not stable within
the scope of recommendations. This insight led to the development of new decision
models.
In Payne’s (Effort Accuracy Framework Model, 1993), users take into account the
cost-benefit aspects. This basic assumption of the decision making is characterized by
trades between efforts towards decisions and expected rewards. The effort framework is
based on the fact that users show adaptive behaviors and select from an available set of
different decision depending on the current situation.

21

Construction of Preferences, (Bettman 1998). The basic idea is that users tend to
identify their preferences within the scope of recommendations. Only in rare cases, they
are able to state their preferences before the beginning of the decision. Taking in
consideration that decision processes are more focus on constructing a consistent set of
preferences than selecting user’s preferences for knowledgebase applications, user’s
preferences are construct within the scope of recommendation and the design of
interfaces that can have a major impact on the outcome of the decision process.
Academics Marketing and Support Factors
Over the last few decades, there has been substantial research conducted in the
area of consumer decision making process. It is believed that consumers make decisions
consciously and deliberatively, consumers are fully aware of the decision making process
and consciously process information before they decide, consumers make their decision
based on the information they have gathered, (Subhash Jha, 2015). Individual cultural
differences situational factors may influence consumer’s available choices and
alternatives, which also depend on social surroundings, the presence of friends, peers or
coworkers has a significant influence on consumer decision making processes (Subhash
Jha, 2015).
Decision making asserts that consumers go through steps to help in making either
easy or tough decisions. Often times, the literature alludes to the fact that these decisions
are of the more complex, where the customers require experience with the product or
service (Gross, 2014). Experience, as a variable, in dealing with the product or service
should be added in such decision making models for future studies. The common variable
in most proposed models are, data points that consumers receive specifications, and

22

promotions, and the progression through which the evaluation steps of the alternative
products or services available to consumers, (Gross, 2014).
Social Factors
In Rosli, Saleh, Aris, Ahmad, Sejzi, & Shamsudin, (2016), E-Learning and Social
Media research use of social media was found to be motivated by technology and social
influences. It states that strong positive relationship exists between the usage of digital
resources and social media, suggesting that social media can be a strong supporting factor
towards E-learning. This supports that social networking provides widespread
information acquisition regardless of geographical and cultural boundaries (Pumper,
Yaeger, & Moreno, 2013).
These nowadays advancements of technology impact the way education is being
approached globally, with the incorporation of computer systems and with heavy
integration of the Internet into the education system, the educational landscape have
changed for good (El-Seoud, 2013; Giesbers, 2014). Digital knowledgebase systems
enable academics and professionals to accommodate their own learning structures
according to their self and directed ability to select their, time, content as well as the
direction of their study, (El-Seoud, 2013; Giesbers, 2014).
Digital Resources Characteristics
These are the factor findings that influence usage of digital resources that suggest
the user’s knowledge of search domain, quality of digital content, system characteristics,
services quality, perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, and intention to use
influence the usage of the digital knowledgebase e-resources, (Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013).
User’s intention to use digital knowledgebase systems are significantly related to, their

23

perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness of digital resources, (Tabassum,
Roknuzzaman & Islam, 2015).
Studies look at the affordance attributes such as accessibility, entertainment
exchange, information repositories and asynchronous video conferencing tools,
(Krauskopf, Zahn, & Hesse, 2012), plus multimedia access and collection,
communication, and representation of thought and knowledge within expert information
management systems, (Song, 2011). Enhanced knowledge representation for experiential
learning, improve contextualization of learning and richer effective collaboration learning
for virtual environments (Dalgarno & Lee 2010). Users also are attracted by hints and
tips for solving problems related to educational affordances of ubiquitous learning
environments (Fu, Chu, & Kang, 2013; Tan, Lin, Chu, & Liu, 2013).
In an EBSCO’s User Research team, student’s digital habits extend beyond how
they interact with just digital resources. The behaviors that students learn online influence
their expectations for the resources they use in the course of their research, and believe
that a holistic understanding of those habits is as essential for companies and Institutions
supporting Digital Natives. In many ways, the obstacles students face when they conduct
research are the same as they’ve always been trouble with in topics and search strategies,
fear of being graded down for citing mistakes, and believing that help and supporting
doesn’t want to be bothered, (Costello, 2015).
Perceived Friendliness
According to (Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013), the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM) is a specific model developed to explain and predict computer usage behavior.

24

The TAM asserts that the beliefs for Perceived Ease of Use (PEU) can determine
technology acceptance and is a key antecedent to use information technology.
Given that a user interface interacts with users, a critical factor to consider in
improving the usability of an e-learning user interface is user-friendliness. Affordances
enable users to a more easily approach and engage in learning tasks because they
strengthen positive, activating emotions (Park, & Song, 2015). The rapid development of
information technology continues to create new possibilities for the use of electronic
learning within professional education. E-learning tools such as video-recordings of
lectures, computer-based trainings, tutor-guided online discussions and virtual document
sharing systems have become an integral part of undergraduate as well as graduate
programs, (Consonni, 2010).
Education and professional organizations need to offer virtual environments to
meet changing expectations regarding the way they are used. In particular, academics
generations expecting to be using new technologies given that they have grown up with,
and are therefore used to accessing information on offer whenever they want to, wherever
they want to, (Mohr, Holtbrugge, & Berg, 2012).
Perceived Usefulness
According to Lee, Hsieh, Chen, (2013), the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM) is a specific model developed to explain and predict computer usage behavior.
The TAM asserts that the beliefs for Perceived Usefulness (PU) can determine
technology acceptance and is a key antecedent to use information technology.
Lim, & Hew, (2014) in their research for perceptions of the usefulness, stated that
digital resources and its emerging technology such as e-book are likely to have a large

25

impact in Higher Education, over the next two-to-three years. E-books may be define as
the digital media equivalent of printed textbooks, read on computers or other digital
devices. Although e-books may be the electronic version of a printed book, some can
exist without any printed equivalent. The former refers to digital contents that are
available on the Internet for downloading to a user’s hardware devices, (Johnson, Levine,
Smith, & Stone, 2010).
As the power of the virtual world continues to manifest itself in people’s quality
of life and capabilities, López & Omoteso’s, (2013) paper aims to assess accounting
academics perceptions of the usefulness of Digital Environments to their learning
experiences; it also considers the factors that it may influence preferences compared to
face-to face learning. The results show that students find Digital Resources, tools and
techniques are useful for their learning, within the frame of the contingency theory of
education, the study found that student’s perceptions of the usefulness are strongly
dependent upon their country of study.
In the literature, Digital Environments are refer to as technology mediated
learning, web enhanced learning, web-based learning, and learning management systems,
these are consider a form of E-learning. They are a two-way communication between
academic communities, or between different learners as a form of digital learning
systems, (López & Omoteso, 2013).
Mohr, Holtbrugge, & Berg, (2012) analysis reveals that the more advanced and
complex the form of digital learning resources, the greater the influence of learning style
preferences on the perception of their usefulness. These results also point towards other
factors that might be of greater importance in explaining variances in the level to which

26

individuals consider different e-learning activities as useful. Perceived usefulness is
considered the subjective probability that using technology would improve a user’s given
task.
Learning Rewards
Learning Rewards relate rewards directly to performance to ensure that the
rewards provided are those rewards deserved and wanted by the academics. Vroom’s
Expectancy theory proposes that the motivation to act rests on three causal linkages that
exist in a perceptual chain between making an effort and achieving satisfaction,
(Hamington, 2010). Modern expectancy argues that individual’s choice, persistence and
performance can be explained by their beliefs about how well they will do on the activity
and the extent to which they value the activity, (Savolainen, 2012).
Gilhespy, (2011) in his study states that the changing characteristics of academic
communities in higher education require institutions to become more flexible in their
material used for education. The rapid emergence and adoption of digital forms has to be
embrace and offer to respond for the needs of flexibility. The study attempts to isolate
and evaluate the benefits offered by different sources of digital information systems. His
findings suggest that digital learning objects are popular and effective and there is a high
frequency and flexibility of use.
The rapid innovation and turnover of forms of technology has energized a number
of educators to try to embrace what appears to be a host of new opportunities. These can
support existing methods of teaching and learning, to reconfigure the teaching and
learning process in such ways that supplant the delivery of traditional forms. It provides
provisional evidence that the adoption of digital technologies is one that achieves very

27

positive feedback from student groups. Digital Resources can be as effective with the
provision of electronic materials as with the provision of traditional learning materials in
the form of written articles, (Gilhespy, 2011).
Baiio & Ray (2011) reports that the challenges and rewards of student’s
interactions and uses a core-periphery model to question the underlying assumptions of
internationalization efforts in undergraduate education. Prior to the interaction, it was
necessary to overcome technological obstacles related to the digital divide. That the most
important challenges included delays in student material exchanges and language
barriers. The rewards of the project included content knowledge gains, student’s
enthusiasm for international cooperation and exchange of learning materials.
Gonzalez, C. (2010) in his “What do university teachers think eLearning” study,
employed an approach to investigate what university faculty think eLearning is good for
in their teaching. Four qualitative findings in different ways of eLearning were
discovered providing information to students, for occasional communication among unit
participants, to engage students in online discussions and to support knowledge-building
tasks. Other variations provided a more details role of teacher, role of students, unit
participant’s interaction and perception of embeddedness with face-to-face component.
Results situated in line with those from previous research and indicated an emerging
consensus of findings. Academic developers may benefit from these outcomes by using
them in designing eLearning support programs.
Attitude towards Using
Attitudes towards knowledge seeking pertain to individual’s favorable or
unfavorable feelings towards performing use of KMSs for knowledge seeking. The

28

subjective norm (SN) of knowledge seeking relates to an individual’s perception of the
desire for the individual to perform or not perform knowledge seeking, (Martinez, Presley
and Zhang, 2013). The perceived behavioral control (PBC) of knowledge seeking defines
an individual’s perception of the ease or difficulty of carrying out a behavior. According
to TPB, intention is determine by attitude, SN and PBC. The theory also suggests that
behavioral intention is the best predictor of behavior, and that PBC directly affects
behavior, (Reynolds, Turner, Branscombe, Mavor, Bizumic, and Subaši, 2010).
The availability for resource refers to the user’s evaluations of factors required in
the knowledge seeking. For example, when less time is available, people’s behavioral
intention to use a system decreases. Studies show that facilitating conditions affect the
use of KMSs for knowledge seeking, as resources increase, user perception’s is that
knowledge seeking is under control and increases, (Reynolds, Turner, Branscombe,
Mavor, Bizumic, and Subaši, 2010).
Intention to Use
The (TPB) is one of the most influential and comprehensive psychological
theories in applied human behavior research, according to the TPB, an individual’s
behavior is controlled by his/her intention, and his/her intention is decided by his/her
attitude, subjective norm (SN) and perceived behavioral control (PBC), (Lai, Chen, and
Chang, 2014).
Fernandez (2011) conducted an empirical study, which found that the use of low
cost videos in engineering classes led to greater motivation improving perception of
efficiency in teaching and learning processes among students. Similarly, Clifton and

29

Mann (2011) observed an increase in student awareness, and learning facilitation among
nursing students who participated within multiple online learning resources.
In a multidisciplinary study, (Mitra, 2010) concluded that online videos had the
potential to enhance student learning and promote critical engagement but that such
videos needed to be part of an overall blended approach to learning. In another innovative
approach to the use of YouTube in the classroom, engineering lecturers created a concept
called YouTube Fridays, which impact students learning and their ability to treat with and
solve real world problems in thermodynamics (Liberatore, Vestal, & Herring, 2012).
Adoption and Use of Digital Resources
Universities are incomparable where research is pool with education. In this
Information based dominated century, scholastic education is measured as a piece of
innovation and using Knowledgebase Management Systems for research activities, online
databases and resources which have become essential. Electronic and online databases
are expedient for searching large quantity of information within the nonstop feasible
time. In developing countries, universities are acclimatizing to the new necessities of
swift access to information for the facilitation of users (Nwezeh 2010).

30

Table 1.
Literature Reviews

Digital Knowledgebase Management Systems
Amjad, Ahmed and Naeem (2013) in their study mention that most of the
researchers used electronic resources daily for many purposes and reasons. Most of them
were satisfied with the usage of electronic resources. Learning, education, and research
were the main purposes, and easy use and easy access to documents were the major
reasons of using these resources. Lack of internet connection, power outages, and
instability of sources were the major problems that were encounter by researchers in
using electronic resources.

31

Zha, Li, and Yan, (2012) examined users regarding printed, electronic resources
and the nature of usage behavior patrons in Chinese Universities. Their conducted a
survey on 273 users. The research promoted that traditional behavior of use for printed
material would be relocated to electronic resources.
Kim (2011) found that universities have spent a large amount of resources
digitizing information and making it available on the web. This study examined the user
perception regarding the purposes of this technology, the service quality, and the website
designs.
Fertalj, Hoić-Božić and Jerković (2010) states that, LMS can have excellent
performance if implemented through advanced Web technologies but it is often
accompanied by rarely used repository or poor educational content. Stating that one
globally accepted way to implement digital learning is by using a Knowledge
Management System as an all-in-one system for online education, which covers
registration, administering and monitoring of users and content. LMS also provides other
tools such as assessment tools, discussion forums, and grading tools and so forth,
therefore, it has become an irreplaceable solution for modern universities and other
educational institutions.
Tai-Kuei Yu and Tai-Yi Yu (2010) investigation, focus on behavioral aspects of
information systems, where most theories, elaboration models, end user satisfaction,
innovation diffusion theories, models of personal computer utilization, motivational and
social cognitive theories, technology acceptance model (TAM), theory of reasoned action
and TPB are seeking to explain and predict the adoption and use of digital
knowledgebase management systems.

32

Understanding learner’s behavior, perceptions and influence in terms of learning
performance is crucial to predict the use of electronic learning systems. By integrating the
task-technology fit (TTF) model and the theory of planned behavior (TPB), Tai-Kuei Yu
and Tai-Yi Yu (2010) paper, investigates the online learning utilization of students and
provides a better understanding of individual, technological and social factors regarding
online learning system performance.
The majority of research on user involvement and electronic learning success has
investigated the impact of user involvement on user attitudes, and ultimately focused on
user commitment to utilizing the system. When user’s understanding of the learning
activities is incorporated as a part of the system design, it is more likely that the resulting
system will fit individual needs, Tai-Kuei Yu and Tai-Yi Yu (2010).
Aman and Aitken (2011) studies, investigate the impact of management support
and commitment on the adoption of knowledgebase management systems (KMS) in
technology industries. By analyzing data from managers, the study contributes to the
KMS adoption literature by empirically establishing the indirect impacts of
organization’s management support and commitment through the mediations of other
organizational elements.
Aman and Aitken (2011) results, suggest that the effects of management support
and commitment are only indirect through the mediation of other variables, namely
knowledge classification and knowledge sharing. Knowledge classification has a positive
influence on perceived benefits, which is a determinant of KMS adoption. Even though
management support and commitment has a positive impact on rewards and incentives,
and policy and procedures, the findings indicate that these organizational elements have

33

influence on KMS adoption, where policies and procedures influence perceived ease of
use, which is a determinant of perceived benefits.
Among the different research models developed to understand technology usage
or acceptance, the most well-known is the technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989),
which has been successful in explaining the usage of information systems, (Aman and
Aitken, 2011). The application of TAM for KMS user acceptance indicates that users,
who have been using the systems for an extended period of time, would have already
formed their beliefs regarding the usefulness and ease of use of the systems, thereby
reducing the effects of intention to use.
Aman and Aitken (2011) research indicate that management’s support for KMS
use in an organization can be seen in the amount of funds that are allocated for the
system’s resources, training, and infrastructure to support KM initiatives. Management’s
commitment to KMS use can demonstrate by having managers lead and support the
system-use, and not just by promoting the system itself.
In Aman and Aitken (2011), the context of KMS for research, has emphasized in
the importance of rewards and incentives as an effective way to motivate knowledge
sharing, as well as the use of Knowledge Management Systems. Recent studies have also
provided empirical evidence on the positive effects of rewards and incentives on the
intention to use knowledge management Systems. The rewards and incentives factor is
referred to as the extent to which an organization has standardized rewards and incentives
system in order to encourage KM activities and the use of KMS to support these
activities, (Aman and Aitken, 2011).

34

Many types of Knowledgebase management systems have been developed and
deployed in organizations (Wang and Noe 2010). In regard to their study, it appears to be
no single taxonomy of KMS systems in the literature, they state that there is a number of
authors that have identified different types of KMS systems with relative advantages and
disadvantages, (Amayah and Nelson 2010).
Chennamaneni, Teng and Raja (2012), state that research and practice on
knowledge management systems have shown that information technology alone cannot
guarantee that employees will volunteer and share knowledge. While previous studies
have linked motivational factors to knowledge sharing, have developed a unified model
that is comprehensive, based on the decomposed theory of planned behavior with critical
antecedents, of psychological, organizational and technological that are theorized to
influence KS behaviors.
Rudd, Djafarova and Waring (2012), in their decision-making process research,
they explore the influences that have an effect on student’s decision-making. The study is
an exploratory research consisting of interviews with students enrolled on courses within
a Business School, where an integrated model reflecting influences on decision making
was developed from the analyzed data that are contextualized for this particular market.
The data suggest that students are influenced by the academic reputation, the desire to
experience culture, the facilities of the institution, the image and reputation of the school,
and external factors related to the destination. The paper contributes to the development
of literature in global decision-making process within higher education.
Rudd, Djafarova and Waring’s (2012) paper contributes to marketing theories by
exploring the relationships between variables and identifying influences in accordance to

35

their importance in the decision-making process. The integrated model in understanding
the selection behavior of international students can lead to a better understanding of
variables involved in the complex behavior of students when choosing to study in
specific Higher Education Institution. The research outcomes could be used both by
academics and professionals consumer behavior researches.
In Nicholas, Rowlands, Watkinson, Brown and Jamali’s (2012) paper sets out by
reporting on how well Digital Repositories are used, what they are used for, what
researcher’s think of them, and where they thought they were going. The paper, states
that Digital Repositories have been within education communities for more than a
decade, and despite the considerable media and conference attention provided, it is very
little known about their use by academics. In their study, scientific researchers, mostly
physical scientists responded to an international survey of digital repositories, making it
the largest survey of its kind. High deposit rates were found and mandates appear to be
working, especially with younger researchers, where repositories have made significant
in terms of impact and use, but in the case of institutional repositories, there have been
very limited resources deployed.
Nicholas, Rowlands, Watkinson, Brown and Jamalis (2012), state that there is
much literature published about repositories. Finding for example that Google Scholar,
identifies 62,700 items with institutional repositories as part of the title or within the
abstract. But that the preponderance of these articles concern themselves with the
processes and strategies for implementation, that few are evaluative, that don’t describe
how far the institutional repository development has been used or driven, or even make
assessments of use being made of those institutional repositories.

36

Academics are creators of the content of repositories as well as the most users of
their content. As creators, their low participation rate has been a major problem for
repositories, especially institutional ones. That is why some institutional repositories have
made it mandatory to deposit content (Sale, A. 2012). In a research by Cullen and
Chawner, (2010) it is found that different reasons have been mentioned for low volunteer
participation, including redundancy, fear of plagiarism, learning curve or confusion with
copyright. However, academics generally seem to be eager on using subject repositories
than institutional ones. Nicholas, Rowlands, Watkinson, Brown and Jamali (2012),
conclude that Digital repositories are not totally accepted as a cultural feature of the
scholarly communication landscape but there are drivers in place which are moving them
towards early adulthood.
In Timothy T. (2012) research for examining the intention to use technology
within many educational systems, states that the integration of technology has been
recognized to be key drivers to the improvement of teaching and learning, leading to
launch major initiatives, and make considerable investments to build and maintain
Information & Communications Technology infrastructures. The study examined
academics self-reported intention to use technology, completing a survey questionnaire
measuring their responses to constructs from a research model that integrated the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB). This
study contributes to the growing interest among researchers in using models to explain
user’s intention to use technology. The results of the study showed that the TAM
constructs were significant in explaining the intentions to use technology, the study

37

indicated that attitude toward computer use had the largest effect on the intention to use
technology.
In Björk and Solomon (2012) Open access versus subscription journals research,
aimed to inform about a debate, comparing the scientific impact of open access to digital
knowledgebase management systems, which included subscription and none subscription
journals, for multiple disciplines and business models. The two-year impact factors were
used as to identify the scientific impact of adoption, use and comparisons performed on
the journal level as well as on the article level where the results were weighted by the
number of articles published in a journal.
As a result, the overall average of citation rates both unweighted and weighted for
the number of articles per journal, were about 30% higher for subscription journals.
However, after controlling for disciplines of medicine and health versus other, age of the
journal and the location of the publisher, the differences largely disappeared in most
subcategories except for journals that had been launched prior to 1996. Open Access
journals that fund publishing with article processing charges are on average cited more
than other OA journals.
Kulshrestha, Kant, (2013) in their study for Benefits of Digital Resources find that
academic institutions are striving to find the right combination of students, faculties,
protocols and systems to manage their learning programs. Digital Learning Management
Systems are becoming an interface for handling course registration, managing course
contents, assessing students through assignments, conducting assessments, evaluation and
report generation. In general, digital knowledgebase management systems serve as means
for acquiring the knowledge using the help of technologies, the Internet and interactive

38

data based digital resources over the traditional ways, which enables learning over a wide
spectrum with higher efficiency. These systems act as central spaces for student,
academics and professional communities to interact outside the classroom and cater to
challenges faced by student, faculty and management in day to day events of Higher
Education and Professional Institutions.
Continuous learning is essential due to frequent technology change, (Chandwani
and Shraddhaanilkumar, 2012) analysis, state that educators in the 21st century realize
that students entering the classroom today are demanding a change in the classroom
because of their ability to gather information faster than any other generation (Siddiqui
and Masud, 2012).
Nowadays education has become more global and students are looking for
learning with the help of internet like submitting assignments, reading lecture notes,
giving online exams and other related resources. E –learning became more popular as
students frequently use internet to access social media websites like Face book, Orkut,
Google+ (Sakai and Moodle, 2010).
A good digital knowledgebase and learning management system provides
functionalities that can be used for tracking learning management, real time student
performance, online collaboration tools, chat-rooms, and e-mail tutor, flexible structure
that allows cross-culture knowledge transfer, user friendly interface for novice (Sakai and
Moodle, 2010).
(Kulshrestha, Kant, 2013) study states that the content management for courses
are serious issues for faculties as well as students, many faculties repeat same courses
providing information in consequent semesters or years, where there are needs for

39

teaching resource management and for this Digital Resources and Learning Management
Systems provide unique, managed and stored contents for future use.
Learner engagement means engaging today’s students for academic success.
Students learn more in a group as they imitate behavior of other students from different
cultural backgrounds, (Jones, 2009). This also helps in building strong student
relationship like getting to know each other, building strong teams, effective
communication, and so on. Digital Resources support several tools for collaborative
learning like chats, messages, forum, wiki, etc. where students learn easily topics which
they found difficult in offline mode of learning, (Kulshrestha & Kant, 2013).
In Arun’s (2013) Pattern and Needs study, finds that nowadays, our way of
gathering information is getting changed with typical use of search engines like Google,
yahoo for example to get the answers or if we are on a journey we make use of mobile
phones. Nearly everyone possesses some sort of communicating machine through which
he/she can gather information from internet or through his colleagues and therefore
people are getting used to it. Sometime it seems that the students are no more interested
in traditional way of education system. Providing education thru Digital Resources with a
blend of 21th century technology is necessary to keep the interest of students and engage
them into the continual learning process, (Arun, 2013).
Introduction of web-based systems for undergraduate courses provided a fair
learning platform for the students to learn outside the class and facilitate discussions
among themselves. There is a positive effect of such systems in their learning abilities,
problem-solving skills and comprehensive abilities. They enable repeated practice of the
concepts which are not possible in classrooms and take quizzes at their convenience so

40

the student themselves will not feel much pressure, (Mafuna and Wadesango, 2012).
Sometimes it is necessary that student gains high level of skills in clinical research where
they need to be accurate at such experimental works. Innovative use of a Digital
Resources and learning management system has shown the student can achieve high level
of skills via computers based assessment. They not only reduce the time but also reduce
the burden of the faculty or the demonstrator, (Epping, 2010).
The awareness of psychology has helped instructors and professionals with
editing teaching approaches. Learning and knowledgebase management systems support
specific tools for understanding and ease student’s psychology by helping to form group
learning. As well as for faculty and instructors that can set appropriate strategies after
knowing student’s psychology for specific individual needs, (Arun, 2013). The results of
Kulshrestha and Kant (2013) found that obstructions for e-resources deployment were the
lack of availability of infrastructure and the internet. Power sources is necessary during
eLearning study, Handwriting becomes bad due to overuse of keyboard, Student tardiness
is often seen if class contents are available online, Overuse of computer can damage
student’s health and eye seeing.
Egberongbe (2011) conducted a survey and explored the usage and impact of
electronic resources on research scholars and lecturers in University of Lagos. She
concluded that most of the academic staff and research scholars were keen to use
electronic resources rather than other information resources. Most of the respondents
were using electronic resources for the purposes of doing research, learning, and keeping
touch with new progress in their concerned areas.

41

According to Olle and Borrego (2010) researcher’s information seeking behavior
has moved toward online information resource as well, electronic environment has
changed the information seeking behavior of scholars and electronic resources which
have become a most accepted preference for researchers to abreast with new information
in the field. Kai Hu (2014) in his study analyzes the application of computer database
system in information management and proposes related countermeasure. With the
continuous development of society, the application of network technology in people's
lives is more and more widely, information management are implemented in various
enterprises, and computer network is used for data collection and collation.
The present era is the era of information, the production of large amounts of data
seems to be the inevitable result to communicate with our work, stating that database
technology is necessary. Database technology applied in information management can
make the information management work more accurate and efficient. Its main purpose is
to effectively manage and access to large amounts of data resources, (Kai Hu, 2014).
Database technology is having more and more enterprises and individual attention as an
important part of the computer systems, its powerful data processing advantages is to be
increasingly applied to information management and greatly valued. The wide
application of computers based increase on database system, we need to continue
research to promote the development of database technology, which can be better applied
in information management to provide information and intellectual support for the
sustained and healthy development of society and economy, (Kai Hu, 2014).
The concept of knowledge management systems in organizations is not new.
Researchers have investigated the strategic management of knowledge in organizations

42

based on the premise that is a strategic organizational asset and a key source of
competitive advantage. Organizations have since then been involved in implementing
knowledge management systems (KMS) to enable them to create, capture, locate and
share organizational knowledge, (Craig Standing, 2013).
The purpose of Craig Standing’s, (2013) paper was to identify and examine the
major issues and challenges that impact the implementation digital knowledgebase
management systems. It states that Wikis have been referred to as next generation KMS,
providing an alternative to traditional knowledge management systems by addressing
many of their limitations. Further research on the range of issues and challenges
surrounding the implementation of wikis in the corporate environment is required in
order to enable organizations to manage more effectively and reap maximum benefits.
Adebayo (2013) examined the challenges associated with cataloguing electronic
resources in randomly selected university and highlighted some challenges associated
with cataloguing electronic resources such as lack of adequate physical description of
some electronic resources, inadequate workflow in cataloguing sections, copyright issues
among others.

43

CHAPTER III
METHODOLOGY
Introduction
Chapter I presented a background to the research explaining how knowledgebase
and information management systems have been existing and implemented in educational
and professional organizations. That these technologies have greater importance within
educational programs due to the need and responsibility of creating and transferring
knowledge with reliable information to their communities. The research problem, the
justification of the study, the objectives and the questions of research, the hypotheses and
the suggested research model is presented.
In Chapter II, there is a summary of the entire literature review that was obtain for
the development of the suggested research model, which included the theories used as a
theoretical framework. In addition, each of the constructs included in this study is review.
In this chapter a quantitative methodology is presented and implemented for the
collection and analysis of the data and for fulfilling the objectives of chapter one. The
stages of the research methodology present the design of the research and the profile of
the population. It also includes a sample size, the instrument for data collection, the
validation and the reliability.
Research Design
The main purpose of the research design was to test the hypotheses of the
suggested research model. The research design used a non-experimental with a
quantitative approach. Hernández Sampieri, Fernández Collado and Baptista Lucio
(2006) explain that a non-experimental research can classify, into longitudinal and

44

transverse. A cross-sectional design was use to collect data in a single moment using a
descriptive correlational design. The correlational design seeks to respond to research
questions by establishing a relationship between the variables. The research consisted of
a quantitative approach that provides empirical information on the factors of adoption and
use of the digital resources by education and /or professional organizations.
The research used an inferential descriptive methodology, which seeked to
specify the characteristics of people, groups, communities or any other phenomenon that
was subject to analysis; it can also offer the possibility of predictions (Alvarado and
Obagi (2008). An inferential study can be generalized to assume what you can learn
about the selected population sample. Therefore, in combination with descriptive
statistics, it could have determine if any demographic data is influencing factors under
study (Faherty, 2008).
Population to study
The selected population were volunteered participants, including faculty,
students, professional and administrative employees. They were recruited to participate
under a non-probabilistic sample, with a confidence level of 95% and a margin error of
5% for a non-defined population, where the total sample collected was 435 participants,
also obtaining information on their genders, functions and roles, active students with
degrees in process and organization where they would study or work.
The results revealed that the largest number of responses (296) came from
females with a 68.05% participation compared to 139 responses from male participants
with 31.95% for the total 435 or 100 percent of participation. The participants were
identifying according to their roles of work and studies showing that there were several

45

individuals with multiple roles and that this helped in the investigation to determine their
activity of adoption and use of digital resources. Participants studying at different
academic levels, regardless of their roles or functions determined that 229 of the 435
participants were studying to complete an academic degree while 206 of them were not
studying or had completed their studies or dedicate time to their professions. The
environment of study or work organization that they frequented to exercise their
functions included academic, private or government organizations, where 86.87%
selected to work or study in an academic organization.
Questionnaire - Instrument
The Questionnaire consisted of three sections: factors that could affect the
perceived usefulness, factors that could affect the intention to use and factors that could
affect the adoption and use adoption of the digital resources by education and /or
professional organizations. The questions in the instrument focused on the adoption and
use of digital resources and information technologies available for academic and
professional communities.
Questionnaire Validation
The questionnaire had been validate by the dissertation committee using the
technique of Lawshe for validation of content (CVR). Johnston and Wilkinson (2009)
explain that C.H. Lawshe developed this technique in 1975 and it is used to measure the
validity of the content of the elements in an empirical measure. It was presented to an
expert panel that evaluated whether each indicator was essential for the operationalization
of the theoretical constructs. Experts in areas of technology and digital resources

46

validated the questionnaire indicators, recommending minimal changes. Each indicator
should had been evaluated and analyzed using the following equation:

CVR 

ne 

N
2

N
2

Figure 2. Lawshe for validation of content

The variable "ne" refers to the number of experts stating that the indicators are
essential and the variable "N" is the total number of experts. The results of the evaluation
revealed that indicators were calculated with a minimum value of 70%, required
according to Lawshe, (1975).
Questionnaire Reliability
Once the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the research (December
2017 by the IRB of the Universidad del Turabo, Ana G. Méndez University System), the
following step was to proceed with measuring the reliability of the questionnaire. This
task was conducted a pilot test with a sample of 60 participants from the academic
community, which included students, faculty, professionals administrative staff from
academic and/or professional organizations.
The reliability was measure using the Cronbach's alpha coefficient test. Leontitsis
and Pagge (2007) state that the coefficient is a theoretically range from zero to one; so,
while the closest result to one, more is the reliability of the sample. As a rule, if α ≥ 0.8,
responses are considering reliable.

47

Table 2
Pilot’s Cronbach’s Alpha Test

Cronbach's
Alpha Based
on
Cronbach's Standardized
Alpha
Items
N of Items
.925
.929
27

For the factor analysis, two statistical tests were perform using the Kaiser-MeyerOlkin (KMO) sampling adequacy measure and Bartlett's Sphericity test.
The adequacy measure of Kaiser-Mayer-Olkin should be a value close to 1.00 and the
value of significance of the Bartlett Sphericity test should be less than 0.05 (Hair, Black,
Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006; Simelane-Mnisi, S., & Mji, A. 2017).
Table 3.
Pilot’s Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin test (KMO) and Bartlett's
Sphericity
KMO and Bartlett's Test
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling
Adequacy.
Bartlett's Test of
Approx. Chi-Square
Sphericity
Df
Sig.

.770
1151.261
351
.000

Recruitment Method
Participants were recruited thru emails requesting to participate within an online
survey platform (SurveyMonkey.com). This correspondence process was authorize and

48

sent thru the Computer IT/IS Services of the Ana G. Méndez University System and
other professional organizations in Puerto Rico, targeting the most possible participants
and population.
The questionnaire asked a series of simple questions about the adoption and use
of digital resources by education and professional communities. The survey used a Likert
format consisting of selecting from lowest to highest level (1 to 5 or never to always)
depending on the degree of their response. There were no right or wrong answers; we
were simply interested in the opinions and experiences of the respondents.
Analysis of the data
The analysis utilized a multivariante approach, using the generation of a structural
equation with the data to be collected, which helped answering the research questions and
hypothesis mentioned in chapter one.
Analytical statistics were generated by using the IBM SPSS and Smart PLS
statistical computer programs, which provided sets of capabilities and applications for all
stages of the analysis process. A descriptive analysis of frequency, average, median
(Hassan, 2011) and measures of variability were used to describe the factors analysis,
demographic data and partial least squares equations. These results and measurements are
being describe with details in the following Chapter IV.
Research Participant Consent
Informative documents for each participating institution were drafted and
submitted to the review process of the Institutional Review Board of selected Institutions,
for consent and authorization before reaching the to the academic and or professional
communities.

49

All participants in the research should had read the provided informative handout
before agreeing to participate in the study. Once agreed with the information, they
proceeded to complete the questionnaire. Respondents had the right to refrain from
participating, not to answer any questions in particular or to withdraw from the research
at any time.
Protection of Confidentiality
All information related to identity has been handle in a private and confidential
manner and protected at all times. Under no circumstances, any participant information
will be shared with third parties. The collected global data is kept in a private, safe and a
protected place. They are under the custody of the principal investigator for a period of
five (5) years. The emails used for the investigation has been deleted or destroyed once
the data was collected.
Summary
This chapter described the methodology that was carried out for the collection and
analysis of data. The design of this study was non-experimental with a quantitative
approach. The population and the sample were also defined, which consisted of 435
participants, also obtaining information on their genders, functions and roles, active
students with degrees in process and organization where they would study or work.
Specified the processes that were carried out to validate and determine trust of the
questionnaire that was used as an instrument to collect the data. And finally mentioning
the statistical techniques that were carried out for the analysis of the data collected, the
risks and benefits that were obtained from this investigation.

50

Chapter 4 will describe the analysis and discussion of the results obtained in the
investigation and will include different tests and statistical methods evaluating the
hypotheses established in the investigation.

51

CHAPTER IV
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
This chapter presents the analysis and discussion of the results obtained in the
investigation.
Initially, in order to determine the reliability of the instrument through the internal
consistency, results of the Alfa Cronbach test are describe. We present the results of the
factor analysis carried out for each component, and measures of the total variance by
each variable for the adequacy of the sample.
With the interest of applying an adequate statistical test for this investigation, the
results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test are explaining to identifying if the data
have a normal distribution.
Data Collection
To achieve the objectives, answer the research questions and provide evidence for
the support or not of hypothesis, it was necessary to collect data from people who work
or study in academic and / or professional organizations and who use digital systems for
the administration and research of information. These participants were volunteers, of
both genders, including faculty, students, professional and administrative employees.
Questionnaires with items related to the research were distributed using the
Computer IT Services of the Ana G. Méndez University System and other professional
organizations in Puerto Rico.
The instrument was created by the researcher validated by the literature and
complemented by the validation of a panel of experts. The questionnaire was composed
of twenty-seven items that measured each of the eight constructs contained in the

52

proposed research model, these included: marketing and support, social factors, perceived
friendliness, perceived usefulness, attitude, intention to use and adoption and use of
digital resources. Also included four items with the purpose of obtaining socialdemographic information of the participants.
The questionnaire distribution process was done electronically by using the
SurveyMonkey.com platform, recruiting participants by sending emails and was available
between January and March 2018. The total sample collected was 435 participants.
Cronbach's Alpha
One of the most used methods to determine the reliability by internal consistency
is using the Cronbach's Alpha index. This test allows to measure the reliability of the
questionnaire that was used as an instrument to collect the data. The closer the
Cronbach's alpha is to 1.00, the greater the reliability of the internal consistency of the
questionnaire (Bonett & Wright, 2015).
As a recommended norm, a Cronbach's Alpha value that is greater than 0.90
indicates that the questionnaire is excellent; values between 0.89 and 0.80, is considered a
good questionnaire; values between 0.79 and 0.70, is considered acceptable; values
between 0.69 and 0.60 is considered a weak questionnaire. Values between 0.59 and 0.50
are consider a poor questionnaire; and if the value is lower than 0.50, it is considering a
questionnaire not acceptable to carry out the investigation (Diedenhofen & Musch, 2016).
To perform the Cronbach's Alpha test in this research, we used the statistical
program Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS). The analysis was carry out
for the 27 items that measured the constructs of the proposed research model. The result
value of the Cronbach's Alpha test was 0.936 (Table 2). With this result, it can conclude

53

that the instrument classifies as excellent and meets the reliability requirements to carry
out this research.
Table 4.
Cronbach's Alpha Test of Research
Reliability Statistics
Cronbach's Alpha
N of Items
.936

27

In order to evaluate the internal consistency in each research construct, an
analysis of Cronbach's Alpha was carry out with the corresponding premises for each of
the constructs. Using the SPSS program, the results of four analyzed constructs ranged
from 0.773 to 0.861, and so they are considering good acceptable values. However, the
constructs Social Factors (.674) and Perceived Usefulness (.653) obtained a Cronbach's
Alpha value index of weak internal consistency, plus the Attitude construct (.303)
obtained a value lower than 0.50. According to Hair et al. (2017), Cronbach's Alpha has
limitations in the population, because it is sensitive to the number of elements of the scale
and in general, it tends to underestimate the reliability of internal consistency.
Table 3 shows the values obtained in the analysis of Cronbach's Alpha applied to each of
the constructs of the research model.
Table 5,
Cronbach's Alpha applied to each of the constructs
Marketing and Support

Perceived Friendliness

Attitude towards Using

Cronbach's
Alpha
.773

Cronbach's
Alpha
.789

Cronbach's
Alpha
.303

N of Items
4

N of Items
3
54

N of Items
3

Social Factors

Perceived Usefulness

Intentions to Use

Cronbach's
Alpha
.674

Cronbach's
Alpha
.653

Cronbach's
Alpha
.835

N of Items
3

N of Items
3

N of Items
2

Characteristics

Academic Rewards

Adoption and Use

Cronbach's
Alpha
.779

Cronbach's
Alpha
.861

Cronbach's
Alpha
.867

N of Items
3

N of Items
3

N of Items
3

Factor Analysis
Factor analysis is a statistical procedure that allows the identification of
underlying dimensions to a measure (Marouf, L. 1. 2017). The purpose of the exploratory
factor analysis is to identify the different components, measure the total variance
explained by each variable and the adequacy of the sample. Hair et al. (2017), suggests
that a factorial analysis should be carry out in an investigation to determine how well
indicators relate to each other and how they form factor sets (Salkind, 2012).
To carry out a factor analysis it is necessary to determine if the study is valid to
apply this analysis. Two statistical tests must be perform: the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin
(KMO) sampling adequacy measure and Bartlett's Sphericity test, to determine if it is
statistically correct.
The global sample adequacy measure (KMO) is based on the correlation
coefficients observed for each pair of variables; while Bartlett's Sphericity test covers the
relationship between each pair of variables by its elements located outside the diagonal in
the correlation matrix (Kaiser, 1970, Kaiser & Rice, 1974, Bartlett, 1950).
The adequacy measure of Kaiser-Mayer-Olkin should be a value close to 1.00 and
the value of significance of the Bartlett Sphericity test should be less than 0.05 (Hair,

55

Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006; Simelane-Mnisi, S., & Mji, A. 2017). The
significance value obtained from the Kaiser-Mayer-Olkin adequacy measure was 0.949
and the Sphericity level of the Bartlett test was 0.000 (Table 4). These results allow
affirming that the study is valid to perform a factor analysis.
Table 6.
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin test (KMO) and Bartlett's Sphericity
KMO and Bartlett's Test
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling
Adequacy.
Bartlett's Test of
Approx. Chi-Square
Sphericity
df
Sig.

.949
6857.729
351
.000

Sig. = Level of significance (alpha-α level)
After checking the validity to perform the factor analysis, the proportion of the
variances explained by the common factors in a variable (communalities), are evaluate.
These are the sum of the factorial squared weights in each of the rows. Table 5 shows the
results of the communalities, in which it is observe that, in the initial column, the value
1.00 indicate that the variable is explain at 100% by the common factors that appear in
the factorial matrix. The majority (23 items) of the value of the extraction of
communalities surpassed values of 0.50, while four items obtained extractions below
0.50.
Table 7
Communalities in the Factorial Matrix
Communalities
Q5 They provide training
Q6 They send me emails and they publish in Portal
56

Initial Extraction
1.000
.618
1.000
.614

Q7 I receive Support in Searches
Q8 I am instructed in Copyright Laws
Q9 Colleagues guide me
Q10 Interaction is Encouraged
Q11 Suggestions and Recommendations are allowed
Q12 Reliable Infrastructure
Q13 Meets my Needs
Q14 There is a Variety of Digital Resources
Q15 Ease of Use
Q16 Research and learning flexibility
Q17 I Can Find Specific Topics
Q18 Satisfies my search needs
Q19 I understand the consequences Copyright
Q20 I Acquire Skills and Critical Thinking
Q21 Easy and Interesting Learning
Q22 I can be more Creative
Q23 I can integrate goals with results
Q24 With digital resources I get Better Results
Q25 Digital Resources Can Distract
Q26 I have skills to evaluate credibility
Q27 Enthusiasm with Digital Resources
Q28 Provide Successful Results
Q29 It has allowed me to Adopt its Use
Q30 Recommends your Benefits
Q31 Promotes reliable and immediate results

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

.656
.606
.592
.494
.379
.454
.701
.656
.564
.679
.659
.766
.593
.622
.657
.605
.701
.461
.280
.368
.705
.749
.736
.667
.641

Total Explained Variance of the Factorial Matrix
The factor analysis revealed that 23 premises had eigenvalues equal to or greater
than 1.00 and that they represent 96.93% of the total variance, four components were
created that had values greater or equal to 1.00 and that represent 60.08% of the total
variance. The first component explains 41.32% of its total variance, the second explains
9.77%, the third explains 4.49% and the fourth component explains 4.48% of its total
variance. The data corresponding to the variance of each component shown in Table 8.

57

Table 8.
Total Variance Explained

Components

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

Total
11.157
2.640
1.213
1.211
.998
.905
.752
.710
.654
.626
.575
.542
.512
.475
.446
.427
.398
.374
.364
.319
.303
.298
.276
.234
.206
.197
.190

Total Variance Explained
Initial Eigenvalues
Extraction Sums of Squared Loadings
Cumulative
% of Variance Cumulative %
Total
% of Variance
%
41.322
41.322
11.157
41.322
41.322
9.779
51.101
2.640
9.779
51.101
4.494
55.596
1.213
4.494
55.596
4.485
60.080
1.211
4.485
60.080
3.695
63.776
3.353
67.129
2.785
69.913
2.630
72.543
2.421
74.964
2.317
77.282
2.130
79.412
2.007
81.419
1.897
83.316
1.759
85.075
1.650
86.726
1.580
88.306
1.474
89.780
1.383
91.164
1.347
92.511
1.180
93.691
1.123
94.813
1.104
95.917
1.021
96.938
.866
97.804
.762
98.565
.729
99.294
.706
100.000

58

Total Variance Explained
Total
6.871
3.972
3.665
1.714

Rotation Sums of Squared Loadings
% of Variance
25.449
14.710
13.574
6.347

Cumulative %
25.449
40.159
53.733
60.080

The Varimax Rotation
An orthogonal Varimax rotation was carry out and was used for the interpretation
of the data. The Varimax method minimizes the number of variables whose load is high
in each factor and simplifies the interpretation of the factors (Thompson, 2004). The
interpretation by the Varimax rotation was consistent with the constructs intended to
measure with the questionnaire. Generally, all values of factor loads equal to or greater
than 0.50 are interpreted as significant (Hair et al., 2017). The generated matrix of rotated
components show in Table 7.
The factorial loads ranged between 0.374 and 0.813 in 27 items. Item Q25
obtained below the significant value (0.50) proposed by Hair (2017). However, there is
literature that indicates that to estimate an item that has a significant weight in a
particular factor, it must have a load value equal to or greater than 0.30 (Beavers et al.,
2013; Costello & Osborne, 2011; & Widaman, 1995; Nunnally, 1978). Still this item is
not included in future analysis.

59

Table 9.
Rotated Component Matrix
Rotated Component Matrixa

Component
1

2

3

4

Q5 They provide training

.118

.773 .076 -.040

Q6 They send me emails and they publish in Portal

.126

.759 .149

.004

Q7 I receive Support in Searches

.128

.765 .219

.083

Q8 I am instructed in Copyright Laws

.002

.522 .116

.566

Q9 Colleagues guide me

.178

.723 .171

.093

Q10 Interaction is Encouraged

.298

.473 .243

.349

Q11 Suggestions and Recommendations are allowed

.101

.469 .288

.255

Q12 Reliable Infrastructure

.339

.329 .374

.302

Q13 Meets my Needs

.345

.264 .715

.014

Q14 There is a Variety of Digital Resources

.282

.389 .625

.188

Q15 Ease of Use

.306

.094 .666

.131

Q16 Research and learning flexibility

.351

.367 .617

.199

Q17 I Can Find Specific Topics

.445

.311 .602

.029

Q18 Satisfies my search needs

.394

.344 .701

.039

Q19 I understand the consequences Copyright

.302

.143 .045

.692

Q20 I Acquire Skills and Critical Thinking

.634

.204 .183

.380

Q21 Easy and Interesting Learning

.680

.190 .325

.228

Q22 I can be more Creative

.741

.090 .163

.146

Q23 I can integrate goals with results

.754

.150 .228

.241

Q24 With digital resources I get Better Results

.637

.087 .101

.193

Q25 Digital Resources Can Distract

-.143

-.164 .324

.357

Q26 I have skills to evaluate credibility

.555

.062 .060

.228

Q27 Enthusiasm with Digital Resources

.785

.161 .207 -.142

Q28 Provide Successful Results

.792

.137 .316 -.052

Q29 It has allowed me to Adopt its Use

.813

.121 .245 -.016

Q30 Recommends your Benefits

.717

.174 .339 -.081

Q31 Promotes reliable and immediate results

.763

.172 .166 -.040

Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization.

It can be concluded that component from the premises, Q20 (Perceived Utility),
Q21, Q22, Q23 (Rewards), Q24 and Q26 (Attitude), Q27, Q28 (Intent to Use) and Q29 to
Q31 (Adoption and Use) are related to each other. Premises, Q5 to Q8 and Q9 to Q11, the
60

constructs Marketing and Support and Social Factors are related. Those in premises Q12,
Q13, Q14 (Characteristics), Q15, Q16, Q17 (Ease of Use) and Q18 (Perceived Utility)
are related and grouped together.
Descriptive Analysis
The research instrument collected sociodemographic data of each participant.
Next, we describe the data collected from the 435 participants obtaining information on
their genders, functions and roles, active students with degrees in process and
organization where they would study or work.
Gender. The results as shown in Figure 3 revealed that the largest number of
responses (296) came from females with a 68.05% participation compared to 139
responses from male participants with 31.95% for the total 435 or 100 percent of
participation.

Figure 3. Gender

61

Table 10.
Gender
Female Participants

296

68.05%

Male Participants

139

31.95%

Roles or Functions: In this item, the participants are identifying according to
their roles of work and studies. According to the following Figure 4, it can be noted that
among the participants there are several individuals with multiple roles and that this helps
in the investigation to determine the activity of adoption and use of digital resources.

Figure 4. Roles and Functions

62

Table 11
Roles or Functions
Students
Professors
Professionals
Administrative
Professor and Student
Student, Professor and Professional
Student, Professor and Administrative
Professional and Student
Administrative and Student
Administrative and Professor
Professional and Professor

142
82
16
73
17
3
3
41
11
20
28

32.64%
18.62%
03.68%
16.78%
03.91%
00.69%
00.69%
09.43%
02.53%
04.60%
06.44%

Degrees in Process: Figure 5 identifies the number of participants studying at
different academic levels. Note that active students could include anyone regardless of
their roles or functions. According to the data provided, it can be determined that 229 of
the 435 participants study to complete an academic degree while 206 of them do not
study at present or have completed their studies and dedicate time to their professions.

Figure 5. Degrees in Process

63

Table 12.
Degrees in Process
Associate Degree

21

04.83%

Bachelor Degree

117

26.90%

Master Degree

52

11.95%

Doctorate Degree

39

08.97%

Do not study

206

47.36%

Study or Work environment: The following graphic number 4 indicates the type
of study or work organization that they frequent to exercise their functions. This includes
academic universities, private or government companies.

Figure 6. Study or Work environment.

64

Table 13
Study or Work environment.
Universities

377

86.87%

Private Companies

42

09.68%

Government

15

03.46%

Normality Test of the Data
Before carrying out the statistical analyzes, the distribution of the data was revise
to evaluate if the data had a normal distribution. Using the SPSS application, the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests and the Shapiro-Wilk test were generated to evaluate the 27
items of the research instrument in order to determine whether or not there was normal
distribution in the data (Hair, et al., 2014; Mooi & Sarstedt, 2011).
The null hypothesis (H0) assumes that the sample data have a normal distribution.
The results revealed that all the items obtained a p-value (significance) of 0.000.
Therefore, the null hypothesis was rejected because the p-value (alpha-α significance
level) was less than 0.05. For this reason, it concludes that the data do not have a normal
distribution, so nonparametric statistical tests were used to continue the analysis in this
investigation.

65

Table 14.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and the Shapiro-Wilk test

Tests of Normality

Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11
Q12
Q13
Q14
Q15
Q16
Q17
Q18
Q19
Q20
Q21
Q22
Q23
Q24
Q25
Q26
Q27
Q28
Q29
Q30
Q31

Kolmogorov-Smirnova
Statistic
df
.228
435
.259
435
.218
435
.280
435
.182
435
.229
435
.165
435
.237
435
.247
435
.228
435
.226
435
.225
435
.218
435
.238
435
.435
435
.300
435
.233
435
.218
435
.234
435
.233
435
.241
435
.237
435
.224
435
.248
435
.261
435
.252
435
.299
435

Sig. Statistic
.000
.849
.000
.817
.000
.840
.000
.772
.000
.887
.000
.836
.000
.892
.000
.822
.000
.856
.000
.862
.000
.861
.000
.864
.000
.856
.000
.872
.000
.589
.000
.768
.000
.822
.000
.855
.000
.842
.000
.833
.000
.898
.000
.846
.000
.835
.000
.841
.000
.802
.000
.817
.000
.751

Sig. = Level of significance (alpha-α level)

66

Shapiro-Wilk
df
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435
435

Sig.
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000

Partial Least Squares - Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM)
To validate the suggested research model, we used a structured equation model
(Structural Equation Modeling - SEM). These techniques of partial least squares (Partial
Least Squares - PLS) were implemented using the SmartPLS statistical program.
The structured least squares equations model (PLS-SEM) is compose of two
elements: the structural model (internal model) and the model of the measurements
(external model). The internal model represents the latent constructs or variables and
their relationships, while the external model shows the relationships between the
construct and its indicators (Hair et al., 2017). The results of the internal model allowed
evaluating the relationships between the constructs of the suggested research model, in
order to support or not the hypotheses proposed in this research.
Composite Reliability
The composite reliability (Pc) is used to measure the reliability of internal
consistency in the research (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988, Hair et al, 2014, Wong, 2013). The
composite reliability index is suggested to be greater than 0.40, in an exploratory
investigation (Hulland, 1999). However, minimum values of 0.70 are considered
acceptable but not greater than 0.95, since the indicators could be measuring the same
phenomenon and could be considered as unlikely to be a valid measure of the construct
(Hair, et al., 2014, Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994).
Internal consistency is a general term used for estimating the reliability of a
measure by evaluating the within-scale consistency of the responses to the items of the
measure. Cronbach Alpha is the most widely used but has its limitations. Cronbach's

67

alpha has limitations in the population, because it is sensitive to the number of elements
of the scale and in general, it tends to underestimate the reliability of internal consistency.
Using the Smart PLS program, the composite reliability index was calculated
obtaining values between 0.793 and 0.925, which can be seen in Table 15. In these results
and because they are within the accepted values indicates that there is a high level of
reliability of internal consistency, in each of the analyzed constructs. , (Hair, et al., 2014;
Nunnally and Bernstein, 1994).
Table 15.
Composite Reliability
Composite Reliability
Adoption and Use
Attitude Towards Using
Characteristics
Intention to Use
Learning Rewards
Marketing and Support
Perceived Friendliness
Perceived Usefulness
Social Factors

CRely
(AVE)
0.921
0.795
0.793
0.658
0.873
0.696
0.925
0.861
0.916
0.784
0.856
0.600
0.876
0.703
0.806
0.586
0.822
0.607

Convergent Validity
Convergent validity is the degree to which a measure correlates positively with
alternative measures of the same construct (Hair et al., 2014; Wong, 2013). It refers to
assessing whether a set of indicators actually measures a particular construct and are not
measuring another different concept (Fornell & Larcker, 1981; Mata, Hernández, Leal, &
Alarcón, 2014).

68

To establish convergent validity, the researcher considered the external loads of
the indicators, as well as the average variance extracted (AVE) (Hair, et al., 2014). The
latent variable must explain a substantial part of the variance of each indicator, so a
recommended value in the AVE should be 0.50 or higher, which means that the external
load of an indicator must be above 0.708, since its squared number equals 0.50 (Hair, et
al., 2014; Wong, 2013).
Table 16shows the values of the loads of each one of the indicators of the
constructs. The results obtained ranged from 0.793 to 0.925 and the AVE values ranged
from 0.600 to 0.861. These values are above the recommended value of 0.708 (Hair et al.,
2014).
Table 16
Convergent Validity
Composite Reliability
Adoption and Use
Attitude Towards Using
Characteristics
Intention to Use
Learning Rewards
Marketing and Support
Perceived Friendliness
Perceived Usefulness
Social Factors

rho_A
0.876
0.484
0.786
0.840
0.872
0.782
0.807
0.715
0.696

CRely
0.921
0.793
0.873
0.925
0.916
0.856
0.876
0.806
0.822

(AVE)
0.795
0.658
0.696
0.861
0.784
0.600
0.703
0.586
0.607

Discriminant Validity
Determining the discriminant validity implies that a construct is unique and
captures a phenomenon that is not represented by other constructs in the model (Hair et
al., 2014). It refers to checking that a construct measures a different concept from other

69

constructs (Mata et al., 2014). To analyze the discriminant validity, the use of the AVE is
recommended (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). The AVE must exceed the squared correlation
values of any other construct (Hair et al., 2014). Table 17 shows the discriminant validity
analysis, which using the Fornell-Larcker criterion. This analysis shows that the square
root of each of the constructs is greater than the values of the correlation in its column
and is greater than the values of its row. These results allow us to conclude that the
discriminant validity in this research is well established.
Table 17
Discriminant Validity
Fornell-Larcker
Criterion

Adoption
Attitude Towards Using
Characteristics
Intention to Use
Learning Rewards
Marketing and Support
Perceived Friendlines
Perceived Usefulness
Social Factors

A &U
0.891
0.613
0.568
0.807
0.720
0.311
0.623
0.653
0.431

Atti

Char

IUse

L Rew

MS up

PFri

PUse

SFac

0.811
0.452
0.608
0.615
0.253
0.495
0.568
0.338

0.834
0.541
0.604
0.542
0.760
0.751
0.612

0.928
0.751
0.300
0.607
0.614
0.400

0.885
0.361
0.632
0.732
0.478

0.774
0.518
0.513
0.685

0.839
0.763
0.578

0.766
0.585

0.779

Analysis of the Path Analysis, beta value = β Model
In order to find validation of the hypothetical effects obtained from the literature
that were raise in the suggested research model, the coefficients of the causal
relationships between the constructs were examine. The PLS algorithm was used, in order
to estimate the relationships of the route model analysis. By using this algorithm it was
possible to obtain the relations between the constructs, the load of the indicators and the
explanatory power of the latent variables of the model based on R2 (Regression to
Square).
70

Figure 7 shows the results obtained with the SmartPLS program using its
algorithm of partial least squares to generate the analysis of the route model. The circles
represent the research constructs, and the value that lies within the circles represents the
coefficient of determination R2. The values in the arrows that leave from one construct to
another is the coefficient of the route (beta value = β), which indicates the relationship
between the constructs. The rectangles represent the indicators of the constructs. The
arrows leave the constructs towards the indicators, as it is a reflective study. The values
found in these arrows represent the loads of the indicators of the construct. The Figure
shows the R2 coefficient obtained in each of the model's constructs. This coefficient is a
measure of the predictive accuracy of the model and represents the amount of variance of
the construct that is explain by the model. The value of R2 varies from zero to one; the
closer is to one, the more accurate the prediction (Hair et al., 2017).
The construct of perceived usefulness obtained an explanatory power in its
variance of 7.29% (R2 = .729) for the predictive variables: marketing and support (.064),
social factors (.052), resources characteristics (.259), rewards (.349) and ease of use
(.282). The positive Beta=β values for the undependable predictive constructs represent
an increase in the coefficient of determination R2 value for the dependable construct
perceived usefulness. Results shown in Table 18.
Likewise, the construct of intentions to use obtains an explanatory power in its
variance of 4.77% (R2 = .477) for its predictive constructs: perceived usefulness (.397)
and attitude towards using (.383). The positive Beta=β values for the undependable
predictive constructs represent an increase in the coefficient of determination R2 value of
the dependable construct intentions to use. Results shown in Table 18.

71

The adoption and use construct obtained an explanatory power of 6.51% of the
variance (R2 = .651), according to the composition of its predictor variable: intention of
use (.807). The positive Beta=β values for the undependable predictive constructs
represent an increase in the coefficient of determination R2 value for the dependable
construct adoption and use. Results shown in Table 18. It can conclude that the model has
a high level of precision to predict the continuation of adoption and use of digital
resources in the search for reliable information.

Figure 7. Results of the PLS-SEM Path Analysis, (Beta value = β)

Analysis of the PLS-SEM t Test Model ("bootstrapping")
Figure 8 represents the results obtained by the SmartPLS program, using the
"bootstrapping" technique. Like the analysis of the route model, the circles represent the
constructs of the research model. The values in the arrows that go from one construct to
another is the coefficient of the route (value of t), which indicates the direct effect of one
construct on the other. The rectangles represent the indicators of the constructs. The
72

values found in the arrows that leave the constructs to the indicators represent the loads
of the indicators in that construct.

Figure 8. Results of the PLS-SEM ("bootstrapping", t Test Model)
Results
To determine the existence of evidence to support or not each of the hypotheses,
we examined the statistical value of t. These were values calculated under the
"bootstrapping" technique using the SmartPLS program. According to Hair et al. (2017),
the value of t is calculated by the division between the coefficient of the route of the
original sample and the standard value according to the "bootstrapping". Using a test with
a confidence level of 90% and with a one-way hypothesis, the route coefficient will be
significant if the theoretical t value is equal to or greater than 1.28 (Hair et al., 2017).
Finding - questions and hypotheses
1. Which are the elements that could measure the perceived usefulness of digital
knowledge systems information within education and professional organizations?

73

H1: The Academic Marketing and Support have a positive impact on the perceived
usefulness of Digital Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the "bootstrapping" technique, a value of t equal to 1.71 was obtain.
Because the value of t found of 1.71 is greater than 1.28 (1.71 > 1.28), it is affirmed that
there is significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can
conclude that marketing and support by organizations is a determining factor in the
perceived usefulness of adoption and use of digital resources for the research of reliable
information. Results shown in Table 18.
H2: Social Factors have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, a value of t equal to 1.32 was the result. As
the value of t found is greater than the theoretical t value (1.32 > 1.28), it is affirmed that
there is significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can
conclude that social factors have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of digital
resources for the research of reliable information. Results shown in Table 18.
H3: The Digital Resources Characteristics have a positive impact on perceived usefulness
of Digital Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, a value of t equal to 5.52 was found, with a
confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one direction, the value of t found
is greater than the theoretical t value (5.52 > 1.28). It is affirming that there is significant

74

evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the
characteristics of digital resources have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of
digital resources. Results shown in Table 18.
H4: The Perceived Friendliness has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of
Digital Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, we found a value of t equal to 6.01, with a
confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one address, the value of t found is
greater than the theoretical t value (6.01 > 1.28). It states that there is significant evidence
to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the ease of use has
a positive impact on the perceived use of digital resources in the research for information.
Results shown in Table 18.
H5: Academic Rewards has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, a value of t equal to 8.51 was found, with a
confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one address, the value of t obtain
is greater than the theoretical t value (8.51 > 1.28). It states that there is significant
evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that learning
rewards positively affect the perceived use of digital resources in the search for
information. Results shown in Table 18.
2. What factors can affect directly the intention to adopt and use digital knowledgebase
information systems within education and professional organizations?

75

H6: The Perceived Usefulness has a positive impact on the intention to use Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, a value of t equal to 7.59 was obtain, with
a confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one direction, the value of t
found is greater than the theoretical t value (7.59 > 1.28). It states that there is significant
evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the
perceived utility positively affects the intention to use digital resources in the research for
information. Results shown in Table 18.
H7: The Attitude towards using has a positive impact on the intention to use Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the” bootstrapping” technique, a value of t equal to 7.61 was found,
with a confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one direction, the value of t
found is greater than the theoretical t value (7.61 > 1.28). It states that there is significant
evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the
attitude of the user positively affects the intention to use digital resources in the search
for information. Results shown in Table 18.
3. Will the intention to use be relevant to the adoption and use of digital knowledgebase
information systems within education and professional organizations?
H8: The Intention to Use has a positive impact to adopt and use Digital Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, we obtain a value of t equal to 37.0, with a

76

confidence level of 90% and with a hypothesis of only one address, the value of t is
greater than the theoretical t value (37.0 > 1.28). It states that there is significant evidence
to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the intention to use
positively affects the adoption and use of digital resources in the search for information.
Results shown in Table 18.
Table 18
Summary of the Results Obtained from the PLS-SEM

H1
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6
H7
H8

Route
Marketing and Support  Perceived Usefulness
Social Factors  Perceived Usefulness
Characteristics  Perceived Usefulness
Perceived Friendliness  Perceived Usefulness
Learning Rewards  Perceived Usefulness
Perceived Usefulness  Intentions to Use
Attitude  Intentions to Use
Intentions to  Adopt and Use

Beta
Value
.064
.052
.259
.282
.349
.397
.383
.807

t
Value
1.71
1.32
5.23
6.01
8.51
7.59
7.61
37.0

Hypothesis
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported
Supported

Note: Supported hypotheses using the value of t, 90% confidence, one-way hypothesis (t = 1.28)

The results revealed that the eight hypotheses were supported (H1, H2, H3, H4,
H5, H6, H7, H8); with a confidence level of 90% and with a theoretical value equal to or
greater than 1.28 for one-way hypotheses (Hair, Wolfinbarger, Money, Samouel, & Page,
2015). The above table 18, show the results of the PLS-SEM path analysis and the
bootstrapping technique analysis generated with the Smart PLS program.
Figure 9 shows the model for the validated research from the results of the path and the
bootstrapping technique analysis generated with the Smart PLS program.

77

Academics
Marketing +
Support
H1 (t=1.71,
β =.064)

Social Factors
H2 (t=1.32,
β =.052)

Digital Resources
Characteristics
H3 (t=5.23,
β =.259)

Perceived
Friendliness
H4 (t=6.01,
β =.282)

Attitude
towards Using
H7 (t=7.61,
β =.383)

Perceived
Usefulness
R2 = .729
H6 (t=8.03,
β =.397)

Intentions to
Use
R2 = .477
H8 (t=37.0,
β =.807)

Adoption +
Use Digital
Resources
R2=.651

Learning
Rewards
H5 (t=8.51,
β =.349)

Figure 9. Results Conceptual Framework

Summary
In this chapter, we presented the results of the different tests and statistical
methods to evaluate the hypotheses established in the investigation. We met the
objectives of the research by studying the factors associated with the adoption and use of
digital information systems for the administration and research of information. The
effects of the factors associated with the adoption and use of digital systems were
investigated and classified. In addition, a model used in the research, was generated and
designed to explain the adoption and use of digital information systems within
educational and professional organizations.
To process the data and to obtain the results of all tests carried out, the following
statistical applications and programs were used, SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social

78

Sciences) and SmartPLS-SEM. The analysis of Cronbach's Alpha for the 27 items that
measured the constructs of the research was 0.936 considered an excellent questionnaire
to carry out the research. The result obtained from the adequacy measure of KaiserMayer-Olkin was .949 and the Sphericity level of the Bartlett test was 0.000 and with it,
was valid to perform a factor analysis. The factor analysis revealed four components that
represented 96.93% of the total variance.
The descriptive analysis allowed identifying the profile of the participants. The
results revealed that the greatest number of responses (296) came from females with a
68.05% participation compared to 139 responses from male individuals with a
participation of 31.95% for the total 435. According to the data provided, it can be
determined that 229 of the 435 participants study to complete an academic degree while,
206 of them do not study at present or have completed their studies and dedicate time to
their professions. That participant’s data include individuals who work or study in
universities, private companies or government. Also can be determine that the largest
number of respondents came from academic organizations.
PLS-SEM tests were perform using PLS Algorithm and “Bootstrapping”
techniques where results revealed that the eight hypotheses were supported; with a
confidence level of 90% and that, t values were greater than 1.28 (for one-way
hypotheses).
The adoption and use construct obtained an explanatory power of 6.51% of the
variance (R2 = .651), according to the composition of its predictor variables: intention of
use and perceived utility. Being the adoption and use the most interesting construct of
this research, it can conclude that the model has a high level of precision to predict the

79

continuation of adoption and use of digital resources in the search for reliable
information. Likewise, the construct of perceived utility obtained an explanatory power
in its variance of 7.29% (R2 = .729) from the predictive variables: marketing and support,
social factors, resource characteristics, rewards and ease of use. While, the construct of
intentions to use obtained an explanatory power in its variance of 4.77% (R2 = .477)
from its predictive constructs: perceived usefulness and attitude towards using.
To determine the existence of evidence to support or not each of the hypotheses,
we examine the statistical value of t. These values we calculated under the
"bootstrapping" technique using the SmartPLS program, obtaining values that exceeded
the theoretical t value of 1.28 in each of the eight hypotheses (1.71, 1.32, 5.52, 6.01, 8.51,
7.59, 7.61 and 37.0 respectively) which determines to support the hypotheses of the
research.
The next chapter will include the results and conclusions based on the research
findings, the contributions to the literature, limitations found in the study and
recommendations for future researches.

80

CHAPTER V
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND CONTRIBUTIONS
This chapter presents a summary of findings and conclusions reached in this
investigation. The chapter is divided into five parts: the first is the summary of results and
conclusions, based on the researcher's hypothesis; the second, details the contributions
and implications towards the reviewed literature during the investigation. The third part
presents the limitations of the investigation. The fourth part, mentions the
recommendations for future investigations. Finally, in the fifth part there is a summary of
mayor conclusions.
Results
The results revealed that the greatest number of responses (296) came from
females with a 68.05% participation compared to 139 responses from male persons with a
participation of 31.95% for the total 435 participants (100%). According to the data
provided, it was determined that 229 the 435 participants were studying to complete an
academic degree, while 206 of them did not study at the time of the research or devoted
time to their jobs and professions. That among the participants and at the time of the
investigation it included individuals who worked or studied in universities, private
companies or government. It was determined that the largest number of respondents came
from academic organizations.
On the other hand, it was noticed that many of the surveyed individuals occupied
multiple roles or functions. These were identified as Students, Professors, Professionals,
Administrative personnel or combinations identified in the survey. This is acceptable

81

since the research revolves around the adoption and use of Information Systems in any of
its facets.
It should be noted that active students could include all participants regardless of
their roles or performances. That the level of education of the 229 participants who were
active students at the time of the survey and were concentrated in university degrees
among associates (4.83%, n = 21), baccalaureate (26.90%, n = 117), master's degrees
(11.95%), n = 52) and doctorates (8.97%, n = 39), so it could conclude that the
participants had a high level of education. The study included participants from academic
universities (n = 377), private companies (n = 42) and government (n = 15). It can be
seen that the largest number (86.87%) of the respondents came from academic
organizations.
In order to support or reject the researcher's hypothesis. The suggested research
model was evaluated using the PLS-SEM tests using PLS algorithm and bootstrapping
techniques. It was possible to develop a model that predicts, through seven preceptors,
the adoption and use of digital information systems in educational and professional
organizations.
To continue, each of the researcher's hypotheses and the conclusions obtained
from the results are detailed.
H1: The Academic Marketing and Support have a positive impact on the perceived
usefulness of Digital Resources.
When performing the analysis of structural equations with partial least squares
(PLS-SEM), using techniques of "bootstrapping", it was found that there was significant
evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that

82

marketing and support by organizations is a determining factor in the adoption and use of
digital resources for the search of information. This means that the greater the promotion
of the existence and accessibility of these information systems and digital resources, the
greater the interest of users to adopt these in the search for up-to-date and reliable
information. It is intended that organizations should provide and disseminate information
on these expert information management systems and that they can also prepare technical
and / or administrative personnel to provide support to users interested in the adoption
and use of digital resources for the administration and search for information. The results
obtained are consistent with those obtained in the literature (Mandl, Felfernig, Teppan, &
Schubert, 2011, Subhash Jha, 2015, Gross, 2014).
H2: Social Factors have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations analysis with partial least squares (PLSSEM), empirical evidence was found to support and affirm the hypothesis raised by the
researcher. It can be concluded that social factors are determinant in the adoption and use
of digital resources for the search of information. This means that the greater the
interaction with colleagues, social media or people interested in the issues and existence
of these information systems and digital resources, the greater will be the interest of users
to adopt these expert systems in search of updated and reliable information. These results
indicate that the influence of students, professors, co-workers or co-students or any other
person that may influence the behavior of a person, is a factor that may affect the interest
for the adoption and use of digital resources for the administration and search for
information. The results obtained are consistent with those obtained in the literature

83

(Rosli, Saleh, Aris, Ahmad, Sejzi, & Shamsudin, 2016, Pumper, Yaeger, & Moreno,
2013, El-Seoud, 2013, Giesbers, 2014)
H3: The Digital Resources Characteristics have a positive impact on perceived usefulness
of Digital Resources.
When performing the structural equations model with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using bootstrapping techniques, empirical evidence was found to support and
affirm the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can conclude that the characteristics of
digital resources have a positive impact on the adoption and use of digital resources to
search for information. Which means that, if the information obtained from digital
resources are of high quality, reliable and updated, the users will be more interested in the
adoption of these for searching information. These characteristics should include the
quality of digital content, quality of services, accessibility attributes, entertainment
exchange, information repositories and asynchronous videoconferencing tools, as well as
access to multimedia information or other resources that may allow the representation of
critical thinking and which can influence the ease of use, perceived usefulness and
intention to use electronic expert resources within information management. The results
obtained are consistent with those obtained in the literature ((Krauskopf, Zahn, & Hesse,
2012, Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013, Tabassum, Roknuzzaman & Islam, 2015, Song, 2011,
Costello, 2015).
H4: The Perceived Friendliness has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of
Digital Resources.
Empirical evidence was found to support and affirm the hypothesis raised by the
researcher. It can conclude that the ease of use of digital resources has a positive impact

84

on the perceived usefulness of digital resources and expert systems for the search of
information. Given that the interface of these resources interacts with the users, a critical
factor to consider in order to improve the interest of the utility is the ease of interaction
with them. The user-friendliness qualities allow users to get closer and participate in elearning tasks because they strengthen positive and activating emotions. The rapid
development of information technology continues to create new possibilities for the use
of e-learning within professional education. Electronic learning tools, such as conference
video recordings, computer-based training, online tutorial discussions and virtual
information sharing systems have become an integral part of academic and professional
programs. The results obtained are consistent with those obtained in the literature (Park,
& Song, 2015, Lee, Hsieh, Chen, 2013, Consonni, 2010, Mohr, Holtbrugge, & Berg,
2012).
H5: Learning Rewards has a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of Digital
Resources.
When performing analysis of structural equations with partial least squares (PLSSEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, the t-value found, affirms that there is
significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It concludes that
learning rewards positively impacts the perceived use of digital resources in the search
for information. Learning rewards are directly related to performance to ensure that the
rewards provided are those desired and deserved. The key elements of the theory of
expectation predict that an individual will act in a certain way based on expectations and
that the act will be followed by an expected result for the individual. This means that the
motivation towards a reward is an important factor that distinguishes those who move

85

towards an accomplishment from those who do not, thus maintaining a particular belief
that must be followed by an expected result. It means that the greater the learning they
perceive when using digital resources, the greater will be the fulfillment of the
expectations of the users. These results are similar to those found in the literature (Baiio
& Ray, 2011, Savolainen, 2012, Gilhespy, 2011, Gonzalez, C. 2010, Renko, Kroeck, &
Bullough, 2012).
H6: The Perceived Usefulness has a positive impact on the intention to use Digital
Resources.
When performing the structural equations model and analysis with partial least
squares (PLS-SEM), and using "bootstrapping" techniques, the t-value found, reveals that
there is significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can
conclude that the perceived usefulness positively impacts the intention to use digital
resources in the search for reliable information. This means that the greater the usefulness
of the information they perceive when using digital resources and if the information
obtained from digital resources are of high quality, reliable and up-to-date, the greater the
trustworthiness of users in the adoption and use of digital resources. These results are
similar to those found in the literature (Lim, & Hew, 2014, López & Omoteso's, 2013,
Mohr, Holtbrugge, & Berg, 2012).
H7: The Attitude towards using, positively impact the intention to use Digital Resources.
When using the technique of "bootstrapping", the value of t-value found, affirms
that there is significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. With
this empirical evidence, it can conclude that the attitude toward the use of digital systems
is a determining factor in the intention to adopt and use digital resources for the search of

86

information. Attitudes toward the search for information relate to the favorable or
unfavorable feeling of the individual towards using digital information systems. It refers
to the degree to which the person has a positive or negative expectation of the behavior in
question. The subjective norm of information search relates to the individual’s perception
and desire to use resources or services, which means that it is an individual’s specific
behavior to determine the intention. The more favorable their perception and behavior
towards the use of information systems and digital resources, the greater the user's
interest in adopting these in the search for up-to-date and reliable information. The results
obtained are consistent with those obtained in the literature (Reynolds, Turner,
Branscombe, Mavor, Bizumic, and Subaši, 2010, Martinez, Presley and Zhang, 2013,
Lai, Chen, and Chang, 2014).
H8: The Intention to Use has a positive impact to adopt and use Digital Resources.
When performing the model of structural equations with partial least squares
(PLS-SEM), and using the bootstrapping technique, the t-value found, affirms that there
is significant evidence to support the hypothesis raised by the researcher. It can be
concluded that the intention to use, positively impacts the adoption and use of digital
resources in the search for information. This means that the more favorable their intention
towards the use of information systems and digital resources, the greater will be the
interest of the users for the adoption of these in their search for up-to-date and reliable
information. According to the TPB, the behavior of an individual is controlled by his
intention, and his intention is decided by his attitude, subjective norm and control of
perceived behavior. The influence of perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness
along with the attitude influences the intention or behavior in the use of digital resources

87

and information systems. The results obtained are consistent with those obtained in the
literature (Lai, Chen, and Chang, 2014, Clifton and Mann, 2011, Liberatore, Vestal, &
Herring, 2012).
Academic Implications
Using the Theory of Planned Behavior, the Technology Acceptance Model and
the Vroom's Expectancy Theory as the framework, this study has integrated a model to
examine the most relevant components that can influence the factors of utility and
intentions in the adoption and use of expert information systems and digital resources for
the search of up-to-date and reliable information. In the research, we find that electronic
learning tools, computer-based training, online tutorial discussions and virtual
information sharing systems have become an integral part of academic and professional
programs. The study demonstrated that user-friendliness qualities allow users to get
closer and participate in e-learning tasks activating positive emotions. The more
favorable user’s intention has to use information systems and digital resources, the
greater will be the interest for up-to-date and reliable information. Learning rewards is
considered as mayor factor. The key elements of the expectancy theory predict that an
individual will act in a certain way based on the expectation and the act will be follow by
a given outcome. The attractiveness of that outcome to the individual, the specific
instrumentality, valence and expectancy are key components of motivation and closely
related to those intentions and efforts to adopt and use digital resources.
According to Hu, (2014), the production of large amounts of data is the result of
communication in current work environments, as well as the implementation of
technologies to provide intellectual support to society and the economy. This ejemplifies

88

the direction in which the research has been developed, since the study manages to
identify constructs that can predict objectives that express the intention and desire to
adopt and use expert digital resources to achieve research with updated and reliable
sources of information.
According to Ahmed and Naeem, (2013), academics or professionals whether
students, professors, professional or administrative employees use information resources
to justify or support their tasks or research. They use the Internet, web resources,
electronic journals, HEC databases, e-journals, e-theses, electronic books, e-newspapers
and other digital resources that can satisfy their needs in the search for information.
Information management systems is a strategic asset of organizations and a key
source of competitive advantage, making it the next generation of database administration
(Craig, 2013). In this study, we are confirming that new generations consist of more
expert information systems that can handle larger amounts of information, variable
formats, which may include multimedia, videos and varieties to online learning or other
means that will continue to emerge with new technologies.
Practical Implications
Individual academic programs can evaluate their needs and offerings of digital
information and services to improve the transferring of reliable information to their
communities. Organizations can develop norms and policies that can help to disclose the
existence of particular digital information systems that support the functions and roles of
their employees or students. Users would be more information oriented knowing that
their organizations provide the necessary tools and technological support to prosper
professionally in their roles and functions.

89

Limitations
Time consuming was one of the most crucial limitations in this research because
of the large number of academic programs in different education and professional
organizations. Having multiple areas of studies and conducting this research for all
academic programs would had been very large and complicated to study all
participations. In addition, the selected population was consider as another limitation due
to the representative nonrandom sampling that aimed to create a minimum response from
different organizations. These respondents were aim to be academics, professionals or
administrative users according to their duties related to the research. The research was
limited to study the adoption to the use of information management systems and did not
collect information concerning the functionality, nor how digital or management
information systems resources were to be use.
Future Investigations
Research and evaluate established professional organization to study how these
industries conduct their procedures and politics to meet the factors and constructs about
the structured model presented in this dissertation.
Research individual academic programs to evaluate the needs for offering digital
information and services to improve the needs and responsibilities of creating and
transferring knowledge and reliable information to their communities.
Due to the interactions of users and the constants changes in technology, it would
be interesting to study in a continuous and longitudinal approach. Study the phenomenon
concerning to generations, academic programs and profession in this context using a
different theoretical framework and incorporate other variables.

90

Conclusions
In this investigation, we studied the impact of digital knowledgebase information
systems within education and professional organizations. We integrated a model to
examine the most relevant factors that can influence the usefulness and intention to
adoption and use digital systems and resources for the search of information.
Theoretically, the research has integrated the Theory of Planned Behavior, the
Technology Acceptance Model and the Vroom's Expectancy Theory to predict the utility
and intention in the adoption and use of expert systems and digital resources to search for
updated and reliable information.
The findings indicate that the evaluated constructs (marketing and support, social
factors, resources characteristics, ease of use and learning expectations), as well as the
attitude of the users are elements that directly influence the utility and intention to adopt
and use digital systems and resources in the search for reliable and updated information.
The greater the promotion of the existence and accessibility of these information systems
and digital resources, the greater the interest for users to adopt and use digital resources.
Organizations should provide and disseminate information on these expert information
systems and that they can prepare technical and / or administrative personnel to provide
support to users interested in the adoption and use of these digital systems for the
administration and search for information. Knowing the existence and support of digital
expert systems in organizations encourages users to make use of them.
If colleagues, academic and professional communities or other social media are
interested in the use of these digital resources, it can promote interaction and learning. It
is important to recognize that the characteristics of these resources must provide

91

reliability and up-to-date information so they are disclosing with the highest quality
possible. If the information obtained from digital resources are of high quality, reliable
and up-to-date, the greater the trustworthiness of users in the adoption and use of digital
resources. Since the interface of the systems interacts with the users, these are critical
factors to consider, with greater ease of use, it allows users to get closer and participate in
learning activities because they can strengthen positive emotions. The motivation is an
important factor that distinguishes those who move towards an accomplishment, the
greater the learning they perceive when using digital resources, the greater will be the
fulfillment of their expectations.
The final research model was able to predict a 65.1% intention of user to adopt
and use digital information systems and resources to search for updated and reliable
information. The fundamental variables that allowed predicting the intention of adoption
and use were the attitude (38.3%), the learning rewards (34.9%), ease of use (28.2%) and
the characteristics of the resources (25.9%), having a high level of precision to predict the
continuation of adoption and use of digital resources in the search for reliable
information.
In this study as well as studied by Amjad, Ahmed and Naeem (2013), we agree
that most educational and professional organizations use electronic resources for many
purposes, satisfying learning, education, and research needs and where the main reasons
are due to the ease of use and access to reliable information. One globally accepted way
to implement digital learning is by using all-in-one system for online education, which
covers registration, administering and monitoring of users and content. These also can

92

provide assessment tools, discussion forums, grading tools and has become an
irreplaceable solution for modern educational organizations.
By integrating models and theories, the online utilization of students provides a
better understanding of individual, technological and social factors regarding online
learning systems and performances. This study contributes to the growing interest among
researchers in using models to explain user’s intention to use technology. The results of
the study showed that the Theory Acceptance Model, Theory of Planned Behavior and
the Expectancies theories were significant in explaining the intentions to use technology
and digital resources in search for information. The study indicated that the attitude
towards use and learning rewards had the largest effects on the intention to use digital
resources. This study contributes to the growing interest among researchers in using
models to explain user’s intention to adopt and use digital information resources.
Within Aman and Aitken (2011) and in general, digital knowledgebase
management systems serve as means for acquiring reliable information using the help of
technologies, the Internet and interactive data based digital resources over the traditional
ways, which enables learning over a wide spectrum with higher efficiency. This study
also contributes to the literature by empirically establishing the direct impacts of
educational and professional organizations to support and commit to academic
communities that are striving to find the right combination for reliable information by
students, faculties, protocols and systems to adopt and use learning programs. Nowadays
education and professional organizations have become more global and are looking for
managing learning systems with the help of internet and other related resources. Elearning becomes more popular as users frequently use internet to access social media.