Author: Ian Burke
Title: Understanding Public Library Services and Use: A Structural Equation Modeling
Framework.
Advisor: Duan Zhang
Degree Date: August 2018
Abstract
This dissertation describes the process of fitting publicly available data from the
2015 Public Libraries Survey and 2015 American Community Survey to a structural
equation model based on a theory of action for public libraries relating operating revenue
to latent factors measuring service availability and library use within the context of
matched community demographic data. The process of using theory-based data analysis
to investigate publicly-available data is examined. Key findings include acceptable
estimates of goodness-of-fit for hypothesized factors representing public library service
availability and public library use, an inconsistent mediation effect of service availability
on the relationship between public library operating revenue and public library use, and
identification of disparities between local community descriptors associated with library
revenue and local community descriptors associated with library use. Suggestions for
further investigation of these disparities are presented.

Chapter One: Introduction
Measuring the Modern Public Library
Public libraries exist to be used by their communities. However, the ways that
libraries are used by their communities have changed over time in response to technology
and community needs. In S.R. Ranganathan’s text, The Five Laws of Library Science
(1931), this idea is expressed as, "books are for use." This is Ranganathan’s "First Law of
Library Science." This sentiment is discussed in Ranganathan’s text in terms of access to
the printed word.
Ranganathan's "Fifth Law of Library Science," is that "the library is a growing
organism." In recent decades libraries have expanded the range of their services while
retaining the sentiment that the purpose of a public library – including its collections,
facilities, programming, and other resources – is to be used. More than ever, librarians
take pains to show that libraries offer more to the public than traditional lending services.
Reported trends in library use suggest that library use is also diversifying: surveys of
library users by the Pew Research Center find that a growing proportion of library users
attend library programs in addition to using library media services, while a range of nonlending services including technology access and meeting space availability are now
recognized as important library services (Pew Research Center, 2016).

1

The diversity of services offered by modern public libraries are not easy to
describe succinctly. This raises the question of whether modern public library use is best
measured using separate, uncorrelated indicators, or if a multivariate factor accounting
for a combination of use modalities might be more apt. If this is the case, would this use
factor be more effectively modeled as a single construct, or as a higher-order
measurement with its own component latent measures of use? Exploring and developing
methods for measuring public library use will allow for more nuanced discussion of the
value of public libraries in the greater community.
In addition to the measurement of library use, this project also aims to address the
measurement of library service availability. Has the expansion of library service offerings
limited the extent to which one public library can be compared to another? If so, is the
modern public library an organization with a singular mission, or a host for a diverse set
of services with impacts that might be better measured independently? Although limited
quantitative research on the relationship between library revenue, services, and use exists,
the validity of the underlying models has not been extensively tested.
In the present study, I aim to use structural equation modeling techniques to
construct and validate a model of public library activities using large-scale publiclyavailable data. Creating a structural model fill provide a framework for discussion of
public library operations. In addition to testing the associational questions implied by the
models tested, this project will advance discussion related to the quantitative evaluation
of library services, while affording an opportunity to investigate the advantages and
limitations of using large-scale administrative data to measure and evaluate public library
services.
2

The models to be analyzed in this dissertation describe the relationship between
public library operating revenue, service availability (represented as a latent combination
of multiple measures), and use (also represented as a latent combination of multiple
measures). The models also assess the impact of several local demographic descriptors on
public library use. The models will incorporate publicly-available data from the Public
Libraries Survey (PLS) and the American Community Survey (ACS). The description of
these models – their fit and the estimates of relationships between library service
components – will be of interest to library studies researchers, social demographers, and
library administrators seeking to understand the data in these large data sets.
Additionally, the process of developing this framework will provide useful information
about the validity of existing theories of library service provision, equity of service
provision, and library use patterns. By framing large data sets within a theory-based
model, complex relationships between data points can be made more readily
interpretable, while suggesting new directions for theory development and data collection
procedures.

3

Incorporating Public Library Measurements into a Predictive Model
Public library use comes at a price: library facilities must be maintained,
collections purchased, and staff compensated. The relationship between library revenue,
the purchases made with that revenue, and the use of those goods and services is
therefore of interest to library administrators, funding organizations, taxpayers, and the
communities served by public libraries. However, existing research on this relationship
using multivariate outcomes has focused on measures of materials circulation, while
other studies have only considered univariate measures of public library use. This limits
the extent to which existing findings can be applied to modern multi-role libraries.
Incorporating the hypothetical measures described above into a model representing the
ongoing work of modern public libraries will provide an example of how these measures
can be applied while offering a platform for future research.
The majority of published articles using quantitative information in library studies
journals consistently focus on descriptive analyses, rather than investigation of theorized
causal relationships (Malliari & Togia, 2016). Analysis of quantitative relationships is
more likely to be discussed in library evaluation guides, econometric studies or costbenefit analyses published for public consumption.
These quantitative studies imply theories of action for library organizations that
can be mapped to generic action models such as those proposed by (Rossi & Chen 1980;
Chen, 1990) which relate organization inputs to outputs and impacts. These relationships
are mediated by processes and placed in a greater environmental context. Library-specific
action models have been mentioned by several sources (e.g., Shaping Outcomes, 2006;
Passonneau, 2013; Sputore & Fitzgibbons, 2017). However, evidence for their use in
4

public library assessments is limited to the alignment of international standards for library
program evaluation (ISO 11620, first adopted 2014) with categories in national library
surveys such as the Public Libraries Survey (PLS). A diagram of a conceptual action
model based on the theory driven/outcome-based concepts mentioned above is presented
in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of an action model relating inputs to outputs, mediated by
processes, within an environmental context.

5

Depending on the goals of the evaluation or study, the specific measures used as
inputs, processes, outputs, and impacts will vary. When modeling library organizations,
operating revenue might be considered an input, the use of the library can be considered
an output, while the amount, quality, or type of the services provided could be all be
considered mediating processes. Impacts can be defined in many ways including
perceptions of value or qualitative changes in a library’s community.
The models tested in the present study are informed by the theoretical foundations
described above. Although theories of action for public library organizations have been
explicitly described in theoretical work and implied by occasional quantitative studies,
the validity of the constructs used to support these action models have yet to be examined
directly. In this study, a structural equation modeling (SEM) will be used to describe the
effect of library revenue (mediated by library services) and local community
demographics on library revenue, services, and use. Examination of the degree to which
the model fits data in the PLS data set will help to validate and/or suggest new directions
for development of theories of public library action. While the model to be assessed will
not include an outcome/impact analysis, it will provide a method of examining the
relationship between input, process, and output variables in aggregate and in context of
local demographic effects, which may be incorporated into later impact studies and
library valuation efforts.

6

Relating Library Revenue, Services, and Use in a Structural Equation Model
Structural equation modelling (abbreviated SEM) is an applied form of the
generalized linear regression model (Graham, 2008). While structural equation models
equivalent to any form of regression analysis can be defined, the term "Structural
Equation Modeling" is usually only applied when a model involves both directional
relationships between variables and latent factors that account for measurement error
within groups of related observations.
SEM is used primarily in psychometric contexts by incorporating latent factors
representing psychometric concepts which in turn predict or "load" on observed
indicators. There is precedent, however, for using this approach to validate theoretical
models describing the operation of programs and organizations. Adedokun, Childress,
and Burgess (2011) demonstrate the use of structural equations to validate program
evaluation frameworks and understand the effect of the program activities (a state college
internship program) versus external factors (such as students’ residency status) on
program outcomes (student plans to remain in-state following graduation). While the fit
of the model examined provides empirical support for the program’s theoretical model,
Adedokun et al. also use the variance left unexplained by their model to discuss the
limitations of their initial data collection procedures.
Jenatabadi and Ismail’s (2014) use of structural mediation analysis to relate
financial inputs to airline operations and performance also bears conceptual similarities to
the methods described in this proposal by examining direct and mediated effects of
system inputs on output variables. Use of SEM to study library programs and services is
limited. Sin (2008) used structural equation modeling techniques to develop a macro7

level model of adolescents’ decisions to use library resources. In contrast to the present
study, Sin models the individual decision to use a library rather than the library’s
performance as a program. Other studies bearing methodological similarities to the
present study include several econometric studies (Vitaliano 1997; Hemmetter, 2006; De
Witte & Geys, 2013) examining the relationship between multivariate inputs to library
organizations and multivariate use outputs. However, these studies identify linear
combinations of observed variables rather than estimates of latent factors and focus on
library lending services rather than library services in general. By examining the factor
structure of current library metrics within a larger context, the present study will provide
empirical evidence regarding the function of library organizations and provide a platform
for further theory-building.
Placing Constructs and Predictors in Context
A theory of library action at the organization level is expressed in the
international evaluation standard ISO 16439 (Methods and Procedures for Assessing the
Impact of Libraries; first adopted in 2014). This standard suggests several indicators that
could be considered inputs in evaluations of libraries and library services, funding, as
well as staffing and existing capital resources. I have chosen to focus on operating
revenue as the primary input in my structural model, while other predictors describing
local demographics and indicators of existing capital resources such as collections and
equipment will be included as covariates and potential moderators. Although human
resources are suggested as inputs into library systems in the international standard, the
allocation of staff resources might be better used as a part of the services construct
described below in order to better model the availability of services offered by
8

libraries. There is evidence for sustained interest in the impact of funds and funding
sources on public library services in research and professional literature (e.g., Holt &
Elliot, 2001; Arns, Williams, & Miller, 2013).
Library processes in ISO 16439 are defined as, "activities which transform inputs
into outputs" (International Organization for Standardization, 2014, p. 8). A more
context-specific term for these activities might be, "library services." Examples listed in
ISO 16439 include cataloguing, lending, and reference services. Although stereotypical
depictions of libraries tend to focus on library services involving materials lending and
bibliographic reference, public libraries in the United States offer more than these two
narrow services. Programs for children and youth, internet access provision, meeting
space, and media production are just some of the services offered by public libraries in
the 21st century.
Orr (1968; 1973) identified six discrete library service types: document services,
citation services, answer services, instruction services, facilities services and adjunct
services. These services can be briefly summarized as services related to material storage
and lending, services related to finding information (bibliographic reference services),
non-bibliographic reference services, and the availability of library space for use,
respectively. Depending on the strictness with which these definitions are applied, this
typology can be adapted with little effort to modern library services that did not exist in
the 20th century. Factor analysis of variables from the PLS data may align with a similar
structure, or alternately suggest a simpler model containing a single latent variable
representing library services.

9

The proposed model will use expenditures on staff, and collections, as well as
library hours and program offerings as indicators of library service availability. These
indicators will be predicted by a hypothesized latent factor and representing the
intermediate allocation of financial resources within the library organization. This choice
resembles a model suggested by Buckland (1999) in which library services are modeled
as resource allocations that, in turn, predict library service use. Human resource-related
measures like the number of librarians on staff, salary expenditures, and weekly hours
have also been used as a proxy for the level of service provided, as in Mehra et al. (2017).
The scale and composition of library service offerings are often overlooked in
quantitative library research and evaluation. Including reference to these services will
allow the proposed models to account for the way management decisions relate to output
metrics.
In ISO 16439, library outputs are synonymous with measures of library use. these
measures include loans, library visits, and program attendance. The output variable of the
proposed model is a latent factor predicting library use in aggregate, similar to the latent
factor model for services mentioned above. Measuring the use of libraries is understood
to be an important part of librarianship, although individual public libraries take different
approaches toward measurement of services. Some counts such as book and item loans
are automatically collected through library circulation systems. However, other
information such as library visits and reference transactions can be difficult to precisely
tabulate, particularly for public library systems with limited resources. This can lead to
the use of sample-based estimates rather than inventories and censuses for these metrics
(Research Institute for Public Libraries Regional Proceedings, 2017). The relative
10

difficulty of collecting information on library use outside of materials circulation may
account for a preference in prior research relating library inputs and/or services to outputs
for measuring relationships for univariate outcomes or factors composed solely of
circulation metrics.
The proposed model will estimate effects of selected library and local
demographic characteristics on library use in order to better understand the interplay
between supply and external demand on realized library use. These predictors of library
use could also be said to represent the environmental context of the library system.
Several significant relationships between use metrics and local community descriptors
have been noted in published research. These include service population median income
(Sin, 2011), service population education level (De Witte & Geys, 2013), and library
funding sources (Vitaliano, 1997; Hemmeter, 2006; Sin, 2011). The percentage of
households with children and percentage of population as identifying as an ethnic
minority will also be included as hypothetical predictors. Including these variables in the
models tested could improve their explanatory value while allowing the interaction
between library funding and local characteristics to be investigated. In order to
incorporate local descriptive information, the PLS data set will be matched with an
external data such as the American Community Survey (ACS), an ongoing project
managed by the United States Census Bureau.
In addition to placing public library operations in a demographic context, this
report will also emphasize the relationship between the data collection process and the
interpretation of the data. As the models examined are based on publicly-available data

11

sets, explaining the relationship between data collection and interpretation will further
contribute to the interpretation and utilization of this data.
Research Questions
There are several large theoretical issues that I hope to address through the
discussion of this project, including the application of publicly available data, the tradeoffs inherent in fitting complex data to a generalized model, and the gaps between public
library services and library organizations’ measurement capacity. However, the four
research questions stated below are more focused. These will frame the development of
the measurements and models analyzed in this report.
Developing measurements. Within the broader framework of structural equation
modeling, there are two methods for examining latent measurement factors that predict
observations included in the measurement model: exploratory factor analysis (EFA) in
which the data are classified into one or more groupings based on automated comparison;
and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) in which the data are fit to a hypothesized
structure. Although multi-step methods incorporating both approaches have been used
(Kline, 2011), the CFA method is used in this project to test several hypothesized
measurements of library service availability and use.
Developing a measurement of public library service availability. The framing
question related to confirmatory factor analysis of public library service availability could
be phased the following way: Is a factor structure measuring public library service
availability supported by the PLS data set?
There are several ways that this question might be addressed. In the present study,
this is accomplished by comparting two confirmatory factor models in terms of statistical
12

fit and the strength with which the hypothesized use factor loads on the observed
variables. As noted in the following chapter, there are several observed counts reported
in the PLS data set that could be related to service availability. Some are related to the
amount of money spent on the library’s staff and collections, while others count nonmonetary service measures such as hours open, the size of the library collection, the
number of programs offered, and the number of employees within the library system.
Not all of these dimensions are addressed by multiple variables in the PLS data,
which makes estimating a higher-order factor model (in which the different dimensions
of service availability are grouped into more than one measurement factor) difficult.
Instead, two single factor models will be compared: one including an indicator of publicinternet terminal availability; the other only including indicators of staffing,
programming, and services. This will allow for the discussion of the way that the
availability of the library as place might be represented in data and associated limitations,
along with other analysis of fit and loading scores. Other topics related to this framing
question that will be discussed include the contrast between monetary- and non-monetary
measurements of service availability; the extent to which staff, collections, and program
counts co-vary; the dimensionality of the service availability variable; and the
implications of using service availability as opposed to measures of service quality or
categorical descriptions of services in a model of public library action.

13

Developing a measurement of public library use. A similar question to the one
posed above regarding service availability can be used to frame the evaluation of library
use in the present context: Is a factor structure measuring public library use
supported by the PLS data set?
Use is measured in the PLS in several different ways, including counts for
materials circulation, the number of interlibrary loans, estimated library attendance,
program attendance, and PC use in the library. To provide symmetry with the Service
Availability measure, the two models for Use to be compared will be single-factor
models. One will include a PC use measure, while the other will not. Topics for
discussion related to this question include relative model fit, factor loadings, comparisons
between the structures seen in the Use and Service Availability measurements, and the
extent to which different aspects of public library use are captured in the Public Libraries
Survey.
Evaluating the mediating effect of public library service availability on use. If
the measurements of public library service availability and use discussed above are found
to have reasonable statistical fit and predictive reliability, they will be operationalized in
a structural model representing public library activities in an environmental context. An
input based on operating revenue will predict service availability and use, while the
effects of local context on library use will also be incorporated into the model. As part of
the model-development process, the mediating effect of public library services on the
Revenue-to-Use relationship will also be examined. This aspect of the study will be
guided by the following framing question: Does service availability fully mediate the
relationship between public library revenue and public library use? While there is no
14

reason to believe that this is not the case, examining the question will help to further
understand the model. In addition to discussing the extent of the mediation effect,
discussion of this question will also address the gap between the relationships suggested
by the model tested and the functional reality that the model approximates.
Predicting public library use. The last research question to be addressed in this
report will be: To what extent do library service availability and select community
descriptors such as local median income, local educational attainment, local
households with children, and the racial composition of the local community)
predict library use when controlling for the effect of per-capita operating revenue
on service availability? To address this compound question, the regression weights for
the predictors mentioned above will be described and interpreted. It is my hope that this
will provide a functional example of the investigatory utility of statistical modeling while
suggesting new routes for research on public library administration and library use.
Summary of research questions. The first two research questions are essentially
questions related to measurement consistency. The information available through the PLS
allows for the possibility for multivariate latent measures to be constructed that measure
the general extent of library service provision or availability, and the use of those
services, but the degree to which the variables indicating these concepts load on the
hypothesized latent factors has not been assessed, to a great extent, in published
literature.
Given that consistent factors or individual variables representing service
availability and use can be identified, the next stage of the study will be to examine the
quantitative relationship between library revenue, service availability, and use while
15

modeling differences between library service areas (LSAs) using community
descriptors. Where the first two research questions are focused on determining the
viability of estimating latent measurements through an inferential process, the third and
fourth questions are primarily oriented toward describing the process of modern public
library service provision and use that may be built upon in future research.
Practical Significance
What this study is not. Before writing further about the potential contributions of
the present study, I feel that it is important to explicitly define what the study will not do.
Although the models tested describe predictive relationships, they do not purport to
assign causal significance to any of the predictors other than revenue and associated
measures of expenditures loading on the Service Availability factor. The several
demographic descriptors intended to provide additional context to the question of
predicting use; significantly more research will be needed to support any assertions of the
relationship between community descriptors and library use.
It is also worth re-stating for clarity that this study examines library use from the
perspective of library organizations, not the individual users. A finding that there is a
negative relationship between local median income and library use does not mean that
low-income individuals within that LSA are less likely to use the library.
Finally, this study does not include any measure of realized library value. It
should be considered a first step toward a model of library action that includes measures
of library value and may also be presented in concert with research assigning value to
library use, but the model presented should not be taken to imply a confusion of library
use with that use’s social impact.
16

Justification for the study. This research will directly benefit the field of library
studies by providing a new perspective on the measurement of library service availability
and use. In addition to providing a novel description of quantitative relationships between
library services and use, the presentation of a partially latent structural equation model
will provide evidence for or against the validity of conceptualizing modern public
libraries as organizations with consistent service and use patterns across the continental
United States. Findings from this research will offer a rich quantitative description of
public library operations across the United States.
However, I believe that greater value of the present research project will be
realized in further research building off the work presented in this report. The models
tested here will only provide a high-level snapshot of library action and does not present
a complete action model as outputs are not linked to impacts. However, the work
presented in this report provides a foundational framework for conceptualizing,
validating, and implanting a quantitative theory of action for library organizations. I hope
that future work may make use of the relationships described in this work to design
studies that examine changes in public library service and use patterns over time, as well
as differences between library systems due to organization structure and setting.
It is also my goal that the dissertation on this project will prove accessible to
readers with limited experience in analyzing structural equation models. As the proposed
study will apply techniques developed outside of the library studies field to the analysis
of public library data, I feel that it is imperative that its methods, results, and discussion
of findings be accessible to the wider library studies community as well as to researchers
already familiar with the methods employed. While I do not intend to write an
17

instructional guide to structural equation model design and interpretation, I will avoid
jargon where possible and define method-specific terms in lay language where
necessary. I also plan to emphasize the role that uncertainty plays in statistical analysis.
As noted by Fischoff and Davis (2014), there is a degree of uncertainty in all empirical
research. Even reliable data-collection methods are subject to issues with missing data
and errors due to malfunctioning systems; theoretical models cannot incorporate
unknown factors; natural variation in measured items leads to uncertainty regarding
population averages and other descriptive statistics. By embracing rather than avoiding
discussion of different sources of uncertainty in the data and model, I aim to improve the
usefulness of the analysis by making complex statistical models more accessible.

18

Chapter 2: Literature Review
Public Library Revenue, Services, and Use in Context
The present study aims to examine the validity of a model of library action at the
organizational level. Several authors have presented theories of library organizations.
These include Ranganathan (1931), Orr (1973), as well as later writers drawing from
management, evaluation, and psychometric theories (e.g, Holt & Elliot, 2001; Sin, 2009;
Lyons & Lance, 2014). The specific action model to be tested has four major components
that will be discussed in the following sub-sections: Revenue, Services, Use, and local
demographic effects. Later sections of the literature review will explore how these factors
have been related by other researchers and how measures of library use might be
operationalized as measures of value.
Revenue. Public libraries in the United States have several avenues for funding,
including local tax levies, grants from state and federal library organizations, grants from
non-profit charities, and internal fundraising. The mixture of funding sources available to
library organizations is dependent on several factors, including state library
organizations, local property values, and library organizational structure (Vitaliano,
1997). While fines for overdue materials are still collected by many libraries, these fines
do not represent a consistent revenue stream and are not reported as revenue in the PLS
(IMLS, 2016).

19

Of the sources for library revenue mentioned above, local taxes are the largest
source of revenue for most libraries in the United States. This revenue stream includes
taxes levied directly by library administrative units as well as income from other local
taxes designated for library use. In the 2014 fiscal year, 85 percent of per-capita library
operating revenue came from local government sources, a slight increase over past years.
State funding sources and private funding sources make up most of the remaining fifteen
percent of per-capita operating revenue (IMLS, 2017). Nationally, private funding
sources have grown to provide a greater percentage of operating revenue in recent years,
but operating revenue from state-level sources is highly variable between states, with
some libraries in Ohio receiving most of their operating revenue from state sources
(Owens & Sieminski, 2007). Federally-sourced revenue makes up less than one percent
of per-capita operating revenue and is usually distributed through grants to state libraries
which then distribute the funds to individual library organizations. Most of the capital
revenue – revenue designated for large, infrequent capital expenditures such as facility
construction and renovation – also comes from local governmental sources. However,
this proportion is smaller, with roughly 60 percent of capital revenue funds in the 2014
fiscal year coming from local sources, fourteen percent from state-level sources, three
percent from federal sources, and 23 percent from other sources. In contrast to operating
revenue, most libraries report receiving capital funds from a single source in a given
fiscal year as opposed to a mixture of sources (IMLS 2017).
Research conducted by Sin (2011) suggests that per-capita operating revenue is
related to population density, with urban areas receiving more funds. It is not clear from
this research whether this is a linear trend or if this relationship is biased due to very high
20

per-capita revenues at major metropolitan library organizations such as the New York
Public Library. Other relationships identified by Sin include lower levels of net funding
in areas with lower median incomes, and higher per-capita revenue for library systems in
the Northeast and Midwest United States relative to the national average. Research
conducted by the American Library Association (2012) examining funding following the
recession of 2008 found that while most libraries saw reduced revenues in the aftermath
of the recession, urban libraries experienced the greatest relative fluctuations in their
operating budgets during the economic recovery.
Recent opinion polls suggest that although there is strong evidence for public
support of libraries in terms of sentiment (Zickuhr, Rainie, Purcell, & Duggan, 2013;
Rassmussen Reports, 2014), public financial support for libraries is not unlimited. In part
due to the limited availability of funds, state library organizations and other groups have
conducted studies to estimate the overall economic impact and return on investment to
taxpayers generated by public libraries. These studies, along with several scholarly
assessments of public library economic efficiency are discussed later in this chapter.

21

Public library services. Library services described in the 1999 textbook
Introduction to Library Public Services (Evans, Amodeo, & Carver, 1999) include
reference services, library instruction, interlibrary loan, circulation services, reserve
services, special collections, serial services, media services, and government information.
The 2015 edition of the same textbook – now titled Library Programs and Services: The
Fundamentals (Evans, Saponaro, Christie, & Sinwell, 2015) – mentions these services
while adding sections on electronic resources, literacy courses and other programs, and
computer access. These changes are reflective of the expansion and diversification of
library services in response to a changing media landscape. In the PLS, these changes can
be seen changes to library collection composition over time. In 2005, 90 percent of
library collections were print materials; by 2014 print materials accounted for 66 percent
of library collections. This change can be explained by a gradual reduction in total print
materials and large increases in the size of electronic and audio collections (IMLS, 2017).
The same IMLS report also notes a trend toward libraries offering more programs and
providing more public access internet terminals. However, adoption of non-traditional
services has not been uniform across public libraries in the United States. Per-capita
program offerings are significantly higher in the Northeast region than in other regions of
the country (IMLS, 2017). Real, Bertot, and Jaeger (2014) describe a "digital divide"
between urban and rural libraries in terms of broadband access and digital literacy
training, with rural libraries lagging in these indicators. Sin and Kim (2008) note that
while most library services are provided at higher rates in high-income neighborhoods,
the availability of public internet terminals was not affected.

22

Public library use. Individual use of library resources is often described by
library researchers in terms of information-seeking behaviors. Most of these theories –
such as Kulthau’s information search process model (Kulthau, 1991) or Sonnenwald’s
information horizons theory (Sonnenwald, Wildemuth, & Harmon, 2001) – emphasize
individual agency in the identification of information resources. Talja, Keso, and
Pietilaèinen (1999) note a movement away from the "system-centered" paradigms of
information science toward a focus on the individual information-seeking behaviors in
the 1990s. Indeed, most recent research has taken a user-centered perspective when
examining public library use. Vakkari and collaborators (Vakkari & Serola, 2011; Sin &
Vakkari 2015; Vakkari, Aabø, Audunson, Huysmans, Kwon, Oomes, & Sin 2016)
present evidence implying that individual perceived benefits from library use might drive
actual use of the library, while noting that use preferences vary between users’ countries
of residence. Varheim (2014) presents qualitative links between library program
attendance and generalized trust.
When use is examined at the library organization level, it is often framed as an
outcome related to one or more predictors of use. Research examining national data sets
such as the PLS suggests predictors of use at the library administrative unit level. Grimes,
Manjarrez, Miller, Owen, and Swan (2013, 2014a, 2014b) produced several reports using
PLS data for IMLS. This series of reports included hierarchical multiple regression
models predicting several measures of change over time in library use (such as visitation,
circulation, and program attendance), based on several predictors, including total
revenue, staffing, and resources. In the 2012 report, circulation was found to be positively
and significantly related to total revenue, but there was significant variation at the state
23

level, with the average effect size using group mean centering showing a negative value.
While these studies examined data from the same surveys, most hierarchical regression
statistics calculated are unique to the reporting year, preventing easy comparison between
reporting years.
Joo and Cahill (2017) examine two measures of "children’s use" – circulation of
children’s materials and children’s program attendance – as predicted by expenditures,
staff, and materials and LSA size. They find that both variables are predicted by staff,
expenditures, and collection volume, suggesting that service availability might be a
predictor of general use as well. Joo and Cahill used PLS data for their research.
Sin and Kim (2008) examine the relationship between multiple demographic
factors and library use/non-use based on PLS and Current Population Survey (CPS) data.
Results are difficult to interpret due to the number of covariates. However, a positive
relationship between library use and individual income is identified. Later work by Sin
(2009) presents a structural equation model describing the relationship between several
indicators and latent variables representing adolescents’ self-reported use public library
resources. Findings from this study suggest that user characteristics, library
characteristics, and neighborhood characteristics all affect adolescents’ decisions to use
library services.

24

Library operations and community demographics. Several studies link aspects
of library operations to community demographics. Koontz, Jue, and Bishop (2009) note
that library outlet closures between 1999 and 2003 were linked to economic factors such
as declines in revenue, but that African American library service area residents and lowincome residents were more likely to be affected by outlet closures. Sin (2011) notes that
large inequalities exist between communities in terms of revenue and service provision.
More recently, a Pew Research Group report (2016) suggests that certain library use
types are linked to user demographics: library computers are more likely to be used by
younger users, female users, and African American users, while higher income
respondents and people with children were more likely than average to have had any
interaction with library services. Recent library users were more common in urban areas,
but lifetime interaction with library services was evenly distributed between urban,
suburban, and rural respondents to the Pew survey.
Valuing Library Revenue, Services, and Use
Interest in assigning a quantitative value to the services provided by libraries has
been embraced by some in the field, while criticized by others. Robert Orr (1973)
observed that the attitudes regarding quantitative measurement of library service quality
could be categorized into two groups: extreme resistance and moderate acceptance. Arns,
Williams, and Miller (2013), note that the reticence observed by Orr in 1973 still exists in
the 21st century.
Primary research assigning economic value to library services and use provide
several examples of models relating inputs to library programs (such as revenue) to
outputs (such as book loans and library visits). This body of research provides evidence
25

that demand for library goods and services varies between geographies and can be
affected by factors both related and unrelated to library management while suggesting
that several observed indicators of library services and use could be represented as
composite factors.
Economic valuation of library services and use. Economic valuation methods
are a response to the problem of communicating the value of non-market goods and
services. These methods assess the monetary value of goods and benefits that cannot be
directly priced and are used in the return-on-investment studies and cost-benefit analyses
discussed later in this chapter.
The United States Government Accountability Office (GAO) has noted that
although assigning monetary values to all costs and outcomes can ease the decisionmaking process, accurately assigning dollar values to social goods can be difficult (GAO,
2014). In addition to this issue, Ackerman (2008) identifies the uncertainty inherent in
making assumptions about unknown outcomes as problematic. The lack of ethical
judgement implicit in monetary valuation, particularly for cost-benefit analysis of public
projects has also been criticized by multiple researchers (e.g., Scitovsky, 1941; Dworkin,
1980). Lyons and Lance (2014) have noted that attempts to relate financial inputs and
outputs can blur the distinction between library outputs and outcomes, as understood by
practitioners of outcome-based evaluation. Theorists outside of the library field (e.g.,
Scitovsky, 1941; Dworkin, 1980) have criticized economic valuation methods as they
present monetary wealth as a valid way of describing collective outcomes. Particularly
when communal goods, externalities and social equity issues are involved, this can lead
to prioritization of practices that lead to high valuations rather than outcomes with high
26

social value. Conniff (2012) expands on this, noting that pricing non-market goods can
lead to perverse incentives to "game the system" by emphasizing more highly-valued
aspects of a program at the expense of actual program benefits.
When dealing with public goods and services such as those offered by libraries, a
key concept underlying the valuation process is that of consumer surplus, or the added
benefit offered by the public good to consumers who would otherwise need to purchase a
substitute good or service on the market (Elliott, Holt, Hayden, and Holt, 2007; Kim
2011). Methods of establishing a value for consumer surplus contingent valuation and
revealed preference methods, both of which have been used in studies of public libraries.
Contingent valuation. Contingent valuation involves the use of surveys to
determine monetary values for public or other non-market goods (Mitchell and Carson,
1989; Diamond and Hausman, 1994). First described by Mitchell and Carson (1989),
contingent valuation methods can be grouped into two general subcategories:
"willingness-to-pay" and "willingness to accept" measures. Willingness-to-pay (WTP)
measures seek to assess the amount respondents will pay for access to a non-market good
or service while Willingness-to-accept (WTA) measures examine the monetary amount
respondents would accept to go without the good or service. While nominally equivalent,
these methods can lead to noticeably different results (e.g., Hanemann, 1991; Aabø,
2005) which may be related to respondents’ income, the presence of adequate market
substitutes, and human psychology (Hanemann, 1991).
Contingent valuation has been used frequently to price library services. In the UK,
Morris, Hawkins, and Sumison (2001) used contingent valuation surveys to establish that
library users would pay .67 British pounds to rent a library book, a lower figure than the
27

estimated cost of book purchase, cataloging, and maintenance of 1.41 pounds per loan. In
the United States, this study has been used as a reference for establishing an estimate of
user willingness-to-pay for loaned materials as a percentage of item price (e.g., Barron,
Williams, Bajally, Arns, & Wilson, 2005).
Aabø (2005a; 2005b) compares the willingness-to-pay (WTP) and willingness-toaccept (WTA) methods of valuation, finding a higher WTA value than WTP value. Aabø
posits that WTA might better represent a market value substitute than WTP in the case of
library services, particularly those that are not readily-available on the open market. Aabø
notes complications with contingent value methods such as the potential to give weight to
"protest" choices (providing an unrealistically high or low value to express support or
dissent) in contingent valuation surveys. In contrast to Aabø, Barron, Williams, Bajjaly,
Arns, and Wilson (2005) suggest that WTP valuation surveys are easier for respondents
to understand, leading to a higher response rate. Contingent valuation of public libraries
has been recommended as standard practice by Elliot, et al. (2007), although
implementation in published reports varies. Elliot et al. (2007) recommend using WTP
surveys to establish a lower bound for valuations while noting that the sum of WTP
valuations of individual public library goods and services may significantly exceed a
general WTP valuation for the library as a single public good.

28

Revealed and stated preference valuation. Another method of assessing library
use value, the revealed-preference method utilizes observation and indirect estimation
rather than through self-report. A related approach, the stated-preference method presents
survey respondents with hypothetical market decisions in order to record their
preferences. However, stated-preference methods have not been applied in a library
valuation context. Levin, Driscoll, and Fleeter’s 2006 study of Ohio public libraries uses
estimates of value derived from purchasing costs by applying discount rates to these
costs. Kim’s 2011 meta-analysis of revealed preference and contingent valuations of
public library services suggests that the application of discount rates to market values – as
opposed to use of primary research on consumer preferences – is typical, with discount
rates ranging from 20% of an item’s resale value to 100% of the new-item market price
as a basis for determining the value of lending services. Kim (2011) also found that
revealed-preference estimates lacked common criteria for estimating value, with some
studies relying on prior work (occasionally contingent valuation methods) and others
using observed prices as a basis for un-discounted price estimates.
While economic valuation studies of public library services – particularly studies
using revealed preference methods – tend to rely on assumptions rather than empirical
observation, research on valuation methods is more developed in studies focused on other
topics, such as conservation ecology and public policy economics. In these fields,
comparisons between contingent valuation, revealed preference, and stated preference
value elicitation methods suggest that while different approaches produce different
estimates of value, observed preference structures are not dependent on method used
(Adamowicz, Louviere, & Williams,1994; Carson, Flores, & Meade, 2001; Cameron,
29

Poe, Ethier, & Schulze, 2002; de Blaeij, Florax, Rietveld, & Verhoef, 2003). This
suggests both that further development of rigorous valuation techniques for public library
services should be pursued, but also that no one monetary value is likely to represent a
"true" valuation of a non-market good. In a meta-analysis of continent valuation studies
related to road safety, de Blaej et al. (2003) note that not only do different approaches to
monetary valuation produce different results, valuations are also affected by non-linear
demand curves. This finding suggests that a better understanding of demand for library
services relative to service availability could affect future public library valuation efforts.
Models Relating Revenue, Services, and Use
Library program evaluation theory and practice. Several areas of study relate
public library revenue to services and/or use. Recently, systematic evaluation of library
programs has presented a major venue for the theoretical discussion of this relationship.
Program evaluation can be defined as a process that promotes best practices with a goal
of "continuous program improvement " (CDC Program Performance and Evaluation
Office, 2016). In contrast to other public services, which have embraced quantitative
measures since the early 20th century, discussions of specific formal quantitative
evaluation practices within the library studies field began in the 1970s. An early
proponent of quantitative library evaluation, Robert Orr (1973) notes that due to the
idealistic goals of public libraries, some librarians may see no reason to question the
library service quality or efficiency. Orr suggests that nevertheless, quantitative
evaluation can improve the management of library organizations. Indeed, support for
evaluation of public libraries in the mid-20th century has been described as rooted in

30

demands for better, or at least more efficient management (Sputore and Fitzgibbons,
2017).
Tighter budgets and demands for institutional accountability during the 1990s and
later decades coincide with more evidence of support for library evaluation in scholarly
and professional literature (e.g., Holt, 1996; Bassman, Lecampagne, Korb, & Chute,
1998; Rudd, 2000). In part due to the limited availability of funds, state library
organizations and other groups conducted studies to estimate the overall economic impact
and return on investment to taxpayers generated by public libraries. The 1994-1999 St.
Louis Public Library valuation study (Holt and Elliot, 1998; 2001) is often cited as an
early example of a public library system undertaking a quantitative cost-benefit analysis.
During this time, there was also a gradual transition from a management-focused
perspective on evaluation toward one focused on assessing libraries’ value for taxpayers
and other external stakeholders. In 1988, the United States government began collecting
data through the PLS (PLS) to support assessment and comparison of library programs.
In 1996, Zweizig, Johnson, Robbins, and Besant published a manual for evaluating
library performance called the TELL-IT Manual. The attention-grabbing title of the
manual is an acronym: TELL-IT stands for "Talk about the vision; Explore alternatives;
Learn from what's happening; Let people know what happened; Integrate results with
ongoing services; and Think about how it worked. " (Zweizig et al, 1996, p. 6). Published
by the American Library Association (ALA), TELL-IT emphasizes qualitative methods
supplementing descriptive summary statistics or constructed outcome measures that
provide actionable feedback for library administrators while also providing information
about library performance to external stakeholders.
31

The methods discussed in the TELL-IT manual bear some resemblance to the
Context Input Process Product (CIPP) model developed by Stufflebeam, Guba, and
Lincoln (1985; 1989). The CIPP model is a guide to evaluation planning that places
evaluation in a cyclic context, with information gained during evaluation of a program's
context, input, process, or product is used to actively improve the program and adapt an
ongoing evaluation to changing program parameters (Stufflebeam, 2013). The theorydriven evaluation approach (Rossi and Chen, 1980; Chen, 1990) in contrast, emphasizes
the development of a theory of a program’s ongoing functions and a description of how
proposed changes to the program may affect the inputs, processes, and outputs of a
program. The two approaches to evaluation are not incompatible, but rather frame the
evaluation discussion in different ways. CIPP could be said to be more concerned with
the relationship between evaluation and the decision-making process, while theory-based
evaluation is associated more strongly with the methodological design of evaluation,
describing the relationship between inputs and outputs, as mediated by internal processes
and external environmental factors (Alkin, 2013).
More recent guidance on evaluation provided by library organizations describes
an approach called outcome-based evaluation (Shaping Outcomes, 2006; Lyons & Lance,
2014). Outcome-based evaluation bears some similarities to the methods put forward in
the TELL-IT Manual but shows more influence from theory-driven evaluation and related
approaches, including an emphasis on logic models that relate programmatic inputs,
processes, and outputs to broader outcomes while accounting for organizational and
environmental contexts. Notably, the guidance provided in the Shaping Outcomes:
Making a Difference in Libraries and Museums (the online course developed by IMLS
32

and Indiana University describing outcome-based evaluation) presents the reporting
process as a final rather than intermediate step in an evaluation cycle. This suggests an
emphasis on the evaluation process itself, rather than on the changes effected by the
evaluative process, as in the TELL-IT and CIPP models. This change might be related to
a shift from management to funding as a motivating incentive for evaluation in library
circles.
Two international standards, ISO 11620 (Library Performance Indicators; first
adopted 1998) and ISO 16439 (Methods and Procedures for Assessing the Impact of
Libraries; first adopted in 2014) suggest standardized vocabulary for discussing library
performance indicators and evaluation. There is evidence for use of these standards in the
United States and abroad in academic library assessments (e.g., Passonneau, 2013;
Sputore & Fitzgibbons, 2017); evidence for their use in public library assessments is
limited to the alignment of ISO 11620 with categories in national library surveys such as
the PLS. As with outcome-based and theory-driven evaluation frameworks, ISO 16439
describes library systems in terms conducive to the creation of a logic model, although
the international standard uses the term "impact" in place of "outcome" when discussing
the external effects of library programs, such as improved childhood literacy rates or
increased wages due to training received at a library.
Two criticisms of current library program evaluation practice recur in professional
discussions. One is that programs undertaking evaluation tasks may overemphasize areas
of success due to the biasing effects due to linking funds to evidence of performance.
Streatfield and Markless (2011) suggest an emphasis on independent evaluation of
national library programs to prevent bias from stakeholders focused on maintaining
33

program funding. Another criticism is that library evaluators do not adequately
distinguish outputs from outcomes (Lyons & Lance, 2014). The Research Institute for
Public Libraries (RIPL) also promotes an outcomes-focused evaluation model. In RIPL
training programs, readers and participants are asked to consider the differences between
the inputs, outputs, and outcomes for public-library-related research projects (RIPL,
2017).
Return-on-investment and cost-benefit analysis. In contrast to economic
valuation studies, which focus on the process of assigning monetary value to nonmonetary outputs, return-on-investment and cost-benefit approaches relate monetary
inputs to output measures. Often, return-on-investment and cost-benefit approaches make
use of economic valuation to assess the value of outputs. The studies discussed below
bear some conceptual resemblance to the model implied by the proposed study’s second
research question and represent the bulk of library studies output that could be compared
to the proposed study.
Although a distinction can be made between return-on-investment studies and
cost-benefit analyses, the two terms are often used interchangeably. In economics and
public policy studies, approaches to cost-benefit analyses revolve around the definition of
economic efficiency and operationalization of said definition, while return-on-investment
is considered a statistic (USGS, 2009). Kim (2011) describes the cost-benefit ratio as a
ratio between gross benefit valuations and unit cost, while return-on-investment ratios
compare net benefit to initial outlays. Nevertheless, the studies described as cost-benefit
or return-on-investment analyses bear enough similarities that I have included them in the
same section.
34

While library research journals do occasionally publish articles on library returnon-investment, or other cost-benefit analyses, most analysis of the relationship discussed
in this section between library revenues and outputs has been published outside of library
research journals as reports to funding agencies or the general public. The 1994-1999 St.
Louis Public Library valuation study (Holt and Elliot, 1998; 2001) is often cited as an
early example of a public library system undertaking a quantitative cost-benefit analysis.
This study, funded by a grant from IMLS involved a contingent benefit survey using the
willingness-to-accept method, identified a 4-to-1 benefit to tax dollar ratio, with survey
respondents specifically placing value on library staff and collections. The authors of the
St. Louis Public Library study later co-authored Measuring Your Library's Value, a guide
to conducting cost-benefit analyses in public library settings.
Perhaps due to the cost of conducting library cost-benefit evaluations, many costbenefit studies since the beginning of the 21st century have been backed by state
libraries, regional libraries, and library consortia. Barron, Williams, Bajally, Arns, and
Wilson (2005) presented a multifaceted evaluation of the secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary economic effects of South Carolina Libraries spending on the local economy.
Elliot, Holt, Hayden, and Holt (2007) caution against the use of economic impact
assessments for most library systems, as this approach can overestimate the size of library
benefits, unless the library can plausibly be considered an attraction for outside economic
investment. Nevertheless, the method is attractive to report-writers who want to
demonstrate library value in as many ways as possible.
The South Carolina report also included an estimate of patrons’ estimate of the
monetary value of services received (a contingent valuation). Similar state-wide studies
35

incorporating both secondary economic impacts and contingent valuation have been
undertaken in Florida (Pooley, Harper, Neal, Lewis, Whitfield, & Scheibe, 2008; Harris,
2013). Earlier reports on Florida libraries combine the effects of secondary economic
impacts to produce a single monetized return on investment. More recent reports have
been clearer about model assumptions and potentially skewed samples influencing
contingent value estimations. An economic impact analysis of the Nashville, Tennessee
Public Library System (Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce Research Center, 2016)
use the results of a contingent valuation survey of library users to weight market
valuations sourced from cited price lists, and state whether impacts are based on flat rates
or multiplied by the number of loans and visits. While secondary economic impacts are
also described in the report, these impacts are presented separately from the weighted
direct impact valuation estimates. A recent evaluation of the statewide impact of Ohio
public libraries (Fleeter, 2016), while less detailed, also specifies the methods by which
output measures were assigned monetary value (revealed preference, with varying
discount rates based on the reusability of items and services), while avoiding discussion
of secondary economic impacts.
A large cost-benefit study of public library systems in the United States conducted
by the Colorado State Library's Library Research Service (Steffen, Lietzau, Lance,
Rybin, & Molliconi, 2009) takes a somewhat different approach to describing local return
on investment. In contrast to other studies conducted by state libraries, the Colorado
study focused on calculating a local return on investment for several individual library
districts rather than aggregating at the state level. A comparison of analyses show that the

36

calculated rate of return was highly variable depending on library district, particularly in
cases where out-of-district users make use of a different library’s services.
The studies described above make use of multiple methods to communicate the
relationship between financial inputs and library use. Methods used to place value on
library services in large-scale return-on-investment studies include contingent valuation
methods, adjusted market values for replacement goods and services, as well as economic
impact analysis. However, while varied returns on investment have been noted between
states and library administrative units, these differences have not yet been investigated on
a national scale, using multivariate outputs.
As noted above, the proposed study will not use monetary values to describe
outputs. However, estimates of the direct and indirect effects of revenue on services and
use can be interpreted as estimates of efficiency while analysis of the relationship
between the service and use variables will contribute to discussions of relative value of
library service profiles between LSAs.

37

Economic efficiency of public libraries. Return on investment studies can be
described as assessments of economic efficiency (Kim, 2011). However, the studies
discussed above avoid explicit discussion of economic efficiency. Several studies
conducted by researchers outside of the library studies field address the issue of public
library efficiency more directly through analysis of library economic efficiency. In broad
terms, economic efficiency is achieved when costs are minimized and outputs or profits
are maximized. The goals of the efficiency evaluation process can affect the
interpretation of a cost-benefit analysis (Rabiyath 2010). Discussion of the ratio of inputs
to outputs within a program or firm will be interpreted differently depending on whether
one is taking a view of the possibilities within an organization or firm, comparing the
efficiency to the possibilities across the sector if the evaluation is being undertaken to
theorize optimal allocation of resources within a system.
Most recent research examining economic efficiency of public libraries discusses
efficiency at the organization level. In these studies, an efficient production frontier is
estimated using multivariate regression predicting outputs based on monetary inputs
and/or resource allocation. Observed input/outputs ratios are compared to the estimated
frontier for the observed input, resulting in an efficiency score. Further insights can be
gained by correlating efficiency estimates with hypothesized determinants of
inefficiency.
Vitaliano (1997) estimates library efficiency within New York State (excluding
New York City), using staff hourly wage rates as inputs and a linear combination of
circulation, hours of operation, and collection expansion as outputs. Vitaliano finds that
the libraries examined operate at an average of 24% over least cost, with slight efficiency
38

gains attributed to library reliance on local tax revenue. Vitaliano’s model somewhat
confusingly uses hourly wages rather than staff expenditures as inputs, while considering
a combination of library services and use metrics as an output variable. Hemmeter (2006)
approaches the question of the relationship between library funding sources and library
efficiency using nation-level data on libraries in the United States. Like Vitaliano (1997),
Hemmeter uses stochastic frontier estimation as a method of estimating library efficiency.
Hemmeter uses staffing expenditures, operating expenditures, and fixed capital such as
library facilities as input and a combination of circulation, hours open, and visits per
collection size to estimate outputs. While the variables used in Hemmeter’s model are
noticeably different from those used by Vitaliano, Hemmeter also finds a small but
significant relationship between efficiency and locally-sourced revenue.
In a study of public library efficiency in the Flanders region of Belgium, De Witte
and Geys (2013) test a Free Disposal Hull efficiency estimation model that incorporates
operations, staff, and facilities expenditures as inputs and young borrowers, book, and
media circulation as outputs. De Witte and Geys’ model also incorporates a library
service potential factor represented by the counts of library holdings, and controls for
hypothesized demand predictors including the percentage of the library service
population with a university degree, the population density, and the presence of library
membership or borrowing fees. Results indicate that including demand predictors in the
efficiency model lessens their apparent effect on efficiency while increasing overall
observed efficiency estimates. This suggests that demand for library services is not due
entirely to library service offerings and management practices. De Witte and Geys also
find evidence that higher income levels, local control of revenue, higher population
39

density, and left-leaning regional political affiliations were associated with higher rates of
library use.
Like the model proposed for this study, De Witte and Geys’ (2013) model
examines libraries as organizations, albeit in the context of analyzing economic
efficiency. The use of a factor representing library services as distinct from library inputs
also resembles the model proposed for this study. However, in the De Witte-Geys model,
only materials circulation counts are considered as observed output variables.
Summary: Prior Work and the Proposed Study
Qualitative evaluations of numerous projects managed within public library
organizations have been described in professional literature (e.g., Fisher, Durrance, &
Hinton 2004; Varheim, 2014). However, with the arguable exception of some costbenefit/return-on-investment studies, descriptions of full-library evaluation efforts appear
to be absent from professional discussions outside of evaluation manuals and workshops,
such as those described in Chapter 1. However, several studies described above describe
relationships between measures of library service access, use, and predictors of library
use. Sin and Kim (2008) found that non-white minorities in the 2000s were less likely to
use libraries in the United States while higher incomes and educational attainment were
as associated with increased library use. Joo and Cahill (2017) find that a strong
relationship exists between the child-focused services at libraries and overall levels of
use. Econometric studies focused on the efficiency of library organizations identify
several additional predictors affecting the ratio of use to library inputs. Vitaliano (1997)
and Hemmeter (2006), find that greater levels of local revenue lead to small gains in
library use relative to the researchers' input estimates. De Witte and Geys (2013) identify
40

similar effects for service availability, higher income levels, regional political affiliation,
local revenue control, and population density. These findings will inform the decisions
about variables included as predictors of library use in the models described in the
following chapter.

41

Chapter 3: Methods
Data Sources
Public Libraries Survey (PLS). The PLS has been administered nationally since
1988, with a pilot in 1985. This survey and associated data are often abbreviated as PLS
in library studies literature. In regression studies, the letters PLS might also stand for the
Partial Least Squares regression parameter estimation technique. This technique is not
used in the present study, but the acronym is noted above in order to reduce confusion.
The PLS has been administered by the Institute for Library and Museum Services (IMLS)
since 2007 (IMLS, 2017). Although the content of the survey has changed over time, the
survey’s goal of collecting data on public libraries in the United States has remained
consistent. Public use data files for PLS from 1992 through 2015 are available through
the IMLS website at the time of this writing. Data are collected for a series of staggered
12-month reporting periods beginning in July of the previous year and ending in
December of the reporting year. There is between a one and two-year delay between
administration of the survey and publication of reports and data based on the survey.

42

The 2014 edition of the PLS included a sampling frame of 9,295 public libraries
in the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and other territories (9,233
libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia) in its universe, with a unit response
rate of 97.4 percent. The 2015 edition of the PLS included 9,251 public libraries in the
United States and its territories (9,229 libraries in the 50 states and the District of
Columbia) in its universe, with a unit response rate of 97.6 percent. 9,066 of the library
administrative entities identified as active and providing data in the 2014 data set are also
represented in the 2015 data set, while 9,052 active administrative entities in the 2015
data set were also active and providing data for the 2014 collection. The mean library
service population reported in the 2014 data set was 34,833, rising to 34,926 in 2015.
However, both data sets contain high numbers of small library administrative entities,
with a positively skewed distribution of service areas; approximately 83% of the
administrative entities reporting in both years consisted of a single library branch.
The PLS is conducted through a federal-state partnership. Information in the PLS
is reported by state libraries through a web portal to IMLS. Timely reporting of data is
tied to some grant awards, providing incentive for state libraries and similar entities to
collect and provide data. The state libraries, in turn, collect requested information through
direct survey of public library administrative entities. Library administrative entities may
have multiple branches or be comprised of a single library outlet. Specific survey
methods used by state libraries are direct surveys of public library administrative entities
within the state and may include additional items not included on the PLS. Some states –
but not all – compel participation by statute. Due to the variety of survey methods utilized
by various state libraries, PLS staff advise caution when comparing states’ data directly.
43

PLS staff also note that data from the District of Columbia, Hawaii, and United States
territories other than Puerto Rico are sourced from single library administrative entities,
making these areas inadvisable to include in a nested analysis of administrative entities.
The central PLS reporting tool contains several measures to ensure that data are
entered accurately. Match reports compare newly entered information with information
provided for previous surveys and highly-correlated variables provided in the new
submission as checks on the accuracy of data (large changes in data provided are flagged
and confirmation requested prior to final submissions. An additional check on accuracy
requires annotations of the reasons for major changes, such as new library branches
opening, or a large change in a use counts. At the national level, demographers from the
U.S. Census Bureau provide a final check on data accuracy by reviewing raw data
submissions prior to inclusion in the master data set. If data are missing for a library
administrative entity or outlet, those data points are reported to IMLS as
missing. Although the goal of the PLS is to be a comprehensive census of public libraries
in the United States, some libraries do not report data, or leave fields missing.

44

Prior to public release, several steps are taken to reduce errors in the data and
suppress cases that might threaten individual privacy. Salaries and other operating
expense estimates are suppressed for libraries with low employee counts and replaced
with missing values. Adjusted estimates of population for overlapping service area
populations are created to reduce overestimation of service area populations by
calculating ratios between state total service population estimates provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau with the duplicated total count, then adjusting the reported counts by this
ratio.
Imputed values for missing data (other than data deliberately suppressed) are
estimated using various methods, depending on whether data for prior years is
available. If prior year data are available, the prior year value adjusted for growth based
on the change in figures reported for similar libraries is used as a basis for the imputed
figure. If prior data are not available, present-year means or medians are adjusted for the
library’s service area population. If population data are not reported or unreliable, other
methods may be used. Imputed figures are flagged and the specific imputation methods
used are identified in the public data set. Imputed data were avoided in the present
research to avoid attenuation of the data. this and other data cleaning decisions are
discussed further in Section 3.3.
Data in the public access version of the PLS is organized into several levels of
granularity. Three data files are produced for the publicly-available data set: a state
summary data file, an administrative entity data file, and an outlet-level data file. These
files are related through unique identifiers for administrative units and states. Additional
levels of geographic hierarchy, such as counties/parishes associated with administrative
45

entities are also included in the public data sets. The proposed study will use the public
version of the administrative entity data file for the 2015 PLS as the primary source for
most variables.
American Community Survey (ACS). The other source of data to be used in the
proposed study is the ACS (ACS) conducted by the United States Census. ACS data are
not publicly available at the individual response level but are instead available as
summary statistics for metropolitan areas, counties and states. While Census-derived
population statistics linked to LSAs and local jurisdictions are available in the PLS public
data file information on local population demographics is not available, necessitating the
use of ACS data.
The ACS was initiated in 2005 as part of an initiative to generate more timely
estimates for population, income, and other demographic data than would be possible
with the decennial census. The ACS is an ongoing nationwide (the 50 United States, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and other US territories) data collection project, which
allows several estimates to be calculated for geographic areas, with a trade-off between
immediacy and sample size. The sampling frames for the ACS are based on the master
address file generated during the most recent decennial census. This means that the basic
unit of the sampling frame is the household (or group housing). Sample selection is
accomplished through a multi-stage process. First, addresses are sorted into
representative sub-frames to prevent addresses from being sampled more than once in a
five-year period. These sub-frames are then sampled using a stratified random sampling
strategy with differential probabilities based on geography (low-population census areas
are oversampled) and prior response rates (areas with historically higher response rates
46

are sampled at a lower rate). The initial survey invitation is distributed through the mail,
with reminder post-cards and telephone follow-ups. Responses are collected through
mail-in forms, an internet survey, or a telephone interview. Non-responders are contacted
directly by field representatives for in-person interviews. Only after failure to conduct inperson interviews (or the identification of a sampled address as no longer actively
occupied), is the target address abandoned as a non-response (Torrieri, 2014).
After the data are collected, data are processed by checking responses for
implausible responses that might bias estimates, and missing data imputed using a
method known as hot deck allocation, a single-imputation method. Raw data are also
weighted in several stages to control for error due to sampling strategies and several
demographic factors. These include sex, age, race, Hispanic origin, marital status, and
housing unit type and population estimates for the weights based on the decennial
Census. The weighted data are then used to calculate estimates for statistics at various
level of geography, which are then organized into tables to allow for filtering by
geography and demographic characteristics. Depending on the size of the population
available for a given estimate, estimates may be calculated using the previous 5 years of
data, 3 years of data, or the previous year’s data collection. For example, estimates for a
large area such as the state of Colorado can be reliably generated using one year’s worth
of data, while estimates for smaller or less densely-populated areas such as rural Morgan
County may require data to be collected over longer period of time to accumulate enough
responses to generate a statistically reliable estimate.
ACS estimates for various geographical areas are available through the United
States Census website. Geography options for small areas such as census tracts or
47

townships vary depending on the ability of ACS to generate reliable estimates, but most
data points are available for counties and larger regions. In the present study, the 2015
five-year ACS estimates were used to provide information about the library service areas’
local demographics.
Measures and Variables
Indicators of library services. Variables loading on the proposed Public Library
Services factor will include per-capita measures for staff-related expenditures, the
number of library employees, the number of licensed databases available, the number of
print serial subscriptions, number of library programs, number of public use computers,
collection purchases, and non-staff, non-collection expenditures (a measure that includes
facilities spending as well as program-related expenses, but not major capital
projects). These variables are meant to reflect the amount of services offered by a public
library, in contrast to the use of those services represented by the variables selected to
load on the hypothesized Library Use factor. As with the Use factor, these variables do
not capture all services offered by libraries, with one-on-one service offerings being a
particular area lacking data points. Nevertheless, the variables in aggregate should be
indicative of the general nature and quantity of different libraries’ service offerings.
Staff-related expenditures reported in the PLS cover expenditures paying for staff
(including both librarians and non-librarians) salary and benefits. Other counts reported
in the PLS cover the number of staff with advanced degrees in librarianship, the number
of staff with the title of librarian, and number of other staff.
The PLS count of library programs uses a broad definition of programs including
any group-oriented event at or sponsored by the library. Programs offered as a series are
48

counted by installment rather than series. One-on-one services are not counted as
programs.
Publicly available internet offerings might best be estimated with the PLS public
use computer count. With recent increases in wireless connectivity and access, some
method of measuring the capacity of wireless support at the library might be
advisable. However, no such measure exists in the PLS now.
The PLS uses several measures to evaluate the size of library collections. These
include counts of database and print serial subscriptions, counts of books/e-books, counts
of audio resources, and counts of video resources. However, these metrics do not always
reflect recent activity put into maintenance of the collections or acquisition of new
material. For this reason, annual collection expenditures are used instead. Annual noncollection, non-staff operating expenditures (described in the PLS as "Other Operating
Expenditures") are also included in the Services factor model to account for the money
spent by libraries toward providing the "space as a service" as well as services such as
makerspaces not covered in PLS metrics.
The number of total service hours reported in the PLS is based on the sum of open
business hours in the past year for all library branches. While a measurement estimating
the number of hours library facilities are open to the public would be a useful indicator of
service availability, the service area aggregate score for hours open is difficult to
interpret, as there is no way to estimate the balance of hours open between the various
library outlets within a library district and those outlets’ estimated share of total services
and use. The PLS outlet file does contain information about individual branches’ service
hours, but none of the other indicators discussed above. An area for further research
49

(discussed in Chapter 5) could involve examining processes for library schedule design
that improve service availability and service quality. However, this is beyond the scope
of the present research.
Indicators of library use. Variables loading on the proposed Use factor may
include per-capita measures for circulation, library visits, active registered users,
reference transactions, total program attendance, computer use sessions, number of
interlibrary loans provided or received, and number of wireless sessions. These metrics
are reported as whole numbers in the PLS, but will be adjusted by the library’s estimated
service area population. While these variables do not capture the entirety of ways that
community members might make use of library space and services, they do reflect a
diverse array of library use practices.
Circulation is recorded in the PLS as a total figure representing the number of
loans and renewals of library material of all types to library patrons (interlibrary lending
is a separate measure). This figure includes electronic materials that are checked out
through the library system, but not materials accessed through third-party databases. The
PLS also includes two measures that represent subsets of the total circulation count:
circulation of children’s materials and circulation of electronic materials. These measures
were considered for but not included in the proposed models.
Visits to the library are counted as a single variable, combining visits across
library facilities. While many libraries have automated systems in place to track visits,
libraries that do not have the resources to count all visits are asked to collect data for one
week (Sunday-Saturday) without vacation days, high levels of staff vacation, or unusual

50

events that might inflate or deflate attendance from the library’s typical experience and
then multiplying that count by 52.
Reference transactions are included in PLS as a measure of interactions between
library staff and patrons with the goal of finding a specific information resource in
response to a question. PLS guidance and trainings emphasize that directional responses
(for example, helping a patron find the restroom or the biography section) and technical
support (e.g., assisting a patron with making a photocopy) not be included in this
measure.
Program attendance is measured in the PLS by counting the number of people
attending library programs, such as story time, a group class, or a seminar. This measure
does not include one-on-one services that might be offered by libraries, such as tutoring.
The measure is duplicated between sessions; a library with a small, but consistent
audience for ongoing library programs might generate the same cumulative count of
attendance as that generated by a library that has few ongoing programs but hosts several
high-attendance events. As with circulation, two sub-counts of program attendance are
provided: children’s program attendance and young adults’ program attendance.
There are two interlibrary loan-related measures in the PLS: loans to other
libraries and loans from other libraries. For the proposed research, I will add the two
interlibrary loan measures together prior to calculating per-capita figures in order to
estimate overall interlibrary loan activity.
The computer use sessions measure in the PLS is a count of the number of times
individuals have logged on to public workstations at the library. The other computer-userelated variable collected in the PLS is the wireless session count, which is based on the
51

number of wireless sessions as calculated by the library wireless service. A caveat to note
about the wireless sessions metric is that this metric may also include sessions initiated
by staff using personal wireless devices such as smartphones or tablets. For this reason –
as well as diversity with regard to the way computer connectivity services may be offered
by different library service organizations – these metrics are reported in the summary
tables below, but not included in the models tested.

52

Observed predictors of library use.
Revenue-related variables. Revenue-related variables are derived from operating
revenue figures in the PLS. Operating revenue includes revenue from local government
sources, state government sources, federal government sources, and "other" sources (such
as contributions to a library budget from a foundation or a Friends of the Library group).
In the model proposed above, only operating revenues will be included. Capital revenues
– such as taxes levied for a major renovation or other construction project – are less
stable year-to-year than operating revenues and can bias efficiency estimates (Vitaliano,
1997). While examining revenue streams separately could allow consideration of whether
increased local control has a relationship to more efficient use of resources, as suggested
by Hemmeter (2006), considering total operating revenue as a single aggregate variable
has benefits for model parsimony.
Local descriptors as predictors of library use. The ACS variables to be used in
the proposed structural model will include several variables representing binary
relationships in the library administrative entities related geographies (census-designated
places and counties). The ratios that these variables will be based upon include the ratio
of persons identifying as white (as opposed to other racial identities) compared with the
overall population, the ratio of the 25-years old and older population holding a bachelor’s
degree or higher, the ratio of households with children less than 18 years old. Median
income for the LSA will also be included as a predictor of library use. Summary statistics
from the ACS can be found at factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml or
queried through the Census file transfer protocol tool at www.census.gov/programssurveys/acs/data/data-via-ftp.html.
53

Library descriptors. Descriptors of library organization style were considered as
potential predictors of library use and moderators of the Services Use relationship.
Variables considered included the count of library branches (including bookmobiles), as
well as the percentage of revenue derived from local (as opposed to state or federal)
sources. Although these variables show promise as predictors of different library service
profiles, the classification of these profiles was judged to be beyond the scope of the
present research.

54

Data Preparation
Matching ACS and Public Library Survey data. Cases in both the PLS and
ACS data sets are described with geographic identifiers (GEOIDs) defined by the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) and maintained by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI). However, the boundaries of LSAs examined by the PLS are not
identified by unique GEOIDs and do not perfectly align with the boundaries of
geographic entities surveyed through the ACS (described in
www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/reference/geodiagram.pdf ). Demographic information from
the ACS was matched using GEOIDs for counties and census-designated places
associated with the LSAs and using the geographic area with a closer population match.
Filtering and transforming the data. To limit the effects of extraneous
variables, several steps were taken to remove extreme outliers from the data. The range of
LSA sizes covered by the PLS can lead to very large and very small library districts
skewing the analysis. While this study is testing a theory of action that should be
applicable to most libraries, libraries serving very small and very large populations have
characteristics that set them apart from other library organizations. Small population
libraries are more likely to operate with little or no full-time staff and adjust hours and
service offerings accordingly. Additionally, staffing data for libraries with very small
staff have been omitted from the public version of the PLS data to preserve respondents’
privacy and confidentiality. In contrast, very large library organizations are likely to act
not just as local community centers, but as regional or national cultural institutions. This
may lead to their central branches attracting more visitors from outside their reported
service area, placing a negative skew on the overall distribution of per-capita use
55

statistics that cannot be easily attributed to local factors. For the reasons described above,
libraries with a service population below 1000 or greater than 1,000,000 were excluded
from the analysis. Libraries that lacked staffing expenditure information due to a small
number of employees, as well as libraries not flagged as meeting the Federal-State
Cooperative System definition for public libraries were also excluded. In order to make
the analysis of a covariance matrix – based off of unstandardized values – viable, service
area total variables were alternately divided by the service area population or one onethousandth of the service area population. Libraries in district of Columbia, Guam,
American Samoa, Alaska, Hawaii, and Ohio were also excluded from the final analysis
due to their remote and/or unique organizational structures. Ohio public libraries are
funded primarily though the state library system, as opposed to the local revenue sources
that support most public libraries in the United States. Libraries in the other United States
territories of Puerto Rico, Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands did not
participate in the 2015 PLS.

56

Software Used
The primary piece of software used in the analysis of factor models and structural
equations was MPlus Version 7. The method of estimation used was Robust Maximum
Likelihood specifying a complex model type to correct for clustering within states.
Additional correlation analysis and descriptive statistics were obtained using SPSS
Version 11, while data merging and text file preparation were accomplished using
Microsoft Excel 2016.
Analytic Strategies
Analytic approaches by research question.
Addressing Research Question 1: Factor structure of service availability.
It is something of a tradition in measurement model evaluation to propose and
compare several approaches to the estimation of a latent measurement factor. However,
the number of viable indicators for a service availability factor within the PLS data set
are limited, leading to a limited number of possible variations, even if difficult-tointerpret indicators such as the average hours open per week are included. The primary
measurement model proposed and tested is a single-factor model with five indicators (all
natural logarithms of the base data): per-capita staff expenditures (staffexp), per-capita
collection expenditures (colexp), librarians per thousand people in the service area (libr),
non-librarian staff per thousand people in the service area (othemp), and library programs
offered per thousand people in the service area (prog).
The proposed models include variables that reflect both the money spent on
library services as well as the range of services provided by public libraries. The theory
underlying this model is that the resources provided by libraries – including the
57

collection, programs, and support services provided by librarians and other staff – tend to
covary. In other words, a library organization providing more programs than average is
likely to also have more staff than average. The alternative model includes a sixth
indicator, the number of internet-connected workstations available per thousand people in
the service area (pc), in order to test the viability of including a measurement that
addresses the dimension of using library facilities outside the context of scheduled
events. This model also provides a point of comparison with the primary model. The
implications of a comparison between the first model proposed in this section and this
alternative are not drastic, at least compared to a model that hypothesizes multiple factors
loading on a higher-order service availability factor. However, the comparison between
models may suggest some directions for future investigations into the dimensionality of
public library service availability. Future work (discussed in Chapter 5) may also be able
to provide more insight into the question of whether different categorical mixtures of
library services are present, which could in turn suggest more theoretical possibilities
related to the measurement of service availability. The two proposed models measuring
public library service availability are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The better-fitting model
was incorporated into later structural equation models used to address later research
questions.

58

Addressing Research Question 2: Factor structure of public library use. Similar
to the Service Availability factors suggested above, the number of viable indicators for a
multivariate Library Use factor are limited. The primary measurement model proposed
and tested is a single-factor model with the following five indicators: annual visits to
libraries in the LSA per capita (visits), reference transactions per capita (ref), circulation
loans per capita (circ), total incoming and outgoing interlibrary loans per capita (ill), and
program attendance per capita (attend).
In the present research, the model described above is compared to a similar model
with an additional PC-use sessions per capita indicator (pcsess) added to the single-factor
model. In addition to providing a comparison model for the primary model tested, this
alternative model provides some symmetry with the alternative model proposed for
Research Question 1 in that it also incorporates a variable representing access to
computer services. These models attempt to incorporate several dimensions of use,
including the traditional lending services provided by libraries as well as programmed use
within library facilities and undirected use of within-facility services represented by the
pcsess variable. These measurement models are based on a theory that public library use
can be measured as a single construct at the organizational level; alternative structures
that could be tested in future research are described in Chapter 5. The models described
above are shown in Figures 4 and 5. The better-fitting model will be incorporated into
later structural equation models used to address the later research questions.

59

Figure 2. Five-indicator model measuring Service Availability.

60

Figure 3. Six-indicator model measuring Service Availability.

61

Figure 4. Five-indicator model measuring Public Library Use.

62

Figure 5. Six-indicator model measuring Public Library Use.

63

Addressing Research Question 3: Mediation of the Revenue-Use relationship.
To examine the extent to which the Service Availability factor mediates the
relationship between revenue and the Library Use factor, several structural equations will
be examined. To establish that Revenue, Service Availability, and Use are all related, the
bivariate correlations between the Revenue variable and the Service Availability and Use
factor scores will be examined and reported. To assess the nature of the mediation effect
within the context of predicting library use, a structural model estimating a partial
mediation of the Revenue-Use effect will be compared to a nested model that assumes
complete mediation (Figure 3.3) using the Satorra-Bentler chi-square difference test
(Satorra & Bentler, 2010).
Addressing Research Question 4: Prediction of public library use. While the
mediating effect of the Service Availability will only be examined for the relationship
between Revenue and Library Use, the direct effects of several other predictors taken
from matched ACS data on the Library Use factor will also be examined. These include
the percentage of persons in the area identifying as white (Race), the percentage of
households with children (Child), the percentage of persons in the area over the age of 25
who graduated from college (Edu), and the median local income in thousands of dollars
(Income). These variables can be seen incorporated into the models shown in Figures 6
and 7.

64

65
Figure 6. Structural model of library action within an environmental context assuming partial mediation of the relationship
between Operating Revenue and Public Library Use by Service Availability.
65

66
Figure 7. Structural model of library action within an environmental context assuming full mediation of the relationship
between Operating Revenue and Public Library Use by Service Availability.
66

Statistical tests and estimated parameters.
Indices of model fit. The measurement of "fit" for confirmatory factor models and
structural equation models is a common method for evaluation of the models’ stability
and comparing the viability of competing models. Most measures of model fit commonly
used to evaluate structural models are based on the well-known chi-squared test, which
compares the difference between observed values and the values expected given an
assumed distribution. In the case of structural equation models, the chi-square is
calculated by comparing the distribution of the matrix of residual covariances to that of
an identity matrix. However, the chi-square test is sensitive to large sample sizes and is
not modified by the complexity of the model. Several indices of incremental fit (in which
the chi-square value of the model tested is compared to that of a "null" or "baseline"
model where variables are assumed to have no correlation) and absolute fit (in which the
model tested is only compared to a hypothetical complete lack of fit) have been
developed to address these issues. While they make use of the chi-square statistic, they
are distinct from it. David Kenny (2015) suggests a third category of fit index in addition
to the incremental and absolute indices: comparative indices that cannot be assessed
independently but should rather be used to compare similar models.
In addition to base chi-square statistics, the present study will report three
measures of fit for the models examined: two absolute measures, one incremental
measure, and one comparative measure.

67

One measure of absolute fit to be used is the Root Mean Square Error of
Approximation or RMSEA. This measurement is calculated in the following way:
√(χ2 − 𝑑𝑓)/√(𝑑𝑓(𝑁 − 1)
Lower values for RMSEA are indicative of better fit than higher values. However,
the question of what values for RMSEA indicate a model with unacceptably poor fit
remains open. A commonly-cited rule of thumb is that a fit of less than .05 is "good,"
while values less than .08 are "acceptable" (McDonald & Ho, 2002; Kenny, 2015). This
five-percent criterion bears some symmetry with conventions for statistical significance
in hypothesis testing, potentially making the RMSEA a good choice for succinct
communication of model goodness-of-fit.
The Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) will also be reported.
SRMR is another measure of absolute fit. In contrast to most other measures of fit, the
SRMR does not incorporate a chi-square statistic based on the residual covariance matrix.
Instead, the SRMR measures a standardized ratio of the sum of squared differences
between the expected covariance and observed covariance (Hu & Bentler, 1999). As with
the RMSEA, lower values are preferred, with a value of zero indicating "perfect" fit. The
equation for SRMR is presented below. In this equation, sij represents the observed
covariance of a pair of variables, σ ij (hat) represents their covariance in the source matrix,
and siisjj represents the product of those variables’ standard deviations. The p(p+1) term
represents the number of possible estimated parameters in the model, with p representing
the number of observed variables included in the model.

68

𝑝

𝑖

√{2 ∑ ∑[ (𝑠𝑖𝑗 − 𝜎𝑖𝑗ℎ𝑎𝑡 )/(𝑠𝑖𝑖 𝑠𝑗𝑗 )]^2}/𝑝(𝑝 + 1)
𝑖=1 𝑗=1

The incremental measure to be reported is the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI), the
calculation for which is presented below. In contrast to the absolute measures of fit
described above, the TLI compares the model under analysis to worst fitting model that
can be estimated using the same data, referred to as the baseline or null model.
((χ2baseline/dfBaseline)- (χ2model/dfmodel))/(( χ2baseline /dfBaseline) – 1)
This measure is a derivate of another popular fit index known as the Comparative
Fit Index (CFI), but one that penalizes model complexity more severely. In contrast to
RMSEA, TLI values close to one are preferred. In general, the rule of thumb is that
values greater than .9 TLI or CFI are considered acceptable fit. However, as incremental
measures are based off of a comparison between the null baseline model and
hypothesized models, cases in which the null model has decent absolute fit will lead to
low TLI and CFI ratios (Kenny, 2015).
The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) will also be reported as a measure of
comparative or relative fit. This measure is also based on chi-square statistics, but is not a
ratio, rather an adjustment to the chi-square based on the number of observations and
parameters in the model:
χ2 + k(k + 1) - 2df
This index is useful less for the purpose of evaluating goodness-of-fit but is
instead used to compare non-nested models with similar goals. Thus, while it will be
reported for all models analyzed, it will only be considered in cases where two or more
69

models are compared, as in the case of the latent factor measuring use and in the
comparison of the complete and partial mediation models.
Power analysis for estimates of model fit.
The degrees of freedom for the chi-squared test are based on the difference
between the number of observations – the number of unique values in the variancecovariance matrix – underlying the model and the number of parameters estimated by the
model. The degrees of freedom, along with the desired alpha levels – the chance of
detecting a false positive result – and the size of the sample are used to estimate the
statistical power – the chance of detecting an effect if one is present – of the goodness-offit tests described above. Using an online power estimation calculator (Preacher and
Coffman, 2006), it was determined that the sample size was more than adequate to
reliably estimate model fit for all models. The minimum sample size required to identify
an RMSEA of .05 with 80% statistical power for a model with five degrees of freedom is
569; the sample size of the analysis data set was 5,144 library organizations.

70

Average variance extracted (AVE) and composite reliability (CR). The average
variance extracted (AVE) will also be reported for the factor models examined. AVE is
the ratio of the squared factor loadings of a construct/factor to the sum of the squared
factor loadings and residual variances in the factor’s observed indicators. The composite
reliability (CR) is calculated similarly, with the difference that the denominator is a
squared sum, rather than a sum of squares. Unlike the measures of fit described above,
these measures of construct reliability were calculated manually.
Parameter estimation. The models described above will be estimated using the
robust maximum likelihood method within a single-level model adjusted for state-level
clustering effects using the MPlus Type=Complex command. A comparison of multilevel and single-level adjusted models is described in Stapleton, MacNeish, and Yang
(2016). Standardized and unstandardized parameters will be reported for the best-fitting
structural models estimated.
In addition to estimated parameters, the Pearson correlations between the
estimated Service Availability and Use factors will be reported. The primary purpose of
this process will be to succinctly provide evidence for or against the hypothesis of a
mediation effect of Service Availability factor on the Revenue-Use Relationship. A
secondary benefit of this process is that the relationships left unanalyzed in the structural
models will also be described and discussed in this report.

71

Satorra-Bentler scaled chi-squared difference test. To further assess the nature
of the mediation relationship hypothesized, chi-square differences between the partial and
full mediation models will be calculated. As the models estimated in this report are
estimated using a robust maximum likelihood method, the chi-square scores will be
scaled using correction factors calculated by the MPlus program during the estimation
process. The calculation of these scaled differences is described by Satorra and Bentler
(2010). This process increases the likelihood that a significant difference between chisquare fits will be found between nested models.

72

Chapter 4: Results
Summary Statistics
Geographic distribution of the data. To demonstrate some of the changes
related to the filtering and data transformation processes, Table 1 compares the
geographic distribution of LSAs in the complete and filtered data sets. As might be
expected, the percentages for libraries and total service area populations excluded from
analysis are not even across states. The filtered analysis data set is somewhat biased
toward states with denser populations and/or regional public library organizations but
also toward states with regional rather than local library service organizations serving
rural areas.

73

State or State
Equivalent
AK
AL
AR
AS
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
GU
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY
Total

Count in Unfiltered
Data Set
80
219
58
1
90
184
113
182
1
21
80
63
1
1
534
102
622
237
320
119
68
368
24
228
393
137
149
52
82
80
74
253
220
282
87
22
756
251
119
131
456
48
42
113
186
549
72
91
159
62
381
97
23
9083

Percent of Cases in Count in Filtered Percent of Cases in
Percentage
Unfiltered Data Set
Data Set
Filtered Data Set Change in Count
0.88%
2.41%
114
2.20%
-47.95%
0.64%
48
0.90%
-17.24%
0.01%
0.99%
40
0.80%
-55.56%
2.03%
155
3.00%
-15.76%
1.24%
72
1.40%
-36.28%
2.00%
126
2.40%
-30.77%
0.01%
0.23%
21
0.40%
0.00%
0.88%
58
1.10%
-27.50%
0.69%
57
1.10%
-9.52%
0.01%
0.01%
5.88%
162
3.10%
-69.66%
1.12%
49
1.00%
-51.96%
6.85%
362
7.00%
-41.80%
2.61%
193
3.80%
-18.57%
3.52%
116
2.30%
-63.75%
1.31%
114
2.20%
-4.20%
0.75%
64
1.20%
-5.88%
4.05%
223
4.30%
-39.40%
0.26%
23
0.40%
-4.17%
2.51%
71
1.40%
-68.86%
4.33%
294
5.70%
-25.19%
1.51%
74
1.40%
-45.99%
1.64%
105
2.00%
-29.53%
0.57%
49
1.00%
-5.77%
0.90%
39
0.80%
-52.44%
0.88%
72
1.40%
-10.00%
0.81%
16
0.30%
-78.38%
2.79%
63
1.20%
-75.10%
2.42%
78
1.50%
-64.55%
3.10%
254
4.90%
-9.93%
0.96%
44
0.90%
-49.43%
0.24%
17
0.30%
-22.73%
8.32%
481
9.40%
-36.38%
2.76%
1.31%
58
1.10%
-51.26%
1.44%
78
1.50%
-40.46%
5.02%
317
6.20%
-30.48%
0.53%
43
0.80%
-10.42%
0.46%
42
0.80%
0.00%
1.24%
30
0.60%
-73.45%
2.05%
115
2.20%
-38.17%
6.04%
359
7.00%
-34.61%
0.79%
41
0.80%
-43.06%
1.00%
81
1.60%
-10.99%
1.75%
28
0.50%
-82.39%
0.68%
30
0.60%
-51.61%
4.19%
180
3.50%
-52.76%
1.07%
65
1.30%
-32.99%
0.25%
23
0.40%
0.00%
100.00%
5144
100.00%
-43.37%

Table 1. Distribution of cases by geographic entity.

74

Means and measures of normality. Tables 2 and 3 show changes in means and
measures of normality for selected observed variables in the PLS and ACS data sets after
filtering and transformation. This illustrates the changes described above. Table 4
demonstrates the effect of loglinear transformations on the scale, skewness, and kurtosis
of variables in the filtered data set.
Bivariate correlations and covariances. Tables 5 and 6 show the covariance and
correlation of the transformed variables described above, as well as an untransformed
library service area population variable for reference. Some collinearity can be seen
between revenue and indicators for the service availability and use. Moderate correlation
between indicators for the Use factor and local demographic descriptors is also present.
While the local descriptors related to race and households with children were not
correlated with higher library revenues, local median income and college education were
positively correlated with library operating revenue.

75

Data
Source
PLS

N
9,060

Percentage of local population identifying as white
Percentage of local households with children
Percentage of local population with a college
degree
Median Regional Household Income
Total Operating Revenue per person in the Library
Service Area (per capita)
Total Operating Expenditures per capita
Staff Expenditures per capita
Collection Expenditures per capita
Total Library Employees per 1000 persons in service
population
Librarians per 1000 persons in service population
Non-Librarian Employees per 1000 persons in
service population
Programs per 1000 persons in service population
Internet-connected public use PCs per 1000 persons
in population
Visits per capita
Reference transactions per capita
Internal circulation per capita

ACS
ACS

9,081
9,081

0.0%
0.0%

100.0%
80.7%

85.3%
30.7%

0.14
0.08

-2.02
0.26

0.03
0.03

5.45
1.72

0.05
0.05

ACS
ACS

9,081
9,081

0.0%
0.00

90.3%
$242,782

32.8%
$50,183

0.14
$20,641

0.93
1.97

0.03
0.03

0.88
7.19

0.05
0.05

PLS
PLS
PLS
PLS

9,070
9,070
5,934
9,069

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

15,945.11
14,162.21
12,738.11
1,361.26

49.53
46.52
33.65
5.35

183.90
163.49
169.02
15.53

72.81
72.31
71.72
74.15

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

6,178.69
6,143.92
5,382.99
6,423.14

0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05

PLS
PLS

9,070
9,070

0.00
0.00

157.89
105.26

0.74
0.42

1.83
1.22

71.21
71.36

0.03
0.03

6,064.70
6,106.81

0.05
0.05

PLS
PLS

9,067
9,069

0.00
0.00

52.63
3,858.70

0.32
38.41

0.73
82.87

44.58
19.27

0.03
0.03

2,946.04
666.92

0.05
0.05

PLS
PLS
PLS
PLS

9,070
9,070
9,070
9,070

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

315.79
203.47
96.28
131.87

2.90
5.93
0.85
7.80

7.26
6.00
1.95
7.14

24.87
8.06
22.05
4.32

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

909.67
167.55
843.11
41.64

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

Incoming and Outgoing interlibrary loans per capita
Program attendance per capita
Public PC sessions per capita

PLS
PLS
PLS

9,070
9,070
9,070

0.00
0.00
0.00

41.58
87.12
229.21

1.11
0.62
1.32

2.28
1.38
3.37

5.30
35.18
45.30

0.03
0.03
0.03

47.66
1,965.64
2,772.62

0.05
0.05
0.05

Library Service Area Population

Minimum Maximum
19.00 4,076,438.00

Mean Std. Dev. Skewness Skewness SE
34,958.75 139,566.64
14.39
0.03

76

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for all FSCS library administrative entities in the PLS data set.

76

Kurtosis Kurtosis SE
295.94
0.05

77

Library Service Area Population
Percentage of local population identifying as
white
Percentage of local households with children
Percentage of local population with a college
degree
Median Regional Household Income
Total Operating Revenue per person in the
Library Service Area (per capita)
Total Operating Expenditures per capita
Staff Expenditures per capita
Collection Expenditures per capita
Total Library Employees per 1000 persons in
service population
Librarians per 1000 persons in service
population
Non-Librarian Employees per 1000 persons in
service population
Programs per 1000 persons in service
population
Internet-connected public use PCs per 1000
persons in population
Visits per capita
Reference transactions per capita
Internal circulation per capita
Incoming and Outgoing interlibrary loans per
capita
Program attendance per capita
Public PC sessions per capita

Data Source
PLS

N
5,144

Minimum
1018.00

Maximum
985,310.00

Mean
43,272.54

Skewness SE
0.03

Kurtosis
37.64

Kurtosis SE
0.07

ACS
ACS

5,144
5,144

0.03
0.00

1.00
0.74

0.83
0.31

0.14
0.08

-1.42
0.29

0.03
0.03

2.50
1.52

0.07
0.07

ACS
ACS

5,144
5,144

0.04
0.00

0.90
242,782.00

0.36
53,178.72

0.15
23,829.87

0.81
1.75

0.03
0.03

0.39
5.01

0.07
0.07

PLS
PLS
PLS
PLS

5,144
5,144
5,144
5,144

1.51
1.24
0.00
0.00

1,944.64
1,689.13
644.17
190.50

48.89
45.43
30.29
4.95

56.32
46.86
29.45
5.07

12.40
11.43
5.71
11.55

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

312.48
317.30
68.67
357.52

0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07

PLS

5,144

0.05

13.78

0.66

0.53

6.47

0.03

105.08

0.07

PLS

5,144

0.00

4.76

0.29

0.29

3.36

0.03

22.78

0.07

PLS

5,144

0.00

12.16

0.36

0.38

9.53

0.03

225.43

0.07

PLS

5,144

0.00

1,164.63

29.93

42.29

8.27

0.03

138.98

0.07

PLS
PLS
PLS
PLS

5,144
5,144
5,144
5,144

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01

27.59
73.46
96.28
131.87

1.57
6.05
0.86
8.10

1.54
5.09
2.04
6.65

4.66
4.08
28.01
4.38

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

41.35
30.43
1,140.84
51.08

0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07

PLS
PLS
PLS

5,144
5,144
5,144

0.00
0.00
0.00

24.64
15.94
35.49

1.07
0.56
1.16

1.90
0.74
1.34

3.97
7.23
7.83

0.03
0.03
0.03

25.15
97.62
125.77

0.07
0.07
0.07

Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the filtered data set.

77

Std. Dev. Skewness
91,224.60
5.47

78

N
Minimum
Total Revenue
5,144
0.92
Total Operating Expenditures per capita
5,144
0.81
Staff Expenditures per capita
5,144
0.00
Collection Expenditures per capita
5,144
0.00
Librarians per 1000 persons in service population 5,144
0.00
Non-Librarian Employees per 1000 persons in service5,144
population 0.00
Internet-connected public use PCs per 1000 persons5,144
in population 0.00
Programs per 1000 persons in service population 5,144
0.00
Visits per capita
5,144
0.00
Reference transactions per capita
5,144
0.00
Internal circulation per capita
5,144
0.01
Incoming and Outgoing interlibrary loans per capita 5,144
0.00
Program attendance per capita
5,144
0.00
Public PC sessions per capita
5,144
0.00

Maximum Mean
7.57 3.64
7.43 3.58
6.47 3.18
5.25 1.58
1.75 0.24
2.58 0.29
7.06 2.98
3.35 0.84
4.31 1.78
4.58 0.50
4.89 2.01
3.24 0.50
2.83 0.39
3.60 0.68

Table 4. Descriptive statistics for transformed variables in filtered data set.

78

Std. Dev. Skewness
0.71
0.15
0.70
0.11
0.71
0.05
0.61
0.28
0.19
1.75
0.20
1.79
0.93
0.03
0.42
1.14
0.56
0.32
0.41
1.82
0.63
-0.04
0.60
1.24
0.30
1.99
0.38
1.56

Skewness SE Kurtosis
0.03
0.76
0.03
0.55
0.03
0.73
0.03
0.33
0.03
4.53
0.03
8.54
0.03
0.27
0.03
2.01
0.03
0.61
0.03
6.45
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.93
0.03
6.79
0.03
4.35

Kurtosis SE
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07

1
Library service area
population

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Correlation

1

-.104**

-.102**

-.238**

.039**

.072**

0

-.095**

Covariance

8321928461

-6724.031

-6485.593

-3057.254

278.675

975.285

-57.255

-6148.737

Correlation

-.104**

1

0.506

0.481

-0.001

-0.003

0.044

0.711

Covariance

-6724.031

0.506

.971**

-0.015

-.060**

.412**

.419**

.941**

Correlation

-.102**

.971**

1

0.485

-0.001

-0.004

0.045

0.724

Covariance

-6485.593

0.481

0.485

-0.011

-.072**

.436**

.436**

.968**

Correlation

-.238**

-0.015

-0.011

1

0.02

-0.002

-0.003

-0.06

Covariance

-3057.254

-0.001

-0.001

0.02

-.218**

-.127**

-.178**

-.031*

Correlation

.039**

-.060**

-.072**

-.218**

1

0.006

-0.001

0.049

Covariance

278.675

-0.003

-0.004

-0.002

0.006

-.072**

.262**

-.060**

Correlation

.072**

.412**

.436**

-.127**

-.072**

1

0.022

0.273

6

Percentage of local
population with a college
degree

Covariance

975.285

0.044

0.045

-0.003

-0.001

0.022

.768**

.447**

7

Median income in tens of
thousands of dollars

Correlation

0

.419**

.436**

-.178**

.262**

.768**

1

5.679

Covariance

-57.255

0.711

0.724

-0.06

0.049

0.273

5.679

.448**

Correlation

-.095**

.941**

.968**

-.031*

-.060**

.447**

.448**

1

Covariance

-6148.737

0.476

0.48

-0.003

-0.003

0.047

0.76

0.506

Correlation

-.087**

.849**

.868**

.056**

-.072**

.413**

.401**

.817**

9

ln of collections
expenditures per thousand
population

Covariance

-4849.701

0.367

0.367

0.005

-0.003

0.037

0.581

0.353

10

ln of librarians per
thousand population

Correlation

-.244**

.614**

.624**

.163**

-.115**

.170**

.171**

.603**

Covariance

-4134.408

0.081

0.081

0.004

-0.002

0.005

0.076

0.08

11

ln of non-librarian staff per
thousand population

Correlation

-.084**

.642**

.655**

-0.014

-.035*

.239**

.252**

.639**

Covariance

-1538.215

0.091

0.091

0

-0.001

0.007

0.12

0.091

12

ln of library programs per
thousand population

Correlation

-.249**

.602**

.619**

.201**

-.116**

.268**

.258**

.591**

Covariance

-21118.956

0.398

0.401

0.026

-0.008

0.037

0.571

0.391

13

ln of PC workstations per
thousand population

Correlation

-.259**

.464**

.472**

.154**

-.105**

-.088**

-.079**

.431**

14

ln of visits per capita

Covariance
Correlation
Covariance

-9872.532
-.151**
-7714.7

0.138
.708**
0.282

0.137
.732**
0.286

0.009
.102**
0.008

-0.003
-.120**
-0.005

-0.005
.368**
0.031

-0.079
.293**
0.391

0.128
.712**
0.284

15

ln of reference transactions
per capita

Correlation

0.002

.431**

.439**

-.065**

-0.001

.224**

.216**

.435**

Covariance

91.177

0.127

0.126

-0.004

0

0.014

0.213

0.128

16

ln of internal circulation
per capita

Correlation

-.063**

.695**

.719**

.201**

-.122**

.481**

.377**

.701**

Covariance

-3639.406

0.313

0.317

0.018

-0.006

0.045

0.568

0.315

17

ln of total interlibrary loans
per capita

Correlation

-.199**

.396**

.414**

.067**

-.095**

.340**

.313**

.396**

Covariance

-10796.719

0.168

0.172

0.006

-0.004

0.03

0.445

0.168

18

ln of program attendance
per capita

Correlation

-.178**

.594**

.609**

.140**

-.068**

.276**

.261**

.582**

Covariance

-4847.476

0.126

0.127

0.006

-0.002

0.012

0.186

0.124

19

ln of PC use session per
capita

Correlation

-.087**

.478**

.485**

-0.005

-.105**

.083**

.039**

.473**

Covariance

-3016.682

0.128

0.128

0

-0.003

0.005

0.035

0.127

1

2

ln of Operating Revenue
per capita

3

ln of operating
expenditures per capita
(provided for reference)

4

Percentage of local
population identifying as
white

5

Percentage of local
households with children

8

ln of staff expenditures per
thousand population

Table 5. Correlations and covariances between select observed variables in the
filtered data set. N= 5,144. Pearson correlations. ** Correlation is significant at
the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

79

1

Library service area
population

2

ln of Operating Revenue
per capita

3

ln of operating
expenditures per capita
(provided for reference)

4

Percentage of local
population identifying as
white

5

Percentage of local
households with children

6

Percentage of local
population with a college
degree

7

Median income in tens of
thousands of dollars

8

9

10

11

12

13
14

15

16

17

18

19

cor
cov
cor
cov

cor
cov

cor
cov
cor
cov

cor
cov
cor
cov

ln of staff expenditures per
thousand population
cor
cov
ln of collections
expenditures per thousand
population
cor
cov
ln of librarians per
thousand population
cor
cov
ln of non-librarian staff per
thousand population
cor
cov
ln of library programs per
thousand population
cor
cov
ln of PC workstations per
thousand population
cor
cov
ln of visits per capita
cor
cov
ln of reference transactions
per capita
cor
cov
ln of internal circulation
per capita
cor
cov
ln of total interlibrary loans
per capita
cor
cov
ln of program attendance
per capita
cor
cov
ln of PC use session per
capita
cor
cov

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

-.087**

-.244**

-.084**

-.249**

-.259**

-.151**

0.002

-.063**

-.199**

-.178**

-.087**

-4849.7

-4134.41 -1538.22

-3639.41 -10796.7 -4847.48 -3016.68

-21119

-9872.53

-7714.7

91.177

0.476

.614**

.642**

.602**

.464**

.708**

.431**

.695**

.396**

.594**

.478**

.849**

0.081

0.091

0.398

0.138

0.282

0.127

0.313

0.168

0.126

0.128

0.48

.624**

.655**

.619**

.472**

.732**

.439**

.719**

.414**

.609**

.485**

.868**

0.081

0.091

0.401

0.137

0.286

0.126

0.317

0.172

0.127

0.128

-0.003

.163**

-0.014

.201**

.154**

.102**

-.065**

.201**

.067**

.140**

-0.005

.056**

0.004

0

0.026

0.009

0.008

-0.004

0.018

0.006

0.006

0

-0.003

-.115**

-.035*

-.116**

-.105**

-.120**

-0.001

-.122**

-.095**

-.068**

-.105**

-.072**

-0.002

-0.001

-0.008

-0.003

-0.005

0

-0.006

-0.004

-0.002

-0.003

0.047

.170**

.239**

.268**

-.088**

.368**

.224**

.481**

.340**

.276**

.083**

.413**

0.005

0.007

0.037

-0.005

0.031

0.014

0.045

0.03

0.012

0.005

0.76

.171**

.252**

.258**

-.079**

.293**

.216**

.377**

.313**

.261**

.039**

.401**

0.076

0.12

0.571

-0.079

0.391

0.213

0.568

0.445

0.186

0.035

0.506

.603**

.639**

.591**

.431**

.712**

.435**

.701**

.396**

.582**

.473**

.817**

0.08

0.091

0.391

0.128

0.284

0.128

0.315

0.168

0.124

0.127

1

.590**

.581**

.557**

.433**

.683**

.392**

.740**

.384**

.561**

.431**

0.369

0.067

0.071

0.314

0.11

0.232

0.098

0.284

0.139

0.102

0.099

.590**

1

.176**

.550**

.576**

.549**

.328**

.492**

.281**

.574**

.401**

0.067

0.035

0.007

0.095

0.045

0.057

0.025

0.058

0.031

0.032

0.028

.581**

.176**

1

.443**

.392**

.507**

.323**

.474**

.281**

.450**

.386**

0.071

0.007

0.04

0.082

0.033

0.057

0.027

0.06

0.033

0.027

0.029

.557**

.550**

.443**

1

.520**

.607**

.318**

.552**

.371**

.801**

.398**

0.314

0.095

0.082

0.863

0.202

0.316

0.122

0.324

0.205

0.223

0.14

.433**

.576**

.392**

.520**

1

.518**

.291**

.368**

.134**

.500**

.592**

0.11
.683**
0.232

0.045
.549**
0.057

0.033
.507**
0.057

0.202
.607**
0.316

0.174
.518**
0.121

0.121
1
0.314

0.05
.474**
0.11

0.097
.765**
0.271

0.033
.395**
0.132

0.062
.636**
0.107

0.093
.619**
0.131

.392**

.328**

.323**

.318**

.291**

.474**

1

.410**

.181**

.404**

.406**

0.098

0.025

0.027

0.122

0.05

0.11

0.17

0.107

0.045

0.05

0.063

.740**

.492**

.474**

.552**

.368**

.765**

.410**

1

.446**

.584**

.451**

0.284

0.058

0.06

0.324

0.097

0.271

0.107

0.4

0.168

0.11

0.108

.384**

.281**

.281**

.371**

.134**

.395**

.181**

.446**

1

.303**

.168**

0.139

0.031

0.033

0.205

0.033

0.132

0.045

0.168

0.355

0.054

0.038

.561**

.574**

.450**

.801**

.500**

.636**

.404**

.584**

.303**

1

.455**

0.102

0.032

0.027

0.223

0.062

0.107

0.05

0.11

0.054

0.089

0.051

.431**

.401**

.386**

.398**

.592**

.619**

.406**

.451**

.168**

.455**

1

0.099

0.028

0.029

0.14

0.093

0.131

0.063

0.108

0.038

0.051

0.143

Table 6. Correlations and covariances between select observed variables in the
filtered data set, continued. N= 5,144. Pearson correlations. ** Correlation is
significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level
(2-tailed).

80

Measurement and Structural Models
Models estimating Service Availability. Two models were run that estimated
service availability. Service Availability Model 1 contained five indicators (all natural
logarithms of the base data): per-capita staff expenditures (staffexp), per-capita collection
expenditures (colexp), librarians per thousand people in the service area (libr), nonlibrarian staff per thousand people in the service area (othemp), and library programs
offered per thousand people in the service area (prog). Service Availability Model 2
included an additional measurement of the number of public computer workstations
available per thousand people in the service area (pc). Estimates of model fit and
reliability for these models are presented below in Table 7, while the standardized errors
and factor loadings are presented in Figures 8 and 9.

Chi-square
RMSEA
SRMR
TLI
AIC
AVE
CR
Scaling correction factor

Service Availability Model 1
(five indicators)
df p-value
126.17
5
<.001
0.069
0.063
0.947
16504
0.58
0.87
12.3797

Service Availability Model 2
(six indicators)
df p-value
262.29
9
<.0001
0.074
0.078
0.841
20579.29
0.53
0.87
12.1814

Table 7. Summaries of model fit and reliability for proposed Service Availability factors.

81

Figure 8. Standardized coefficients for a five-indicator model measuring Service
Availability. Standard errors for parameter estimates are shown in parentheses.

82

Figure 9. Standardized coefficients for a six-indicator model measuring Service
Availability. Standard errors for estimates are shown in parentheses.

83

All five indicators for the Service Availability factor in Model 1 had loadings
greater than .500, offering support for the validity of the construct. Fit indices provided
limited evidence for the adequacy of model fit, with RMSEA and SRMR values below
the .08 threshold and TLI value greater than .9. Model 2 performed slightly worse with
regard to fit on all measures, although factor loadings remain high for the indicators.
Although the two models purporting to measure library service availability are not
precisely nested, they are very similar, only differing in terms of indicators by one
variable, and in degrees of freedom by four. Model fit indices and measures of reliability
reflect this, with both models falling within widely-accepted ranges for "acceptable" fit
on the RMSEA and SRMR indices. There is a noticeable discrepancy between TLI
scores, however. Unlike RMSEA and SRMR, the TLI is an incremental fit index
dependent on the average correlation between variables in the model. This suggests that
the PC availability indicator is less-well correlated with the other indicators in the model
than the five other indicators are with each other.
Average variance extracted (AVE) and composite reliability (CR) measures
suggest that the Service Availability factor is a reliable predictor of the proposed
indicators, but that less than 60 percent of the variance in the indicators is explained.
Factor loadings in both models were robust. The lowest loading was the PCs
indicator in the six-factor model, with a standardized loading of .536. The two
expenditure-related indicators – staff expenditures and collection expenditures – had the
highest loadings in both models, with values greater than .8 for collection expenditures
and values greater than .9 for staff expenditures in both models.

84

All measurements of model fit and reliability suggested that including the public
computer variable included in the PLS data set would reduce the coherence of a singlefactor measure of public library use. Re-examination of bivariate correlations between
indicators reinforces this conclusion. The average Pearson correlation for the five
indicators in Model 1 is .55. Adding the PC availability indicator drops the average
correlation to .53. While the PC indicator has a positive absolute correlation above .5
with the program availability indicator and the number of librarians employed per
thousand residents of the LSA, it has lower correlations with the expenditure-related
variables as well as the transformed count non-librarian employees. The relatively low
correlation between PCs and non-librarian employees is difficult to explain outside of
unexamined differences in terms of library service offerings between libraries, a plausible
theory regarding the low correlation between operating expenditures and PCs may be due
to the infrequent nature of PC purchases. While the replacement of technology is
considered an operating expense rather than a capital expense according to the official
PLS documentation, the expected multi-year lifespan of personal computers could lead to
these services having less of an impact on library finances than staffing, program
offerings, or collection maintenance.
While Model 1 may be limited with regard to the extent that it approximates all
dimensions of library service provision, its relative superiority with regard to fit and
rough equivalence in terms of reliability statistics (AVE and CR) when compared to
Model 2 led to its use in the structural models tested later in the project.

85

Models estimating Use. Two models were also run estimating a single factor
representing library use. Use Model 1 includes five indicators: annual visits to libraries in
the LSA per capita (visits), reference transactions per capita (ref), circulation loans per
capita (circ), total incoming and outgoing interlibrary loans per capita (ill), and program
attendance per-capita (attend).
As with the hypothesized Service Availability factor, Use Model 2 added an
additional measurement related to internet access and computer use. Model 2 adds a sixth
indicator resenting the number of public computer use sessions per thousand people in
the service area (PCSESS).
Estimates of model fit and reliability for these models are presented below in
Table 8, while standardized errors and factor loadings are presented in Figures 10 and 11.

Chi-square
RMSEA
SRMR
TLI
AIC
AVE
CR
Scaling correction factor

Use Model 1 (five indicators)
df p-value
21.742
5
0.0006
0.026
0.022
0.994
25609.17
0.5
0.82
7.4302

Use Model 2 (six indicators)
df p-value
97.508
9
<.0001
0.044
0.037
0.977
27865.97
0.48
0.81
5.779

Table 8. Summaries of model fit and reliability for proposed Use factors.

86

Figure 10. Standardized coefficients for a six-indicator model measuring Public Library
Use. Standard errors for parameter estimates are shown in parentheses.

87

Figure 11. Standardized coefficients for a six-indicator model measuring Public Library
Use. Standard errors for parameter estimates are shown in parentheses.

As with the Service Availability factor, all measurements of model fit and
reliability suggest that including the public computer variable included in the PLS data
set reduces the fit for a single-factor measure of public library use. When compared with
the measurement of Service Availability, the measures of library use display better model
fit, but generally lower factor loadings and measures of construct reliability/variance
explained. Also in contrast to the Service Availability factor, the additional variable
88

added in the six-factor model is not the lowest-loading indicator in either model. The
indicator with the lowest loadings is instead the inter-library loan activity indicator, a
variable that may be dependent on the strength of regional lending services, rather than
library-specific service availability.
Correlations between factor scores and observed predictors. Factor scores for
the five-indicator Use factor and the five-indicator Service Availability factor were saved
and correlations between these factors as well as other hypothesized observed predictors
of use were obtained using a combined measurement model estimating no directional
relationships other than factor loadings. These correlations are presented in Table 9.

89

ln of Operating Revenue per capita
1
(totrev)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Correlation

1

.971**

.419**

-.060**

.412**

-0.015

.856**

.930**

Covariance

0.506

0.481

0.711

-0.003

0.044

-0.002

0.286

0.413

ln of operating expenditures per capita
2
(provided for reference)

Correlation

.971**

1

.436**

-.072**

.436**

-0.011

.881**

.955**

3 Local median income (income)

Covariance
Correlation
Covariance

0.481
.419**
0.711

0.485
.436**
0.724

0.724
1
5.679

-0.004
.262**
0.049

0.045
.768**
0.273

-0.001
-.178**
-0.06

0.288
.403**
0.451

0.415
.426**
0.634

Correlation

-.060**

-.072**

.262**

1

-.072**

-.218**

-.113**

-.095**

Covariance

-0.003

-0.004

0.049

0.006

-0.001

-0.002

-0.004

-0.005

Correlation

.412**

.436**

.768**

-.072**

1

-.127**

.460**

.449**

4

Percentage of local households with
children (child)

Percentage of local population with a
5
college education (edu)

90

Covariance

0.044

0.045

0.273

-0.001

0.022

-0.003

0.032

0.042

Percentage of local population
6
identifying as white (race)

Correlation

-0.015

-0.011

-.178**

-.218**

-.127**

1

.121**

.073**

7 Factor scores for Use (use)

Covariance
Correlation
Covariance

-0.002
.856**
0.286

-0.001
.881**
0.288

-0.06
.403**
0.451

-0.002
-.113**
-0.004

-0.003
.460**
0.032

0.02
.121**
0.008

0.008
1
0.221

0.006
.965**
0.283

Correlation

.930**

.955**

.426**

-.095**

.449**

.073**

.965**

1

Covariance

0.413

0.415

0.634

-0.005

0.042

0.006

0.283

0.389

8

Factor scores for Service Availability
(serv)

Table 9. Correlations and covariances between saved factor scores and proposed predictors. N= 5,144.
Pearson correlations. ** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). * Correlation is significant at the
0.05 level (2-tailed).

90

Significant and strong correlations were found between the total Revenue
variable, the Use factor, and the Service Availability factor. These correlations support
the assertion that the Revenue-Use relationship may be mediated by the Service
Availability factor. Other notable observations captured in the above table include the
weak but negative correlation between the Use factor and ratio of households with
children in the matched local area, the difference in the strength of the relationship
between the race variable and Use versus the race variable with the Services factor, and
the race variable with the revenue predictor. Income is strongly and positively correlated
with the percentage of the local population with a college education. The measure of
median income is also moderately and positively correlated with operating revenue,
expenditures, and the factor scores for Use and Service Availability. The income variable
is also weakly but significantly negatively correlated with the percentage of the local
population identifying as white, which may indicate that higher median incomes are
associated with more racially diverse areas or geographies.
A note on interpreting model estimates.
The parameters for the models tested in the present research have been presented
as standardized coefficients. However, if readers are interested in interpreting the models
in real terms, they should bear in mind the implication of data transformation. As noted in
Chapter 3, all indicators of the latent factors and the Revenue variable were transformed
to their natural logarithms to reduce the effect of outlying cases on the overall
distributions being compared. A loglinear transformation creates a new score which is the
power to which the natural number e (also known as Euler’s number) must be raised to
equal the raw number. This reduces the effect of outlying cases while preserving rank
91

order. Number e is a non-rational number close to 2.72 that is the base for equations
modeling constant exponential growth. While public service organizations such as
libraries do not experience constant growth, their size is closely related to the size of
populations whose growth can be modeled using these equations.
In practice, this means that the marginal effect of each additional dollar per-capita
of operating revenue is very large for low values, but that values greater than the natural
number e demonstrate diminishing returns with regard to the levels of Service
Availability and Use that they can "buy." Likewise, the Service Availability and Use
factors predict indicators that follow a similar distribution: a factor score close to e for
use would predict indicator counts that correspond with the unstandardized factor
loadings while larger changes in factor scores will have a multiplicative effect on the
exponentiated factor loadings and subsequent estimates of the factor indicators. To
demonstrate this relationship a logarithmic distribution for raw values between the
asymptote of zero and 10 is presented in Figure 12, with dashed lines indicating the
intersection of x=e (approximated as 2.72) and y=1.

92

The University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Statistical Consulting Group
has published an in-depth discussion of the interpretation of regression weights for
logarithmically transformed variables at https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/other/multpkg/faq/general/faqhow-do-i-interpret-a-regression-model-when-some-variables-are-logtransformed/ (UCLA Statistical Consulting Group, 2018).

Figure 12. Plot of the natural logarithmic transformation.

93

Structural equation models. The two structural equation models tested are
presented along with standardized parameter estimates in Figures 13 and 14 below.
Measures of fit (including measures for the baseline model, which assumes all regression
weights and disturbances to be 0 and all factor loadings to be 1) are presented in Table
10. To evaluate the difference in fit between these two models, a difference test was
conducted evaluating the change in chi-square statistics between the partial mediation
model and the nested model assuming complete mediation of the revenue-use
relationship through the Service Availability variable. The result of this test was
significant, with a Satorra-Bentler Scaled Chi-square Difference (df=1) of 389.45,
p<.001. This implies that although there is strong evidence that the Service Availability
factor mediates the relationship between Revenue and Use, the structural model implying
full mediation displays a statistically significant worse fit than the partial mediation
model, even if most measures of model fit imply an acceptably-fitting model.

94

Baseline Model
value
Chi-square
13759.34
RMSEA
0.167
SRMR
0.378
TLI
0
AIC
65231.11
Scaling correction factor
3.571

df
95

p-value
<.0001

Model Assuming Partial
Mediation
value
1557.658
0.061
0.062
0.868
23692.92
4.8546

df
78

p-value
<.0001

Model Assuming Full
Mediation
value
1655.069
0.062
0.066
0.861
24083.31
4.8059

Table 10. Summaries of model fit for baseline structural model, partial mediation, and full mediation model.

95
95

df
79

p-value
<.0001

96
Figure 13. Standardized coefficients for a structural equation model of library action within an environmental context
assuming partial mediation of the relationship between Operating Revenue and Public Library Use by Service Availability.
96

97
Figure 14. Standardized coefficients for a structural equation model of library action within an environmental context
assuming full mediation of the relationship between Operating Revenue and Public Library Use by Service Availability.
97

Chapter 5: Discussion
Responses to Planned Research Questions
Is a factor structure measuring public library service availability supported
by the PLS data set? In Chapter Four, two factors predicting several measures of public
library use were proposed and examined for evidence of fit and reliability. Both models
fit the data moderately well and explained a meaningful portion of their total variance.
This evidence could be taken as support for the construct validity of the factor structures
proposed. The evidence presented above shows that the indicators included in the models
are positively correlated with each other and – at least in aggregate at the national level –
load onto a single predictor. This, in turn, suggests that service availability at public
libraries could be discussed as a single concept. However, the procedures described
above do not rule out the possibility of other measures that might better capture the full
range of services available at public libraries or provide more practical utility when
incorporated into a structural model linking monetary inputs to library use outputs.

98

As noted above, indicators available in the PLS data set that are arguably related
to the construct include several alternative methods of counting employees, including the
number of employees with graduate degrees, counts of materials held in library
collections, and the number of programs targeted specifically at children or young adult
audiences. While these variables could be useful for other research questions, such as the
value of a graduate degree to library organizations or the relative effect of children’s
programs on library visitation compared to that of other programs, these variables were
excluded from the models examined in the present report. The reason for this was an
assumption that the variables did not increase the number of use dimensions being
addressed but rather represented either narrowly-defined counts of aspects already
covered by other counts (as in the case of counts of masters-degree-holders and
children’s programs) or difficult-to-interpret indicators (counts of physical materials
might represent high levels of access or poor collection upkeep practices; counts of
electronic collections are hard to translate into an amounts of consumable media without
more information than is in the PLS). Limiting the number of variables for use in the
model similarly limited the number of identifiable structures for analysis. With five
indicators, only a first-order factor structure (in which all indicators load on a single
factor) is possible unless some indicators load on more than one factor. The number of
identifiable parameters in a model is equal to n*n+1, where n represents the number of
variance/covariance relationships between observed. Thus, adding more indicators has a
multiplicative effect on the number of structures that might be analyzed. Testing all
possible factor models for an expanded set of candidate use indicators would be time
consuming and potentially unproductive. However, separation of monetary and non99

monetary indicators of use could lead to factor structures with more easily-interpretable
loadings. A more nuanced breakdown of expenditures could provide researchers with
more information about which expenditure categories covary; a factor model for service
availability that measures only non-monetary indicators might provide more additional
information in an action model that includes monetary inputs.
Is a factor structure measuring public library use supported by the PLS data
set? As with the Service Availability factor, the two models measuring public library
Use demonstrated reasonable levels of fit, acceptable factor loadings, and measures of
reliability. Fit measures indicate that the Use factors proposed fit the data in the filtered
data set very well. However, factor loadings and measures of reliability suggest that
alternate models might better explain the variance in the hypothetical Use factor, with
some loadings estimated as lower than .5 and composite reliability/average variance
extracted statistics indicating that the indicators in the model only explain around 50
percent of the variance in the latent factor. While the six-indicator model does have
slightly worse fit and reliability statistics, the indicator added to the model (PC sessions
per capita) did not have the lowest factor loading; the inter-library loan activity indicator
was the least inter-correlated variable. This pattern might be attributable to an unanalyzed
relationship between interlibrary loan frequency and the strength of regional lending
services rather than library-specific service availability. Not only might further attempts
to identify a Use measurement model benefit from testing alternative factor structures.
However, developing a systematic process for selecting model component indicators
could also benefit researchers by confronting assumptions about data collection
consistency and indicators’ logical connection to the units under analysis. As with the
100

Service Availability variable, the Use models proposed demonstrate reasonable fit and
reliability, but neither should be considered an ideal quantitative model of library use;
alternate factor structures could likely be fit, particularly if more indicators can be
reasonably included. A single factor with more indicators, while likely being less wellfitting could provide useful information about the degree to which different types of
library services are used while a multi-factor Use model could allow use of library
facilities (programs, PC use, etc.) to be considered separately from media services and
research help services.
Does service availability fully mediate the relationship between public library
revenue and public library use? The two latent factors incorporated into the structural
model both had strong positive correlations with the revenue predictor (see Table 3).
When incorporated into a model assuming partial mediation of the Revenue → Use
relationship by the Service Availability variable, an inconsistent mediation effect was
revealed in which the direct effect between Revenue and Use was measured to be
negative, while the Revenue-Service Availability and Service Availability-Use
relationships were measured to be positive. Practical interpretation of inconsistent
mediation effects can be difficult. MacKinnon, Fairchild, and Fritz (2007) note that
inconsistent mediation patterns are, "more common in multiple mediator models where
mediated effects have different signs." However, in the case of the Revenue, Service
Availability, and Use relationship, all bivariate effects indicate positive associations.

101

According to Kenny’s (2018) discussion of structural mediation, the total effect in
a partial mediation model can be described as the sum of the direct mediation effect and
the product of the indirect effects:
c = c' + ab
where c represents the total effect, c' represents the direct effect of the causal variable on
the outcome variable, a represents the effect of the causal variable on the mediating
variable, while b represents the path between the mediating variable and the outcome
variable.
When the coefficients estimated by the partial mediation structural model are used
in this equation, a total effect of β =.776 is estimated for the mediated relationship. This
hews very closely to the estimate of the total effect seen in the full mediation model
(where the direct effect c would be assumed to be zero) of β =.778. The direct, indirect,
and total estimated effects for the tested models are shown in Table 11.

Revenue-Use (direct effect)
Revenue-Service Availability-Use
(indirect effect)
Total Estimated Effect

Model Assuming Partial
Mediation

Model Assuming Full
Mediation

-2.204

-

3.022*.986 = 2.98

.975*.798 = .778

0.776

0.778

Table 11. Direct, indirect, and total effects of operating revenue on the Use factor in
models assuming partial and full mediation.

102

There appears to be strong evidence that the Service Availability fully mediates
the revenue-to-use relationship, and that the large negative coefficient seen in the model
assuming partial mediation might best be interpreted as acknowledging that there is a
weaker correlation between Service Availability and Use than between Revenue and
Service Availability, as seen in the model assuming full mediation. Alternatively, the
negative direct effect could be interpreted as an indication of the importance of library
services to library operations. While the effect of operating revenue on services is very
strong, the effect of services on use is stronger. The inconsistent sign observed in the
direct effect of revenue on use could be interpreted as an indication that revenue does not
always translate to use; the services provided by the library are a crucial component of
the library use process.
The simpler "full mediation" model presents the same relationships but from a
different perspective. This model has statistically significant worse fit based on adjusted
chi-square differences. However, its simplicity makes the process of library service
provision and associated use patterns easier to communicate, if the goal is to emphasize
predictors of use other than library service availability. The line of effect from revenue to
services to use is still strong, but the magnitude of the path between services and use is
not so large as to overwhelm the contributions of community effects on use in visual
depictions. While the models present mathematically similar stories, they emphasize
different aspects of the library organization action model.

103

What predicts public library use? When considering all predictors of use in the
full models (both the full mediation model and the partial mediation model), the local
descriptive variables taken from matched ACS model do not predict use as strongly as the
Service Availability factor or the co-linear Revenue predictor. However, moderately
strong associations were found between Use and three of the four local descriptive
variables: the percentage of persons identifying as white in the local census-designated
place or county, the local median income, and percentage of persons with college
educations in the local areas were all positive predictors of library use, while the
percentage of local households with children was not predictive of changes in the Use
factor.
Operating revenue and service availability as predictors of library use. As noted
in the previous subsection, operating revenue is mediated by the service availability
factor. Both predictors have strong positive associations with the estimated Use factor,
but revenue is not universally directed toward services that are used. Given stable
revenue, a smaller difference between the path between revenue and Service Availability
compared to the path between Service Availability and Use could indicate improvements
in library management practice and/or the adoption of library services by local
communities.

104

Local median income as predictor of library use. Despite being having a strong
positive correlation with operating revenues and having a moderate positive correlation
with the Use factor score derived from the measurement model, local median income had
a small negative association with the Use factor in the structural model. This may
indicate that libraries located in wealthier areas see less demand for their services than
those located in lower income communities, despite being able to afford more services.
However, it should be noted that most public libraries in the United States derive a large
portion of their funding through local property taxes rather than income taxes and that
local tax rates and property values (as opposed to net local revenue) are not included in
the PLS data set. Gini coefficients or other measures of income distribution were also not
included in the models tested. While the negative relationship between local median
income and use is noteworthy, a more focused investigation using detailed data could
reveal more about the nature of this relationship.

105

Percentage of local households with children as predictor of library use. The
relationship between the percentage of local households with children and the Use factor
was positive, but very small. This highlights the difference between the phenomenon of
individual library use and local library use; while children’s programs are known to be a
major driver of library attendance (Pew Research Center, 2016), the percentage of
households with children in a given locality is not highly variable within the continental
United States. What variation that does exist does not appear to be associated with use of
local libraries. Despite the limited magnitude of the relationship, it is worth noting that
the percentage of households with children had a small negative relationship with
revenue and the Service Availability factor, as well as the Use factor when not
controlling for revenue. While the reason for this disparity cannot be determined in the
present study, it merits further study.
Percentage of local population with a college degree as predictor of library use.
The relationship between the percentage of the local population with a college degree – a
rough proxy for the education level of the local population – and the Use factor was
positive and significant. This variable is strongly correlated with local median income,
which complicates its interpretation. However, the difference in the direction of these
variables’ relationship with the Use factor suggests that community engagement with
formal education may also translate to engagement with public libraries.

106

Percentage of local population identifying as white as predictor of library use.
Examination of the table of bivariate correlations (Table 3) between the predictors and
other factors in the models reveals that while education and income have moderately
strong correlations with revenue and the Service Availability factor, the percentage of the
local population identifying as white is only significantly correlated with the Use factor.
This may indicate disparities in access to library services in some communities with large
minority presence, a mismatch between library service offerings and community
demands, or another cause rooted in a library area descriptor linked to racial
demographics not included in the models tested, such as the size of the library service
area or the urban density of the locality served by the library administrative entity.
Interpretation of community and organization data versus individual data. I
believe that should be emphasized again that the data underlying the models described
above describes large areas: counties, cities, and library service areas that contain many
individuals. While community outreach on the part of a library organization may play a
role in an individual’s decision to visit a library, the individual decision to use the library
is not captured in any of the models described above. Instead, the model describes the
process of converting revenue into services within the context of several local
descriptors. This is useful for identifying describing relationships at the national level
while revealing relationships in need of closer examination such as the disparity between
revenue and community demand in the case of local households with children, or
potential limits to access facing communities with large non-white populations.

107

Applying Findings from this Study
Theory-building. Many implementations of confirmatory factor analysis are used
to provide supporting evidence for a proposed theory. While evidence supporting a model
of public library action is presented in this report, the research described above might be
better described as an investigatory process than an attempt to confirm or falsify the
model proposed. The finding that library operating revenue predicts library service
availability and use of services should not be surprising; understanding the degree to
which these factors are correlated provides a baseline from which to build further theory.
The process of fitting available data to a theoretical framework prompts
reconsideration of the logical relationship between observed measures of library services
and use and the reality of library service provision. This in turn prompts questions that
might lead to more robust models and data collection practices in future work. In the case
of the present data, the patterns that can be seen in the models analyzed raise questions
about how measurement of service capacity could be accomplished using non-monetary
measures, whether it might be possible to dis-entangle local descriptors that predict
library use from those that predict library revenue, and whether a multi-factor model for
public library use might be more reliable than the single-factor models proposed.
Although the models tested fall within acceptable guidelines with regard to model fit,
further iteration of data point selection and model design in response to the process of
interpreting the initial models could prove beneficial in terms of producing a more
cohesive model for measuring library processes.

108

Applying findings in practical contexts. Although the findings presented above
do not – in the author’s opinion – represent a fully realized theory of library operations,
the findings from the initial models presented above nevertheless offers several insights.
These include the strong covariance of staff and collection expenditures, the
identification of an apparent relationship between library use and local racial
demographics, the quantification of direct and indirect effects of revenue on use when
mediated by a service availability factor. These findings could be used as the basis for
further research or as points to support arguments for increases to funding or services.
The models tested in the present study also provide a solid foundation for further
development of formal library data collection procedures, as model fit results indicate the
potential for reliable multivariate measures of library use and service availability. Further
development of these measurements could be used in conjunction with library valuation
studies, assessments of current library services in relation to local literacy, information,
and media needs, taxpayer return-on-investment studies, and assessments of library
impacts.
Limitations of the Present Study
Although several issues with data selection, matching, and interpretation have
been noted in previous sections, the limitations of this study should be addressed in a
separate section so as to provide a reference point for future research. These limitations
can be grouped into three main categories: data preparation, variable selection, and
generalizability.
The data preparation process involved several filters and transformation processes
that excluded library organizations with very large and very small service areas, as well
109

as libraries that did not report variables included in the model. For these reasons, libraries
with very small or volunteer-heavy staffs were excluded from the analysis data set, as
were library administrative units that cover very large populations. Data missingness was
assumed to be primarily dependent on library organization size (a factor not included in
the models tested), but the degree to which data were missing at random from the data set
prior to filtering for data availability was not assessed. Libraries in remote locations and
libraries in Ohio were also excluded, leading to an analysis data set that might not be
representative of nationwide aggregates.
Selection of variables for the models presented in this report was undertaken with
the goal of balancing representation of the various aspects of use and services captured by
PLS data with model simplicity. As noted above, increasing the number of factor
indicators could increase the number of potential models that could be compared.
Alternative models for Service Availability and Use not assessed in the present report
might provide better fit and/or more actionable information.
Another limitation worth noting is that the models presented show aggregate
results but lack comparison groups differentiated by region, administration style, local
population density, or time period. This limits the degree to which claims of
generalizability of the models and their estimates might be made in the present report.
Areas for Further Research
There are several directions that further research related to this report might take.
Most of the limitations listed above could be addressed if not resolved through
reexamination of the 2015 PLS data. Alternative data preparation methods could be used,
alternative factor models proposed, and tests of model invariance between sub-sections of
110

the library population could be undertaken. Pursuing this direction of research could help
to refine the research community’s understanding of the data set while providing
librarians and library researchers with a richer understanding of library services and use
patterns.
Other directions further research might take include more intensive examination
of the role physical and social geographies play in determining use patterns. Combining a
structural use model with a geographic analysis component could also lead to a more
precise understanding of the relationships between library location, neighborhood
demographics, library services, and library use, building on work such as that presented
by Koontz et al. (2009). A related course of research could examine the effect of
different funding models on library administrative entities’ ability to provide services to
their communities; libraries funded by local taxes at the township level might exhibit
higher levels of service disparity than libraries funded through county or regional
sources.
Finally, incorporation of a reliable and valid use factor in a longitudinal model
that combines several years of PLS data could yield additional information about
nationwide trends in library use over time. This effort might be complicated by changing
data definitions over time, as well as by changing library use patterns and might work
best incorporated into a multi-stage research project.
Conclusion
The study described in this report demonstrates a method for understanding
publicly available administrative data through confirmatory factor analysis and structural
equation modeling. The models proposed demonstrate reasonable levels of fit and
111

reliability, yielding actionable estimates for the relationships between library use, service
availability, operating revenue, and select demographic descriptors. The models tested
show a strong but not perfect predictive relationship between revenue and use when
mediated by a latent factor representing services while identifying an apparent negative
relationship between the Use factor and the percentage of non-white persons in the local
community, which could point toward further research on equitable access to library
services. However, I believe that reflecting on the process of examining the data and
framing it within the context of an action model might lead to more impactful research on
public data and public library use. At several points in this chapter, I have suggested that
alternative models for the measurement of Service Availability and Use might be betterfitting or more explanatory than those presented in the report. I have also noted that
further analysis of the consistency of the model’s estimates between sub-sections of the
population of library administrative entities represented in the Public Libraries Survey is
merited before making any strong claims about the validity of the model and its
estimates. The process of exploring the data within the context of the structural model
highlighted these issues; an algorithmically-driven exploratory process would be oriented
toward identifying the best linear combinations of model variables, while questions about
the practical value of including or excluding a given indicator might go unaddressed. It
was the process of fitting available data to a theoretical framework that led me to
reconsider the logical relationship between observed measures of library services and use
and the lived reality of library service provision.

112

A well-known aphorism in quantitative modeling is that, "all models are wrong;
some models are useful." This phrasing is commonly attributed to George Box, who
employed it to highlight the problem of overparameterization of models (Box & Hunter,
1978). I feel that it is appropriate to cite Box’s words in this discussion. In my opinion,
the goal of quantitative modeling is not to perfectly describe the observed world but to
describe it in such a way that useful connections can be made, either by the researcher or
someone else. While the initial parameter estimates reported here may be used to provide
a baseline for comparisons between library administration entities or as a way to re-frame
the conversation around taxpayer return-on-investment, I believe that its greatest use will
be realized as a first step in the generation of more useful models and research
approaches.
