ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
What.CD: A Legacy of Sharing
by Ian Dunham

Dissertation Director:
Phil Napoli
This dissertation explores digital music experiences through the defunct website
What.CD, a former BitTorrent tracker and associated online community. A large amount
of musical activity has yet to be researched or taken into consideration by the recording
industry because of its illegal status. However, the findings here, that are the result of
quantitative analysis of the BitTorrent data and qualitative analysis of interview data,
suggest that What.CD was a vibrant, dedicated group of individuals who avidly listened
to music. Furthermore, the activity of users on What.CD should be integrated into
current understandings of how music functions societally, especially in digital contexts.

Introduction
This dissertation presents research conducted on the website What.CD, a private
BitTorrent tracker in operation from 2007 to 2016. Its main purpose was as a comprehensive
collection of recorded music. As an object of study, I explore many facets of the site including its
data, its users, and its operating logics. However, the overarching argument of this document is
that digital communities like What.CD are unique among online collectives in their organizing
capabilities and democratizing potential.
Specifically, the practices developed and refined on What.CD can contribute to a more
comprehensive understanding of how digital music functions in and outside markets. What.CD
users were unequivocally avid music fans, and all their activity reflected that primary interest.
That activity, the most important of which was listening (a concept further developed in Chapter
2), hint at powerful subversions to current hegemonic music practices like purchasing vinyl
albums, using streaming services, and paying for digital downloads.
To further elaborate, What.CD represents an important technosocial possibility, which
refers to the potential trajectory that alternative timelines offer. While usually temporally
situated in the future, each possibility is also rooted in past events and developments. For
instance, the internet’s current state — its social, economic, and political stakes — is only one of
many paths it could have taken. If any of its predicating factors, such as governmental and
corporate development, had differed slightly, different possibilities might have emerged. In the
case of What.CD, its short existence constituted one technosocial possibility that was too
dissonant with current governance regimes. If some of the structural and cultural norms of
online behavior had developed divergent to how they did, What.CD may still be around and
celebrated for the vibrant community it became, rather than demonized.

As digitization has transformed society, music has certainly not been exempted. The

2

way people buy tickets to see artists, connect with their favorite bands and musicians, and
especially how they listen to music, has been radically changed from life before the internet.
However, just as passionate communities rallied around genres and scenes in the 60s, 70s, and
80s, they now connect with artists and each other through culturally meaningful exchanges. In
many ways, online access has opened new possibilities for musical exchange, such as through
streaming services, direct contact with artists through social media and personalized fundraising
efforts, and newly configured communities. This dissertation takes up one of those new
communities called What.CD. As anything online is subject to increased transience and
instability, though, it is a defunct community at the time of writing.

The Author’s Subject Position

My own position as both a user of What.CD and a scholar documenting and analyzing
the site placed me within a precarious configuration of the conventional insider/outsider
identities. A recognition of this position is important for understanding this dissertation because
it dramatically affects the outcomes and conclusions, as well as the type of research that is
possible.
The insider position stems from spending a certain amount of time on the site,
interacting with its users, and participating in music consumption. The feeling of being an
outsider, ironically, comes from the same set of activities. While classic sociological research
suggests that insider/outsider statuses are informed by the ways in which we perform, online
spaces privilege a performance (Goffman, 1974). While physical interaction allows us to pick up
on cues, all of which are admittedly culturally situated, including facial and body language, vocal

inflection, and clothing choice, digital representation of the self takes on entirely different

3

contours that rely on textual nuances, and graphical ones to a lesser degree.
My feeling of being an outsider might also be attributed to other factors. I am not a data
hoarder or even a collector. While I enjoy music and can probably tell the difference between a
crappy MP3 and a lossless file, such activity doesn’t even leave a mark compared to the
terabytes of data some former users have on meticulously curated hard drives. Also, like many
of the people I interviewed, legal services, namely Spotify, provide a convenience that’s worth
the $5 a month they charge students. For all the railing against late stage capitalism I am guilty
of, convenience is still king.
Both physical and digital identities require a certain amount of time, though, which can
determine whether one feels like an insider or outsider. If a person spends enough time at a bar,
they become known as a regular. If they frequent a gym, the other regulars and the staff begin
to recognize patterns of arrival or equipment use. If an individual spends her time and money
shopping on Amazon, then both the algorithms and the delivery drivers (and possibly thieves)
begin to also notice patterns. Similarly, when people spend a lot of time on Facebook, their
“friends” as well as the platform’s internal machinery take notice and may react by unfollowing
that friend (for people) or deploying certain ads (the machinery). Or, when a person tweets
several times a day, develops a following in the tens of thousands, and gets that coveted blue
check mark next to their name (

), their activity shapes the type of user they are perceived to

be. In all these examples, whether social contexts are constituted by people, machines, or both,
spending adequate time there unites them all.
Of course, the linearity of the time spent in a social context is less important online.
While being in the office from 9 to 5 means that a paycheck is being earned (a social norm that
includes both a time and a place), tweeting regularly can be done on a considerably more

flexible timeline. In fact, increased flexibility is one of the most celebrated, and criticized,

4

characteristics of online life. Building a fanbase and other types of work at 3 AM affords working
(1) at home, (2) on the road, or (3) from a tent, which, on the one hand, grants freedom from
the 9 to 5 schedule, but on the other, means that people are increasingly (1) losing connection
to their families and friends, (2) not enjoying their vacations, or (3) homeless. Because of this
flexibility that generally liberates scholars who do work online, I feel the opposite: like an
outsider who doesn’t spend enough time on the platform I am writing about.
Spending time on private trackers is something that has been written about from a
firsthand perspective elsewhere. From an anthropological perspective, “showing up” is an
important signifier of being invested, and certainly holds true for online spaces too. To really
know what users are thinking about, and how they are thinking about their use of the platform.
And I have certainly tried to be present, both on What.CD and its successors, to try and
understand these logics. I take some consolation from these shortcomings in a couple of facts:
not all users on What.CD were hardcore “superusers,” (not an official designation) and there is
no holistically quantitative way of measuring whether a person is an outsider or insider.
Participation on What.CD consisted of several different activities that will be described
in detail later, but since it was a music-driven BitTorrent community, the most obvious marker
of participation is the number of musical works uploaded. Some superusers had hundreds of
uploads, while modest users might have 15-45. By the time I was a member of What.CD, it was
virtually impossible to find original works that had not been uploaded yet. Moreover, the labor
involved in uploading a new work was significant. 1

Maybe this was because I had other stuff going on. I’m married, we just had a son who was
born 3 months early, I teach courses for TA funding, and I try to not spend too much time staring
at a computer screen. Maybe it was because I didn’t make any friends on What.CD, unlike many
users I communicated with throughout this project that keep in touch with other former
1

Despite these concessions, I am confident the following document fairly describes

5

What.CD and its legacy. Despite the decidedly “digital” nature of this research, for some reason,
it always brings me around to material practices and communities that are excited about music.
So, while each What.CD member was in a special class of music fan, which more is written about
later, they also, for the most part, like to go to record stores, concerts, dance clubs, and coffee
houses to experience music in a way that playback off a smartphone or hard drive never could
offer. My hope is that, as this research is read, it sheds some light on the relationship between
people and music, and less so on the technological upheaval that surrounds it.
Methodologically, this dissertation uses two different data sources as primary research
materials, a qualitative survey and a quantitative dataset. They are each considered
independently in separate chapters, and are intended as complimentary components to the give
the reader a comprehensive picture of What.CD’s culture and function. The survey consisted of
questions about What.CD’s culture, rather than about its position in a broader digital context,
although some questions about this position were also asked. The goal of those questions was
to gain a better sense of how What.CD users thought about the internal workings of the site,
including their interaction with other users and with the construction of the platform.
Responses were manually coded and categorized, and word frequencies were recorded using
linguistic analysis software.
The dataset used in a separate chapter was an SQL database that the former What.CD
administrators released through a Twitter announcement about a year after the site was shut
down. It contains millions of entries for hundreds of datapoints, and was dissected using various

members one and a half years later. They did this through being on the same IRC (internet relay
chat) channels every day, talking about music they liked and about the best way to transcode
audio.

database analysis tools. The method driving this analysis centered on following particular

6

markers around the database, as they appear in various contexts. Some of these contexts
include musical genre, historical time period, user-made collages, tags and labels, and audio
format. The goal of this analysis is to give the reader a better understanding of the importance
of non-centralized data management, both for the internal impact it had on What.CD and for
the external implications it might have for other digital platforms and cultures.
Other methods included in this dissertation center on cultural interpretation of legal
statutes as it pertains to the users of What.CD and the legal contexts in which they exist, as well
as critical cultural studies approaches to digital listening. These approaches are designed to
rigorously consider the experiences of What.CD users as they might differentiate and align
themselves with the experiences of other users online. Additionally, comprehensive conclusions
about digital listening that can be applied to industry-related projects and the development of
future listening communities are also a goal of these discussions.
This remainder of this introduction seeks to give the reader a background on What.CD
and the BitTorrent protocol on which it operates. Then, in Chapter 1, I provide a theoretical
background and literature review on which the rest of the dissertation relies. In Chapter 2, I
further explore What.CD through its users and tools, and discuss the subject position of the
typical What.CD user, specifically as that individual is formulated through the act of listening.
This is an identity construction that deals with historically-situated digitization on one hand, and
active listening practices on the other. Chapter 3 evaluates a database which houses What.CD’s
torrent data, by mining it for social significance, which reveals the great lengths to which
volunteers spent countless hours documenting and archiving a massive volume of information,
arguably a singular collection. In Chapter 4, the results of a survey administered to about 120
former What.CD members are examined for user sentiment about the site. Interestingly, nearly

half the respondents also use legal services like Spotify or Pandora. Then, In Chapter 5, I assess

7

the legal context of music online in relation to how listening practices are shaped and affected.
Chapter 6 explores these legal services and four characteristics they and their customer base
exhibit: control, non-committance, convenience, and community. Finally, the conclusion
investigates other legal and cultural factors that will have an impact on digital listening in the
future.

What.CD
Peer-to-peer technologies have drastically changed the landscape of the music industry
in the past 15 years (Smith & Telang, 2012). Because of these changes, several spheres have
been profoundly affected: the legal, the social, and the economic, just to name a few. More
than any other technology, the BitTorrent protocol has disrupted the music industry’s
conventional understanding and flow of consumer capitalism, regardless of the measurable
damage it has done to their bottom line (Sinnreich, 2013). Although there are many studies that
consider the economic and purely technical aspects of BitTorrent trackers, relatively sparse
research exists on the cultural impacts of such technologies and the communities that rise up
around them. While these sites never achieved widespread popularity, they represent social
possibilities that are typically closed before they can be fully explored. Analyzing a set of
practices that are, at best, legally questionable and at worst, wholly illicit, could easily be written
off by the music industry as an endorsement of such behavior. However, considering the sheer
volume of music available through such platforms, in addition to measurable amount of energy
and time spent on them, they are an appropriate target for specific research. By considering the
aspects of What.CD that can act as a model for future legitimate digital music communities,
platform designers can keep technosocial possibilities open.

What.CD, a website that hosted a private BitTorrent community, is explored here as an

8

example of a sociotechnical space that simultaneously bought into and transgressed the
expectations for consumer capitalism. By establishing a technologically-oriented theoretical
framework, this introduction seeks to establish What.CD as an understudied instance of
digitization shaping specific consumptive musical practices. To do this, affordances and
mechanisms of What.CD are explored with the goal of finding linkages between technical
apparatuses and their broader social implications. Methodologically, I explore technical
mechanisms like ratios 2 and file types as well as What.CD’s own documentation (rule sets, wikis,
and FAQs). Additionally, a survey with former What.CD users grants additional perspective in
the formulation of a particular community, and a trove of data released one year after
What.CD’s shutdown grants insight into the torrent database it held.
It should be noted that in November of 2016, What.CD was shut down by the French
government, but that former members have come forward and volunteered to be surveyed. At
least two other alternatives to What.CD have sprouted up in its place, both of which have the
prospect of being as prolific as what it replaced. These spaces will also be explored, but its users
were not interviewed because of the possibility of exposure.

What is BitTorrent?
The BitTorrent protocol, which is how the What.CD community shared music, was
developed in 2001 by Bram Cohen, an American computer scientist. At one point in time, it
accounted for as much of 25% of the internet’s traffic and is most widely known as a technology
that enables piracy (Danaher & Waldfogel, 2012). It is a peer-to-peer system that allows for

2 In this context, a ratio is a the amount of downloaded data versus the amount of uploaded data within a

private BitTorrent community. A healthy ratio indicates that a member is being a productive contributor.

decentralized distribution of files by allowing users to act as nodes which can simultaneously

9

download and upload portions of files. Whole files are compiled from pieces that each user
contributes until the entire file is downloaded, and then that file is shared in turn with the entire
network. A few terms will allow What.CD to be more easily understood in the next sections:
-

A torrent client is a piece of software that uploads and downloads files from other
torrent users around the internet.

-

A torrent file (*.torrent) is a small file which gives the addresses of the tracker, which
tells the torrent client where the desired files can be located throughout the network

-

A tracker is a central server that “oversees the computers and allows all of the clients to
connect with one another” (Mazzei, 2015). Some trackers are decentralized, which
further obfuscates geographic location of data.

-

a seeder is a user that has completely downloaded a file and is now sharing it on the
network.

-

a leecher is a user that is currently downloading pieces of the desired file from another
user.

Although BitTorrent technology can certainly be more complicated than this, these basic terms
are as technical as the discussion will become, as this dissertation is primarily concerned with
the social and cultural aspects of What.CD.

What was What.CD?
What.CD was a private tracker that required a username and password that operated
from 2007 to 2016, obtained either through interview or invitation. The interview was difficult,
as will be demonstrated many times throughout this dissertation. However, the site was self-

described as a “paradise for music lovers” (whatinterviewprep.com), because it had an

10

incredibly deep repository of recorded music. What.CD refers to (1) the website, (2) the tracker,
and (3) the Internet Relay Chat (IRC) network. Collectively, these components comprised a social
world in which users interacted and created meaning in culturally specific modes. Music and
digitization were the major values that the community rallied around, although both of those
terms’ definitions and emphases are contingent on the community discourse itself.
Many of the ideas having to do with technology, digitization, and communication within
this dissertation depend on philosophy that predates and then runs concurrent to internet
development. Specifically, the philosophy of technology generated by Herbert Marcuse, Andrew
Feenberg, and Bruno Latour is explored for its deeper explanations for seemingly superficial
actions and behaviors. Furthermore, thoughts on capitalism and democracy from these authors
bridge the discussion of What.CD to broader themes, which demonstrates how such a seemingly
obscure online community can provide insight into how we might think differently about current
technological development. The first chapter will explore these themes.

11

Chapter 1: Theoretical Framework and Literature Review
This chapter will set up a theoretical framework, walk through the main components of
What.CD, and lastly set up the theme of the Listening Subject on What.CD. Its main tenets are:
that a critical theory of technology is necessary for situating the activity on What.CD as culturally
meaningful; and digital contexts inherit many characteristics of older social forms and are thus
dependent on them for accurate interpretation.
Critical Theory of Technology
The use of tools to engage in socially meaningful activity dates to the beginning of
industrialization. The construction and reconstruction of tools is also central to notions of work,
productivity, and equality. While digitization provides a new context for the discussion of tool
usage, such discussions are still grounded in many of the same struggles that Marx discussed
well over a century ago. In the case of What.CD, internet-based tools were exploited for ends
that were incongruous with the goals of industry power brokers, although not entirely out of
step with markets. Andrew Feenberg writes

The need [for intervention] is obvious in domains such as music, where the power of the
media to focus all attention on a few stars has devastating consequences for creativity
and diminishes the worth of the many talents that fail to make it to the top. Recent
developments on the Internet have begun to challenge the system and may in fact open
music up to far wider participation. (2002, p. 9)
His predictions and observations about participation are accurate, especially considering
What.CD. Within the user base, participatory behavior was rampant, which resulted in the
discovery of many talented artists that never made it to the top of a Billboard chart. It is not

12

clear from Feenberg’s prediction if market cooperation was expected or not, because it certainly
has resisted the widespread normalization of many behaviors found on What.CD. What follows
is a review of philosophical thought about the potential of digital technology to positively affect
social interaction.
For Marx, the solution to a power monopoly was through technological systems,
becoming the means to continually create surplus value, not for the capitalists, but for the
workers themselves. He writes that

“The transformation of scattered private property, arising from individual labor, into
capitalist private property is, naturally, a process, incomparably more protracted,
violent, and difficult, than the transformation of capitalistic private property, already
practically resting on socialized production, into socialized property” (Marx, 1909).
Arguably, the actions of What.CD users represent such a transformation into socialized
property. As the music industry has already consolidated a large amount of cultural information
and sought to capitalize on it, the site’s membership sought to create an archive that existed
outside of the industry’s boundaries. Granted, the configuration of players in Marx’s model rely
on various relationships to labor, while that of What.CD rely on relationships to listening and
digital interaction.
Additionally, Herbert Marcuse wrote that a Marxian interpretation of technology
considers that “the machine never creates value but merely transfers its own value to the
product, while surplus value remains the result of the exploitation of living labor” (2013, p. 31).
Marcuse and his student, Andrew Feenberg see redemption in reclaiming the surplus value for
the laborers who are working within the technological system.
Feenberg is embedded deeply within Marxist traditions and this has a considerable
impact on the shape of his arguments. As a student of Herbert Marcuse, he began his

intellectual journey in the 1960s amid the social upheaval and the New Left. As such, he has

13

some critiques of other major cultural discourses that have arisen since then, namely Science
and Technology Studies (STS) and postmodernism. Briefly, his criticism of the former is its
“inability to develop criteria of progress out of the analysis of local situations and struggles”
(2002, p. 31) and its dependence “on the spread of a radical ontological operationalism that
eliminates or redefines all the categories of common sense, philosophy, and social science” (p.
32). His criticism of the latter is that it “attacks all forms of totalizing discourse, including talk of
potentiality, in the belief that totalization is the logic of technocracy” (p. 28). While certain
aspects of a critical theory of technology align with those of postmodernism and STS, such as the
necessity to consider social forces like gender and race as power dynamics, Feenberg seeks to
distinguish his own pursuits as more pragmatic by using real-world computer-human
interactions as examples (such as computers in educational and manufacturing contexts).
In the case of What.CD, while both STS and postmodern lenses are valid interpretive
tools, a critical-technological approach grants the site agency beyond its components and
discourse to allow its principles to be applied to other digital communities, especially ones that
are generally seen as too corporatized, or where users feel like their participation in the public
sphere comes at too great a cost to their privacy and autonomy.
Simultaneously, though, there are moments at which Feenberg attempts to combine
STS and Critical Theory to bridge knowledge gaps that currently exist, also a valid approach for
applying theoretical ideas to the analysis of What.CD The motivation for trying to reconcile the
two was born out of modern politics adopting “technocratic rationalism” in ways that Marcuse
did not predict. Namely, “democratic interventions are inspired by participant interests rather
than by a general disillusionment with capitalism. And they induce technical change not through
a Great Refusal but through negotiations, some conflictual, others cooperative, between lay

14

actors or technical outsiders and those in command of the institutions” (Feenberg, 2017, p. 8).
Whereas STS identifies networks as being comprised of individuals and technological objects,
though, Feenberg still prefers to keep humans at the center of the reimagined technological

rationalism. He also envisions technosystems that privilege knowledge that is formulated from
horizontal social structures rather than from on top, an innovation that digitization has afforded.
While such preferences remain vague, they do serve to connect Marx and Marcuse to modern
discussions of capitalism and technology.
To further consider Feenberg’s critical theory of technology, we must also appraise
instrumental views on one hand, and substantive views on the other. An instrumental view is
based on the idea that “technologies are ‘tools’ standing ready to serve the purposes of their
users. Technology is deemed ‘neutral,’ without valuative content of its own” (Feenberg, 1999, p.
5). A substantive view, alternatively, considers that “technology constitutes a new cultural
system that restructures the entire social world as an object of control” (p. 6-7). Apart from the
obvious implications such a view has for how computing and networking technology has
changed society, we can also excavate slightly deeper to see how control is easily built into the
lowest levels of our everyday tech usage, such as the smartphone, and how all kinds of systems
depend on our relationship with such a device. The NSA, Facebook, Google, and any number of
other institutions predicate their operative models on heavy use. This substantive view of
technology has many advantages to an instrumental view, particularly that it leaves room for
pluralism to exist within societies, even though substantive views do not break these
possibilities as wide open as Feenberg would like.
Therefore, Feenberg seeks to separate his discussion from both substantive and
instrumental views of technology by suggesting a critical view. This view, as a key selling point, is
based on “public participation in technical decisions, workers’ control, and requalification of the

labor force” (2002, p. 12). Feenberg demonstrates that this theory, if it relies on either the

15

instrumental or substantive viewpoint, relies on a substantive construction, since technology
“denies that modernity is exemplified once and for all by our atomistic, authoritarian,
consumerist culture” (p. 14). He pushes beyond the substantive, though, to describe how
technological systems can be more egalitarian and rooted in uses a community like What.CD
deems appropriate. Additionally, Feenberg elaborates on why he supports online
communication and its democratizing potential:

But are online communities real communities, engaging their members seriously? The
testimony of participants as well as extensive research confirms that the Internet is the
scene of new forms of sociability that strongly resemble face-to-face community … The
behaviors and symbols that sustain and support the imagined unity of community are
routinely reproduced on the Internet (2012, p. 14).
Regardless of the businesses that act as gatekeepers or the governments that surveil citizens, he
maintains that escape routes and the formation of communities can nonetheless happen more
freely online than they can in other physical or technological spaces. This is the justification
behind studying the mechanics and communication tools created and used by What.CD.
Feenberg considers that dominant market logics may deny space for the technological
pluralism with which technological systems should be developed. He also believes that
entrenched systems “invisibly sediment values and interests in rules and procedures, devices
and artifacts that routinize the pursuit of power and advantage by a dominant hegemony ... On
this view, technology is not a destiny but a scene of struggle.” (1991, p. 15). We should then try
to integrate dialectic policies into how fundamental systems, like the internet and the
technologies that function on top of it, like BitTorrent, are viewed by industries and government
entities. Jeremy Wade Morris (2015) writes that such integration has already occurred within

the music industry, as marketing data is extracted from piracy systems like Napster that were

16

originally designed to sidestep the commodification of music: “Individual Napster users became
an analyzable group of listeners and participants that could serve commercial ends. Napster
provided a space for an audience that engaged in community-like behaviors, but one that was
nonetheless built to be a commodity that would generate sellable data and patterns” (p. 33).
A word that Feenberg uses when describing his critical theory is “participatory.”
Although made famous by Henry Jenkins (2012) to describe the cultural shifts that took place
after much of our lifeworld went online, Feenberg’s use of the term targets the underlying
technology that made culture itself participatory. He writes that “in an industrial society …
democratization of work is indispensable to a more participatory way of life. And it is precisely in
the domain of work that democratization poses the most difficult problems.” (p. 17). The
question of democratization of digital work is one that technologists answer with resounding
celebration, as web-based solutions have distributed workloads across an army of freelancers
that are not bound by geography or a 40-hour work week. Rather, as Feenberg and autonomous
Marxists have suggested, such a transformation of the West’s workforce has forced them into a
position of precarity, and the designers of the systems that have afforded this precarity are the
ones who gain the most benefits (Hardt and Negri, 2000). The type of participatory involvement
that Feenberg sees as a solution to such precarity is deeper and more substantial than being
able to work from a laptop in Starbucks without any health insurance.
Feenberg’s critique of Marcuse and Marx, rather than a framing issue concerning their
ideas about technology as wrong or inaccurate, is that they portray an incomplete solution to
how scholars and policymakers should approach the development of computing and networking
systems to best serve workforces or general populations. Rather than a unified protest against
capitalist oligarchs, Feenberg sees technologically-aware Marxism as “a protective umbrella

under which social creativity can operate at the microlevel of particular institutions and

17

workplaces. A new society can be born only of an immense multiplicity of such activities, not
from a politically enforced plan” (2002, p. 62).
So how is change within such a critical framework achieved? Feenberg suggests that it
must start from a fundamentally different vantage point that takes an alternative trajectory to
current technological development. Development of any kind is likely to reproduce ideas
generated by its foundational principles, as the author is blatant about noticing: “This is the
paradox of reform from above: since technology is not neutral but fundamentally biased toward
a particular hegemony, all action undertaken within its framework tends to reproduce that
hegemony” (2002, p. 63). As has been shown in some facets of the music industry, such as
copyright, policymakers are constantly reeling and struggling with how to mitigate the effects of
technology in society, rather than attempting to shape it as Feenberg suggests. Similarly,
independent musicians are not trying to overthrow BitTorrent as a distribution system. Many
celebrate its potential for exposure, especially on a site like What.CD (Sinnreich, 2013, ch. 4).
Feenberg’s theory also seeks to intervene in the conception of the relationship between
the social sphere and technology. While spending most of his time in the traditional Marxist
discourse of class struggle, he is also interested in demonstrating the usefulness of Marxism to
identity politics and environmentalism. By going back to Marx’s writings and teasing out ideas
that tie technological progress to the accumulation of capital, Feenberg posits that socialism
need not be pitted against markets, but rather that their orientation should be recalibrated to
fulfill the needs and desires of workers. As things stand, the domination of the managerial class
is built into the logics of technology and therefore prevents democratization. Feenberg writes
that, for conditions to change, we need “public participation in technical decisions, workers’
control, and requalification of the labor force” (2002, p. 12)

The conceptualization of technology within this critical theory recognizes that it is

18

neither neutral nor instrumental within society (two descriptions common in Marcuse’s
discussion of technology in relation to Marxism), but rather “an ‘ambivalent’ process of
development suspended between different possibilities” (p. 15). Alternatively, he describes it as
a “scene of struggle” a “social battlefield,” and to borrow from Bruno Latour, a “parliament of
things” (p. 15).
The salvation of the working class, who today can be considered a clear majority of
westerners as capital has become increasingly consolidated, is seen as a distant future for
conventional Marxist thought, a coming-of-Jesus moment in which a “higher phase” arrives
(Feenberg, 2002, p. 47). Rather than waiting for salvation and suffer alienation in the meantime,
Feenberg suggests that current technological regimes necessitate a persistence of domination.
He also writes that “whatever the merits of placing moral and political limits on technology in
particular cases, history seems to show that it is impossible to create a fundamentally different
form of modern civilization using the same technology as the West” (p. 13). Since an
intervention of some kind needs to occur, finding vehicles through which such changes can
arrive becomes the challenge. Elsewhere, Feenberg has written that the internet, more than any
other set of technologies, can stage this intervention (2012, p. 3). First, though, we must rethink
what the point of technology is.
One way to do this is through, at least temporarily, dispensing with the idea that
efficiency should be the bottom line for technological development. Rather, the priorities of the
“user” class should determine the functionality of technical systems. Without the involvement
or sponsorship of any corporation, the technology was developed, although not entirely
altruistically, with user desire in mind. Feenberg writes that “opening technical development to
the influence of a wider range of values is a technical project requiring broad democratic

19

participation” (2002, p. 34). Although he does not directly identify what these values might be,
we can assume that they are related to wider participation in communication and community
decision-making mechanisms.

On the other hand, the type of democratization that BitTorrent has afforded is only for
content sharing, not necessarily for power distribution. While content does not need to be
managed by a central gatekeeper and the most popular torrents are also the ones that the most
people want, What.CD is decidedly autocratic in its user structure 3. Such a notion resonates with
technological skeptics like Evgeny Morozov and Tim Wu, who argue that hegemonic regimes like
corporate power and government involvement, as well as the ideological promise-making
machines of tech journalism and Hollywood futurism, are responsible for the disconnection
between technological possibilities and the more modest realities they deliver.
In researching What.CD, though, I have found that members were excited and
motivated by a sense of community. As the chapter on user opinions will explore, survey data
exposed some insights about the seemingly contradiction of users being thoroughly excited
about a community organized through authoritarianism. Namely, while users were not excited
about the strict rules and ratio requirements, such structures facilitated musical availability that
no other community had access to. So, although other governance may have brought about the
same excitement, What.CD’s demands certainly did not prevent enthusiasm from forming.
The ultimate end for Feenberg is to imagine a possible technological future outside of
the current trajectory, the prospect for which is difficult to imagine since it does not exist at all.
By seeking alternative “values” that align with the improvement of the lives of the working class,

3 A conversation with Stephen

Witt, the author of How the Music Got Free (2015), illuminated the
possibility that “democratizing” technology has yet to produce any better alternative to today’s
democratic tendencies.

20

an alternative reality can emerge. The challenge lies in dismantling current hegemonies, a task
that very few inside the academy or any industry have a reason to pursue. Feenberg himself
seems aware of the audacity of his claims: “The optimists argued that computers would

eliminate routine and painful work and democratize industrial society. The pessimists argued, on
the contrary, that computers would put millions out of work and bring universal surveillance and
control. There is a third alternative: perhaps the computer is neither good nor evil, but both”
(2002, p. 90). In the third space, one that is characterized by a certain ambivalence, his ideas
offer a promising starting place for theorizing BitTorrent as a potential democratizing
technology.
Specifically, What.CD’s model has the potential to dismantle current paradigms that
dominate markets without the consent of its customers. For instance, the ways in which current
listening practices are still largely shaped by a format, such as web streaming or digital
downloads. The original popular compressed audio format, the MP3, was optimized for its size,
rather than its sonic integrity. As newer compression techniques have allowed for file size
reduction without a supposed sacrifice in audio quality, hegemonic forces like dominant
streaming services and research institutes where audio coding is developed make the claim that
such tensions are now resolved. However, What.CD challenges this notion by demonstrating the
popularity of uncompressed audio and documentation regarding analog-to-digital conversion
processes. If such affordances were made available on a larger scale and were found to be
popular, the importance of such a discovery lies in the routes to market dominance that are
available to marginal ideas.
BitTorrent
Although cultural discussions of BitTorrent and other P2P technologies are certainly

present, such as Andersson’s claim that its role has changed from “reactive” to “proactive”

21

(2009, p. 64), most extant literature related to BitTorrent research largely consists of
quantitative research related to economics, computer science, and information technology (Li et
al., 2013; Vinkó and Hales, 2015; Wang & Kangasharju, 2013), some of which is discussed briefly
below. Such studies are interesting because they sidestep thorny issues of legality and piracy
often associated with media studies because they are primarily interested in technical matters
like load balancing, network topologies, and bandwidth efficiencies. Through discussing these
issues, though, we can see the possibility of analyzing BitTorrent as a possible alternative to
corporate logics (those currently of Google, Facebook, and Amazon, or whomever this might
consist of in the future). For instance, regarding BitTorrent, Mueller and Asghardi (2012) write
that “the power to shape traffic flows redistributes control among actors in the Internet
ecosystem, generating broad political economy debates about efficiency, fairness, innovation
and transparency” (p. 462). Because of the direct impacts of technological decisions on the
social sphere, the authors here conclude that discussions about the design of the protocol are
very similar to discussions about the values they list. In this instance, the ability of internet
service providers (ISPs) to perform deep packet inspections of the data coming across their lines
makes them capable of a gatekeeper function that could render democratic participation more
throttled than if such choke points did not exist. Such a concern is the reason for much of the
advocacy activity surrounding network neutrality in many countries currently. Because
BitTorrent traffic is specifically targeted because of its likelihood for piracy, and because deep
packet inspection is performed through pressure from content industries, the resulting
development of the network is directly shaped by corporate interests rather than the desires of
most users that are easily found in their online behavior.
Similarly, Cuevas et al. (2013) find that, although a broad segment of the population

22

uses BitTorrent, there are a few sources of its contents that have political motives of some kind.
Although BitTorrent has the potential for democratization, its use can be co-opted by entities
that have the resources. In other words, the BitTorrent protocol can be gamed on public
trackers, even though most pedestrian users have no interest in user exploitation, or for that
matter, even copyright infringement. To that end, the authors “study content publishing in
BitTorrent from a socioeconomic point of view by unveiling who publishes content in major
BitTorrent portals and why” by conducting “a large-scale measurement over two major
BitTorrent portals … to capture more than 55 thousand published content objects that involve

more than 35 million IP addresses” (p. 1421). Their findings suggest that, while BitTorrent can be
(and certainly has been) used with democratizing tendencies, it can also be gamed by those who
have the knowledge and desire to use it for their own ends. Within their study, the authors
found that the motivation for most content publication was not what could be considered
“democratic” (as will be discussed later, although What.CD cannot be considered purely
democratic, it is more so than public use of BitTorrent).
Broadly speaking, BitTorrent use can be divided into public and private services. Public
services consist of readily searchable repositories of content, mostly illicit. Private trackers [PTs],
What.CD being one, required a username and password and are more tightly regulated by
internal systems of accountability. Several studies of private services have come to novel
conclusions regarding the communicative dynamics that are not present in public counterparts.
Li et al. write that “core users are the base of the activity of the PTs and the number of them is
stable in different PTs” (2013, p. 2274), suggesting that the stability that results from
accountability creates a more predictable environment in PTs than in public torrent sites.
Conversely, Blake Durham (2013) considers that the ideological underpinning of PTs is

antithetical to democratic tendencies: PTs are “not an inversion of capitalist culture industries

23

but the formation of alternative but equally hierarchized inequalities of access” (p. 1).
One of the problems that arises from the dynamics of PTs is the saturation of content
and the subsequent difficulties of encouraging downloading and finding new content. As was
certainly the case on What.CD, finding content that was not already uploaded was challenging.
Liu et al., in their discussion of private P2P incentives, consider that such challenges are not
insurmountable, and are in fact a result of insufficient system design. “To prevent collusion,”
they “propose an upload entropy scheme, and show through analysis and experiment that the
entropy scheme successfully limits collusion, while rarely affecting normal users who do not
collude” (p. 610). In this context, collusion means that users “cooperate with each other and
artificially boost their upload-to-download ratios, thereby free-riding the system.” There are
more subjective mechanisms for preventing collusion but cannot be relied upon to universally
enforce fair upload and download dynamics.
Paul Aitken (2012) suggests that a different mechanism for preventing content
deterioration is the structural barrier that prevents most internet users from accessing its
contents. He writes that “private sites combat the potential debasement and corruption of the
circulation of cultural production by closing themselves off to general access. In so doing,
members are treated to a high quality and usually considerably more diverse catalogue of
media” than exists on public trackers (p. 256). Such is certainly the direction in which What.CD
went, as will be demonstrated below, as new content to upload became increasingly scarce.
One of the Pirate Bay’s founders also corroborated such a suggestion and further developed the
idea by claiming that as soon as a private or public BitTorrent site was turned into a profitgenerating enterprise, the content available on that site almost always deteriorates (citing the
Pirate Bay as an example of this in the early 2010s, Van der Sar, 2010).

24

Another problem is the rather steep learning curve that accompanies the use of PTs, as
will be further demonstrated in the description of What.CD. Aitken notes that “efficiently
searching for and finding BitTorrent content requires a considerable amount of knowledge and
experience” (p. 57), and ignorance of the rules on PTs is not tolerated. Although the rules for
many PTs seem to be like each other, the existence of such thorough rule sets implies the

perceived uniqueness of the cultural space that they occupy. Additionally, there are instance of
these rule sets coming across as a conscious effort to carve out new cultural space. Additionally,
rule sets might be purposefully obtuse to weed out pedestrian users. This is the case on other
PTs whose format is derived from What.CD using a specific content management system,
Gazelle, which offers a certain set of affordances and is therefore partially deterministic.
Aitken further writes that private sites, with their rules, regulations, focus on obligation
and reciprocity, and their exclusivity, are spaces in which the organization and administration of
the circulation of cultural production are prioritized over simply liberating information from its
commodity status” (p. 262). As will be developed in the dissertation itself, a discussion about the
“commodity status” of goods seems to be a separate matter from the power that is not equally
distributed in PTs – in fact, it has been described in totalitarian, authoritarian terms.¹
Relatedly, a technical issue that is closely tied to rhetoric surrounding the “sharing
economy” is the egalitarianism of the BitTorrent protocol, and computer scientists often find
that systems in which everyone is compelled to participate are more productive at sharing
content than systems that only reward selfish behavior (Liu et al., 2010). Similarly, Vinkó and
Hales suggest that learning from BitTorrent client peers can enable the most successful sharing
outcomes: “cooperative (sharing) strategies outperformed free riding strategies,” and allowing
peers to slowly mutate their behavior in reaction to the network allows not only sharing of
content, but of optimal down and uploading scenarios (p. 181). By assessing the number of

25

participants on a BitTorrent network and their activity, public and private trackers can achieve
an efficiency greater than if users are left to their own volition (Wang & Kangasharju, 2013).
Because sharing is generally seen in altruistic terms, especially online, a discussion of

BitTorrent and sharing should rely on the sociological concept of limited greediness developed
by Roca and Helbing (2011). They write that

the wellbeing of participants improves if they contribute to the public good, but there is
a free-rider problem: why contribute if one can enjoy the benefits without bearing the
costs, and why cooperate if one may obtain a greater personal benefit by cheating?... In
particular, the punishment of free riders by cooperators is able to sustain and enhance
initial levels of cooperation … Our results strongly suggest that learning rules,
particularly self-referential factors in decision making, can be a key component in the
explanation of the emergence and stability of cooperation (p. 11370)
So, both rules and a modified regimen of sharing might encourage more cooperation and are
generally present within PTs while being absent from public trackers. As Galloway and Thacker
discuss (2007), cooperation and an obsession with networks that favor lateral connections over
hierarchy and “verticality” (p. 25), identifying the exact nature of each “node” within a P2P
network determines where political contingencies might exist: “Together [certain
characteristics] compose a new, sophisticated system of distributed control. As a technology,
protocol is implemented broadly and is thus not reducible simply to the domain of institutional,
governmental, or corporate power” (p. 30).
Intellectual Property
Another issue that current literature deals with is how intellectual property policies are
unsuitable for a digitally networked age, and a host of writers have weighed in as to why
copyright does not work, how it can be fixed, how it should be abolished, and so on
(Aufderheide & Jaszi, 2011; Bollier, 2013; Bollier & Pavlovich, 2008; Boon, 2010; Gillespie, 2007;

Levine, 2011; and others). Although I do not intend to directly deal with copyright within the

26

dissertation from a legal or policy standpoint, there are several ways it is implicated from a
cultural one. For instance, one need not address specific case law to see its traces within the
need for secrecy within PTs, in how the music business has come unraveled since 2000, or in the
infinite mysteries of fair use; not to mention the hot mess in which international copyright
currently finds itself.
To briefly summarize this cultural treatment of copyright, I refer to the category of
scholars that includes Patrick Burkhart, Siva Vaidhyanathan, and the more general discussions of
William Patry, among others. To make sense of how digitization has changed policy making
approaches, Patry (2012) writes that “the Internet and other digital technologies have
undermined the central premise around which copyright markets have historically been built:
artificial scarcity” (p. 3). All these scholars, although they disagree about what a solution should
look like, agree that there is a fundamental problem in the gap that exists between policies and
practices. Patry also writes that this problem is because of inefficient policymaking:
“Policymakers have been operating in an evidence-free copyright law zone for many decades”
(p. 51). While Burkhart tends to agree with Patry, many academics seem to suggest solutions
that are too far afield from reality. It could be argued that Feenberg and his critical theory of
technology also fit into this category with his overly broad use of the term “democratization.”
Vaidhyanathan (2003) is an advocate of a “thin” copyright policy that has certain
regulatory limits since he thinks that the damage of irrelevant policies is harmful:

The tension in the law is not between urban lower class and corporate uberclass. It’s not
between black artists and white record executives. It’s not always a result of conflicts
between white songwriters and the black composer s who sample them. It is in fact a
struggle between the established entities in the music business and those trying to get
established. It is a conflict between old and new (p. 134).

27
Because so much is yet undetermined, or as Feenberg suggests the Internet has not yet reached
its final form, the damage of ill-conceived policies is damaging to cultural spheres which are
often disconnected from their institutional counterparts like the recording industry. Even
representatives of Vaidhyanathan’s “new,” like tech companies, are detached from these
cultural spheres where the content (if it can be adequately described in such an industryimbued term) originates.
Jeremy Wade Morris, while actively attempting to shift the focus from copyright policy
to the formation of a digital commodity market, writes “digital goods call into question how
scholars have typically understood commodities, and the case of music highlights how the
digitized commodity form is reconfiguring the circulation and experience of cultural goods” (p.
43). Furthermore, he insists that by shifting discourse about digital music away from a focus on
copyright, scholars can begin to see the importance of materiality that extends beyond current
frustrations with inept intellectual property regimes. Such a line of thinking is also why I find it
important to review the technical studies of BitTorrent and related technologies; by doing so,
we can investigate exactly where innovation is occurring without having to worry about whether
it is legal or not.
Patrick Burkhart has written about the “celestial jukebox” and the results of a shift to
digital music streaming (2010), as well as the impact of recent alternative political movements
(2014). His contribution in describing the cultural significance of copyright uses Habermas’s
lifeworld to communicate what dire straits musicians are in: “Copyright law has helped to
‘uncouple’ the music lifeworld from other social subsystems to the point that the law is no
longer called upon to justify itself with reference to its interventions into the music lifeworld.
Rather, the law, together with power, money, and communication networks, works as a

28

‘steering medium’: it works independently of the lifeworld, colonizes it, and converts its cultural

communications into formal, instrumentalist, market-based transactions (Habermas 1987, 365)”
(2010, p. 15). Although it could be argued that, within capitalism, external forces have always
acted as a steering medium, it is difficult to consider music recording without money, just as it is
equally difficult to think about a musician’s incentive to create without the reward of money or
fame.
Ben Wagner writes about the development of freedom of expression online, specifically
of its dependence on specific technological interests and affordances. In his 2016 book, he
makes that argument that technical and political choices that were made in the early stages of
the development of the Internet and have not changed since. None of these choices were
necessary then or now, rather they fitted a certain set of specific interests and have since
become entrenched within Internet communities of practice and their institutions. It is also
increasingly taken for granted as a liberal speech space that is assumed to be free by nature” (p.
179-180). What.CD, and P2P spaces more broadly, are generally outside of the bounds of state
law, which doesn’t preclude them from being regulated by other forms of law that can also be
framed as normative under the theory of critical legal pluralism. Kleinhans and MacDonald
(1997) describe such pluralism as the process by which “manifold legal norms emerge, change,
and negate or reinforce one another in social situations not derived from, tributary to or
purportedly structured by State action” (p. 29). Such a definition implies that events outside of
court decisions, precedents, and FCC intervention can still be as important as state law, which
opens cultural discussions of regimes like copyright and censorship.
What.CD circumvents normal market structures in ways that have been well
documented concerning piracy and internet distribution systems (Adermon & Liang, 2014).
However, there are relatively few studies about the culture of music piracy, which should be

corrected since many of the members of What.CD would likely not consider themselves

29

criminals. In fact, some incredibly avid fans of music can be found on What.CD, which is
demonstrated through curatorial activities and extremely accurate record keeping. What follows
is a discussion of current theories of technology and what they contribute to better positioning a
study of What.CD as an important cultural space.
Philosophy of Technology
Henry Jenkins (2012) writes that consumer capitalism is capable of being reconfigured
by fan involvement. Furthermore, he identifies five main aspects of fan communities that are
particularly transformative: “its relationship to a particular mode of reception; its role in
encouraging viewer activism; its function as an interpretive community; its particular traditions
of cultural production; its status as an alternative social community” (p. 2). By circumventing
normal market models that involve paying for a consumer good, or as is the case with music and
movies, paying for a license to play a consumer good, digital distribution has allowed for new
value systems to rise around new models. In turn, these new models are driven by specific
technological affordances, such as network structures and increased bandwidth, both of which
have paved the way for BitTorrent trackers to dominate peer-to-peer sharing technologies.
Such reconfigurations butt up against the music industry’s desire to fold new
technologies back into the market logic: that the ultimate purpose and medium by which fans
connect with music is capital, and if a surplus value is not created through artist-fan interactions,
then something needs to be fixed. However, by taking a more critical view that questions why
consumers are not paying as much for music anymore, and why brands cannot build audiences
anymore, and even whether artists need a meaningful revenue stream to do so, we can begin to

30

see why What.CD flourished. Furthermore, we can also see why observing What.CD can provide
a corrective to the way that industry professionals typically problematize the music industry.
Technology and Social Impact
In One Dimensional Man, Herbert Marcuse (2013) writes that

No matter how much such [technological] needs may have become the individual’s own,
reproduced and fortified by the conditions of his existence; no matter how much he
identifies himself with them and finds himself in their satisfaction, they continue to be
what they were from the beginning—products of a society whose dominant interest
demands repression (p. 8).
Such a position, which is typical of Frankfurt School members, including Adorno and
Horkheimer, criticize the “culture industries” for their blatant attempts to dupe the public
(Adorno and Horkheimer, 2007). Marcuse was especially focused on the central figure of
technology in shaping notions of democracy post WWII, though, and thus spends much of One
Dimensional Man developing a cohesive argument for why contemporary technological system
development is in opposition to democratic progress.
The absolution of system designers, to Marcuse, hinges on keeping their user bases
comfortable. Their destructive tendencies can be overlooked or even completely hidden when
masked by a sufficient number of affordances, advantages, and rules. Although Marcuse was
writing in pre-internet contexts, one need look no further than a system like What.CD to see
such tradeoffs. While, on the one hand, users are “liberated” from the oppression of capitalist
pressure to spend money in a space like What.CD, they must also recognize how markets
themselves influence the music they are likely to listen to, even if their musical tastes are
informed by discourses that circulate in independent or alternative music markets. Additionally,
they must constantly see the rules regime under which What.CD and other PTs operate.

31

Bruno Latour, as a seminal thinker within Science and Technology Studies (STS), played a
role in shaping it as a multidisciplinary field that coalesced in the 1970s and 80s, even though
many of its precursory bodies of literature were developed much earlier in the 20th century.
Although its entire set of goals cannot be discussed here, a few important contributions that
connect with a discussion of What.CD can be teased out of Latour’s foundational volumes
Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society (1987) and
Reassembling the Social (2005). The goal of integrating these ideas into the current topic is to
deconstruct the seemingly holistic object of a technological fact to uncover its motivations and
internal logics. Taking a different methodological approach from Marcuse and Feenberg, STS
seeks to deconstruct technology rather than culturally situate it.
Latour begins from the premise that a finished product of technology, such as What.CD
before any excavation, is too late in the process to understand its full importance. It is therefore
futile “to analyze the final products, a computer, a nuclear plant, a cosmological theory, the
shape of a double helix, a box of contraceptive pills, a model of the economy; instead we will
follow scientists and engineers at the times and at the places where they plan a nuclear plant,
undo a cosmological theory, modify the structure of a hormone for contraception, or
disaggregate figures used in a new model of the economy” (1987, p. 21). It does not seem like a
methodological failure, then, rather than an emphasis on the result of sociotechnological
processes instead of their composition. We must, therefore, look at the ways that What.CD
users constitute culturally meaningful relationships with both the technology itself and with
other users, to gain insight into why so much of time and energy is spent on this site.
Latour arrives at a notion of technological fact by rethinking any given field of study,
such as What.CD as a web of contingencies rather than a sterile result that the scientific method
delivered to someone in a lab coat. Although he draws on preexisting concepts from sociology

and anthropology to conceive of this web of meaning, Latour emphasizes that much of the

32

contingency is invested in relationships between different individuals or classes of people like
scientists, or in this specific case, What.CD members. He writes that “the instrument, whatever
its nature, is what leads you from the paper to what supports the paper, from the many
resources mobilized in the text to the many more resources mobilized to create the visual
displays of the texts” (1987, p. 69). Within such a framework, there are several possibilities for a
unit of analysis within What.CD, all of which are discussed below.
In addition to the scientific or technological fact being comprised of a collection of
relationships, the concept of specific “knowledge” must also be reconsidered. Latour writes that
“’knowledge’ is not something that could be described by itself or by opposition to ‘ignorance’
or to ‘belief’, but only by considering a whole cycle of accumulation: how to bring things back to
a place for someone to see it for the first time so that others might be sent again to bring other
things back” (p. 220).” In the context of What.CD, such acts of sharing occur when users upload
new content, thereby sharing it with the entire community and expanding the range of potential
knowledge members can have.
Similarly, the “social” is another concept that Latour finds reason to reinterpret. His use
of the term is unusual when considered in the conventional sociological context of “local, faceto-face, naked, unequipped, and dynamic” (2005, p. 65). Rather than focusing on the social to
designate a certain type of interaction or relationship, Latour suggests that it can only be
captured as a unique characteristic of those interactions. It is a “momentary association which is
characterized by the way it gathers together into new shapes” and resists being made
permanent (p. 65). Additionally, digitization scholars should be especially wary of the fact that
the social is not a category similar to “the biological,” “psychological,” or “economical.” Rather,
it describes the “‘modifications” and shifts that affect those domains that we should describe as

social. Lastly, Latour desires that we move away from describing forces as social, since this

33

implies a vector with a certain direction and velocity. Rather, by describing these brief moments
between objects as social, we can “distinguish in the composite notion of society what pertains
to its durability and what pertains to its substance” (p. 66). As will be demonstrated through a
more thorough discussion of What.CD, interactions between sociotechnical objects are the best
moments at which to gain a precise understanding of how sociality bears out for users.
In deeper inspection of “the social,” Latour finds it entirely possible to have a set of
nonhuman “actors” that can develop social ties. So technological artifacts like computers,
applications, and digital networks all have interactions and relationships (see Figure 1). Latour
writes that “anything that does modify a state of affairs by making a difference is an actor—or, if
it has no figuration yet, an actant. Thus, the questions to ask about any agent are simply the
following: Does it make a difference in the course of some other agent’s action or not? Is there
some trial that allows someone to detect this difference?” (2005, p. 71). Such a configuration of
describing social relationships allows us to put a technological tool like What.CD itself squarely
in the center of a “social” sphere, in which it is acting and being acted on within a host of
surrounding actors, which are people as well as other technological objects. Thus, an actor
within the social mesh of What.CD can consist of various kinds of users, as well as the
technology they use, including the BitTorrent protocol, IRC channels, and forums.
This chapter’s goal has been to establish a theoretical framework upon which the rest of
the dissertation builds, and to ground research on What.CD in theories of technology that allow
for a more meaningful exploration of the various tools and affordances that the site offers. A
distinct concession from this exploration is that thinkers often fall on either side of the “internet
exceptionalism” debate. On the celebratory side are authors like Lawrence Lessig (2006) and
Yochai Benkler (2006). On the skeptical side are those like Evgeny Morozov (2012) and Tim Wu

(Goldsmith & Wu, 2006) who have justified concerns about the possibility for democracy to

34

flourish in a space that is so heavily controlled by corporate power and surveilled by
governmental regimes. Because all these authors’ work is preloaded with certain philosophical
and political assumptions, the above theoretical framework attempts to lay the groundwork for
a discussion to which these authors might contribute additional meaning at a later point in
further research. What follows in the next chapter is a descriptive layout of each of the
important components of What.CD, as well as the connections they have to the theoretical
framework described above.

Gazelle

Rules

IRC

Torrent

Forums

Uploading

Downloading
Torrents

Figure 1: Conceptual Map of What.CD Components

35
Chapter 2: What.CD – Its Users and Tools
This chapter describes the various rules and other components of the social context of
What.CD. danah boyd, using Gibson’s development of an affordances framework (1979), writes
that social media platforms of different kinds offer affordances that facilitate certain social
interactions (2010). According to this rubric, this chapter assesses What.CD for certain
affordances and features that allowed it to function as a platform in which a strict set of rules
created a structure in which members interacted. These affordances include: the rules
themselves, uploading, downloading, torrent comments, forums, IRC channels, and the Gazelle
platform on which What.CD operated. There were approximately 145,000 active members of
What.CD, with a possible total of 200,000. Elaborate sets of rules governed communication and
actions of nearly every kind on What.CD and the salient ones are briefly described below. Lastly,
this chapter scrutinizes the listening subject as a unique identity construction dependent on the
digital context of What.CD.

Figure 2: The top of What.CD with blurred user metrics
Rules
Rules governed everything on What.CD and were considered “paramount.” In fact, the
very admittance of a new user was the result of following rules that predicated membership. An
elaborate interview was conducted for candidates, to which an entire website of assistance had

been devoted (whatinterviewprep.com). According to What.CD’s metrics, over 25,000

36

interviews had been administered by the time the site had shut down:

This system has been in near-constant operation for over 7 years. Thanks to the tireless
efforts of the Interview Team (whose members come from all over the world), What.CD
entrance interviews are conducted 24 hours a day, and in several different languages.
Although some fail, hundreds of users pass the interview every month. Bit by bit, the
number of interviews conducted by our team grows. Last year we celebrated the
50,000th interview, and we now have the honor of announcing that over 25,000
What.CD members have successfully earned their invitation by passing the interview.
However, these were not the only rules that had to be followed. Although there were only 6
major top line “golden” rules (each with many parts), those did not account for the rules
governing naming conventions, best practices, creating torrents, chatting on What.CD’s IRC
network, or how to tag torrents. Although breaking some rules could simply result in a
reprimand, others could ban a user from the site, either temporarily or permanently.
Compared to other private trackers, What.CD’s rules were strict and plentiful. Public
trackers such as The Pirate Bay and Kickasstorrents have little or no rules governing behavior,
such as what kind of material can be uploaded or whether a certain ratio must be maintained.
As will be demonstrated by describing more elements of What.CD, rules were very important to
the governance of behavior and maintaining an atmosphere that encouraged musical
exploration and a certain kind of social responsibility.
A paradox exists in this context, where rules govern a community that is seen from the
outside as piratical. While forcing critics to reframe a seemingly “wild west” community as
adhering to strict internal logics, such a paradox also exposes how rules are constitutive of most
elements of What.CD’s existence, rather than a force that molded user behavior. In other words,
even though rules are usually interpreted as a method or tool of governance, rules on What.CD

should be thought of as affording certain capabilities and motivating interaction. For instance,

37

requiring uploads to adhere to standards arguably encouraged more usage of the site, thereby
demonstrating that rules not only facilitated interaction, but also constitute the culture in which
users were listening.
It should also be noted that, in a discussion of rules, online spaces (and probably
physical ones, too) are always shaped by rules, and communication can either be viewed as
constricted or fostered by them. A social media platform is celebrated or excoriated for the
things it allows users and corporations to do, the liberties it grants or the rights that it violates.
What.CD and its rules, however, are analyzed in this chapter as neither enabling or limiting, but
as cultural artifacts that can be loaded and unloaded with meaning as specific instances
determine.
Marcuse’s interpretation of the role of technological systems in our social lives is that
they offer a tradeoff of certain kinds of fulfillment for a general loss of control. That loss of
control is more generally representative of the oppression that such systems reproduce in a
logic that has not ventured too far from the original capitalistic arrangement. For such thinkers,
being aware of the rules that the designers of What.CD have put in place can give users a good
idea about the obvious and hidden control mechanisms that are put in place. For Feenberg, on
the other hand, the rules of What.CD are merely structural elements that provide for
meaningful democratic communication. What.CD is therefore one of these “new forms of
sociability” (2012, p. 14) that is possible on the internet and unprecedented in its ability to
establish self-governance despite external trends toward increasing corporate control.

Uploading

38

What.CD, at its most basic, was a website and associated private BitTorrent tracker. As such,
users had to maintain a certain ratio of uploaded to downloaded content. Uploaded content
was generated through two ways: either through finding new material that had not been
uploaded yet, a task that was increasingly difficult, or through fulfilling requests that other users
had posted. The seed-to-leech ratios that each member had was a mechanism to motivate
seeding, which may explain the incredibly deep repository of content. While a broader
motivation might be to create the most robust musical library in human history, the political
economy of a high ratio on What.CD allowed for a user to climb the ranks of user classes, as well
as be seen in a better light on the site (anyone’s ratio, as well as the amount they have up and
downloaded, was publicly viewable, see Figure 3). Put more simply: users keep uploading either
because it is a marker of status or because they want to keep downloading, and they download
as an affordance of how much they have uploaded. Such a community organizational
mechanism like uploading can be considered, at least currently, one that bypasses commercial
models for internet development, and as a result, has the potential to contribute to new
models. Feenberg writes that “any technology that offers new possibilities for the formation of
community is thus democratically significant” (2009, p. 81).
Uploading New Content
A specific page on What.CD acted as a portal for allowing new uploads. It required that a
user create a torrent file that included the new work, the type of files it contained, and much
more detailed information (see image below). Being granularly specific with metainformation
both allowed for standardization that users relied on and acted as a verification process for the
uploader.

39

Although most content was music, there were also ebooks, applications, audiobooks,
and other categories. If a user found a new work, they were obligated to upload it in a certain
fashion that appropriately documented the work and its format. But where would users find
new works? The site’s documentation suggested going to the dollar store, the library, borrowing
CDs from friends, visiting newsgroups, and going to Bandcamp to download free albums. It was
especially difficult to find content that has not been uploaded, though. For instance, there were
approximately 200 different versions of Pink Floyd’s Dark Side of the Moon alone. This includes
every possible format, release, and remaster, and such availability is not an anomaly.
Additionally, each version had MP3s at 320kbps, two different variable bit-rate MP3
possibilities, and a FLAC (lossless) download. With any given search that a user carried out, she
also decided in which format she would download that work. Generally, buying music

40

legitimately online through iTunes or Spotify does not allow for the choices that What.CD gave
to its users.
Fulfilling Requests
Requests were perhaps an easier way for new users to get their ratio up to an
acceptable level (the exact calculation of a user’s ratio is discussed below). There were
thousands of requests for content that date from a few hours to years ago. Each request was

accompanied by a bounty, which is the amount of bandwidth the requester offered towards the
uploader’s ratio if they fulfilled the request. Usually the bounty was commensurate with either
the difficulty of finding that or the level of desire for that content. So, if someone offers 30
gigabytes for a vinyl release of Bad Brains’ 1989 release Quickness as a lossless FLAC, the
uploader would be obliged to follow the very strict rules concerning audio quality and naming
conventions, and then claim the request as filled, at which point that user would have the
bounty added to their ratio. If something about the upload was problematic because it has not
followed all the rules, then the requester or a moderator can “unfill” the request, an action that
can have dire consequences for the uploader. Such consequences include being banned from
the site or being demoted to an inferior user class.
Downloading
Finding content that might interest a user could either be done through searching for
specific torrents (a search bar was static at the top of any page, see Figure 1), finding out what
other users have downloaded, or seeing what had been uploaded most recently. By clicking on a
torrent after using one of these query methods, a user could see the artist, album, label, genre,
album artwork, original uploader, track list, a URL for more information (such as a Bandcamp

41

page or the artist’s website), to which collages the work belongs, and in which formats the work
is available.
Concerning private trackers, Chen, Chu and Li (2011) write that “because there are too
many seeders in PTs [private trackers] … members can hardly … increase their share ratios. This
phenomenon forces most members to seed for a long time to survive ... Obviously, this vicious
circle can benefit members who are downloading, but it does harm to members who want to
upload” (p. 1). In their computational estimation of the problem, the authors hypothesize that

an optimal seed-to-leech ratio will provide for the best environment, in which both downloaders
are encouraged to keep downloading and uploaders continue to find new material. On What.CD,
different download categories determined how a torrent would affect a user’s ratio:
Freeleech: Users can download the torrent without it affecting their ratio, except that it
will increase the amount that is uploaded. New users are encouraged to utilize
freeleeches to increase their ratio
Neutral Leech: Users can download the torrent without affecting their ratio, but, unlike
freeleech torrents, the amount uploaded will also not affect the user’s ratio.
Normal Downloads: When users download or upload torrent data, it is reflected in their
ratio in terms of gigabytes.
Certain ratios had to be maintained, the calculation for which is not simple, within the What.CD
wiki it stated:

Your required ratio depends on several things:
- How long you have been on the site.
- Your downloaded amount.
- How many torrents you are seeding.
- How long you have been seeding them over the past 7 days.
- Is your download ability disabled? (What.CD)

42

Additionally, the wiki described the basic ratio formula as “maximum required ratio multiplied
by 1 –

𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠
”
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒

(What.CD). So, a user’s ratio was not as simple as

𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢𝑢
,
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑

but rather took

other social parameters into consideration that suggest certain cultural values. These include a
user’s length of time on the site making them more valuable than new members, which signified
the importance of continuity within the community. Also, the number of torrents a user was
currently seeding and the length for which they had seeded played a part in their ratio, which
also emphasizes the value in being reliable with the material that a user has downloaded so that
it is available into perpetuity. The site’s wiki explicitly stated that torrents are calculated as being
effectively seeded if they have been available for at least 72 hours in the past seven days. Lastly,
and perhaps most obviously, unproductive members of the community, that is, those whose
ability to download content has been disabled were also less likely to have a socially acceptable
ratio.
Both uploading and downloading torrent data were important ways to maintain a type
of citizenship on What.CD, one that consisted of unspoken communication and whose rationale
exists mostly in numbers (ratio, number of gigabytes downloaded). However, what Bakardjieva
calls “subactivism” takes citizenship to be “a kind of politics that unfolds at the level of
subjective experience and is submerged in the flow of everyday life” (2009, p. 86). So, although
numbers are certainly important, in each torrent a user decided to upload or download, a
statement was made regarding musical taste, political sensibilities, and other community values.
These values are further explored through textual communication in various channels below.

Interaction: Torrent Comments, Forums, and IRC Channels
Although the most novel way that users on What.CD interacted was through BitTorrents
– after all, the rest of the tools on the site were pedestrian without the music provided through

43

torrents – the following modes of communication are important to what Sanjay Sharma (2013)
calls the “technocultural assemblage” of a platform (p. 48), which is the constitutive effect of
tools like GUIs and algorithms combined with the communicative practices of a group of users.
For What.CD, torrent comments, forums, and IRC channels created possibilities for discourse

about the music, the site itself, and other matters. Just like nearly every other part of the site, a
set of explicit rules governed allowable behavior within these discursive spaces.
The way in which Feenberg’s Critical Theory of Technology comes into play on What.CD
is perhaps most visible through these various types of interaction. The ways in which the
platform had the potential to be democratizing, while not present in the language used in
torrent comments, forums, and IRC channels, can be seen in the way that capitalistic tendencies
are rerouted through these avenues. As users discussed and exchanged music, they actively
fostered communities of taste and unique digital consumptive habits, all outside the purview of
record labels and dominant streaming platforms.
Torrent Comments
In addition to the information listed above as part of a torrent’s page, there were also
any comments that users have left (see Figure 4).

44

Figure 4: An example of torrent comments, from the page for the video game Fallout 4’s
Soundtrack by Inon Zur

Usually, these comments pertained to the music from the referenced torrent or, as Figure 4
demonstrates, requests for seeds or notification that a user is seeding. In addition to building
rapport, notifying viewers of comments that I am seeding signifies that (1) I care about this artist
or album or (2) I care about my status on the site and about maintaining a certain ratio. In either
case, the discussion that ensues, just like most of the discussion in the forums and on IRC

channels, serves an ancillary role to the main technosocial apparatus on the site, the torrents

45

themselves.
Forums

Figure 5: Listing of Forums at What.CD
The forums were categorized according to whether topics related to: the site itself, community,
music, and help (see Figure 5). A sense of community for users that rally around music was most
fostered in the second two, as sub-categories might suggest. The rules that dictated acceptable

communicative practices within the forums encouraged a certain notion of productivity. The

46

following rules were especially prescriptive:

-

Don’t use all capital letters, excessive !!! (exclamation marks) or ???
(question marks). It seems like you’re shouting!

-

No posting music requests in forums. There’s a request link at the top of
the page; please use that instead.

-

Don’t point out or attack other members’ share ratios. A higher ratio does
not make you better than someone else.

-

No political or religious discussions. These types of discussions lead to
arguments and flaming users, something that will not be tolerated. The
only exception to this rule is The Library forum, which exists solely for the
purpose of intellectual discussion and civilized debate.

-

No language other than English is permitted in the forums. If we can’t
understand it, we can’t moderate it.

-

Try not to ask stupid questions. A stupid question is one that you could
have found the answer to yourself with a little research, or one that
you’re asking in the wrong place. (What.CD)

These rules could just as easily apply to many other forums online, and do not imply anything
noteworthy on their own. However, with the understanding the What.CD was both ruledriven and music-driven, we can see the moderator’s desire to funnel as much of a user’s
time as possible into contributing to music-related discourse. They also sought to cordon off
discussion related to other topics in their own forums to keep topic matter highly categorized.
Contrary to such desires, though, the amount of activity in each of the forums suggests that
users enjoyed talking about non-music-related topics: The Lounge, which was a catch-all for
discussion that was not specifically site or music-related, had the highest number of both
topics (41,446) and posts (1,811,720). Compared to the next highest category, Music (25,628
topics and 778,106 posts), the amount of content within The Lounge was indicative of the
need for discursive space whose guidelines deviate from the “nuts and bolts” of the site itself.

One forum that demonstrates the identity construction of What.CD users within their

47

technocultural assemblage is The Laboratory. As is discussed below, the content management
system on which What.CD is built, Gazelle, was designed by the site’s creators and has been
used by other private BitTorrent trackers, including those that were created after its closure.
The impact of What.CD’s technosocial practices were not limited to its site, but its logics are
reproduced elsewhere. The Laboratory was where code-minded users discussed various
tweaks to the website and tools that were built to augment the utility of What.CD, such as the
Android and iPhone apps, custom stylesheets, and other data manipulation and monitoring
tools. Because many What.CD users were not simply interested in compiling accurate and
robust data about music (in this context, even the music can be considered data that should
conform to strict standards), but also in coding solutions more broadly, The Lab represented
the unique constellation of interests and communicative strategies that set What.CD apart
from other online music communities.
There were also active discussions concerning music, pertaining to what people were
listening to, how they listened, as well as the music that “vanity house” artists (those who are
What.CD members and have an interest in distributing music they write) were creating and
promoting. Some of the most popular threads, according to age and number of posts, were
entitled “The ‘What album should I start with?’ Thread,” “Judge others by their recently
snatched,” as well as threads devoted to particular genres like dubstep, house, and classical.
These forum discussions indicate that the identity construction of many users on What.CD
was tied up in communities of taste (Bennett, 1999) that must constantly be reconstituted
through this specific communication mode. So, like many other social media platforms,
members’ identities were not only maintained through specific comments, but through the
persistence and visibility of those comments. The novel affordance here, though, lies in the

distinctly musical and collector status that the site attracts. In other words, it was not
common to find users that feel tepid about their membership at What.CD; enthusiasm and
participation could be parlayed into higher ratios that contribute to the internal logic by
which What.CD operated. Furthermore, many users knew others across several private
trackers, enabling them to be invited to new ones that opened up in the wake of What.CD’s
shutdown.
IRC Channels
IRC Channels were perhaps the most cryptic and difficult to access of any of the
textual communication tools available through What.CD. Internet Relay Chat, a format that
predates web browsers and other modern chat tools, consists of a network of users who chat
simultaneously, and are most associated with communities of programmers. Guillaume
Latzko-Toth (2014) writes that “within the IRC environment, every human is first and
foremost a user who may encapsulate different roles. One may be an IRC operator and yet a
simple user on a specific channel, while simultaneously being a ‘voice’ on another channel.
That said, not every user is human. The ecology of IRC entities is complicated by the presence
of bots and scripts (i.e., non-human actants)” (p. 582). This description held true for
What.CD’s IRC network, on which there are a number of channels. Nearly all of them required
a valid What.CD username and password (as specified in the IRC rules), but the #help and
#general channels were accessible to anyone with the knowledge of the channel’s address
and the ability to use an IRC client (a special program that grants access to the IRC’s
interface). Also, if a user’s account had been deactivated because of a poor ratio, they could
visit the channel #disabled to reason with the administrators.

48

49

Figure 6: Screenshot of an IRC client logged into the What.CD network

There were also official IRC channels for specific music genres, which allow more granular
conversational topics than the forum categories. Additionally, there were several unofficial
channels that are not run by What.CD, which ranged from such topics like the #bonnaroo to
chat in the #french language. Because of the specificity of channel topics and the volume of
discussion generated, IRC is more likely the space for a more generative research of cultural
identity construction for specific users and the music they listen to.
User Classes
There were several user classes had to meet certain requirements related to number
of torrents uploaded, amount of data uploaded, amount of time as a member, and
maintaining certain ratios. Like nearly every other component on What.CD, these layers of

users represented certain amounts of time and community contribution and they reward

50

heightened attention to the values like diversity of uploaded content, persistence of torrent
seeding, and encoding analog formats like vinyl and cassettes to digital ones like MP3 and
FLAC. Some user classes, mostly secondary ones, were specialized and created an official
space for users who wanted to share their own music (“Artist”), elite visitors from other
private trackers (“Torrent Celebrity”), or those who maintain the site (“Delta Team,” “Build
Team,” and “Alpha Team”). In connection with Feenberg’s discussion of class dynamics in
technological systems, we see a contradiction between the predicted egalitarianism of
technological alternatives and possibly autocratic tendencies of What.CD.
However, some user classes were mysterious and there was no opportunity to seek
clarification, as is similarly the case in IRC channels — certain parameters prevent a user from
privately messaging another user they have never encountered before, and the rules state
explicitly: “Do not PM, DCC, or Query anyone you don’t know or have never talked to without
asking first; this applies specifically to staff” (What.CD). Likewise, the user classes of “VIP,”
“Legend,” and “Forum Moderator” all did not have explicit requirements for achieving that
status. Rather, they were achieved by “being awesome” and not asking. One can only assume
that they were reached by going beyond the requirements for lower classes, and the likely
number of people that meet these high requirements was low enough that it does not require
as explicit a discussion as the lower users. Generally, it is not a person who is promoting or
demoting a user from one class to another; when I was moved from “user” to “member,” I
received an automated message that alerted me to my promotion. Furthermore, the sense of
mystery was perpetuated by comments that draw a clear distinction between ordinary users
and the extremely elite. For instance, the secondary classes of Delta and Build Team could not

be reached through the user’s own volition, but rather hinge on the contingency of “don’t ask

51

us; we might ask you.”
Latour’s development of the social can help us frame different classes of users as
interacting within a context where connections are formed, especially in how more elite users
demonstrate their status in various communication channels. A user’s status determined their
posture and standing within the community, but conversely, was also shaped by their choice
of channel, the types of conversations they had, and the amount of time they spent on the
site.
The Interview
To be a member on What.CD, an individual had to either be invited by a current
member in good enough standing to warrant invites or pass a thorough interview, for which
there was a dedicated website that prepared potential members. On that site, the following
categories of knowledge had to be mastered (whatinterviewprep.com):
●

Analog and Digital Music Sources

●

Audio Formats

●

MP3

●

Transcodes

●

Torrenting

●

Spectral Analysis

●

CD Burning and CD Ripping

●

What.CD Rules

Knowing about these topics was necessary to be a contributing member of What.CD, and
provided for a minimum commonality that all members shared when communicating across

forums, within torrent comments, or on IRC channels. Broadly speaking, the categories either

52

belonged to external bodies of knowledge, such as formats and file types, or the internal rules
and logics of the website.
The interview itself took place over IRC at the channel #What.CD-invites, and often
required waiting 1-2 hours (or even longer) in a queue before a member of the interviewing
team could get to the prospective member. Additionally, the prospective member had to have a
certain minimum connection speed to even qualify for an interview. The interview could be
taken a total of three times before ultimate failure was declared, at which point the only chance
at membership was an invite from the appropriate member class.

Gazelle
The platform on which What.CD operated was an open source content management
system called Gazelle. Gazelle began development when the site was first launched in October
of 2007 and was considered to have reached a level of maturity indicated by its documentation,
bug fixes, and coding standardization. It was maintained by What.CD administrators, and is used
by many other private trackers. Its architecture also follows many of the conventions and logics
stemming from What.CD, including torrent and user organization, facilitating forums, and
creating user interfaces. For example, the following rules were taken from Project Gazelle’s
“Coding Standards:”
●

All button labels shall use sentence case.

●

All table headings shall use sentence case.

●

All text-based buttons shall use the brackets CSS class. (github)

Although coding standards are common for many programming languages and platforms like
Gazelle, by creating a strict regimen to which coders must submit, the solution to chaos that the

53

internet seems to breed through its unique democratization, at least for What.CD, was to follow
a strict code of conduct. Because other sites use Gazelle, its tendencies and characteristics are
modeled and replicated elsewhere (see Figure 7).

Figure 7: Passthepopcorn, a private tracker that uses Gazelle. Compare the UI and options to
Figure 3.

In The Exploit, Galloway and Thacker (2007) discuss how technological systems serve to fulfill
social roles, and how those systems provide justification for some models and characteristics to
dominate while others are forgotten or hidden through specific modes of control:
Control in networks must aim for an effectiveness that is immanent to the network, in
the sense that the most perfectly controlled network is one that controls or regulates
itself … The network itself must be articulated as an object of design, implementation,
and regulation. Control in this sense does not pervade the network but operates over it;
control in this sense is topsight and oversight. (p. 36)
By maintaining Gazelle, What.CD indirectly controlled other sites, even though they fall outside
the bounds of What.CD’s native network. As some informal discourse suggests (not to mention
the fact that “celebrities” from other trackers have a special status on What.CD), the
relationships between private trackers can be characterized as achieving solidarity, which is, on
the one hand, egalitarian, but as the authors above indicate, can also suggest relationships of
power.

54

In Jonathan Sterne’s MP3: The Meaning of a Format (2013), the audio file is interpreted
as a container in which cultural values are stored and transported. For instance, he writes that
the “MP3 offers an inviting point of entry into the interconnected histories of sound and
communication in the twentieth century” (p. 2), implying that the file itself is held up by a vast
network of cultural contingencies, some of which are technical, others of which are social.

Similarly, What.CD can act as a place to start examining a network that is comprised of technical
and social components. As this dissertation has already stated, deterministic and neutral
approaches to technology deny the agency with which websites (just like audio files) take on
historical and cultural meaning.
Similarly, Jeremy Wade Morris (2015) uses the development of a specific software
interface, Winamp, to explore broader themes of digital capitalism: “As was evident from
Winamp, innovations are firmly embedded in past ideas and practices, and there is much more
to the music commodity than simply format and packaging” (p. 136). Morris employs a number
of specialized terms to describe what happens when users play music through an early digital
interface, such as “paratext”, “micromaterial” and “transectorial” to describe the connections
between past listening formats and newer, less familiar ones. As much as Winamp sought to be
a rebellious, anti-establishment force in the burgeoning digital music experience that
accompanied widespread personal computer use in the late 1990s, its paradigms were rooted in
forms that its users were already familiar with from home stereo systems, recording technology,
and other extant components of music consumption. In keeping in line with a market-oriented
listening trajectory, Morris posits that Winamp “was simultaneously sketching out the contours
for a sellable digital music commodity and selling the idea of the computer as the future device
for music playback” (p. 45) Simultaneously, though, it opened up the possibility for the
“commodification of music as a digital file” (p. 24)

55

Furthermore, the relocation of music from a fixed medium encased in various paratexts
like a UPC code and album art to a disaggregated file that came with none of those trimmings
placed digital music in a “liminal” space that hinted at commoditization since the new format
was “not wholly detached from the broader forces, materials, and symbols that make popular
music a commodity in the first place” (p. 47). However, it did temporarily detach the product
from its economic symbolism until capitalistic mechanisms could reappropriate digital music
through iTunes, Spotify, and other services.

This balance of the familiar and the new was accomplished through concrete visual cues
such as skeuomorphs, which “are vestiges that represent the material weight of the past on the
present (and the future)” (p. 50). An example is a slider within Winamp’s user interface that
controls the frequency attenuation of an equalizer; although a blank field into which a numeric
value is entered would function equally well, high end stereos have sliders, and were therefore
familiar to Winamp’s user base. Skeuomorphs are also “more than just a design concept,
though; they are templates for thought and experience” (p. 49) that allowed Winamp to take
advantage of a new technosocial phenomenon.
Relatedly, Morris is interested in the role of interfaces in our interaction with
technology: “Interfaces are the sites where users and cultural products meet. They contribute to
both the use and exchange values of digital commodities, even if it might seem that Winamp’s
interface innovations exacerbated the threats presented to music’s status as a commodity” (p.
60) Comparably, all of the different What.CD interfaces described above (Gazelle, the site itself,
IRC chat) are all loci where specific commodities are dealt with, including music. However,
What.CD, when compared to Winamp, has the added social complexity of users interacting with
each other cooperatively and competitively.

56

An additional example of old and new was in the way that Winamp broke albums apart.

Although the idea of an album is considerably weaker today in the context of streaming services,
disaggregating an album into individual tracks, which was accomplished through the user
interface maintaining a searchable library of tracks, allowed playlists to be easily assembled
from music from multiple sources. Morris claims this “opened the music commodity up for new
forms of aggregation” that have now become naturalized in the more advanced stages of the
digital music ecosystem.
Finally, as it relates to What.CD and perhaps to the BitTorrent ecosystem more broadly,
Morris writes that “the larger marketing efforts that fed music’s commodity status didn’t simply
disappear with the advent of digital files, leaving the music commodity as nothing but pure use
value. Recorded music files on computers, even in their most primitive forms, were still
commodities in many senses” (p. 61). One of the tasks at hand, then, is to determine with more
specificity how digital music acted as a commodity on sites like What.CD and other private
trackers.

The Listening Subject
In this dissertation, the listening subject is situated in a cultural context as someone who
gains meaningful experiences through the act of participating in the circulation of music on
What.CD. Rather than the music acting as an “artifact” in a network centered on markets,
though, the specific listening subject discussed here is concerned with alternative politicaleconomic markers that are centered on technologically-mediated listening. The technology
mediates audio at several levels: encoding/decoding, distributing, and keeping track of user
status. Additionally, notions of sociality within this network are maintained through

technological ordering that configures the important modes of communication, which will be

57

discussed below.
The work of Jonathan Sterne (2003, 2013), Veit Erlmann (2010), and other sound studies
scholars has informed how listeners have been constructed throughout the 19th and 20th
centuries by various discourses, especially as they are co-developed through technological
paradigms and broader cultural forces. Although typically concerned with the aesthetic
interpretation of the listener rather than the intervention that technology makes, these
constructions are important for media studies because they predicate much of the
contemporary obsession with technocultural solutionism, an example of which are streaming
music services that will be discussed toward the end of this dissertation. Although a growing
body of writing accounts for the many ways that sound is now validated, attention here will be
paid to the individual and their role in creating, maintaining, and reifying the listening public of
What.CD. Specifically, findings about What.CD pertain to its unique position in the world of
digital music sharing, and the subject formation the site imprinted upon its users as What.CD
Listeners.
Framing the listening subject as unique in a digital context is much the same task as
framing him or her as a specific cultural subject in historical contexts. Of the latter, Erlmann
writes that “while this figure has been and continues to be defined in predominantly ‘neutral,’
nongendered, and nonracial terms, the Western aural self is deeply caught up with the history
and politics of difference.” (2016, p. 269). The challenge in imagining the act of listening as a
contentious one lies in its perceived mundanity: we hear all the time and are surrounded by
sound, and therefore recent scholarly explorations of sound (Bull et al., 2015) make it more
difficult to take as seriously as visual and film studies (Kane, 2015). The listening subject is a site
of scholarly inquiry, as Erlmann eludes to, related to issues of power and difference that have to

do with race (Veal, 2012; Weheliye, 2012), class, gender (Martin, 2012; Rodgers, 2012), and

58

broader political-economic constructions. Additionally, the listening subject relates to
discussions of affect (Aitken, 2012; Kassabian, 2013) and immaterial labor that empower the
sense of hearing with a range of possibilities that have historically only been available to
“active” subjects (Chion, 2012, p. 52).
Analyzing the listening subject can be a useful activity across various zones of
scholarship that interface with historicity, anthropologically and sociologically-oriented
fieldwork, music studies, and for media studies that are concerned with copyright, participatory
culture, and commoditization in digital contexts. Music is the central object of listening
discussed here, but the research does not investigate matters traditionally associated with
music research like artists, genres, music theory, or transcription. Rather, songs and albums, as
units of analysis, operate as artifacts that exist across networks and whose acquisition and
retention are more telling than metrics like artist ranking and download sales. The listening
subject is implicated in these networks and analytic units.

The Networked Listener
Kate Crawford writes that “listening is not a common metaphor for online activity. In
fact, online participation has tended to be conflated with contributing a ‘voice’.” (2012, p. 80).
One of the goals of fleshing out the identity of the Networked Listener, then, is to validate his or
her capacity for listening in a specific networked context. Despite the implication that “listening”
might represent a certain mode of online activity coded for our interpretation, the term
“listening” is invoked here in as literal a fashion as possible: it has to do with materiality and
hearing, not with “listening” to users online through a graphical user interface. From the
beginning of its formation, though, the act of technologically-aided listening has been social.

Sterne (2013) suggests that, even at the dawn of internet popularity, sociality was built into

59

music sharing:

Because it presented an alternative, especially in these early years, file-sharing betrayed
the social character of musical exchange to its users, putting the recording industry’s
privileged position directly into question. The internet was a space of circulation where
the record industry did not assert its dominance, and in that moment, file- sharing
served synecdochally to call into question the industry’s dominance tout court. (p. 204)
As a fissure created by the instability of new technological practices allowed users to pry open
previously hegemonic listening practices, such chasms were quickly filled in by some of those
same forces, such as the recording industry. However, such demolition was not allencompassing, which is why the networked listener, while partially shaped by industries and
markets, is also shaped by self-determining practices that are inherently social. Therefore, three
characteristics are used here to describe the Networked Listener: being historically situated,
decidedly parsimonious in its current iteration, and uniquely ambivalent to market forces.
Historically Situated
A Networked Listener exists in a social sphere characterized by multidirectional modes
of perception. In comparison to eras in which listening was monodirectional, the Networked
Listener is wrapped up in a networked public (boyd, 2010) and is just as likely to produce
content as they are to consume it (Bruns, 2008). They are also prone to historical interpretation
of technological moments, and Tiziano Bonini and Belén Monclús (2014) have identified 4 eras
of listener participation: 1920-1945, 1945-1994, 1994-2004, and 2004 to now. Each consecutive
era gains new footing as more participatory than the previous, as well as being responsible for
reconfiguring technological and human elements of the listening sphere. For instance, following
the popularization of the radio, “workers’ radio clubs” formed in Germany in the 1920s, in which

60

groups of hundreds would gather in public halls and listen to music to develop critical listening

skills that could be augmented through public discussion (Lacey, 2013). Such an occurrence both
demonstrates the importance of the sociality of listening as well as the reconfigurations
technology is capable of. These clubs were designed to allow listeners to “gather together and
exchange experiences, information and knowledge” (p. 150), a set of activities media scholars
most readily attribute to the internet age, but that Bonini demonstrates, permeate throughout
the 20th century. He also discusses Benjamin’s rather early (1978) suggestion that there should
be less distance between the writer and the reader as an example of the precursors to a
contemporary understanding of listening.
The fourth and current era of listening is characterized by the popularization of social
networking sites like Facebook, which are seen to be dominated and shaped by the logics of the
network itself. A listener can therefore be considered as a “node” that operates with certain
political, ontological, and technical capabilities (Galloway and Thacker, 2007). These capabilities
allow listeners to remix (Sinnreich, 2010), interact directly with well-known artists through
Twitter, or, as was the case with the What.CD Listener, create dynamic archives that operated at
a comparatively large scale.
As particular inventions, such as the transistor and what might be called the “audible
internet” (streaming services and their underlying protocols as well as affordances like
bandwidth increases that allow for music to be downloaded) have transplanted listening
practices into new contexts, the Networked Listener has emerged as a participant (or node)
who, while not forced to participate, is at least forced to be aware of the other nodes of the
network. Who else is downloading the same album, how popular that album is, the current size
of the online network, and how valuable a sought-after album is are all indicators of the self-

aware network. Additionally, these are all items that contribute to knowledge that users must

61

view if they participate at all.
Parsimony
Another characteristic of the Networked Listener broadly, and the What.CD Listener
specifically, is parsimony. The term, which is generally characterized by being shrewd with
resources and making conservative investments that are certain to pay off. Parsimony is used
here to invoke a specific techno-driven aesthetic that follows from the core logics of the site, but
it also results from the site’s administration creating exacting regimes of rules (Durham, 2013).
The What.CD Listener, rather than sharing music unconditionally, only did so when there was an
immediate benefit to his or her own existence on the site. As a result, in this context, parsimony
has to do with two domains: the technical practices of the networked listener and their
subsequent impacts as forms of social control.
The first of these domains tightly prescribed how the What.CD Listener should be
hearing music. Generally, the What.CD Listener was compelled to discriminate, nearly to the
degree that the What.CD user was associated with snobbery (Aitken, 2012). What.CD
membership was very difficult to obtain and required that members could “hear music” in a way
that allowed them to be discerning. On one hand, such discernment had to do with the quantity
of music consumed, and with the act of listening on the other. In the field of critical listening,
which overlaps the fields of audio recording and hi-fi enthusiasm, “clean” listening qualifies the
equipment that is used, the type of recording, the environment in which the listening takes
place, developing skills that mobilize appropriate descriptive language, and a host of other
specific abilities (Harley, 2010). More specific to What.CD, though, are expectations concerning
the practices of ripping and uploading audio. What.CD had rules in place for what software

could be used to “rip” CDs and vinyl and what bit rate at which that ripped audio should be

62

sampled. Additionally, only original content could be uploaded (content that had not previously
been submitted), and the metadata for that upload was held to equally stringent standards.
Such isolationism was closely associated with the privilege of being a part of the site in the first
place. What.CD’s refusal to allow casual listeners to participate created an atmosphere of
parsimony, where users were forced to continuously catalog and critique the music library,
rather than simply exploring it for pleasure.
Uploaded content, which users were required to contribute in tandem with any
downloading done on the site, was generated in two ways: either through finding new material
that had not been uploaded yet, a task that was increasingly difficult due to the vast number of
tracks already in the library, or through fulfilling requests that other users had posted. The
“seed-to-leech” ratio that each member had (further explained below) was a mechanism
designed to motivate seeding, which may partially explain the incredibly deep repository of
content. While a broader motivation might be to create the most robust musical library in
human history, the political economy of a high download-to-upload ratio on What.CD allowed
for a user to climb the ranks of user classes, as well as gain social clout on the site (everyone’s
ratio, as well as the amount of data they had up- and downloaded, was publicly viewable). Put
more simply: users kept uploading either because it was a marker of status or because they
wanted to keep downloading, and they downloaded only as an affordance of how much they
uploaded.
The second domain of parsimony is social control, a topic which has a deep sociological
canon of its own (Cohen, 1985; Lemert, 1972; Wiatrowski et al., 1981), and is meant here as a
mechanism for keeping the What.CD Listener in line. Just as rules shaped the What.CD Listener’s
experience with a convention of parsimony, the Listener’s online life was equally dictated by

nearly autocratic asepsis by site administrators that resonates with Foucauldian and post-

63

Foucauldian notions of surveillance (Andrejevic, 2017) characterized by machinic monitoring
and self-policing. For example, the determination of user rank was often shrouded in a nebula
that only site administrators could see through. There was also constant mystery surrounding
decisions regarding the website’s maintenance and coding, as well as how some top-level
decisions were made. While social control was built into the rules of What.CD to encourage
meeting the ideals of the Networked Listener, the goal of the rules was to engender a type of
decision making that adhered to the core logics of the site.
Uniquely Ambivalent
The third characteristic of the Networked Listener is a special ambivalence toward
market forces and to a commitment to What.CD as an organization. Simultaneously, there was
also an ambivalence to the progress that the industry had made through streaming services like
Apple Music and Spotify. Here, this ambivalence is interpreted as an interest in a cultural value
system that does not align with either late capitalism or extreme copyright libertarianism that
represent two poles on a spectrum. Paul Aitken (2012) writes that, because of this ambivalence,
“we should be wary of discourses that overly celebrate piracy as a revolutionary force of
emancipation and of discourses that see piracy as a wholly negative phenomenon for capital” (p.
1-2). Arguably, the ideological positions of piracy-advocacy and industry advocacy are
diametrically opposed, with the networked listener caught in tension between them. Therefore,
the constellation of forces acting on the networked listener involves the complexities of each of
those polar positions as well as other actants.

Conclusion

64

The goal of this chapter has been to familiarize the reader with the main concepts
pertaining to BitTorrent and private trackers like What.CD and discuss the Listening Subject and
Networked Listener as identity constructions that What.CD members shaped as they
participated in on-site activity. The ways in which users were trained to listen connects back to
one of the main themes of this dissertation, that What.CD represented an important moment of
departure from hegemonic forces within music capitalism. If the modes of listening described in
this chapter could be advocated for, rather than fought against by the recording industry, then a
public that represents a greater diversity of interests can result. Specifically, independent artists,
casual listeners, and digital natives can all find digital music culture a welcoming, open
environment rather than one in which fierce competition and costly labor is required. The next
chapter will explore a dataset of What.CD torrents to connect music curation with specific social
practices.

65
Chapter 3 – The Role of Torrent Data in Shaping a Robust Public Sphere

Introduction
A primary component of understanding the activity of What.CD is torrent information,
of which a database was made available to the public approximately a year after the site’s
closure. This chapter will discuss that data at some length, and then attempt to contextualize it
in both the larger digital environment that listeners belong to as well as according to the inner
logics that emerge from patterns and trends within the data itself. Using various aspects of the
data as entry points, this chapter seeks to bolster cultural discussions of What.CD with
information from the torrent side of the torrent/user divide. As the recording industry itself
finds such data useful for tracking customer habits, figuring out where listeners spent their time
and energy on What.CD is an equally valuable exercise for finding important activity taking place
in market adjacent spaces. Furthermore, the various rankings, lists, and charts compiled from
the following data correspond to the underlying values that What.CD users constructed based
on personal aesthetics and technical considerations, as well as values that were collectively,
although non-democratically, agreed upon. What emerges from the data are trends and
patterns that suggest that, while private trackers have been described as unegalitarian and even
totalitarian at times, they are still places where many individuals spent a great deal of time and
energy maintaining some form of digital decorum.

The Data

66

What.CD’s Twitter handle released a trove of information on October 27, 2017 in the
form of an SQL database that included the following tables (the descriptions have been added
by me):

artists_alias – although an artist might go by several names, they all led back to the same
“ArtistID” number, and this table consolidates various names into one ArtistID
artists_group – a basic table with alias IDs and redirects to the main ArtistID
artists_similar – this table assigns a “SimilarID” number to artists that have sonic qualities in
common, so for instance, Bruce Springsteen and The Hold Steady share a SimilarID
artists_similar_scores – allows users to rate the similarity of artists from 0-100.
Collages – information pertaining to collages, including CollageID, name, number of torrents,
number of subscribers, and last updated date
collages_torrents – specific GroupID numbers for works associated with particular CollageIDs
tags – lists tags, their tag type (“genre” and “other”), and number of uses
torrents – a comprehensive list of Torrent IDs, associated GroupIDs and all other possible
metadata such as original format, media, torrent filelists and path, and encoding characteristics
torrents_artists – lists GroupID, ArtistID and AliasID for all torrents
torrents_group – lists GroupID, ArtistID, as well as name and other metadata of all torrents
torrents_tags – allowed for positive and negative votes to be collected on all tags according to
TagID

All this data only pertains to torrents that were uploaded to the What.CD tracker, not to any
user. As they wrote when the data was released,

67
We secured a backup of non-user data before destroying encrypted storage volumes.
We’ve taken exceptional measures to ensure the safety and security of this data in the
time since. We are now releasing that data via this curated package. The package
contains torrent, group, and artist metadata. It also includes collages, select wiki
articles, the internal log checker, the version of Ocelot used in production, and a
collection of art files.
On one of What.CD’s replacements, the following notice was posted following the release of the
data:

Figure 8: Screenshot of What.CD replacement announcement concerning What.CD Data
The moderators of the new site were also skeptical about the accuracy of the data, despite its
source and comprehensive scale.
The data discussed in the remainder of this chapter is important because it can be used
to connect the theory of Chapter 1 to pragmatic examples, such as Pink Floyd’s Dark Side of the
Moon. Ideas like Feenberg’s Critical Theory of Technology, as well as some of its components
like democratization, notions of digital labor, and digital socialization, are all bore out here. In
each example of data being illustrated, the following questions should be kept in mind:
•

How do the individual artists connect to broader genres, or into historical contexts?

•

How is capitalism subverted through these data?

•

How might these data affect listening practices?

•

How are formats important to various aspects of the data?

68

By using these framing questions to orient the exploration of the What.CD dataset around
themes, Chapter 1’s theory can be used as a lens to both actively view the data and develop
appropriate conclusions.
The selected categories for information are indicative of important metrics at What.CD
and suggest the depth of the archive. The database was imported to a local SQL server, and two
variables were analyzed, “artists” and “torrents.” Specifically, the individual torrents were
attached to specific artists, a task that had to be done manually through the SQL server
interface. The resulting table has approximately 22 million rows of information, some of which
are duplicate entries (There are often several spellings for one artist, such as “J.S. Bach” and “JS
Bach”). There are about 3.5 million individual torrents, so the disparity between that figure and
the artist-paired table can be explained by duplicates, but also works on which multiple artists
contribute, such as compilation CDs or record label samplers. Additionally, each format in which
a work was uploaded must be counted as a separate torrent, so often there are 4 or 5 torrents
with the same title (or in the case of some works, many more). After names were connected to
individual torrents, a frequency table was generated that displays which artists had the most
torrents uploaded.
Some conclusions can be drawn from this frequency table. Firstly, the most numerous
torrents belonged to classical artists, with Antonín Dvořák claiming 14,814 individual works.
Among the top 100, after eliminating duplicates, other patterns also emerge.
Artist

Torrents

Antonín Dvořák

14814

Frédéric Chopin

10413

DJ Tiësto

9812

Bach, JS

8621

Moby

7630

Dvorak

7407

Frederic Francois

69

Antonín Leopold
Dvořák

4938

Tiesto

4906

Armin van Buuren

4829

deadmau5

4340

David Bowie

4217

Umphrey’s Mcgee

4132

Chopin

6943

Snoop Dogg

4119

Wolfgang A. Mozart

6832

Kanye West

4099

Piotr Ilyich

Ludwig van
Beethoven

6703

Tchaikovsky

3996

Jay-Z

5898

Johannes Brahms

3966

Händel

5838

Franz Peter Schubert

3956

Oakenfold

5649

On A Friday

3892

Camille Saint-Saëns

5376

MF DOOM

3846

Béla Bartók

5285

Richard M. Hall

3815

Sergueï Rachmaninov

5124

Moby

3616

Felix Mendelssohn

4940

Sergei Prokofiev

3584

Saint Saëns

3471

70

Chopin

3471

George Friedrich

John Legend

3417

Handel

2925

Avicii

3413

Elvis

2922

David Guetta

3383

Vivaldi

2881

The Grateful Dead

2881

London Symphony
Orchestry

3366

Robert Alexander

Kid Cudi

3197

Schumann

2864

Lil’ Wayne

3093

Bob Dylan

2863

Chris Brown

3076

Pharell

2775

Royksopp

2751

Doctor Dre

2748

Astor Piazzolla

2747

The Miles Davis
Quartet

3058

Calvin Harris

3044

Beyonce Knowles

3042

Timbaland

2743

faure

3028

Eminem

2737

Björk

2983

New Jacks

2726

Pitbull

2960

Depeche Mode

2724

C. Debussy

2960

Phish

2720

Kool & the Gang

2949

Rihanna

2718

Chocolate Puma

2930

Meat Loaf

2703

Elton John

2636

71

Queen

2625

Felix Mendalssohn

2469

Étienne de Crécy

2621

Jason Derulo

2445

Leoš Janáček

2584

Mötörhead

2443

Afrojack

2443

Reggie “Redman”
Noble

2577

Gov t Mule

2442

Norman Cook

2577

Franz Liszt

2441

Louie Armstrong

2577

R. Kelly

2438

Fatboy Slim

2562

Herbie Hancock

2422

Serge Rachmaninoff

2544

Armin Van Helden

2421

Marvin Gaye

2508

César Franck

2421

Ummet Ozcan

2496

Massive Attack

2408

Pearl Jam

2483

James Brown

2377

Nicki Minaj

2480

Paul van Dyk

2479

Orchestra

2366

Maurice Ravel

2474

Ultra Naté

2346

John Dahlbäck

2472

Bartholdy

2470

The Backstreet Boys

2340

Coldplay

2340

Berlin Philarmonic

For instance, nearly all artists that are not classical belong to either the genres of hip hop or

72

electronic dance music. These genres typically rely more heavily on remixes than other
dominant genres like pop and rock, thus the total number of works attributed does not
represent individual album releases. Here is a selected list of releases by Kid Cudi, a hip-hop
artist:

Media
1

CD

Format

Year Remaster Title Work Name

MP3 2008

4 Track CDM Kid Cudi Vs. Crookers (2008) Day ‘N’ Nite CDM
UK Promo Kid_Cudi_Vs._Crookers-Day_N_Nite-(Promo_CDM)-2008-

2

CD

MP3 2008

3

Vinyl

MP3 0

CDM DV8
Kid Cudi – Day ‘N’ Nite (2007) (320 mp3)
Netherlands

4

CD

MP3 2009

CDM Kid_Cudi_vs_Crookers-Day_N_Nite_V0

5

CD

MP3 2009

UK CDM Kid Cudi Vs Crookers – Day ‘n’ Night (v0)

6

CD

FLAC 2009

UK CDM Kid Cudi – Day ‘n’ Night – FLAC
13 Track Kid_Cudi_vs._Crookers_-_Day_N_Nite-(DIGI0275)-WEB-

7

WEB

MP3 2009

Digital Single 2009-UME

8

CD

FLAC 2008

7 Track Single Kid Cudi – Day ‘N’ Nite EP [FLAC]

9

CD

MP3 2008

7 Track Single Kid Cudi – Day ‘N’ Nite Maxi Single (v0)

10 CD

MP3 2008

7 Track Single Kid Cudi – 2008 – Day ‘N Nite EP [320]

11 CD

FLAC 2008

Promo Kid Cudi Vs Crookers – 2008 – Day N Nite [FLAC]

12 CD

MP3 2008

Promo Day N Nite [2008] [Data Records Promo] [V0]

73

13 Track
13 WEB

MP3 2009

Digital Single Kid Cudi vs. Crookers (2009) – Day N Nite [Web] [320]
13 Track

14 WEB

FLAC 2009

Digital Single Kid Cudi vs. Crookers (2009) – Day N Nite [Web] [flac]
13 Track

15 WEB

MP3 2009

16 CD

MP3 0

Digital Single Kid Cudi vs. Crookers (2009) – Day N Nite [Web] [V0]
VA-Promo_Only_Mainstream_Radio_August-2009-XXL
VA-Ministry_of_Sound__Sessions_Five-(MOSA081)-2CD-

17 CD

MP3 0

2008

18 CD

MP3 0

Ministry of Sound Sessions Five

19 CD

FLAC 0

Various Artists – Sessions Five

20 CD

MP3 0

Fool’s Gold Spring DJ Sampler

21 CD

MP3 0

3OH3-Want-(Advance)-2008-FNT

22 CD

MP3 0

3OH!3 – Want

23 CD

MP3 0

3OH!3 – Want [2008]

24 CD

FLAC 0

3OH!3-Want-[FLAC]-2008

25 CD

MP3 2009

Deluxe Edition 3OH3-Want-(Deluxe_Edition)-2009-C4
Deluxe Edition

26 CD

MP3 2009

(Clean) 3OH!3 – Want (Deluxe Edition) v0

74

Deluxe Edition
27 CD

MP3 2009

(Clean) 3Oh!3 – 2009 – Want [320]
Deluxe Edition

28 CD

FLAC 2009

(Clean) 3OH!3 – Want (Deluxe Edition) (Clean) (2009) [FLAC]

29 CD

FLAC 2009

Deluxe Edition 3OH!3 – Want (2009) [FLAC] {Deluxe Edition}

30 CD

MP3 2009

Deluxe Edition 3OH!3 – Want (2009) [V0] {Deluxe Edition}

31 CD

MP3 2009

Deluxe Edition 3OH!3 – Want – 2009 (Deluxe Edition)

32 CD

MP3 0

Diplo and Santogold – Top Ranking

33 CD

MP3 0

Diplo & Santogold – Top Ranking [2008] V2

34 CD

MP3 0

Top Ranking (320)

35 CD

FLAC 0

Top Ranking Santogold_FLAC
Santogold x Diplo – Top Ranking A Diplo Dub (2008)

36 WEB

FLAC 0

[FLAC-16]

37 WEB

MP3 0

Santogold x Diplo – Top Ranking A Diplo Dub (2008) [V0]
Santogold x Diplo – Top Ranking A Diplo Dub (2008) [CBR

38 WEB

MP3 0

320]

39 CD

MP3 0

Adam’s Case Files
Various Artists – 2008 – Scion CD Sampler-Fool’s Gold

40 CD

MP3 0

Remixed – 320

41 CD

MP3 0

Various Artists – 2008 – Scion CD Sampler-Fool’s Gold

Remixed – V0

75

Scion CD Sampler Volume 22_ Fool’s Gold Remixed (2008)
42 CD

FLAC 0

– FLAC

43 CD

MP3 0

88-Keys-Death_Of_Adam-2008-C4

44 CD

MP3 0

The Death of Adam [320 CBR MP3]

45 CD

MP3 0

88-Keys – 2008 – The Death of Adam [MP3 V0 (VBR)]

46 CD

FLAC 0

88-Keys – 2008 – The Death of Adam [FLAC]

47 CD

MP3 0

The Alchemist – The Alchemist’s Cookbook EP [2008] [V0]

48 CD

FLAC 2009

The Alchemist [2008] The Alchemist’s Cookbook [FLAC]

49 CD

MP3 2009

The Alchemist [2008] The Alchemist’s Cookbook [V0]

50 CD

MP3 2009

The Alchemist [2008] The Alchemist’s Cookbook [320]

51 CD

MP3 2009

The Alchemist [2008] The Alchemist’s Cookbook [V2]

52 CD

MP3 0

Kanye West – 808s and Heartbreak

76

The type of works listed here include albums that Kid Cudi made himself (row 8), albums he was

“featured” on or contributed to in some other way (rows 43-46, row 52), tracks that his acapella
vocal tracks were used on (rows 1-7), and compilations that he appeared on (rows 40-42). This
type of information is not unique, equally comprehensive data was found on both Discogs and
Wikipedia for Kid Cudi, so the differentiating factors with the What.CD dataset are file type,
media type, and other metadata specific to each torrent. Such information can be viewed in the
title of each torrent. File types include MP3 with further modifications (VBR and CBR; bitrates
like 320; V0, V1 and V2) and FLAC. The year of release is also often listed.
It was hypothesized that the number of works for the top-producing artists was a
function of the genres within which they exist, namely classical, hip hop, and dance. Therefore,
it is important to look at one of the few artists not in those genres. Coldplay, which appears at
the very end of the list with 2340 individual torrents, has the following works at the top of their
list:
Name

Origin

Format

File Info

2

Coldplay-Parachutes-2000

CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

3

Coldplay – Parachutes

CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
4

edition – 2CD – 2001 – V0

CD

MP3 V0 (VBR)

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
5

edition – 2CD – 2001 – FLAC

CD

FLAC

Lossless

6

Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][V0]

Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

7

Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC]

Vinyl

8

Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC

Vinyl

FLAC Lossless
FLAC

24bit Lossless

77

96K]
Coldplay – Parachutes – special
9

edition – 2CD – 2001 [320]

10 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) – FLAC

CD

MP3

CD

320
FLAC Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
11 edition – 2CD – 2001 – V2

CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

12 30162 2 3]

CD

FLAC

Lossless

13 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [V0]

CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [Capitol
Records-Nettwerk America – 0 6700

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
14 EMI UK LP) 24-96 Rip

Vinyl

FLAC 24bit Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
15 EMI UK LP)

Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

16 Parachutes

WEB

MP3

V0 (VBR)

Vinyl

MP3

320

18 Limited Edition) [V0 – Vinyl]

Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

19 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [320]

CD

MP3

320

WEB

FLAC

Lossless

21 Coldplay – Parachutes – 2006 (WEB – WEB

MP3

320

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2008 –
17 Limited Edition) [320 – Vinyl]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2008 –

Coldplay – Parachutes – 2006 (WEB –
20 FLAC)

78

MP3 – 320)
Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
22 EMI UK LP) 24-96 Rip (V2)

Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

WEB

FLAC

24bit Lossless

WEB

FLAC

24bit Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [19223 24]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
24 [24-96]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
25 [FLAC]

WEB

FLAC Lossless

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
26 [320]

WEB

MP3

320

27 [V0]

WEB

MP3

V0 (VBR)

28 Coldplay – Parachutes (2006) [V2]

WEB

MP3

V2 (VBR)

29 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [V2]

WEB

MP3

V2 (VBR)

30 Coldplay-Parachutes-2000

CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

31 Coldplay – Parachutes

CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
32 edition – 2CD – 2001 – V0
Coldplay – Parachutes – special
33 edition – 2CD – 2001 – FLAC

CD

34 Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][V0]

Vinyl

35 Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC]

Vinyl

FLAC Lossless
MP3

V0 (VBR)
FLAC Lossless

79

Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC
36 96K]

Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
37 edition – 2CD – 2001 [320]

CD

MP3 320

38 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) – FLAC

CD

FLAC

Lossless

CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

40 30162 2 3]

CD

FLAC

Lossless

41 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [V0]

CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

Coldplay – Parachutes – special
39 edition – 2CD – 2001 – V2
Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [Capitol
Records-Nettwerk America – 0 6700

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
42 EMI UK LP) 24-96 Rip

Vinyl

FLAC 24bit Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
43 EMI UK LP)

Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

44 Parachutes

WEB

MP3

V0 (VBR)

Vinyl

MP3

320

46 Limited Edition) [V0 – Vinyl]

Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

47 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [320]

CD

MP3

320

WEB

FLAC

Lossless

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2008 –
45 Limited Edition) [320 – Vinyl]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2008 –

Coldplay – Parachutes – 2006 (WEB –
48 FLAC)

80

Coldplay – Parachutes – 2006 (WEB –
49 MP3 – 320)

WEB

MP3

320

Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

WEB

FLAC

24bit Lossless

WEB

FLAC

24bit Lossless

Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [VINYL]
50 EMI UK LP) 24-96 Rip (V2)
Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [19251 24]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
52 [24-96]
Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
53 [FLAC]

WEB

FLAC Lossless

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)
54 [320]

WEB

MP3

320

55 [V0]

WEB

MP3

V0 (VBR)

56 Coldplay – Parachutes (2006) [V2]

WEB

MP3

V2 (VBR)

57 Coldplay – Parachutes (2000) [V2]

WEB

MP3

V2 (VBR)

Coldplay – 2000 – Parachutes (2016)

All these releases are variations of the band’s album Parachutes, which was released in 2000.
That means there are 57 discreet “works” that have enough differences to categorically
separate them. Such information, as with Kid Cudi, cannot be found in other artist discography
databases, since all the differences in the Parachutes releases would be collapsed into one. The
participants at What.CD made sure that seemingly miniscule differences were documented. For
instance, rows 51-53 seem nearly identical. All three are “web releases,” which means they
were downloaded from a digital source like iTunes or Bandcamp. Additionally, they all have

FLAC file formats, which is a higher quality alternative to the MP3. However, row 51 has a

81

sample rate of 192 kHz, while row 52 has one of 96 kHz, half of the first. Row 53 does not have a
specified sample rate. All three are lossless 4, which indicates a certain relationship to the
original audio from which it was taken. Two of them are also noted as being 24-bit files, which is
a higher bit depth than most audio files (16-bit is widely accepted as an industry standard).
Other differences include the source format, which could have been a vinyl record or a
CD. There are examples of two identical releases differing only in their source format, such as
rows 7 and 10. Both contain FLAC file formats and have identical track listings:
Row 7
.flac s14757082s 01 Don’t Panic.flac ÷
.flac s33782757s 02 Shiver.flac ÷
.flac s33654883s 03 Spies.flac ÷
.flac s22417787s 04 Sparks.flac ÷
.flac s30673606s 05 Yellow.flac ÷
.flac s26715253s 06 Trouble.flac ÷
.flac s3351332s 07 Parachutes.flac ÷
.flac s25339322s 08 High Speed.flac ÷
.flac s21282621s 09 We Never Change.flac ÷
.flac s39781673s 10 Everything’s Not Lost.flac ÷
.cue s1279s Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC].cue ÷
.m3u s570s Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC].m3u ÷
.md5 s641s Coldplay – Parachutes [VINYL][FLAC].md5 ÷

4

Lossless audio files have an identical data structure to the audio they were compressed from,
so while the file size may be smaller, no analytically-observed differences can be found.

.db s18944s art/Thumbs.db ÷
.png s1110432s art/back.png ÷
.png s681485s art/cover.png ÷
.png s630686s art/inlay back.png ÷
.png s920578s art/inlay front.png ÷
.png s398195s art/label side A.png ÷
.png s415878s art/label side B.png ÷
.jpg s37690s folder.jpg ÷
.txt s1933s info.txt ÷
.txt s450s restoration.txt ÷

Row 10
.flac s15988653s 01 – Coldplay – Don’t Panic.flac ÷
.flac s36691369s 02 – Coldplay – Shiver.flac ÷
.flac s36793643s 03 – Coldplay – Spies.flac ÷
.flac s24841657s 04 – Coldplay – Sparks.flac ÷
.flac s34341001s 05 – Coldplay – Yellow.flac ÷
.flac s29216705s 06 – Coldplay – Trouble.flac ÷
.flac s3684705s 07 – Coldplay – Parachutes.flac ÷
.flac s27605615s 08 – Coldplay – High Speed.flac ÷
.flac s23798145s 09 – Coldplay – We Never Change.flac ÷
.flac s44248817s 10 – Coldplay – Everything’s Not Lost.flac ÷
.log s4776s Coldplay – Parachutes.log ÷
.cue s1477s Parachutes.cue ÷

82

The only differences between the two are the images contained in the vinyl version, since

83

properly capturing the artwork was an important aspect of documenting the release. The music
contained on both releases sounds nearly identical to an untrained ear, and arguably, even to
discerning ones. Other differences in the 57 versions of Parachutes include special editions that
were released after the initial release, 2-CD versions, those that were released in the UK, those
that were released when iTunes began selling digital music, and releases that took place under
other record labels.
Additionally, there is a “restoration.txt” in the vinyl torrent in row seven which includes
information about how the vinyl album was converted from an analog format to the digital FLAC
files:

Figure 9: Screenshot of restoration.txt
With records that are older, ensuring as high a quality conversion as possible largely depends on
the equipment and software implemented. Thus, there are at least three separate pieces of
software used to “clean up” the audio after it was recorded into a computer.

In another vinyl torrent, a file called “Rip Info.txt” detailed the exact signal path the
audio followed from beginning to end:

84

Figure 10: Screenshot of “Rip Info.txt”
Here, the turntable, the cartridge used therein, the preamp for the turntable, the digital-toanalog audio converter, and the cables used to connect the equipment are all listed. Three
pieces of software are also listed and the sequence in which they were used, all information that
is important for verifying that the best quality conversion was attempted.
Both sets of metadata demonstrate that, as can be corroborated in the rules of What.CD
discussed elsewhere in this dissertation, evidence of the necessary labor to produce the content
is nearly as important as the content itself. It thus suggests that listening in a specific mode was
central to participating on What.CD through the conversion of vinyl, but that there were
simultaneously many ways to listen. More on this topic is discussed in the chapter on What.CD
users and their listening tendencies.
Another important component of the data that What.CD released is collages. As the
introductory information about private trackers explains, collages were groups of torrents that
had some organizational commonality, such as a genre, a record label, an era, or a ranking
system such as Rolling Stone’s “Top 100 rock albums.” There are 27,329 collages, the largest 10
were:

85
Number Name

Num. Torrents

1 Self Titled

Subscribers

11931

0

2 Guitars on Album Covers

8176

5

3 Delivery: A What.CD Request Contest

6292

10

4 Self-Released/Unreleased: Releases Without a Label

5686

5

5 AllMusic Pop/Rock Album Picks

3989

18

6 Pitchfork 8.0+ Reviews

3574

477

7 Video Game Soundtracks

3189

74

8 Albums From Greece

3178

17

9 Naxos

2879

20

2712

14

10 Personal collage 12390

The most popular collages, that is, the ten with the most subscribers were:

Subscrib
#

List Name
1 Pitchfork: Best New Music

Tags
indie alternative rock electronic experimental

ers
1016

electronic experimental techno dubstep house
deep.house tech.house minimal ambient drum.and.bass
2 Resident Advisor Recommends disco dance hip.hop idm uk.garage uk.funky grime bass

585

L.I.E.S. (Long Island Electrical

electronic house deep.house acid.house techno

86

3 Systems)

experimental

560

4 Hyperdub Records

dubstep hyperdub electronic uk.garage grime

553

5 Warp Records

electronic idm warp.records experimental ambient

510

6 Pitchfork 8.0+ Reviews
7 Ninja Tune

477
ninja.tune electronic trip.hop hip.hop downtempo

8 1080p

423
407

experimental abstract drone ambient noise electronic
9 PAN
10 Lobster Theremin

techno

399

house deep.house techno

386

As can be seen here, dance genres have the most heavily subscribed collages, namely rows 2, 3,
4, 5, 8, and 10, indicating some features of collages that lend themselves to such music. A
current private tracker very similar to What.CD states that a collage is a “collection of releases
curated by an individual or group of users. A collage has a name, category, descriptions, tags,
and the releases included in them. Any user can and may contribute to any collage except for
personal collages. Interactions with collages are restricted depending on user class.” There are
several categories for collages:

1. Personal
2. Theme
3. Genre Introduction
4. Label
5. Staff Picks

87

6. Charts
7. Artists

The collages with the most torrents belonged to “theme” (rows 1, 2, 3, 7, and 8), “label” (rows 4
and 9), “charts” (rows 5 and 6), and “personal” (row 10). The collages with the most subscribers
belonged to “label” (rows 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10) and “chart” (rows 1 and 6).
The total number of entries in all combined collages was around 35 million, with many
artists and albums listed in hundreds of separate collages. To obtain this list, several different
components of the original What.CD dataset were combined to match artist names with their
IDs within the collages (collages, collages_torrents, artists_alias and torrents_artists). While the
list is not a direct representation of the number of works on which the artist participated (the
extremely high count numbers below are likely a measurement of the various formats and
releases associated with one work), it does give some impression of the overall importance and
impact that artist has. The artists with the most entries in collages were:

Number Artist

References

1 Pink Floyd

179,154

2 Barry St. John

144,518

3 Radiohead

115,146

4 David Bowie

112,524

5 Kanye West

100,453

6 Jay-Z

89,236

7 MF DOOM

82,542

8 The Beatles

80,813

9 Nirvana

79,771

10 Doctor Dre

77,032

11 Kid Cudi

73,167

12 Doris Troy

72,475

13 Lesley Duncan

72,244

14 Clare Torry

72,226

15 George Martin

70,751

16 Miles Davis

70,634

88

The range of artists that such a metric displays is notably different from the other lists, as three
artists are primarily known for their careers as background vocalists (rows 2, 12, and 13), and
one is a producer (row 15).

Dark Side of the Moon
Walking through Dark Side of the Moon grants the data surveyor insight into how
various works and artists are connected within the What.CD dataset. As an entry point, we can
take the unlikely subject of Barry St. John, who performed backing vocals on some of the

tracks 5. In the What.CD Dataset, her ArtistID is 341051, which, when searched for in the

89

torrents_artists table, yields 5 works: Pink Floyd’s The Dark Side of the Moon (GroupID 1179),
The Girls’ Scene (a 1999 compilation, GroupID 372247), Nazareth’s Rampant (GroupID 440263),
Goldmine Soul Supply – British Soul Volume 2 (GroupID 726680), and The Baker Gurvitz Army’s
1974 self-titled album (GroupID 72320523). St. John, while a singer songwriter in Britain in the
60s, 70s, and 80s, is most remembered for her work on Dark Side of the Moon. However, the
simple act of looking up her ArtistID allows an interested listener to pursue both the musicindustry and auditory impact St. John has left.
Sticking with Dark Side of the Moon (DsotM), though, allows us to track the larger
narrative of a rock album that has had a huge cultural impact in the west. By searching its
GroupID, 1179, in a custom-aggregated table, nearly 790,000 rows of data are generated. This
new table is sorted according to Collages that the album belonged to. Interestingly, 1,947 of the
same works show up for hundreds of collages. Their core works are listed in this table:

Numb
er

5

Remast
Torrent_ID Media Format Encoding

erYear RemasterTitle

1

85487 CD

MP3

320

2

153341 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid

3

175757 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1981 200g Audiophile Half-Speed Master

4

235686 CD

MP3

5

261611 CD

FLAC

6

271617 CD

MP3

320
Lossless

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid

1994 Remastered
1994 Remastered

320

1988 24 Karat Gold CD MFSL Mastered

“Time”, “Us And Them”, “Brain Damage”, and “Eclipse” (A4, B2, B4, and B5) according to
Discogs

90

7

382376 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 US

8

429799 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1994 Remastered

9

461848 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 Japan

10

462579 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 US

11

597916 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1988 24 Karat Gold CD MFSL Mastered

12

842169 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2003 Hungary

13

930677 CD

MP3

14

963269 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1994 Remastered

15

971741 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid

16

1042082 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1988 24 Karat Gold CD MFSL Mastered

17

1140204 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2003 Hungary

18

1158858 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1979 MFSL Half-Speed Master

19

1180683 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2003 30th Anniversary Edition 180g Vinyl

20

1220130 DAT

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 Alan Parsons Quadraphonic Mix

21

1264038 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1993 20th Anniversary Edition

22

1266037 CD

MP3

23

1266041 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1993 20th Anniversary Edition

24

1266043 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1993 20th Anniversary Edition

25

1277945 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid

26

1305811 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1984 United Kingdom / De-Emphasized

27

1310034 Vinyl

MP3

28

1369229 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2003 30th Anniversary Edition 180g Vinyl

29

1369246 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

2003 30th Anniversary Edition 180g Vinyl

320

320

320

1994 Remastered

1993 20th Anniversary Edition

1973 Japan

320

91

30

1369249 Vinyl

MP3

31

1495247 CD

FLAC

32

1495296 CD

MP3

33

1495331 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1983 Japan / De-Emphasized

34

1501758 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1973 Japan

35

1578719 Vinyl

MP3

36

1578725 Vinyl

MP3

37

1608900 Vinyl

MP3

Lossless

2003 30th Anniversary Edition 180g Vinyl
1983 Japan / De-Emphasized

320

320
V0 (VBR)

1983 Japan / De-Emphasized

1981 200g Audiophile Half-Speed Master
1981 200g Audiophile Half-Speed Master

320

1973 US
Remastered Limited Edition + 3

38

1639230 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2000 Bonus Tracks

39

1713706 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973 Japan

40

1754420 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1979 MFSL Half-Speed Master

41

28945982 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2001 Japan Mini-LP Remaster

42

28962030 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1994 Remastered

43

28984807 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2003 Hungary

44

28988364 CD

MP3

45

29067678 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1987 Canada / 20th Anniversary Edition

46

29067684 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1987 Canada / 20th Anniversary Edition

320

2001 Japan Mini-LP Remaster

Remastered Limited Edition + 3
47

29191188 CD

MP3

320

2000 Bonus Tracks
Remastered Limited Edition + 3

48

29191191 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2000 Bonus Tracks

49

29332302 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2001 Japan Mini-LP Remaster

92

50

29386648 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973 US

51

29540921 SACD

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid Stereo

52

29581598 SACD

FLAC

Lossless

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid Stereo

53

29581603 SACD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid Stereo

54

29612451 WEB

AAC

55

29614200 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Remastered

56

29615072 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition

57

29615073 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Experience Edition

58

29615150 CD

MP3

60

29615151 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Experience Edition

61

29616561 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition

62

29616573 CD

MP3

63

29616714 DVD

FLAC

64

29616752 DVD

AC3

640

2011 Immersion Edition

65

29617487 DVD

MP3

320

2011 Immersion Edition

66

29617492 DVD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition

67

29617619 DVD

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition

68

29621836 Blu-ray FLAC

24bit Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition / Stereo

69

29624260 Blu-ray FLAC

24bit Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition / 4.0 Quad Mix

70

29624294 Blu-ray FLAC

24bit Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition / 5.1 Surround Mix

71

29648770 WEB

MP3

72

29675146 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Experience Edition Japan

73

29687512 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Experience Edition Japan

256

320

320
24bit Lossless

2011 Experience Edition

2011 Experience Edition

2011 Immersion Edition
2011 Immersion Edition

320

2011 Remastered

74

29688328 Blu-ray MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition / Stereo

75

29789246 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Remastered

76

29789249 CD

MP3

77

29789252 CD

MP3

78
79

320

93

2011 Remastered

V2 (VBR)

2011 Remastered

29877010 Blu-ray FLAC

Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition / Stereo

29936570 Vinyl

Lossless

1973 West Germany / Limited Edition

FLAC

180 gram Heavyweight Vinyl,
80

29986254 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2011 Remastered

81

30016793 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1981 200g Audiophile Half-Speed Master
180 gram Heavyweight Vinyl,

82

30036207 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

2011 Remastered
180 gram Heavyweight Vinyl,

83

30036210 Vinyl

MP3

320

2011 Remastered
180 gram Heavyweight Vinyl,

84

30036214 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2011 Remastered

85

30061597 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1992 Russia

86

30102870 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 Japan

87

30133168 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2003 UK Remaster 30th Anniversary

88

30381029 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition

89

30398958 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1981 200g Audiophile Half-Speed Master

90

30617133 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1997 UK Reissue

91

30617135 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1997 UK Reissue

92

30620612 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1984 United Kingdom / Pre-Emphasized

93

30621022 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 Netherlands

94

30662403 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1994 Remastered

95

30867290 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 A3 // B3 Matrix

96

30867355 Vinyl

MP3

97

30867356 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 A3 // B3 Matrix

98

30867357 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1973 A3 // B3 Matrix

99

30867688 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973 A3 // B3 Matrix

100

30871861 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1986 Australia & Asia

101

30876465 WEB

AAC

102

30915337 CD

FLAC

103

30964614 CD

MP3

104

30964615 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1985 Digital Mastering

105

30964616 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1985 Digital Mastering

320

256
Lossless

94

1973 A3 // B3 Matrix

2011 Remastered / Mastered for iTunes
1985 Digital Mastering

320

1985 Digital Mastering

Remastered SACD Hybrid
106

31035520 SACD

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2003 Multichannel

107

31046460 CD

MP3

320

1987 Canada / 20th Anniversary Edition

108

31046463 CD

MP3

320

2003 Hungary

109

31046469 SACD

MP3

320

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid Stereo

110

31046473 Blu-ray MP3

320

2011 Immersion Edition / Stereo

111

31073033 SACD

MP3

112

31078479 Vinyl

MP3

113

31078480 Vinyl

MP3

114

31078716 DAT

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2003 Remastered SACD Hybrid Stereo
320

V2 (VBR)

1979 MFSL Half-Speed Master
1979 MFSL Half-Speed Master

320

1973 Alan Parsons Quadraphonic Mix

95

115

31078717 DAT

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 Alan Parsons Quadraphonic Mix

116

31078718 DAT

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1973 Alan Parsons Quadraphonic Mix

117

31269182 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1987 Canada / 20th Anniversary Edition

118

31291170 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1986 United States

119

31291171 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1986 United States

120

31291172 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1986 United States

121

31291173 CD

MP3

320

1986 United States
“Pro-Use Series”/Limited Edition

122

31339962 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1978 Japan

123

31542603 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1983 Japan / Pre-Emphasized
Remastered SACD Hybrid

124

31543715 SACD

FLAC

Lossless

2003 Multichannel

125

31556188 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1988 24 Karat Gold CD MFSL Mastered

126

31686053 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973

127

31686937 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973

128

31686995 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973

129

31775803 Vinyl

MP3

130

31775804 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973

131

31775823 CD

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1986 Australia & Asia

132

31775841 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1997 UK Reissue

133

31837974 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 Netherlands

134

31854569 Vinyl

MP3

135

31885429 Vinyl

FLAC

320

320
24bit Lossless

1973

1973 West Germany / Limited Edition
1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

96

“Pro-Use Series”/Limited Edition
136

31914763 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1978 Japan
“Pro-Use Series”/Limited Edition

137

31914764 Vinyl

MP3

320

1978 Japan
“Pro-Use Series”/Limited Edition

138

31914765 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1978 Japan
“Pro-Use Series”/Limited Edition

139

31914766 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1978 Japan

140

31915157 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

141

31915158 Vinyl

MP3

142

31915159 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

143

31915160 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

144

31923111 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1993 24 Karat Gold UltraDisc II

145

32012247 CD

FLAC

Lossless

2015 Remastered

146

32058733 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1973

147

32146147 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

2003 UK Remaster 30th Anniversary

148

32146148 Vinyl

MP3

149

32146149 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

2003 UK Remaster 30th Anniversary

150

32146150 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2003 UK Remaster 30th Anniversary

151

32166044 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2001 Japan Mini-LP Remaster

152

32245725 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 Original UK A2 // B3 Pressing

153

32276988 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1973 Original UK A2 // B3 Pressing

154

32277769 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1992 Russia

320

320

1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

2003 UK Remaster 30th Anniversary

97

155

32284838 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 West Germany / Limited Edition

156

32284841 Vinyl

MP3

157

32284842 Vinyl

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1992 Russia

158

32284872 DVD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition

159

32386394 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1983 Japan / De-Emphasized

160

32419536 Vinyl

MP3

V0 (VBR)

1973 Original UK A2 // B3 Pressing

161

32419544 Vinyl

MP3

162

32439183 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

1979 MFSL Half-Speed Master

163

32525855 Blu-ray FLAC

Lossless

2011 Immersion Edition / 5.1 Surround Mix

164

32536750 CD

FLAC

Lossless

1984 Europe

165

32545115 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1974 West Germany / Quadraphonic

166

32750295 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

1994 Remastered

167

32903801 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1974 Japan

168

32975174 Blu-ray MP3

V2 (VBR)

2011 Immersion Edition / Stereo

169

33075588 CD

MP3

V2 (VBR)

2011 Experience Edition

170

33111454 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1974 Japan

171

33151846 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

1973 Original UK Quad Pressing

172

33184569 CD

MP3

173

33221291 DAT

FLAC

Lossless

1973 Alan Parsons Quadraphonic Mix

174

33285864 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2016 Remastered

175

33285874 Vinyl

FLAC

Lossless

2016 Remastered

176

33285881 Vinyl

MP3

177

33285882 Vinyl

MP3

320

320

320

320
V0 (VBR)

1992 Russia

1973 Original UK A2 // B3 Pressing

2011 Experience Edition Japan

2016 Remastered
2016 Remastered

178

33285924 Vinyl

FLAC

24bit Lossless

2016 Remastered

98

Thus, it becomes clearer how there might be so many iterations of one album. Listed in this
table are the torrent’s ID number, original format, converted format, year of remaster, and
remaster title. The media with which an uploader would have started is the first consideration,
usually a vinyl record or CD. However, the occasional DAT (Digital Audio Tape) or Blu-ray disc
also found their way to What.CD. Secondly, the format to which the uploader would convert
their original media was either determined by the uploaders preference or by the needs of the
community — if there was already a FLAC conversion, then various MP3 versions would be
needed, for example. Thirdly, proper documentation in the actual uploading process would
ensure that the uploader’s contribution filled a gap in the DsotM corpus. While the various file
formats, bit depths, and sampling rates were discussed earlier, the impact that such
proliferation has on the size of the What.CD library can be seen here directly.
Some particularly interesting entries here are the quadraphonic mixes made by Alan
Parsons, an engineer who worked on the original recording of DsotM (rows 20 and 173).
Quadraphonic sound, a precursor to modern surround sound, had 4 discrete channels rather
than the conventional 2 channels in common stereo sound. Equally rare were SACD (Super
Audio CD) releases, of which seven rows of data are occupied in the table above. Furthermore,
there are releases that have geographic specificity, such as Japan (row 10), Hungary (row 12),
Canada (row 45), Russia (row 85), the Netherlands (row 93), and Australia and Asia (row 131). As
digitization has transgressed many of the boundaries that the music industry traditionally relied
on for profitability including nation states, What.CD allowed for pan-geographic collections that
still cannot be offered by any legitimated musical service.

Additionally, by looking solely at the vinyl releases, we see there are 78 rows of data

99

originating with this medium. 37 were converted to FLAC and 41 were converted to MP3. Of
those 41, 15 were converted to 320 Kbps, 16 were converted to V0 variable bit rate, and 10
were converted to V2 variable bit rate. They range in release date from 1973 to 2016, and the
records are further differentiated according to other characteristics such as 180 and 200-gram
weight (a higher quality record), some thirtieth anniversary editions, and various label and
remastering associations. In interviews with former What.CD users, many specified their use of
specific releases because of their perceived quality, even their ability to hear the differences
between a FLAC version of a CD release compared to a vinyl release.
The GroupID for DsotM, 1179, has the following artist entries associated with it:

Number

GroupID

Name

1

1179 Pink Floyd

2

1179 Pink Floyd

3

1179 Doris Troy

4

1179 Doris Payne

5

1179 Lesley Duncan

6

1179 Clare Torry

7

1179 Barry St. john

8

1179 Barry St. John

9

1179 The Screaming Abdabs

10

1179 Architectural Abdabs

11

1179 Doris Payne (Doris Troy)

100

Row 2 is an obvious misspelling for the same artist. Rows 3-8 and 11 are backing vocalists (Doris
Troy and Doris Payne were the same person and rows 7 and 8 are also redundant), and rows 9
and 10 are pseudonyms from the band’s early days. The presence of the backing vocalists’
association with Pink Floyd explains their high ranking in the table above that mentions the most
represented artists on What.CD and exposes the importance of their contribution in a manner
that would otherwise remain hidden to most listeners. In other words, Barry St. John’s general
obscurity would have prevented many listeners from knowing about her if she had not been
associated with DsotM’s GroupID. The backing vocal work on the albums mentioned above, as
well as her own solo career, relegate her to listeners interested in specific subgenres of popular
music.
The collages that DsotM appears in tell another component of the narrative of one work
within the data of What.CD. It shows up in 409 different collages, 301 of which are “personal
collages” that any member could create. Other collages of interest have titles like “100 Albums
Every Science Fiction and Fantasy Fan Should Listen To,” “15 Greatest Stoner Albums of All Time
(Q Magazine),” “Albums that contain tracks with Alarm Clocks,” “Beastie Boys: Paul’s Boutique
Samples,” and “Surround Sound (multichannel) Albums.” The various reasons a collage might be
created can be seen in these names, such as listener-generated lists that focus on favorite works
or publication-generated lists that rate albums with specific cultural parameters. In the case of
the “Paul’s Boutique” collage, the famous Beastie Boys album of the same name is
deconstructed according to the various works it sampled during the making of the album. At

101

some point, DsotM was sampled, and thus was included in the collage. Other notable works of
the 86 works included in this collage were:

Alice Cooper – Lace and Whiskey (1977)
The Beatles – Help! (1965)
John Williams – Jaws (1975)
James Brown – Soul Pride – The Instrumentals 1960-69
Diana Ross & The Supremes – 2000 Let The Sunshine In (1969), Cream Of The Crop
(1969)
Public Enemy – Yo! Bum Rush The Show (1987)

So, in some ways, looking at various collages that DsotM appeared in is an archeological process
that unearths connections between artists. Simultaneously, it invited listeners to interact with
collage creators, who were themselves listening in various modes that compelled them to make
a collage in the first place.
A further criterion on which collages were based was format groups, such as
multichannel audio. Multichannel versions of DsotM, which is any format greater than stereo
sound reproduction, could have been included in this collage, but also in collages that were
solely collections of multichannel audio, such as the following:

ID

Name
Surround Sound

647 (multichannel) Albums

# Tor.

Tags

S

rock alternative progressive.rock audiophile pop
1554 multichannel 5.1audio

74

102

289

rock alternative progressive.rock pop audiophile

1 Lossless Multichannel Music
Surround Sound
647 (multichannel) Albums

426 multichannel 5.1audio

30

rock alternative progressive.rock audiophile pop
1554 multichannel 5.1audio

74

8 surround multichannel

3

206 Grammy Award for Best
42 Surround Sound Album
156 24-Bit/96kHz Quadraphonic
9 Mixes
317

49 70s rock progressive.rock experimental psychedelic

14

surround surround.sound quadraphonic quad

53 Possible Hidden Quadraphonic

27 multichannel

By collecting audio according to the number of playback channels, a listener would not only
indicate the genres of music that they were interested in, but also the environment in which
they listened to music, as surround sound requires a more elaborate array of loudspeakers than
stereo, which could be as small as a set of earbuds. Both the quadraphonic and 5.1 mixes of
DsotM, while appearing in the collages above, demonstrate value beyond their stylistic or
cultural significance to listeners who are willing to listen to anything in surround, as the first row
in the table above suggests.

What It Means
Searching these data exposes the multiple layers at which an artistic work is codified:
collages, original media formats, destination formats, all artists associated with a work
(composers, participating musicians, producers, and mix engineers), as well as layers of
information relating to uploader conversion data. While being aware of such data at all times

2

103

was certainly not a requirement of browsing and listening on What.CD, it could be used to allow

a user to find more precisely what they were looking for, as well as know more comprehensively
what to seek out.
In that way, What.CD trained listeners to listen in a certain manner. Contrary to the
logical conclusion that site administrators and staff were shaping these listening habits though,
they were rather shaped holistically by the system of What.CD through its various components.
Collages
The intent of collages was to allow for groupings that did not exist through tagging,
specific artist pages, and were to be “sensible” and “reasonably broad” (What.CD). To create
collages, though, users had to be at least a Power User, which prevented many low-level
members from creating their own. Anyone, however, could contribute to a collage once it had
been created by editing descriptions and torrent information. Also, users could comment on any
collage, which encouraged discourse about its contents and structure.
Some collages were also used, though, as an attempt to stimulate a more specific type
of listening, such as those that were called “Staff Picks” and “Group Picks.” The former would be
collected during special occasions, such as during holidays and site anniversaries, while the
latter would be chosen by a “well-defined group of people” (What.CD) like the interview team.
Often, these collages would be turned into “free-leech” selections for a certain amount of time,
meaning that their downloading would not affect a user’s ratio. The result is some music
operating outside the general rules of consumption and being granted a special, if temporary
dispensation.
Collages are currently utilized in a few ways on legal platforms like Spotify and Pandora.
However, the degree to which users can create and publish them is limited. More importantly,

104

there is no way to create a consensus about which collages are better than others. In that way,
they are all “staff picks” with no real representation from the services’ listeners.
Formats

Audiophilic tendencies of a subset of What.CD listeners caused digital formats to be an
important factor when considering downloading a torrent. Lossless files are particularly
important if a listener is interested in reconstructing a CD, SACD, or Blu-ray, bit for bit, as the
physical media would have looked originally. During interviews with former members, it became
apparent that the listening and archiving habits of individuals who work in the music industry, as
well as those who are primarily interested in audio quality (as opposed to file size or torrent
quantity), made a priority out of downloading as many FLACs as possible. Especially in relation
to torrents whose original media was a vinyl record, audiophiles on What.CD almost universally
sought out torrents for that format, even if it was for a genre they were not particularly invested
in.
Formats were also important, though, for ensuring all possibilities for potential
downloaders. If an album was only represented by 320 Kbps MP3 files without any V0 or V2 CBR
files, let alone FLAC, then it was considerably less valuable than a GroupID such as that for
DsotM, which was represented by over 100 torrents. As the administration and staff of What.CD
were interested in complete archival sterility to the point of mandating careful attention in
various rule sets, the larger disk space required for these more accurate files was generally
written off as a negligible annoyance, as it continues to be downplayed in What.CD’s
descendants.

105

Original Media

As discussed earlier, the possible formats for original media were not a main concern for
the What.CD community. Rather, they set as a barrier to entry the proper conversion and
documentation. As a result, a large variety of media were found to have been converted on
What.CD, including SACD, DVD, Blu-ray, Cassette Tape, CD, Vinyl, Soundboard (a live feed of a
concert recorded directly from the mixing console, What.CD had an infamous collection of Phish
bootlegs), DAT, and Web Rips. A lack of prejudice surrounding media meant that many musical
communities that consider certain physical containers like these important to their cultural
identity could retain those markers and still participate fully on What.CD.
For example, some record labels associated with a “lo-fi” sound only distribute their
recordings on cassette tape. Instances of this within the What.CD dataset include members of
the collage “Paxico Records,” which is a small, cassette-only record label:

Artist

Album

GroupID

Josh Hey

Ndeed

72444773

rxn

footnotes

72553689

GoYama x Lidly The Ego Scale

72705937

Ahwlee

1991

72885264

Weirddough

Love Spells

73039396

Howie Wonder heart beats

73062790

PHILADELPHIA
Paxico Records SUMMER OF

73121059

106

‘64

BudaMunk &
Fitz Ambro$e

BUDABROSE

73125506

CLOUD

SILHOUETTES

73125567

Various
The Nativist

Options

73319405

Similarly, DAT recordings are generally associated with multichannel recordings (Pink Floyd –
The Dark Side Of The Moon °Quad°), live concert bootlegs (Handsome Furs – Live At Neumo’s,
Seattle 04.19.08), unreleased studio sessions (Jerry Garcia – Workingman’s Dead Studio Sessions
– 1969), and other novel recordings (The Smashing Pumpkins – The End Is The Beginning Is The
End (Remixes)). While many torrents consisted of mainstream formats, the lack of boundaries
on origin formats allowed for a more varied body of music.
Artist Association
A What.CD Listener was able to quickly connect artists to a diverse body of work that,
while capable of having missing pieces that users had not found or were not aware of, was
generally comprehensive and potentially authoritative. Because uploaders were fans, their
investment was not simply in an archive for its own sake, but rather the proof of their interest
and devotion to a scene, artist, genre, or record label. As such, many times the collection of
music and connected discourse on IRC, in What.CD forums, and in torrent comments
represented a unique mode of fandom.

The ability of What.CD to create a web that centered on an artist was also a defining

107

feature of finding music on the site, represented in the dataset through ArtistIDs. As was
demonstrated in the cases of Pink Floyd, Kid Cudi, and Coldplay, torrent searches illuminate the
connections between artists, their releases, and the torrents that represent those releases.
Furthermore, artists can be connected with works with which they are tangentially related, such
as through being a “featured” artist on a track or performing backing vocals, as in the case of
Barry St. John and DsotM.
Currently on legal platforms, it is difficult to get full information about all the artists
involved in a production that used to commonly be found in liner notes. They could take a cue
from What.CD, as this information is likely readily available through extant databases.
Tags
Although not discussed at length in this chapter, tags were useful adhesive connecting
many parts of What.CD, allowed for users to find works they would find interesting, and were
archived in the dataset. When uploading a new torrent, users were instructed to include
descriptive tags that would allow other users to easily find relevant music. A rule set governed
the use of tags, and specified a format:

●
●
●

All tags should be comma-separated on the upload form.
You should use a period (“.”) to separate any words inside a tag. For example,
“hip.hop” or “post.rock”.
Abbreviations should be avoided. It’s “alternative.rock” or “progressive.rock”,
not “alt.rock” or “prog” (What.CD).

As mentioned earlier, tags were also able to be voted on, since some were more relevant or
useful than others. The top 25 most used tags were:

108
Tag ID

Tag

Tag Type

Uses

50 rock

genre

523626

23 electronic

genre

511323

42 pop

genre

292616

35 indie

genre

248758

genre

243459

5 alternative

genre

220196

25 experimental

genre

206355

33 house

genre

199404

38 jazz

genre

185211

39 metal

genre

182137

26 folk

genre

165149

53 techno

genre

147910

genre

146090

genre

129290

14 classical

genre

124678

47 punk

genre

117108

18 dance

genre

107763

4 1990s

genre

97046

155 hip.hop

6 ambient
1614626 2010s

54 trance

genre

85528

45 psychedelic

genre

84243

57 world.music

genre

72599

27 funk

genre

64353

12 blues

genre

63861

3 1980s

genre

62866

genre

59778

52 soul

109

Streaming services like Spotify pregroup music according to genre. However, the only
mechanism for genre distinction were tags, thereby leaving it to What.CD members to
determine how music should be organized. Tags were an attempt, like many of the other
prescribed practices of What.CD like audio conversion and ratio maintenance, to regulate
behavior.
The specific behaviors, though, were not suggested in a totalitarian environment that
other private tracker research suggests existed. In the instance of tags, the rules did not prevent
users from exercising their own judgment or creativity. By being aware of the conventions of
tagging, users could more comprehensively find what they were looking for. The tags would
have been fairly useless if there was no rule conformity, just as lines on a road do not prevent a
person from driving to a desired destination.

Metadata

110

While metadata describes all the specific variables mentioned thus far, some aspects of
the What.CD dataset that have not been discussed in this chapter also fall into the general
category of metadata, including:

Metadata
Remastered
RemasterYear
RemasterTitle
RemasterCatalogueNumber
RemasterRecordLabel
Scene
info_hash
Size
Time

The “info_hash” above is encrypted information about the torrent. For example, using an editor,
the following information was extracted from one of the Coldplay torrents discussed earlier:

111

Figure 11: Torrent file hash info
The highlighted section contains the information included in the hash file, which is the number
of files, torrent piece size (524,288 bytes), the number of torrent pieces, a “private” flag, since it
comes from a private tracker, and source information. None of this is data that a What.CD user
would have usually seen or have been concerned with, but ensures that the downloading node
is receiving a complete torrent from the corresponding seeders.
Much of the other metadata pertains to remaster criteria, which was especially
important for releases that had been released initially and then released a second time, such as
for DsotM’s 30th anniversary edition. Such information would have allowed downloaders to
differentiate between otherwise identical torrents, and would have allowed for the multiple
record labels involved in various releases to be appropriately credited. Interestingly, legal
services like Spotify don’t have such a problem, their releases are sanctioned by record labels

112

and artists, and therefore remastered albums are never confused with originals. Additionally, on
What.CD, “WEB” formats were torrents that originated in legal digital stores like iTunes, which
houses remastered albums and originals alike. Because the data structures of What.CD allowed
it to act as an archive just as easily as a source for listening (the sole purpose of legal services),
remaster information was therefore important to appropriate levels of differentiation.

Conclusion
Brett Robert Caraway (2012) writes that “contemporary conflicts over file-sharing
likewise hinge on the relative autonomy of new forms of cooperative social arrangements. Many
of the file-sharers … believe P2P systems offer a means of exodus from the coercive relation to
the content industries—not just for themselves, but for musicians as well.” (p. 582). The data
presented in this chapter are pragmatic evidence of a new social practice that What.CD
developed without the influence of outside “coercive relations.” One of the larger themes of
this dissertation is the formation of new technological practices and the social impact they have.
By constructing an archive with guiding principles of accuracy and comprehensiveness, What.CD
succeeded in surpassing most other collections, private and public, of recorded music and its
metadata.
In the Chapter 1, Andrew Feenberg was invoked for his critical view of technology. He
writes that his view is based on “public participation in technical decisions, workers’ control, and
requalification of the labor force” (2002, p. 12),” which describes, in many respects, the shape of
user intervention into technical practices on What.CD. The data the site collected, when
compared to the vast quantities that social media sites like Facebook collect, revolved around
social consensus, rather than user exploitation. While not wholly democratic or egalitarian, all

data points that this chapter has explored were collected with the goal of improving site

113

functionality and enhancing curatorial possibilities.
Additionally, the broader narrative of taken up within this dissertation represents
resistance to a hegemonic industry, as well as technological possibilities that hint at greater
democratization that Feenberg endorses. That is, more users involved in a range of
communication practices, regardless of power dynamics, has the potential to create a digital
reality that a greater percentage of individuals find socially useful. The data analyzed in this
chapter provide an example of how the nuts and bolts of such participation construct one such
community.
The data that has been analyzed here, although publicly available, required a basic
knowledge of SQL databases to access relevant components. Coupled with the theoretical
framework provided in the first chapter, this analysis has sought to elucidate the connection
between the underlying structures of the website that provide parameters for the site’s inner
logics and specific user behavior. In turn, these behaviors can be mapped onto larger patterns of
cultural activity that have also been explored. As will be discussed in the next chapter that deals
with user data and attitudes, the site was a mix of top-down authoritarianism and strong
emotionally-driven user experiences that lent What.CD such a unique position on the digital
music landscape.

114
Chapter 4 – Analyzing User Survey Data for Meaningful Dynamics
The previous chapter used a dataset released by What.CD’s former administrators to
explore the torrents that comprised the collection hailed as one of the greatest in digital history.
By exploring different variables, its possible narratives were unwoven from the dense numbers
and jargon in which digital information is often tied up. The amount of user investment in Dark
Side of the Moon, for instance, represents hundreds of hours and considerable computing
power to archive comprehensively. However, such information can only provide one side of a
multifaceted story of What.CD, and does not effectively address issues of sociality,
democratization, and cooperation that the site boasted. While Chapter 3’s analysis provided
comprehensive understanding of torrents, users were left largely out of the picture.
Unfortunately, such data were not available for similar analysis because of security concerns.
Because What.CD and most other private trackers operated in ways that are at least partly
illegal, all user data was deleted at the time of the servers’ seizure in November of 2016. If
authorities had been able to connect usernames with “real-world” email addresses and IP
addresses, irrevocable harm could have resulted.
This chapter uses a different approach to investigate the attitudes, processes, and
dynamics among What.CD’s user base as it pertained to the typical range of activities with which
they engaged. While logged into the site, search bars along the top encouraged users to find
new material. Figure 1, while taken from one of What.CD’s successors, illustrates the search
functions that were available. The two most important components of What.CD, then, were the
torrents, assessed in Chapter 2, and users, whose activities are examined here. The small actions
users would take in downloading certain music, discussing it, and listen to it all add up to a
snapshot that offers a broader perspective about the overall user base.

115

Figure 12: A screenshot of a private tracker’s search functions, as well as other elements
through which they can interact with torrents and each other.

Survey
In this chapter, user opinions that were gathered from a survey are evaluated through
various criteria, including the nature of membership and the role of What.CD among other
music services that users may have been using in tandem. The goal of this exercise is to draw
connections between the responses to the survey and possibilities for widening digital
participation in other domains. Specifically, how we might make social media and streaming
music services more socially empowering rather than tools used for extraction of useful data by
corporations is of interest?
A survey was conducted asking former What.CD users the following questions:

1. How long were you on What.CD?

116

2. How did you join (interview, invite)?
3. What user class did you ultimately belong to?
4. How would you characterize your use of What.CD (i.e., your sole source of music, a
music-discovery platform, a community to connect with others, etc.)?
5. How would you describe the importance of What.CD to you personally and from a
broader cultural perspective? So, for example, would you say the site was important
beyond its utility to you?
6. Did you interact in (1) the forums or (2) IRC channels? Can you briefly describe that
activity?
7. What type of music, if it’s possible to describe that, would you say you listened to most
through What.CD?
8. Did you also use any legitimate streaming or downloading services at the same time
(such as Spotify, Pandora, or iTunes)? If so, what was the difference between that
activity and what you did on What.CD?
9. Was there a particular format you were most likely to download on What.CD (MP3,
FLAC), and why (it sounded better, the files were smaller, etc.)?
10. Were there any other specific activities you participated in (site development,
moderation, other various contributions)?
The approach of this survey was to avoid questions of legality. While hints of the “piracy” aspect
came up in some responses, respondents were never explicitly asked to reflect on the illicit
nature of their behavior. While other studies focus on the legal battles and their cultural effects,
a decision has been made in this dissertation to avoid these topics when at all possible.
However, Chapter 5 does deal with some aspects of legality. Rather, the site itself, its internal

patterns of behavior, and the possible industry interventions that can be made are the goals

117

within this document. Correspondingly, as can be seen above, focus on specific user behaviors
and user reflections about What.CD’s culture. Outside of some basic classification info in
questions 1-3, the focus of the questions was on user behavior and attitudes, not on their
impressions of external forces like copyright law writ large.
Participants were found through recruiting on current private trackers and other online
communities that focus on them. There are two private trackers that are considered the most
direct descendants of What.CD, both of which were used to find participants. Additionally, the
website reddit has a “subreddit” (a specific community within the larger site) devoted to
BitTorrent trackers, located at reddit.com/r/trackers. Lastly, a private subreddit for former
What.CD members, located at reddit.com/r/whatnextcd, was also used for recruitment. Survey
responses were collected using SurveyMonkey. 120 individuals provided responses, and no
identifying information was collected. The goal of these questions was to ascertain the various
cultural values held by What.CD users and possible logics that can be extracted from either
standalone comments or patterns within the user sample. Accordingly, this chapter seeks to
explore the responses to that survey based on various attitudes about the site itself, digital
music, and about the site’s governance.

Attitudes and Behaviors on What.CD
On the survey, questions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 10 all interrogated specific views about
What.CD’s structure, function, and culture. Like other digital platforms for a specific purpose, its
design was intended to drive certain modes of interaction while limiting or outright prohibiting
others. For instance, Gazelle, the software that handled load balancing and databases (backend
management), only allowed for a maximum of 200,000 users, thus differentiating itself from

118

public trackers like the Pirate Bay that handle millions of users. In doing so, Gazelle’s designers
maintained both a sense of a closed, elitist community and a user base size that would ensure

adequate torrent seeding. Similarly, the process of becoming a member, either through an invite
or an interview, was designed to only let certain people in and simultaneously create a sense of
community. In this section, specific attitudes of users will be explored according to their survey
responses.
When asked how long they were on What.CD for, users responded according to this
table and histogram:

Membership Length
Cumulative
Value (years)

Frequency

Percent

Percent

0.08

2

1.7

1.7

0.25

3

2.5

4.2

0.5

4

3.4

7.6

0.75

1

0.8

8.4

1

11

9.2

17.6

1.5

6

5

22.7

2

10

8.4

31.1

2.5

2

1.7

32.8

3

9

7.6

40.3

3.5

1

0.8

41.2

4

11

9.2

50.4

4.5

2

1.7

52.1

4.75

1

0.8

52.9

5

10

8.4

61.3

5.5

1

0.8

62.2

6

9

7.6

69.7

6.5

1

0.8

70.6

7

8

6.7

77.3

7.75

1

0.8

78.2

8

15

12.6

90.8

8.5

1

0.8

91.6

9

9

7.6

99.2

10

1

0.8

100

Total

119

100

119

120

Figure 13: Membership Length/Frequency Histogram

Since What.CD only operated from 2007-2016, a span of nine years, the maximum
allowed value is 9 (apart from one outlier who claimed 10 years of membership), with nearly 8
percent being on the site for its entire existence. It is worth noting that nearly as many people, 9
percent, were members for a year or less. As the histogram illustrates, nodes of users
congregate around 2, 4, 5, and 6-year markers in a nearly even distribution. The mean duration
on the site was 4.5 years, exactly half its age, with a standard deviation of 2.84 years. The most
users joined at the 1-year mark (n=11), 4 years (n=11), and 8 years (n=15). 8 years represents
12.6 percent of all participants.

Interview/Invite

121
Cumulative
Frequency

Percent

Percent

Interview

56

47.1

47.9

Invite

61

51.3

99.2

1

.8

100.0

119

100.0

Open
Signup
Total

When asked how they joined What.CD, nearly half of participants (47 percent) indicated
the interview process, while the other half (51 percent) joined through an invite. At the
beginning of the site’s operation, there may have been a brief time of open sign-ups, especially
if users were known to be migrating from Oink, What.CD’s predecessor. One participant
indicated having joined through that method. While What.CD was still operating, a blog entry
had mentioned that about 25% of people that were members came through interviews, so the
numbers reported in this survey may be slightly high.
The interview was strenuous. Studying for it was time consuming, and there was little
room for error while taking it. Many users have voiced frustration after taking it, and feel like it
was too high of a barrier for entry to the site (see Figure 3). Because it was so difficult, one
hypothesis is that users that gained access through the interview process valued their
membership more highly than those who joined through an invite. Such a valuation would be

122

measured through more on-site activity, higher ratios, and survey language praising the site’s
successes.

Figure 14: Comments from reddit.com/r/whatnextcd concerning the interview process for one
of What.CD’s successors, which was nearly identical to the interview for What.

User class was determined by the amount of activity uploading, downloading, and
seeding torrents (a more thorough exploration of user classes is in the first chapter). The
possibilities were:
User
Member
Power User
Elite
Torrent Master
Power Torrent Master
Elite Torrent Master
Other user classes also existed, but were only attainable through administrative requests rather
than maintaining metrics of any kind, such as “developer,” “donor,” “legend,” and “staff.” The
following cross tabulation considers the relationship between how users joined What.CD and

123

the user class they ultimately attained, and may expose some attitudes and behaviors of those
users.

Interview/Invite

User Class

Interview

Invite

Total

No Mention

1

0

1

Developer

0

1

1

Donor

0

1

1

Elite

22

21

43

Elite Torrent Master

5

6

11

Legend

0

1

1

Member

3

6

9

1

0

1

Power User

17

19

36

Staff

0

1

1

Torrent Master

2

2

4

User

6

3

9

Power Torrent
Master

124

Total

VIP

1

0

1

1

56

61

119

The most common groups were Power User and Elite, with 46 and 36 members, respectively.
Approximately half of each joined through interview and invite, which indicates that the joining
method most likely did not have any correlation with a certain amount of site activity. Thus, the
hypothesis that members that interviewed may have felt more of a sense of ownership because
of the increased labor required is proven to be inaccurate. However, it is interesting to note that
most users were adequately active to become Power Users, which required uploading at least
five torrents, a feat that would have proven especially difficult toward the end of the site’s
existence, since fewer holes existed in a comprehensive music library. Of the users that
remained Users, six joined through interviews and three joined through invites, the opposite is
true for Members, one class below Users.
The bar chart below describes the relationship between user class and length of
membership. Of note is the one Donor and Legend belonged to the site for as long as it was in
operation, nearly 9 years. Also, the greatest number of Elite belonged for 2 years or less,
indicating that, even though the torrent collection was at its greatest in that time, members
were still able to find recordings that had not been codified into What.CD’s collection yet. The
distribution of membership of Power Users seems to be the most even across the various time
periods, with around 7 per span. The one survey participant who claimed Developer status was
a member for 6-8 years, an unsurprising amount of time for someone who may have felt more a
sense of ownership than other member classes.

125

Figure 15: Bar Chart of Membership Length and Frequency
Question 5 of the survey interrogated notions of culture on What.CD: “How would you
describe the importance of What.CD to you personally and from a broader cultural perspective.
So, for example, would you say the site was important beyond its utility to you?” The responses
from participants range from indicating major cultural importance to very little. On another axis,
the responses reflect opinions about levels of use, in which some users were incredibly active,
and others were only active to the extent that their ratio remained healthy or their musical
needs were met. There is not any evidence that the two axes correlate, so it is entirely possible
that users that were on What.CD daily did not think of it as a culturally valuable site. Conversely,
some users could have used the site infrequently yet felt that it was culturally significant.
Keywords were compiled from Question 5 and then loaded into NVivo, a linguistic and
qualitative research tool. The following word map was generated:

126

Figure 16: Word Cloud for Question 5
The relative size of the words represents the frequency with which those words are used. The
top ten words and their frequencies were:

Weighted
Word
archive

Length

Percentage

Count
7

15

Similar Words

8.20% archive

127

important

9

10

5.46% important

library

7

10

5.46% library

community

9

5

2.73% community

knowledge

9

4

2.19% knowledge, knowledgeable

musical

7

4

2.19% music, musical

culture

7

3

1.64% culture, cultures

preservation

12

3

1.64% preservation, preserve, preserved

recommendations

15

3

1.64% recommendation, recommendations

5

3

1.64% taste, tastes

taste

Clearly, notions of the archival nature of What.CD were most often brought to mind in Question
5. At nearly 10% of the overall word usage, the site’s utility was most closely linked to its ability
to store information in a useful configuration. Often, the decentralized structure of a private
tracker was referenced as the reason for its success as an archive. One user wrote that “the loss
of the metadata was the big loss to me. Communities come and go. The release of the data
partially filled that gap.” This data was the result of the What.CD collective uploading and
subsequently curating such a huge trove of information, much of which the previous chapter
used as its impetus.
Another user described What.CD as “the world’s largest music library. A cultural
monument of the digital world,” while still a different participant named it as “an irreplaceable
resource. Information collected over years, by thousands of people, about thousands of artists
and releases.” The actual number of artists is difficult to compare to other services like Spotify

or Tidal, but What.CD users were clearly under the impression that their archive was far

128

superior to anything commercially available.
The mechanics of What.CD often attracted the attention of network specialists. One
participant wrote that the utility of the site was impressive

Only from a technical standpoint. That it was able to host 250k users and track 2.5
million torrents in real time all while remaining anonymous and without major down
time. 99% of paid websites aren't able to keep up those kinds of numbers. Let alone a
free/anonymous service that only relied on donations. Amazing.

There is clearly some relationship between the fact that What.CD was able to maintain these
impressive stats and its cultural importance. Otherwise, how would someone like this
participant explain the technical excellence in the fact of no specific commercial motivation?
Speaking of the tracker software itself, a participant wrote that

Gazelle, the backend code made for What.cd, is still used on lots of trackers. Many of
their rules have been adopted by other trackers. They made a huge difference to the
private tracker community, but I wouldn't say it goes farther than that.

While acknowledging the successes of Gazelle, this individual limits the scope of its impact to
the closed world of private trackers, a sentiment rarely articulated elsewhere in the survey
results. They are correct, though, that the development and implementation of such a tool has
little utility outside of the technosocial sphere of a private tracker like What.CD. Additionally,

one participant even attributed his coding skills to the site: “I would never have become the

129

programmer I am today if it wasn't for the hours spent working on What.cd.”
What.CD’s utility was tied to its “community” values, which underlines the findings
related to how generally useful the site was. Online communities are generally difficult to
define, as they are amorphous, transient, have blurry boundaries, and are often more contested
for their community status than a city or a mosque. Nonetheless, What.CD was clearly
interpreted as a vibrant community by the respondents to this survey. Question 5’s responses
were manually coded in a cascading manner, in which the first filter was whether or not the site
was useful. The following frequency table was generated:

Was What.CD
Useful?

Frequency

Percent

N

17

14.7

Y

99

85.3

116

100

Total

A considerable majority found the site useful. The second filter sought to differentiate those
who found the site useful for personal reasons from those who found it useful for “cultural”
reasons (as nebulous as that term might be, it appears participants understood its meaning in
this context), as well as those who found it useful for both. Of the approximately 100
participants who found the site useful, these percentages were found:

Cultural/Personal

Frequency

Percent

Not Useful

17

14.7

Both

18

15.5

Cultural

38

32.8

Personal

43

37.1

116

100

Total

130

The highest percentage of participants found the site personally useful, and the following
comments summarize some of the sentiments from users who found utility in various features
such as the following individuals:

Before I would just listen and download from YouTube, after w.cd I actually started to
value quality, bought high end headphones, bought CD's, not only to upload them to the
tracker, but also to just to build a music collection outside of my HDDs. Basically it took
my music 'taste' to a whole other level. I think it also made me appreciate other art
forms a lot more than before. And I'm afraid it released my inner datahoarder.
I felt genuinely sad when it went offline. That's when, for the first time, I felt its effect
on my life had far exceeded its immediate utility.
I actively purchase merch (mostly new vinyl) from artists I truly enjoy, and without
What.cd my vinyl collection would probably be 25% of what it is. It's my opinion that
others acted as myself, so that in a broader sense this was the most valuable impact of
What.cd to the music world. I can say with certainty that through What.cd I exposed
friends not on What to great new music that they would otherwise never have known of
as well. To summarize, I believe the importance was a level playing field of exposure for
artists. I won't deny that the pirating aspect was a big contributor to its effectiveness
though.
It was like a big library for me. I actually work in classical music, and it was incredibly
useful to have everything I needed available at a couple of mouse clicks. Yes, because of
the effort put into curating the material, I think it was an important worldwide resource.

131

Of the 38 participants (the next-largest group) who found the site of purely cultural importance,
individuals cited the ability to locate hard-to-find recordings:

From a broader cultural perspective, What.CD was pretty much the only place to find
some rare releases that would otherwise be forgotten. Incredible works of art should be
preserved and therefore What.CD was of great importance.
The same sentiment was echoed by another respondent:

One of the groups that I liked, at the time, had a few releases. But, one of the What.CD
members was friends with the group. He uploaded stuff from them (probably against
What's rules). That was impossible to get *anywhere* else. Furthermore, there was a
supergroup that released one album. The album stopped being produced. Being in the
States and the group being in Europe it was impossible to obtain (and I'm willing to buy
stuff and get it imported), literally impossible. But, on What.CD the FLAC's were
available.
Here we see that, while other users admit to piracy being baked into the What.CD model, many
of its users were willing, and in some cases extremely motivated, to participate in the
marketplace. Sometimes, as in the instance above, there was no way to find recordings other
than through What.CD. While we might categorize such individuals as “super-listeners,” it is
clear to see their devotion was to an artist and a subsequent desire to have a complete
discographic record, however that might be gathered.
A sense of cultural importance could either be driven by What.CD’s archival tendencies,
or by its ability to foster a community, both of which have already been explored in some ways
so far. One participant was so convinced of the site’s community-driven ethos to call the site a
“great, supportive, intelligent community, in addition to being a great place to find music
recommendations and to download stuff.” While the site’s ability to be community-driven was
less commonly brought up than its value as an exploitable resource for music acquisition, the

132

fact that some respondents felt strongly about its accomplishments in connecting music fans

with each other exposes the multiple and intertwined motivations its designers and users had.
Many survey participants mentioned their ability to find new music:

It really broadened my mind and opened me up to a lot of new musical landscapes. I
discovered jazz and classical properly through What, for example, and found my taste in
it.
I spent nearly 25% of my life downloading music from What. It helped open my eyes to
new genres of music and helped me discover acts to which I never would have been
exposed if not for What. I went to shows based on recommendations from people on
the forums and met some incredible people (musicians, fans, booking agents, tour
managers, etc.) at those shows. What is without a doubt the most important website I
have been able to utilize over the course of my life. As a 31-year old who has grown up
with the internet, I think that is a testament to how important it was to me.
What.cd was by far the most influential thing in my life on music consumption. I listened
to/found far more through it than I ever did before or could have otherwise. It was the
greatest music database ever accumulated, and on top of the music itself had more and
more reliable data on music (album covers, different releases, metadata) than any other
site ever.
While Question 5’s purpose was to extract opinions about What.CD’s utility, we can see that the
content it produced bled into other issues that surround the site, including the availability of
music, the purpose of its existence, and the site’s role in the larger landscape of digital music
repositories.

Attitudes about Digital Music
Some other questions on the survey interrogated various aspects of how former
What.CD Members listened to music. Specifically, questions 7, 8, and 9 all centered on listening
practices:

133

7. What type of music, if it’s possible to describe that, would you say you listened to
most through What.CD?
8. Did you also use any legitimate streaming or downloading services at the same time
(such as Spotify, Pandora, or iTunes)? If so, what was the difference between that
activity and what you did on What.CD?
9. Was there a particular format you were most likely to download on What.CD (MP3,
FLAC), and why (it sounded better, the files were smaller, etc.)?
Question 7 was largely answered through specific genres, as this word cloud indicates:

Figure 17: Word Cloud for Question 7

134

The term “rock” is the most commonly used genre descriptor (used 42 times in the question
responses), which is broad enough to encompass a great deal of artists and bands.
However, words like “lossless”, “unreleased,” “obscure,” and “anything” suggest that
stylistic parameters did not drive the search and download habits of all What.CD members.
Many survey participants emphasized the breadth of musical variety they were interested in,
rather than name specific genres. Additionally, many used the site as a music discovery engine,
rather than just a place to locate rare or hard-to-find music they already had some preexisting
knowledge of. It is interesting to note that simply reading through these comments will expose
most people to genres that are generally unknown, like “filk,” a folk-based music with lyrics
steeped in science fiction, or electro swing, which borrows elements of both modern jazz and
dance-oriented electronic music.
For Question 8, the responses were tallied according to those who used legal services.
56 participants said they did not use any music service other than What.CD, while 60 confirmed
the use of some other service. Of those 60, the following frequency table represents the services
named:

Legal Services

Count

Apple Music

1

Boomkat

1

Deezer

1

135
Juno

1

Download
Rdio

1

SoundCloud

2

Tidal

2

Youtube

2

iTunes

3

Bandcamp

4

Google Play

9

Pandora

9

Spotify

37

Grand Total

73

Respondents explained their use of other services, as well as their dissatisfaction with
those services. However, the fact that a small majority of participants used What.CD in tandem
with legal services indicates that they did not have an aversion to paying for music. The contrary
is often true, in fact, as some of the above responses to Question 5 suggest. Below is a list of
reasons that users mentioned specifically for preferring What.CD:

Reasons

Frequency

convenient

1

ease of use

1

easier to use

1

finding new music

1

functionality

1

music discovery

1

pay artists

1

regular listening

1

reliability

1

rip music for What.CD

1

simplicity

1

supplement What.CD

1

support independent
artists

1

to fill What.CD requests

1

casual listening

2

discovery

2

support artists

2

variety

3

136

portability

8

convenience

9

137

Interestingly, some of the same reasons were named for preferring paid services (emboldened
entries appear on both lists):

Reasons
availability

Frequency
1

DRM-free
hoarding

1

harder-to-find
music

1

higher quality

1

portability

1

privacy

1

reliability

1

cared about

2

community

3

control

2

convenience

3

ownership

3

discovery

5

quality

6

variety

9

138

“Portability” was used to describe the ease with which streaming services did not require any
premeditated downloading, whereas What.CD files could be loaded onto a cell phone or music
player (such as an iPod) and played. “Reliability,” similarly, carried positive valence for both
types of platforms, since What.CD did not require any real-time internet connectivity, but such
connectivity was dependable enough to be considered the more dependable option.
“Convenience” is broad enough to encompass characteristics of both platform types, for
What.CD is refers to the ability to find whatever a user is looking for. For something like Spotify,
it means being able to find desired music quickly, and more importantly, being able to play or
download it on demand.
“Discovery,” interestingly, is a specific activity that participants in both groups found
effective for their listening practices. For streaming services, affordances like themed radio
stations and recommendation engines drive users to explore music that is somehow adjacent to
music they are already listening to. What.CD members would have used components like
collages, forums, and free-leeches to find new music. While in the first instance, an algorithm is
making suggestions, the latter employed mechanisms curated by other users. It should also be
noted that many participants also noted that What.CD was only useful for obtaining music they
were already aware of. Also, for those who employed both types of platforms, there was some

crosstalk between the two — a user might be listening to a Pandora station and hear a song

139

they liked, and then go to What.CD to find the entire album or discography of that artist.
Similarly, “Variety” resonates as a common characteristic of both platforms, a term that
can be easily mapped on to paradigms related to any sizeable archive of music. However, it was
much more commonly invoked when describing What.CD, especially in its ability to satisfy
desires to find obscure recordings. One participant wrote that
Both platforms [Pandora and Spotify] were missing alternative versions of records. Sure,
both services have Purple Rain, but the best version is the CD release from West
Germany. WCD had it, others didn't.
In this instance, we see that it is not only variety of different musical artists, but of different
versions of the same release, of which the previous chapter discusses the importance. The two
approaches to variety expose the diversity of listening practices that digital music archives
engender. While commercial interests like Spotify, Pandora, and Apple Music benefit from
narrowing the possibilities of listening to the ones that their services fulfill, What.CD was shaped
by the collective desires of its user base. So, if a user wanted to listen to the West German
release of Purple Rain, they could request it or upload it themselves.
A fitting conclusion to the discussion of Question 8 is the following response concerning
the use of different platforms:
I used iTunes, Spotify, and Bandcamp when it came along as well. iTunes is for sorting
my music so it mostly resembles my CD-collection of yore, as it was my easiest way of
processing the large amount of music I owned, and loading it over to my iPod. Spotify is
just an easy way to play whatever I feel like listening, wherever there's internet. My
"physical" music collection, as in the downloaded files, aren't as handy. Bandcamp is a
handy way to support artists directly, and get a hold of music that's not on What.
In some ways, the spectrum of attitudes about digital music from this sample population do not
diverge from that of the general public. Additionally, the activity of users on What.CD should be
interpreted as “para-capitalistic,” as their motivations for uploading, downloading, and

communicating about music are all oriented around market-based activity, but extend to

140

solutions that those markets have yet to consider or provide.

Attitudes about Governance
Early on in this project, a conversation with Stephen Witt, a longform journalist, began
the process of thinking about What.CD and the various regimes under which it is governed.
When I mentioned that the activity on What.CD seemed to be egalitarian, possibly even
democratic, Witt was quick to disagree and offer an alternative explanation for the behavior of
users on What.CD and other private trackers, which mirrors what other scholars have said on
the topic (Durham, 2013). Totalitarianism dominates on private trackers; as previous discussion
of the site’s rules demonstrates, the pressure that each member was under forced them to
digitally behave prescriptively. As a result, any analysis of activity and attitudes must be viewed
through the lens of that predefined range. Similarly, copyright policy lurked in many corners of
What.CD, it would show up from time to time on the site’s forums, and was ever-present in the
music that was being pirated.
The more tangible of these two regimes was certainly the site’s internal governance,
which, at first glance, suffered under a demand for strict adherence to rules regarding ratios,
documentation, and argumentative behavior in forums and on IRC channels. The following
section will explore user attitudes towards this digital totalitarianism, particularly in what its
advantages and disadvantages may have been.
Such a discussion must begin from the premise that all the former users that were
surveyed, and most members in good standing more generally, visited What.CD frequently and
interacted with the site because it was something they bought into and about which they were

141

enthusiastic, albeit at varying levels. This graph illustrates the range of enthusiasm various user
types may have embodied:

invited
infrequent
users

invited
neutral
users

interviewed
infrequent
users

interviewed
frequent
users

invited
frequent
users

Figure 18: User Enthusiasm Spectrum
Generally, the method of joining What.CD had some relationship to the enthusiasm they had
about the site. Members who were invited did not have to wait in a long queue or study for a
rigorous entrance exam. Because their membership was not hard won, perhaps they viewed it
as more disposable. In turn, this may have had an impact on the level and quality of their
interaction. Conversely, users who did wait in a digital line (that may have lasted for hours) took
the interview may have felt more ownership over their What.CD membership and thereby
embraced rulesets as the key to being a productive community member, the result of which was
improving an archive they were excited about.
The number of rules and the issues they governed were not superfluous or arbitrary.
Rather, they acted as a guide to mediate and foster a shared enthusiasm. In that way, the
governance had a direct relationship to the affective status of the site’s user base. The extreme
sadness, shock, and sense of loss expressed by What.CD users directly after its closure
demonstrate its strength as a community despite a strong top-down power structure. As some

142

scholars argue concerning digital communities, authoritarianism, or at least hierarchical social
relationships, must exist for meaningful interactions to occur (Richardson & Lindgren, 2017).
One of the early promises of the internet was egalitarianism, particularly in social

spheres that may have previously been authoritarian or otherwise non-discursive (Papacharissi,
2004). Such egalitarianism necessitates horizontal relationships, that is, those between peers,
that are as robust as vertical relationships, which indicate a power differential. However, the
scarcity of examples of online social groups that demonstrate that digital ideology, which favors
horizontal relationships, challenges the notion that the internet is a place where serious
democratizing work can take place. One need look no further than any of the recent political
movements largely organized online, such as the Arab Spring, Occupy Wall Street, Black Lives
Matter, #MeToo, and a host of others, to see that leadership is required for longevity (Kavada,
2015). Similarly, What.CD was rife with artifacts that promoted ordinary member activity as the
driving force of the site and the main reason for its success, while constantly being underpinned
by rules, procedures, and top-down decision making.
Treré and Barassi (2015) explore the example of the Italian politician Beppe Grillo and
his 5SM political party that came to prominence following a 2013 election. They assert that,
while web-driven communication encouraged populism to a certain degree, the end results, “far
from being horizontal and participatory, legitimized authoritarianism, populism and leadership.”
While the initial campaigning and organizing took place on Web 2.0 platforms and had an antiestablishment manifesto, its techno-fetishism only served to reproduce the same power
structures that preexisted the 5SM movement. The authors seem to draw many comparisons
between old, Berlusconi-era tactics and this new, blog-oriented political movement.
In the same way, What.CD’s discourse and file-trading activity, while both criticized for
its authoritarianism and celebrated in the light of technological utopianism, struck some balance

143

between them that generally reproduced social structures that sociologists and anthropologists
are more familiar with. One survey participant responded, “I believe the importance [of
What.CD] was a level playing field of exposure for artists. I won't deny that the pirating aspect
was a big contributor to its effectiveness though.” Horizontal and vertical social structures are
thus put into sharp relief, ultimately suggesting that neither description is very useful or
accurate. Even hybridizing the two might leave some behaviors as unexplained, like the
seemingly lax position the recording industry itself has taken on private trackers 6. What is
suggested here, then, is an approach to power grounded in the lived experiences of What.CD

users, especially the participants of the survey instrument. Their comments, as well as the larger
narrative extracted from them, suggests three findings: (1) enthusiasm was garnered because of
the rule sets and copyright law, not in spite of them, (2) at some level, the rules became
transparent to the site’s operation for most users, and (3) horizontal relationships were valued
more than vertical ones while vertical mobility may have had negligible impact on horizontal
relationships.
The rule sets of What.CD, though more thoroughly explained in a previous chapter,
were largely inherited from Oink, the site’s predecessor, and have been passed down to
What.CD’s successors. They governed every action related to uploading and downloading down
to a very granular level. They emphasized accuracy and procedural honesty, which became well

6

Caraway (2012), in a survey of some 250+ BitTorrent users, established that many do not fear
the legal implications of filesharing that the RIAA and MPAA have historically threatened. This is
either because protective measures like VPNs are used or because those industry groups have
adopted a different strategy for curbing piracy. Lately, the recording industry specifically has
chosen to go after more large scale offenders and using its international muscle to shut down
websites like What.CD (Mitchell et al., 2018). However, even this action was preceded by nearly
ten years of What’s uninterrupted operation, during which the Pirate Bay was hounded by content
industries. This suggests that the relatively small user base of What prevented it from being a
major target by the RIAA until 2016. Generally speaking, private trackers present much less of a
challenge to the recording industry than their public counterparts, and litigating their crimes in
court proved hugely embarrassing for Oink’s prosecutors (What.CD’s predecessor, Sockanathan,
2011).

144

known community values as a result. Many other private trackers have also been affected by
this practice and utilize similar mechanisms to govern behavior and activity. As users

participated in uploading and downloading music, their enthusiasm for listening to a particular
artist, for finding lossless audio, or for amassing a private archive all reveal the predicate
enthusiasm for the rules that allowed for that content to exist in the first place. When asked
how they would describe their use of the site, one user responded that it was a “great place to
get obscure music in high quality, to discover new music via the extremely comprehensive
tagging system and collages,” indicating the required adherence to the rules facilitated the
accurate retrieval of highly sought-after music. Another user commented that “it was an
important place for archiving/preserving music that otherwise could have been lost for good,”
which also would not have been possible without What.CD’s structure and organization.
Such enthusiasm is clear to see when compared to the general indifference or even
malaise that surrounds the use of public trackers like the Pirate Bay. Generally, internet users
are not excited about the prospect of using the site, they merely do so out of necessity. Or, at
the very least, there is very little sense of community excitement that stems from the use of
those platforms 7. Interestingly, there are very few rules there, too: there is no need to maintain
ratios, upload original content, quality check audio, or fulfill requests. While assuming a direct
relationship between the rules and enthusiasm at What.CD would belie the complexities of
affect on the site (even as the term enthusiasm does), it is useful to map the general excitement
onto a set of specific practices that were made available because of the rules.

7

Lysonski, & Durvasula (2008) establish that most people who pirate music are neither fearful of
litigation nor ethically opposed to the activity. Furthermore, the enthusiasm that What.CD
generated is never replicated in studies that seek motivations for public BitTorrent piracy
(Hinduja, 2007).

145

As far as copyright is concerned, ambivalence dominated any discussions and the survey
data analyzed, as a previous chapter discussed. Efforts within this dissertation have sought to
decenter the general hegemony with which IP policy is treated, because user attitudes about it
were just not as common, influential, or polarized as industry-oriented discourses generally
imply. A few hints suggest general support of copyright, even though the very premise of the
site requires its transgression. Namely, at least two people surveyed work in the music business
that depends on copyright policy to remain solvent. Additionally, enthusiasm about a certain
musical artist or work is difficult to extricate from a related excitement about the policies that
govern its traditional distribution. One respondent wrote that “I believe the importance was a
level playing field of exposure for artists. I won't deny that the pirating aspect was a big
contributor to its effectiveness though,” indicating that while users were aware of copyright
policy, breaking those rules was not as important as following the site’s internal rule sets.

Another participant wrote that “... legal or otherwise, so it was important for the preservation of
these recordings. It was truly impressive in its scale.” While users generally knew about
copyright, breaking those laws had no immediate consequence, and the risks that were
associated with transgressing that policy were more than worth it for finding and preserving
recordings.
The second finding, that the rules and other forms of governance became naturalized,
offers insight into how users might generally stay interested in a digital space that, on its face,
seems so oppressive. While a user was browsing for music, uploading new content, or discussing
music in the forums, the rules were not bearing down as they might in a prison or a courtroom.
Rather, their invisibility functioned in a similar manner to the governance found on social media
and other digital platforms that have terms of service, license agreements, and explicit content
policing. While interacting with the site, various affordances shaped by governance never

throttled simultaneous notions of community and the social importance all the kinds of

146

interaction. One user commented that
“Personally, [What.CD] meant a lot to me. I checked it multiple times daily and heavily
relied on artist and label notifications to keep up with new uploads. Culturally I think
wcd was important as what I assume would have been the largest archive of high quality
FLAC rips in the world, or of music generally. It was so well organized and cataloged. I
also imagine there were many out of print, rare, and difficult to find albums that were
available nowhere else…”
Simultaneously, we see the presence of the most appreciated aspects of the site, namely highquality audio and meticulous organization, both of which were the result of governance
decisions. In survey responses, though, there is never an explicit mention of the rules or their
regime, because they became naturalized to users.
The third finding, having to do with horizontal and vertical relationships, suggests that
relationships among peer groups were more important than relationships characterized by
authority differences. Several respondents commented on the role of friend making on
What.CD:

“I found some great friends on What though and we are still in contact.”
“A source of music, a way to discover music … and a method to meet a couple good friends.”
“I chatted in IRC for a while but me and my friends moved to a different chat client after a
while.”
“I made friends all around the world, and the forums because part of my daily routine. I felt like I
knew some users there better than people I knew in real life.”
“Yes, for forums, I just chatted in many, various topics. I found that compared to public forums
that What.CD was a lot more mature and friendlier. For IRC, I was mostly in #hiphop, and have
met some fantastic individuals whom I still keep in contact today.”

147

In contrast to this sentiment, there is no mention of vertically-oriented relationships, negative or
positive. No respondents thought that rule enforcement was fair or biased, only that site
structure and organization facilitated certain modes of relationship development.
The beginning of the chapter took up the subject of user rank and what links that might
have to other metrics, and unfortunately there was no data related to the relationships various
ranks had to other members (friends, individuals whose activity they follow closely). However,
the fact that some survey participants voiced an extreme feeling of loss of community, as well as
friends they stay in touch with well after What.CD’s closure indicate that the vertical
relationships were considerably left impactful than those that centered on enforcement of rules.

Conclusion
This chapter analyzed data gathered through a survey instrument, specifically looking at
how it reflected opinions and attitudes of former What.CD members. The goal of the questions
was to ascertain the various cultural values held by What.CD users and possible logics that could
be extracted from either standalone comments or patterns within the user sample. The findings
related to discourse on the site, attitudes about digital music, and the role of site governance
are all a critical component of the site’s narrative, and to the effects of digital platforms more
broadly. The next chapter will interrogate various notions of legality as they pertain to private
trackers.

148
Chapter 5: Digital Music and Legal Issues: Why Discussing Piracy is Passé but the Law
Still Matters

Introduction
This chapter discusses the legalities of digital music in the context of private BitTorrent
trackers and other services by considering current legal regimes and various national
governance contexts. However, it does so with the pretext that everyone admits that piracy is
illegal. Therefore, while a small space is taken up with a discussion of copyright, its industrial,
philosophical, and practical shortcomings have been heavily documented elsewhere. Because
copyright is woefully incapable of appropriately governing a vast swath of cultural activity
online, I assume that both legal and illegal listening carry significance and should be treated
equally by academics and the music industry. The music that members on What.CD shared was
nearly entirely illegal under current U.S. copyright regimes, and very few users would argue that,
the discussion in this chapter centers on processes that can narrow the gap between digital
listening practices and the various policies that attempt to regulate them.
One example of the disparity that exists between listening and the law is in this
example: In late September 2017, a European Parliament member unearthed a study on piracy.
Julia Reda, a member of the German Pirate Party, found a 300-page study paid for by the
European Commission by submitting a Freedom of Information request, a document she only
gained access to after requesting it three times (Reda, 2017). After finally gaining access to the
document, its findings revealed no certain connection between piracy and any sort of sales
displacement (Ecorys, 2015). Advocates of the Pirate Party and Copyright Libertarians were
quick to chalk the original commission up to a witch hunt and describe the ensuing report as

149

being factually impotent (Brown, 2017) and an attempt by content industries to demonize piracy
as a reason for stronger media protection online. Those who suppressed the document within
the European Parliament, on the other hand, allowed some scholars to suggest that piracy has
overall negative effects on media sales (Herz & Kiljanski, 2016).
Both were equally bombastic claims, and what is most likely, however, is that a more
complicated relationship between piracy and legal sales exists. Both the pirates and the industry
representatives have ideologically-driven agendas that may prevent them from seeing the full
picture of how piracy and legal markets interact, influence each other, and coexist in digital
spaces.
Because of these real-world complications, this chapter suggests that a balanced view
that takes legal contexts, on one hand, and cultural factors, on the other, into consideration will
provide a more effective framework than either legal studies or cultural studies tools on their
own. As a media example, digital music will be explored from both angles: specific legal contexts
within Europe and the U.S., as well as the important cultural roles of both legal and illegal online
listening. The main conclusion of this exploration is that listening is reductively categorized
because of current epistemological regimes, and that illegal and legal listening play an equally
important role in the understanding of digital media consumption.
In short, the suggestion of this chapter is that the statuses of "legal" and "illegal" grossly
miss the mark for appropriately governing media consumption. This shortfall is the result of
several factors which have all been thoroughly analyzed, namely the persecution of piracy
(Sinnreich, 2013), the inability of copyright policy to keep up with technological change (Patry,
2011), and the difficulty in assessing the relationship between piracy and legitimated
consumption (Ecorys, 2015). Also, many of the "illegal" acts of which individuals have been

150

accused are questionably so by a wide range of interests, not just copyright libertarians (Calboli
& Ragavan, 2015).
In place of the legal/illegal dichotomy, it is suggested that legal scholars invoke
terminology based on the general effectiveness of a platform or practice. Specifically, the fact
that a platform facilitates copyright infringement should not deter us from thinking about the
positive cultural effect it has on digital culture. This concept will be explored in the case study
section. It is interesting to note that there is rarely an economic model that fits all digital
products (film, books, video games, music). While this is somewhat recognized by policymakers
and the respective industries, adopting the suggested terminology shift will allow for greater
flexibility to shape laws around the practices involving those specific products.

Current Legal Regimes
Just like its impact on the movie or publishing industries, digital developments have had
a transformative effect on music and how copyright deals with it. Siva Vaidhyanathan writes
that “music, more than any other vehicle of culture, collapses the gap that separates idea from
expression” (p. 117). The shifts that are written about are done with the assumption that, over
the past 100 years, copyright’s term has increased to its current length of the life of the author
plus seventy years at the request of content industries, namely the movie and music industries
(Patry, 1996).
Some new media scholars are hesitant to draw a clean distinction between “the digital”
and its predecessors especially when it comes to copyright policy, since its 100-year history has
much to do with its current successes and problems. At the very least, the problems that arise
with private trackers could not have taken place in a pre-digital world because they have to do
with flawless copies and manifold distribution. Although many make the mistake of assuming

151

this means that society has been upended, the changes have been subtler and stacked on top of
pre-digital practices. As Robert Merges (2011) writes, copyright policy is like a “sprawling,
chaotic megacity… Construction cranes are everywhere. The old city center — the ancient core

of the field— is today surrounded by new buildings, new neighborhoods, knots of urban growth,
budding in every direction, far off into the distance” (p. 1).
Furthermore, Penalver and Katyal (2010), in their discussion property disobedience,
although not fully endorsing illegal behavior, find some benefit to pushing the boundaries on IP
ownership by equating it to squatting and other forms of physical property transgression:
“Particularly in cases of protracted and pervasive acquisitive free riding, these transgressions
may demonstrate the need for a responsive legal shift to update an ossified regime of
entitlements or to address the presence of high transaction costs that preclude efficient
transfers” (p 174). They use the term “altlaw” to describe someone who participates in a
practice that exists in a legal grey area, such as sharing files under the claim of fair use. An
altlaw’s action, while not fully legally endorsable, might give legislators and judges a good idea
of where legal and technological solutions are best positioned because they directly suggest a
consumer’s preference as far as formats and devices are concerned.
Unfortunately, the law, and especially the current state of copyright law in the U.S.,
does not do well with grey area. In delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court in 2007, Justice
Souter wrote that someone “who distributes a device with the object of promoting its use to
infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression or other affirmative steps taken to foster
infringement, is liable for the resulting acts of infringement by third parties” (MGM v. Grokster).
The opinion also indicates that Grokster and other similar platforms had an explicit interest in
attracting former Napster users, a piece of especially damning evidence when determining if
Grokster was a “contributory infringer.”

152

A common discourse used by courts and plaintiffs in these filesharing cases is one that
presumes that copyright directly protects, rewards, and incentivizes creators to keep creating.
For instance, to quote Justice Souter once more, the “values of supporting creative pursuits
through copyright protection” are ones that the Court should uphold. Patry, however, would
argue that the legal system’s use of the term creativity differs significantly from its broader

understanding: “copyright law has rejected the subjective approach to creativity usually found in
the popular usage of the term” (p. 19). Because creativity is measured through the commercial
success of a work, a trap that Merges (2011) also seems to fall into when defending the current
copyright regime, vast swathes of artistic practices are either ignored or minimized. For
example, authors who have either released work under Creative Commons licenses or infringe
on copyrighted works in the process of making their own truly creative work (and thereby forfeit
any financial remuneration for their work) are not covered by current notions of creativity found
in the Copyright Act.
Many thinkers (Lessig, Vaidhyanathan, and others) have considered the commons more
seriously when it comes to copyright and the Internet. Bollier and Pavlovich (2008) write that it
“is a new paradigm for creating value and organizing a community of shared interest” and a
“vehicle by which new sorts of self-organized publics can gather together and exercise new
types of citizenship” (p. 1). Although copyright policy resonates with some online activity, like
selling it on iTunes or licensing it for Spotify streaming, many practices, like filesharing, fall so far
outside the bounds of what can resonate with current policy that it can do nothing but condemn
it.
The commons, historically tied to issues of land usage in England and the American
West (Penalver & Katyal), also make sense for thinking about the cultural content that authors
have at their disposal within specific contexts (such as the U.S., YouTube, electronic music).

153

When all these contexts are partially or wholly digital, the ease and likelihood with which users

can copy content exposed issues that courts had, until the 2000s, yet to deal with. While courts
have almost exclusively condemned the new uses as patently infringing according to current
copyright law, they have simultaneously placed a stigma on legitimate uses of filesharing
technologies and any expansion of the commons that authors in which authors may be
interested (Sinnreich). In the case of Arista, Limewire’s role as a “vicarious” copyright infringer
(among other things) means they had the “intent to foster … infringement” (Moser and Slay,
2011, p. 200). On its face, the use of sound recordings on a platform like Limewire, regardless of
their legal status, should be considered an expansion of the commons, and the inability of the
Court to acknowledge such an expansion is indicative of the previously mentioned disconnect
between copyright policy and musical practices (and therefore its usefulness).
Siva Vaidhyanathan, in a historical analysis of the development of copyright in the U.S.
and particularly Mark Twain’s role in it (2003), notes the fact that, over the course of his career,
he was first an unestablished author who benefited from piracy and then one who benefited
from stronger copyright enforcement. Although the author is clear in emphasizing that great
thinkers often contradict themselves as they pass through different points of development, such
a change in opinion indicates that different types of authors prefer different copyright
treatments. The current copyright regime, as rewarding as it can be for some, is also inflexible in
the options it presents to a large percentage of its practitioners. In infringement cases, there is
little argument that legal standards for infringement have been violated; additionally, the
argument that conditions for such activity to be considered infringement were set by the
creative industries during the passage of the Copyright Act of 1976 and the Copyright Extension
Act of 1998 is not hotly debated (Tehranian, 2007), and therefore such suppositions deserve a

154

legal reconsideration. A resulting “nation of copyright infringers” indicates the degree to which
courts were out of touch with practices and norms.
There are a great many reasons why legal scholars find copyright problematic:
-

For Aufderheide & Jaszi (2011) and Bunker (2010): The problem is the shrinking
of the fair use doctrine, and the solution is broadening the type of material and
circumstances it can be claimed.

-

For Balkin (2014), the problem is that communication practices have become
too privately centrally controlled, and the solution is to rethink “new school”
regulation to conform to the changing technological landscape.

-

For Bollier (2001) and Pavlovich (2008), the problem lies in policy not keeping up
with technological developments, and the solution is following “open
movements” to their logical end to come up with a “new species of citizenship”
(p. 294-304).

-

For Boyle, the problem is a shrinking commons, and the solution involves
reinventing it before we can save it (p. 7).

-

For Burkhart, the problem is that copyright law caused an invasion into the
lifeworld that disconnects our musical consumption from any traces of reality,
and the solution is to radical activism through organizations like the EFF
(chapter 1).

-

For Mazzone (2011), the problem lies in “the gap that exists between the rights
that the law confers and the rights that are asserted in practice” (p. 12). The
solution lies in modeling copyright policies of other countries and empowering
citizens to fight against the overreach.

-

155

For Silbey (2010), the problem lies in agents of change using the same rhetorical
strategies that their opponents are, which are largely based on mythological
origins of the author (2008). The solution is to pay closer attention to this
discourse (p. 267).

-

And for Tushnet (2004), the “problem is that the concerns of copyright, though
they relate to the production and circulation of speech, are orthogonal to those
of free speech, and neither one can be resized to fit the other” (p. 590). The
solution is to keep the arguments and discourses somewhat separate, a
suggestion that goes against the ideas of Bunker (2009).

The issue that seems mostly answered at this point is the novelty of the digital turn.
Both scholarly studies and more popular notions of the digital have reached a point of maturity
that is reflected in thinking beyond the processes themselves. Richard Rogers (2013) writes that
Internet research should move “beyond the study of online culture and beyond the study of the
users of ICTs only” (p.4) to consider useful frameworks like political action, extreme inequality,
and true innovation. Rogers goes on to say that we should “follow the methods of the medium
as they evolve, learn from how the dominant devices treat natively digital objects, and think
along with those object treatments and devices so as to recombine or build on top of them.
Strive to repurpose the methods of the medium for research that is not primarily or solely about
online culture” (p. 5). The emphasis on moving forward from research that centers around
particular online communities as sites of resistance or solidarity makes sense in that modern
practices are usually housed in the physical world.
One of the issues that will inevitably persist into the next 15 years is that of who
controls copyright policy. Although most scholars suggest reforms of various kinds to narrow the
policy/norm gap that is a yawning chasm, policymakers in the U.S. do not seem to be in touch

with them or even with D.C.-based organizations that promote reforms such as Fight for the

156

Future, FreePress, Credo, Public Knowledge, the EFF, and Demand Progress. Rather, members of
Congress and employees of the Copyright office are more likely to listen to lobbyists and
industries that can hire powerful law firms. The issue of control over copyright policy is also part
of a broader concern about the rights of a democratic society to pursue values that fall outside
those of corporate, transnational interests.
Unsurprisingly, then, the control over the future of copyright policy has two parallel and
interwoven sets of topics: its corporatization and the transnationalization. Corporatization,
which is very real according to much literature but also a specter that avoids direct
identification, is evidenced by the lengthening of copyright terms, which has largely been
achieved through lobbying of content industries. In both the Copyright Act of 1976 and the
Copyright Term Extension Act, the length for which an author can hold the exclusive rights was
increased to its current time of life of the author plus 70 years. Additionally, corporations flex
their litigation muscles through the witch hunt for pirates. It has been noted that not only has
this proven ineffective for curbing piracy, but it has also alienated the music industry’s
customers (Sinnreich, 2013). Although some artists such as Howard Kaylan and Mark Volman
from The Turtles 8 and organizations like the Future of Music Coalition believe in long copyright
terms that might prevent them from being used productively by the public, there seems to
otherwise be an agreement that an increasingly long copyright term is not good for authors or
their audiences.

8

In 1989, Kaylan and Volman sued hip hop group De La Soul (http://articles.latimes.com/198907-23/entertainment/ca-392_1_de-la-soul), for a song that had long been out of popular rotation.
Additionally, the FMC has noted on several occasions they are in agreement with the lengthening
of the copyright term as it seems beneficial to professional songwriters, some of whom are
powerful members of their constituency (futureofmusic.org).

Levels of Governance

157

What.CD’s legal status was never questioned in that it was decidedly illegal. However,
its users are still citizens of countries all over the world, namely in the west. It is therefore
appropriate to consider the legal regimes provided by different countries and jurisdictions with
the goal of demonstrating how fragmented and ineffective they currently are. Such inefficacy
may have left space open for What.CD to thrive for so long, but also causes problems like the
permeation of U.S.-led copyright initiatives that are culturally damaging and uneven prosecution
of internet users across these various jurisdictions. When an agency of the French government
shut down What.CD, they were not doing so in a vacuum. The site’s shutdown was a major loss
of culture by all its members and proponents.
Under current law, digital music is also governed by laws bound to geographical regions
at several levels, such as the European Union and North America. To consider the national legal
contexts of a few different places and the possible impact they have on the more holistic
approach to digital music governance that is being promoted in this chapter serves to
demonstrate how copyright problems are not just American. The information used to analyze
various contexts comes from the repressed document referenced in the introduction (among
others), because it provides a perspective in which any "cultural" discussion is decidedly absent.
That is, it does not deal with parameters such as moral directives, hegemony, or human
experience. Because of this treatment of the law, it allows us to see the way that many current
legal scholars operate and consequently, how such blind spots might be remedied.
While the question of how the practices of piracy are societally treated has been the
subject of previous scholarship, its focus has been on other domains of communication, rather
than the law specifically. For instance, Jessica Beyer and Fenwick McKelvey (2015) desire to
draw attention away from the legal condemnation of pirates and focus on its epistemological

158

differences to capitalist culture. Additionally, they assert that piracy is "a set of ideals grounded
in collaborative culture, nonhierarchical social organization, and a reliance on the network" (p.

891), a claim that contradicts with some real-life instances of piracy. However, it does accurately
describe the sentiment with which What.CD’s users describe their relationships with each other
and the site itself.
Furthermore, and perhaps more in line with this chapter's recommendations, Ilya Kiriya
and Elena Sherstoboeva (2015) suggest that copyright measures in Russia are both steeped in a
Soviet history of censorship and a modern instrument of control. They write that "piracy is a
cultural phenomenon rather than an economic or legal problem in Russia ... the new Russian
antipiracy law may represent a new censoring mechanism operating under the pretext of
copyright protection" (p. 840). While censorship in an authoritarian state can take many guises,
fighting piracy certainly is a convenient one. However, it should be emphasized here that piracy,
from this chapter's perspective, is only a legal issue. If a law did not define piratical activity as
deviant, then it would not receive the political and institutional ire it currently suffers. While
much can be learned from seeing piracy as a set of social practices, it is this author's desire to
shift actual legal paradigms rather than dismissing them as ineffective.
It should also be mentioned that, as digitization has created slippage in recording
industry revenue, policymakers and industry experts in most countries have tried to adjust
earnings reports to consider streaming revenue. In early 2017, the International Federation of
the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) reported a 6% growth in revenues over the previous year, but
with the caveat that any growth "should be viewed in the context of the industry losing nearly
40% of its revenues in the preceding 15 years" (p. 10). However, as will be discussed later, such
adjustments are dubious since digitization is hardly a finished project, and therefore should not
be used as concrete measures of success or failure. While the IFPI is focused on ensuring the

159

survival of their industry and celebrate the successes of streaming, they do little to ensure that
they are not simply trying to make up for the massive losses experienced during early
digitization.
Briefly, several national contexts will now be examined for specific copyright
enforcement tendencies. The diversity of attitudes that various federal governments and
enforcement agencies take towards intellectual property policy create a patchwork that

exacerbates the problem of ineffective laws for digital content. What.CD’s users were scattered
across the globe, and while none were ever the victim of any particular national copyright
enforcement, their legal standing would have differed dramatically according to the appropriate
jurisdiction. By assessing the current status of several different countries, the goal of this section
is to demonstrate how ill-prepared current legal paradigms are to deal with new and culturally
relevant ideas about content sharing and distribution.
The United States
As a country whose content industries are undoubtedly important on the global stage,
the U.S. certainly has the most egregious legal problems when it comes to addressing piracy.
Additionally, its economic power grants it leverage in extending its policies to other countries by
way of trade agreements and industry groups (for example, the IFPI is mostly just the
international arm of the RIAA, both of which are discussed in this chapter). The U.S. is also
where the most negative effects of anti-piracy legislation can be seen, especially its
ineffectiveness and damage to the legal marketplace.
Some of the most innovative new forms of digital consumption are also coming from the
United States, such as BitTorrent, which is discussed below, as well as the blockchain protocol as
a means of distribution. Widely known for its use in cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, blockchain can

also be effectively used as a filesharing method that is much more secure and capable than

160

BitTorrent. Stifling innovation has a chilling effect on the software and music industries, which
co-develop in digital spaces and whose legal parameters equally impact consumers.
France
France has the most concrete notions of digital copyright infringement and penalizes
users who upload and download content (Ecorys, p. 48). A three-year prison term and a
€300,000 fine are possible penalties, which can be applied to users who download and upload,
but also to people who write software that allow those activities. More than any other country
in the EU, this legal provision is the most severe for activity that, in other legal contexts, is seen
with ambivalence since that software could just as likely be used for non-infringing purposes.
There are the "copyright police" in France called HADOPI, who send out warnings to
internet users who have infringed. Between 2010 and 2014, they sent out " 2,756,788 first
warnings, 283,673 second warnings, and has issued 983 deliberations" (p. 51). HADOPI also tries
to make internet users aware of legitimate channels of digital consumption, which seems to
result in free advertisement of those channels. Some of them are rather difficult for small artists
to sell their music on, especially compared with illegal routes like BitTorrent or blockchain. So, if
new artist is trying to gain listenership through a route that is not sanctioned by HADOPI, they
suffer vilification for not having the capital to access these legitimate channels.
Spain
In Spain, laws governing digital marketplaces and illegal media consumption seem to be
more relaxed than other places in Europe. Distributors can get in trouble for illegal activity, and
typically not end users, a notable difference from both France and the U.S. Distributors are also
given 48 hours to remove the infringing content before a judgment is made. Only 403

complaints were lodged by rightsholders in the same time that thousands were in Spain,

161

indicating the differences in enforcement.
This more relaxed approach to copyright enforcement either indicates the Spanish
government's general attitude to illegal digital consumption, or a lack of resources to allocate to
the problem, or perhaps both. Intellectual property is not a major industry in Spain, so they may
just have less at stake. However, the resulting flexibility for consumers might allow for laws to
change more easily to suit a broader spectrum of digital listening in the future.
Germany
Like Spain, consuming infringed content is not illegal, although downloading illegal
material may constitute reproduction in certain contexts. However, "downloading is only related
to mechanical reproduction rights and is legal for private purposes if the source where the
content has been downloaded from is authorized and no payment is received" (Ecorys, p. 58).
There is also no policing agency like HADOPI in Germany, which results in very few individuals
being prosecuted for copyright infringement. Generally, the only cases that were brought to
court were companies and websites charged with infringing thousands of copyrights.
Poland
Polish laws regarding media use and copyright favor authors as a class capable of
creating and controlling content. Within the court system, it has yet to be determined if
downloading files can be fit into a private use clause or not. Like Spain, Poland does not have a
large content industry to protect, and therefore does not have an agency that specifically deals
with copyright infringement. According to Ecorys, there are "ongoing, systemic problems with
prosecutions and the judiciary with rights holders" (p. 63), which leaves non-market-based
activities to develop outside of the context of "piracy."

162

Sweden

Sweden is unique because of the influential roles of two of its organizations, the Pirate
Bay, one of the most prolific music piracy websites, and Spotify, the most successful legitimate
online music service. Palmås, Schwartz, and Larsson (2014) argue that the two online
phenomena did not coincidentally develop. Rather, they sprouted from the same technosocial
context that included high broadband and mobile internet penetration and familiarity with
filesharing. In fact, the ties are so close between piracy and legitimacy that they were once
indistinguishable:
The content that they needed for their beta version was copied from their own and
their friends’ music collections. In other words, the cloud-based streaming service
heralded by many people as the successor, or perhaps antidote to file sharing, itself
began as an archive of non-licensed media content. (p. 415).
Because Spotify was able to transform their initially illegal enterprises into ones in which
record labels would eventually profit, they were seen as a success story. By observing a
culturally meaningful activity (filesharing) and harnessing its core logics, Spotify's creators were
able to legitimate their service without changing any of its core functionality. They were one of
the few, though, that was able to make this transition.
The European Union
The EU as a whole has pursued a single digital market solution that seeks to "modernize
the framework of exceptions and limitations and to achieve a well-functioning copyright
marketplace" (European Commission, 2017). The main devices it would achieve such a
modernization through are deterritorialization, minimization of tariffs, and industry-wide
compliance with such measures. This solution, while simplifying a complex legal landscape,
would itself resemble many of the regimes of EU member countries.

From this analysis of various countries' approach to digitization of music, we can see

163

that a specific vocabulary and approach to problem solving eliminates the possibility of learning
from illegal listening. In every national context, there is some version of prosecution of illegally
downloading music. Ironically, there has been some movement by intrepid individuals within
content industries to use BitTorrent data to predict what content is truly popular (Van der Sar,
2017) while those industries flatly blame illegal activity for a host of problems.
One national context that has not been considered here is China, since its regulatory
environment is not connected with its western counterparts in any significant way. However, as
Glyn Moody (2016) notes, China's streaming service QQ Music is one of the only streaming
services to turn a profit. Moreover, the deals that have been struck between major record labels
and QQ Music are most likely more reasonable because of the homogenous nature of the
Chinese market, compared to the fragmented nature of the marketplace in the west. Also, with
the cultural differences that might afford Chinese policy makers with different legal frameworks
and paradigms than are entrenched in the E.U. and U.S., legal scholars should also not discount
QQ Music's success simply because of the piracy problems that China is mostly known for.

Community
As was explored in the legal context of Sweden above, illegal music communities nearly
always inform legitimate practices: BitTorrent filesharing led to the creation of Spotify, and even
before this, Napster acted as a model for how digital music sharing might work. Napster and
other illegal services often act like communities in aspects of sharing (the music itself as well as
related interests), establishing decorum, and adhering to a mutually decided moral code. If
these community values can be transferred to be represented in the legal realm, then laws are
more likely to reflect the desires of listeners. What.CD users demonstrated the possibilities of

164

community outside of legally sanctioned activity, which is why some of their practices would be
wisely observed by current policy makers. In many European countries (and in the U.S. to a
lesser extent), collective rights organizations are charged with representing certain classes of
artists, such as songwriters or musical performers. As entities with the legal authority to
represent all artists within that class, they are assumed to represent community values. If such
an organization existed for listeners of digital music, then their interests could also be
represented in legal and political settings. It is not difficult to imagine how such a union might
arise out of the ardent music fans on What.CD and other private trackers.
In 2015, the Copia Institute wrote that "in Sweden, the success of Spotify resulted in a

major decline in the file sharing of music on websites like The Pirate Bay. A similar move was not
seen in the file sharing of TV shows and movies... until Netflix opened its doors" (p. 3). A similar
effect was found when Apple first legitimated digital music sales through iTunes (Waldfogel,
2010). Therefore, communities form around digital paradigms of sharing whether they are
legally legitimated or not. Finding ways to advocate for and legally justify protections around
highly prosecuted behavior, like file sharing, would allow for the gaps between legal streaming
and piracy to be made smaller, if not closed completely.

Hegemony
Record labels and lawmakers operate from positions of power that is not usually
representative of a population's desires or practices, a fact that is rarely recognized by those
organizations. To the contrary, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) often
bemoans the paltry sums it receives from digital listening despite seeing record profits (Geigner,
2016). There are many reasons for this hegemony: political strategizing that has allowed for

recording industry trade groups to dominate legal discourse (Patry, 2009), disproportionate

165

resources to pursue a goal, and a refusal to consider alternatives to their own agenda.
While it is a common trope in cultural studies to understand the complex
hegemony/resistance relationship (Kellner, 2003), this relationship is usually simplified in legal
contexts. As has been said once already, binaries are most convenient, and perhaps necessary
for traditional legal thinking. Complexities do not easily lend themselves to sound court
decisions or effective legislation. However, these binaries, which make hegemony considerably
easier than if the legal arena interested in digital media governance were pluralistic, also create
a suitable atmosphere for that hegemony to take root.
Real world legal examples of this hegemony center around how U.S. courts interpret
"Fair Use" for digital music. Hegemonic parties have gone as far as suing a woman who posted a
YouTube video of her daughter dancing to a Prince song which played faintly in the background
(Lenz v. Universal Music Corp., 2015), suing sampling artists who have no legal method of
affordably expressing their art (McLeod and DiCola, 2011), and penalizing internet users who
download a handful of songs (BMG Music v. Gonzalez, 2005). While Fair Use is a doctrine
designed to grant copyrighted works flexibility in consumption, both the body of work that can
be protected under Fair Use as well as the situations in which it can be claimed have been
gradually shrinking and are difficult to ascertain (Samuelson, 2016).
In fact, in a recent study in which digital content creators were interviewed, it was found
that "social norms that emerge among these content creators do not always track to what the
law actually says, but are often guided more by ethical concerns. Our participants showed
surprisingly similar patterns of understandings and confusion, impacting technology use and
interaction online" (Fiesler & Bruckman, 2014, p. 1023). What.CD, while largely comprised of
content consumers rather than creators, demonstrated a similar internal code of behavior that

166

shaped data and interaction. The law, or more accurately, the various jurisdictions under which
manifold laws would come into play, were of little or no concern to the site until it was shut
down. Instead, musical activity flourished through sharing in ways uninhibited by outmoded

regulation. Although the alignment of ethical behavior and what the law endorses is assumed to
be ideally synonymous, we find that hegemonic forces have widened the gap between the two
in digital contexts. By keeping hegemony in check, a more suitable application of legal principles
to a greater array of cultural contexts can be achieved.

Sharing
Sharing, as a technocultural practice, has been written about extensively by Lawrence
Lessig (2002, 2004, 2008, 2009), who has championed the cause of an open internet free of
antique regulation. He pushed Creative Commons as an alternative to conventional copyright,
which has had both rhetorical effects on the copyright debate as well as a tangible impact on
how content creators publish their work. Unfortunately, this work has not been taken to heart
by the music industry or lawmakers to any meaningful extent. The recording industry reliably
asserts that traditional legal regimes, especially copyright, is what protects and sustains the
entire musical ecosystem in the West (Sherman, 2015), a claim which is dubious at best.
While the shortcomings of copyright have been written about extensively by legal
scholars, music industry insiders, lawyers, and musicians, the cultural practice of sharing has yet
to be effectively translated into legal language. In 2015, the U.S. Copyright Office even
completed an extensive music licensing study that resulted in a report that attempted to
identify copyright's key stakeholders and their legal needs in a digital environment.
Unfortunately, even this document did not yield the results necessary to connect new cultural
developments to extant policy structures. Despite its concessions that "music creators should be

fairly compensated for their contributions" and "Usage and payment information should be

167

transparent and accessible to rightsowners," the report's core logics are decidedly vacant of any
recognition of sharing as an important part of any digital culture (Copyright Office, 2015).

Cultural Factors
A common discourse used by courts and plaintiffs in these file sharing cases is one that
presumes that copyright directly protects, rewards, and incentivizes creators to keep creating.
For instance, to quote Justice Souter once more, the “values of supporting creative pursuits
through copyright protection” are ones that the Court should uphold. Patry (2011), however,
would argue that the legal system’s use of the term creativity differs significantly from its
broader understanding: “copyright law has rejected the subjective approach to creativity usually
found in the popular usage of the term” (p. 19). Because creativity is measured through the
commercial success of a work, a trap that Merges (2011) also seems to fall into when defending
the current copyright regime, vast swathes of artistic practices are either ignored or minimized.
For example, authors who have either released work under Creative Commons licenses or
infringe on copyrighted works in the process of making their own truly creative work (and
thereby forfeit any financial remuneration for their work) are not covered by current notions of
creativity found in the Copyright Act.
The lack of language from such agenda-setting sources addressing the importance of
sharing may explain the gap between policy and practice that has been mentioned before in this
chapter. A specific recommendation would be for governmental and industry institutions like
the Copyright Office, the RIAA, and the IFPI to craft specific resolutions about sharing. These
documents should start with these new cultural practices, rather than trying to fit them into
older logics. Legislation like the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) in the U.S and the EU's

Single Marketplace initiative pigeon-hole artists, technologists, and lawmakers into old

168

paradigms rather than encourage forward thinking legislation (Robinson, 2016).

Listening’s Role in Legal and Illegal Music Platforms
In the dissertation’s literature review, a quote from Andrew Feenberg emphasizes the
potential of “democratic interventions” to drive technological decision making. He further writes
that, rather than a “general disillusionment with capitalism,” most users of legal and illegal
music platforms “induce technical change not through a Great Refusal but through negotiations,
some conflictual, others cooperative, between lay actors or technical outsiders and those in
command of the institutions” (Feenberg, 2017, p. 8).” Through the act of listening on What.CD,
users constantly negotiate their own positions as well as technical changes that affect the site’s
social sphere. For instance, by building new site functionality that enables new modes of
listening, site administrators are negotiating with other user classes to change institutional
norms. Similar changes occur through legal services like Spotify, but with considerably less
flexibility or room for democratization.
Legal markets have a surprising amount of overlap with market-adjacent platforms like
What.CD. Listeners often suffer from oversaturation, or what Anita Kassabian calls “ubiquitous”
listening (2013), which can follow them around and play at their disposal across devices,
locations, and contexts (ch. 1). Essentially, ubiquity is what legal streaming services have
achieved by allowing users to access limitless music on any possible device, and the same
volume of music could be found at What.CD. The only difference in the two platforms was the
bottlenecks to this ubiquity: price for legal services and available bandwidth for What.CD.
What.CD users, rather than sharing music unconditionally, only did so when there was an
immediate benefit to their own activity on the site. On legal platforms like Spotify, a similar

169

behavior can be observed in allowing full albums to be listened to on a mobile device only when
customers are paying subscribers.

Similarities also lie in how both types of services are crafted and how they envision their
user bases listening and interacting with other listeners. For instance, the values of cooperation
and sociality are emphasized in both types of platforms through various communication tools.
Also, both types of services are interested in having an active role in shaping precise listening
experiences that involve file types, advertisements, and user interfaces.
For the purposes of this chapter, sound as an industry-related artifact is inseparable
from the technology that carries it, and in some important ways, the technology predicates the
capabilities of the sound. Trevor Pinch and Karin Bijsterveld write that “sound is no longer just
sound; it has become technologically produced and mediated sound” (2012, p. 4), suggesting
that, while technological mediation has always been important to analysis of markets of all
types, it is especially central to uncovering the importance of the relationship between legal and
illicit types of listening.
Listening through legal and illegal digital platforms is also characterized by a special
ambivalence toward market forces and especially toward the service they use to for listening.
While the activity of users on What.CD was not in direct defiance of hegemonic control of the
music industry with which it has become known (Burkart, 2010), the networked listener was
certainly aware of the control’s role in digital distribution (namely, that it had impeded the kinds
of distribution that the networked listener preferred for most of the 2000s).
The specific task of listening, both on What.CD and on legal platforms, occurs within
contexts that encourage specific characteristics as described above, and is ultimately shaped by
market forces since that is where the music and the disseminating technologies originate.

170

What.CD might have been the partial exception to that rule, but still could not escape capitalism
entirely, since the contents of the torrents would be decidedly vacant without market influence.

Conclusion
This chapter has attempted to find connections between legal policies and cultural
factors surrounding illegal digital consumption, specifically of music. The goal of finding such
connections has been to seek out possibilities for a more balanced view for legal frameworks.
Piracy, while certainly illegal to various degrees depending on the jurisdiction, is nearly
universally panned by lawmakers as bad for industries, consumers, and creators, a claim that
simply does not stand up to relevant research, especially the “found” Ecorys report discussed
throughout this chapter. The next chapter will scrutinize listening practices on What.CD as they
compare with legal streaming services.

171
Chapter 6 - Listening Practices and Characteristics of Streaming Services
As streaming services have emerged as a dominant player in the music industry, their
impact on listening habits have proportionately affected industry norms and audience
expectations. Compared to private trackers, streaming as a technological model has gained
widespread legitimacy, so its associated listening practices are described here. In this chapter,
such services are examined using four main characteristics: control, non-committance,
convenience, and community. Additionally, these services are situated in historical and
technological contexts with which they are connected, such as previous physical formats and
modern music piracy. The development and use of streaming services should be predicated on
community-driven values, such as equitable access and fair compensation, rather than
corporate ideologies like market dominance and strict rights maintenance.
Music streaming services like Spotify, Amazon Music, Apple Music, Pandora, Slacker,
and Deezer are the fastest growing revenue stream for the music industry and account for the
largest track play counts, especially when compared to conventional radio and physical sales
(Nielsen, 2017). Additionally, over the last five years, considerable rhetorical investment has
been made by the three major record labels (Sony, Universal, and Warner) to convince the
public that streaming is the future of music. In many respects, this is true, as the contractual
agreements between these labels and streaming services ensures an easy, mutually beneficial
relationship. However, the possibility for a wide range of artists to earn revenue, gain exposure,
and form audiences is often challenged by the hegemonic force that streaming services are
beginning to impose. Historically, other institutions have been in the same predicament of
unintentional gatekeeping, including radio stations and record stores.

172

In this chapter, the current position of streaming services is explored as it relates to four
characteristics: control, non-committance, convenience, and community. Historically, the
economic and cultural importance of the technosocial practice of listening to music was defined
by market-based gatekeepers who relied on consumer obsession with such formats as vinyl
records, cassette tapes, CDs, and the MP3s. Research has connected these to discussions of
materiality (Bødker 2004; Hagen, 2015; Lepa & Hoklas, 2015; Styvén 2007) and each of those
formats was celebrated for its portability, its fidelity, and longevity. Additionally, they were each
said to surpass their predecessors in certain ways that resonate with the current positivistic
thrust of computing technology. As streaming services now dominate the digital music
landscape, a slightly critical look at their social impact is considered here. Additionally, private
BitTorrent trackers are considered as an alternative to mainstream markets. While the
BitTorrent protocol has been around since 2001, it continues to be socially important because it
offers resistance to music industry hegemony. Original research on one tracker, What.CD,

demonstrates the usefulness of considering other technological realities than ones driven by the
market like streaming services.
Furthermore, this chapter suggests that streaming services and legal downloads are
simply the latest stage in music consumer fetishism by using an argument that borrows ideology
from a critical theory of technology, which attempts to consider new ways technology can be
democratizing (Feenberg, 2012). Specifically, tension exists between the increasing
centralization and corporatization of internet services on one hand, and the transformative
communicative possibilities that decentralization and distributed control offer. Audiences,
artists, and other groups are discussed as well as the impacts on individual listeners.

Control

173

Control over our online musical experience is one of the key selling points of streaming
services, and arguably the shift started at the advent of recorded music (Kassabian, 2013). More
specifically, control over our “ubiquitous” musical experience is now at its peak. McCourt (2005)
writes that “to compensate for their lack of materiality, digital music providers tout greater
selectivity, personalization, and community as ‘value‐added’ features” (2005, p. 1743), which
indicates that streaming services have attempted to imbue listening experiences with a sense of
limitless resources. While the impact this has on actual practices can be seen as liberating or
cheapening a listener’s experience, a critical approach would suggest that the test of this
technology’s success lies in its ability to reroute consumer logics to prioritize autonomy and
community rather than reproduce traditional corporate ideology.
Previous physical format epochs had built-in control mechanisms that proved more
reliable than current efforts. Namely, locking content to physical media prevented the type of
slippage we see today between the two. For instance, the ability to reliably copy audio from a
vinyl record, an 8-track, or cassette tape was considerably more expensive and difficult than
encoding a CD to MP3 files or downloading an album through BitTorrent. Large scale piracy
efforts were also noticeable and easily shut down by the RIAA in predigital times. While some
communities of listeners, such as Grateful Dead fans rallied around the availability of bootlegs
(Neumann & Simpson, 1997), a much stronger sense of cooperation and fellowship existed
through record stores and the cartels that entitled them.
Music and the ways in which it has transgressed hegemonic control has always lived in
the shadow of the mainstream narrative of digitization. From the popularization of the internet
in the late 1990s, Napster created visible ire for the recording industry, and much less visible
pathways were available to more motivated listeners. In How the Music Got Free, Stephen Witt

writes that “warez scene” servers and their accompanying IRC (internet relay chat) channels

174

were the backbone for more serious, volume intensive piracy than Napster:

Access to this topsite “darknet” was granted exclusively on a quid pro quo basis. To get
in, you had to contribute pirated material of your own … The lure of the darknet—the
promise of the digital library—was enough to corrupt … The media on the topsite
servers was available weeks before it could be found in stores, or even elsewhere on the
Internet. The spread of files from these servers was carefully monitored and controlled;
leaking to the Scene was rewarded, but leaking from the Scene was taboo. The files took
a long time to migrate to the chat channels and the Web. Sometimes they never left the
closed economy of the Scene at all. (p. 130)
Ironically, control was stringently exercised within this digital context, perhaps more strictly
than current streaming services, and relied on the logics of the platform. These logics involved
the combination of the new possibility of faceless, non-localized interaction, which lended an air
of enigma that required tight control, both because of the risk of being caught and the need to
maintain internal order. While being able to access the servers and IRC channels was a form of
gatekeeping in itself, a further knowledge of individual user handles and protocol raised the
barrier to all but a select few. As Witt explains, the individuals who had access to new musical
content who also were interested in illegally digitizing it through the newly developed MP3
encoder were relatively few, and their digital personas were infinitely more intriguing than their
“real” lives. The main protagonist in Witt’s narrative, for instance, gained access to new releases
before their shelf date because he worked in a CD manufacturing plant in North Carolina and
would sneak albums out at the risk of being caught and fired.
The lineage of piracy has also demonstrated that control is central to nearly all coveted
digital music communities. For instance, the shift of musical activity from the warez scene to
Oink, a private BitTorrent tracker, interested itself in maintaining a selected user base capable of
maintaining certain up- and download ratios and adhering to rules related to on-site behavior,

175

the use of virtual private networks (VPNs), and upload content formatting. When Oink closed in
2007, its successor, What.CD began operation shortly thereafter, and was in near constant

operation for over nine years. In turn, at least two new trackers have opened up after What.CD’s
halt, both of which are still in operation at the time of writing. They both have nearly identical
rules and graphical appearances to What, and use the same backend software, Gazelle.
Control in digital music has also been fought over at the level of encoding and decoding
of data. This layer of technology is important because all current streaming is predicated on its
widespread adoption and data economy. The MP3, the formative and most well-known audio
compression algorithm, was a frequent site of contestation from the moment it was completed
in the late 1980s. While originally intended to be a closed technology only usable through
licensing, it was quickly reverse-engineered and thereby capable of encoding any audio. As a
result, filesharing became a widespread technosocial practice. Attempts to take back the MP3
have manifested through digital rights management (DRM), which locks the audio inside of an
encrypted container, as well as through more complicated encoding schemas that require
specific playback hardware. Modern streaming services have inherited the baggage of
maintaining a closed infrastructure and must consistently fight against attempts to break
encryption, access music from outside specified channels, and find other vulnerabilities.
Control is also a central theme through network development, not only for music
distribution. While preaching the importance of decentralization and the emerging significance
of cryptonetworks, Chris Dixon (2018) writes that

“over time, the best entrepreneurs, developers, and investors have become wary of
building on top of centralized platforms. We now have decades of evidence that doing
so will end in disappointment. In addition, users give up privacy, control of their data,
and become vulnerable to security breaches. These problems with centralized platforms
will likely become even more pronounced in the future.”

176
It is no coincidence that streaming services depend on a centralized network paradigm, which
grants the service control over all affordances it offers — where music can be streamed, on
which devices, what music is available, and so on — creating a sharp distinction from largely
decentralized illicit services like private BitTorrent trackers. However, there are hints of legal
services also moving toward a decentralized structure. Early examples of this are FileCoin, a file
storage utility, and Upfiring, a filesharing tool. Both are incentivized through the same
mechanisms are BitCoin and Ethereum, and suggest one possible future for legal music
streaming services.
In addition to control being maintained by streaming services, the major suppliers of
content rely on their ability to monopolize the music that consumers want to hear. It is
estimated that somewhere between 66% and 80% of all music sales come from only three labels
(Digital Music News, 2016) who have convoluted agreements with streaming services. On top of
these sales figures, the various ways that artists are promoted on those services, such as newly
released albums, artist radio stations, and popularity charts obfuscate independent artists
without major label backing. While digitization has provided some of these artists the
opportunity to rise up through fissures that hegemonic forces have yet to fill in, their overall
rate of listenership is low because of service-imposed disadvantages.
The solution to the various modes of control this section has discussed is not simple
liberation. Because control is rarely top-down or authoritarian for streaming services or even
private trackers, we must consider the steps that listeners can take to give themselves agency.
Here, two possible actions along such lines are discussed, including more full-bodied awareness
and a continued negligence of law and policy. While all this chapter’s arguments operate on the

177

principle that markets, as they currently stand, can and should not be avoided, reshaping them
to benefit individuals rather than corporations is certainly a goal.
Increased user awareness of what is at stake in using a streaming service is an

empowering possibility that can make extant control mechanisms less effective at pinning users
down. More generally, as tech experts suggest a heightened concern about privacy and online
safety (Bakos et al., 2014), knowing the stakes of interacting with digital corporations is the first
step in breaking control. Nissenbaum (2010) suggests that an effective assessment of whether a
practice takes privacy into consideration necessarily involves the context in which the new
practice occurs. As a result, testing streaming services for privacy should involve an analytical
model that identifies certain actors and flows of information, and then subsequently attempts
to determine how appropriate those flows are given a set of norms. To reframe the discussion
of privacy as neither a right to secrecy or a right to control, Nissenbaum writes “there is, indeed,
great complexity and variability in the privacy constraints people expect to hold over the flow of
information, but these expectations are systematically related to characteristics of the
background social situation” (p. 129). By increasing awareness of what occurs through using a
streaming service — certainly not just the innocuous and easy listening the services themselves
advertise — users can begin to make more informed decisions.
Secondly, a continued disregard of law and policy is crucial for institutions to adapt to
user needs. Users of streaming services did not begin using them because they are legal, but
because they are convenient, a characteristic that is explored below. Such motivation correlates
to why users of private BitTorrent trackers pursue music on that platform: its libraries are
robust, the community is vibrant, and the law plays no role in user decision making (aside from
the use of a password-protected account). Currently, copyright law remains overly complicated
and irrelevant to any listener of online music, which is why original research by the author has

178

indicated that private tracker users are nearly as likely to use it in tandem with legal services.
Moreover, while the U.S. Copyright Office struggles to establish its role in encouraging
streaming market success and artist equitability, end users can evade outdated and clunky

regimes by finding services and tools that allow them to listen how they want. Markets adjust
more responsively to such action, and bypassing central rulemaking institutions allows users to
provide much needed resistance to traditional efforts at control.

Non-Committance
Non-committance refers to the tendencies of consumers to be service-agnostic, and it is
therefore assumed that their subsequent musical choices are equally blasé. Morris and Powers
(2015) write that “The branded musical experience supplied by streaming services is ultimately
about smoothing over streaming’s central paradox: getting users to accept it as their conduit to
music, while also using differentiated and variable access to the stream as the primary means of
extracting value from a wide range of musical practices” (p. 13-14). By framing it as a classic
example of branding is in some ways, then, convincing consumers of actual differences, rather
than working toward solutions that would truly differentiate services. Historically, we see
consumers committing to certain record stores, labels, and artist collectives. This occurs
sometimes on Bandcamp (bandcamp.com), where an “indie” ethos works to deliver more
economic and cultural equity to artists, and is perhaps the best example of consumers
committing to a streaming service.
There are several considerations when consumers are choosing a streaming service,
such as the GAFA (Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon) platform with which they are most
associated (Deleon, 2017), which artists are available, how expensive the service is, the quality
of audio it offers, and how information about live performances and other metadata is

integrated into the platform (Nielsen, 2017). Ultimately, most currently popular platforms

179

integrate the same affordances in slightly different configurations. The way that Spotify, for
instance, establishes itself as unique in the marketplace then is through advertising and price
point.
Licensing agreements have paved the way for most streaming services to offer the same
robust libraries as their competitors. Fortunately for the services, such negotiations are only
required with the three major labels mentioned in the previous section for most popular music
to be available. While non-major music is sometimes pursued by listeners, and while some of
that music is available on streaming services, data on what music users are listening to exposes
the overwhelming representation of major label artists (Nielsen, 2017). The awareness
mentioned in the discussion of control might lead to an increased interest in artists outside of
the major label sphere, which is where Bandcamp seems to be currently flourishing.
Robert Prey (2017) discusses the construction of the individual within the confines of
two streaming services, Spotify and Pandora, and the effects of viewing individual users through
different function-defined lenses. He calls this process “algorithmic individuation,” and frames it
as an operation concerned with the ongoing activity of users rather than a static portrait:
“Through myriad acts of everyday consumption – from the songs we listen to, to the products
we buy – we produce our identity and modulate ourselves as individuals. The recommendation
systems that power personalized media across the web are merely one enabler of individuation,
albeit an increasingly central one” (p. 10). While such activity seems largely akin to traditional
marketing approaches that advertising agencies have always been interested in, it does point to
commitment as a characteristic by which streaming service users are difficult to define and that
the services themselves may not rely on in the future.

Convenience

180

An oft-lauded claim of streaming music is that its convenience is unprecedented. The
typical buzzwords used by services accentuate the limitless, ad-free, expert-curated, always-on
nature of the new listening that parallels the rhetoric regarding other internet-based
technologies. Arguably, convenience is at the heart of many other music technologies, and is
therefore one of the basic tenets of the materiality of listening (Sterne, 2013). In studying
various technosocial groups and their relationships to streaming services, Sinclair and Green
(2015) contend that “steadfast pirates are still not convinced of the superiority of legal digital
platforms over illegal forms of digital consumption, and the mixed tapes and old schoolers have
reservations over its potential superiority to physical forms of music” (p. 12), which challenges
services’ definitions of convenience. Further, it demonstrates that definitions for these terms
should be culturally-driven, a point that is further discussed below.
It should be noted that a discussion of ethics is absent and intentionally separated from
any consideration of convenience in this context. The most frequently cited criticism of
discussing digital musical activity that happens in the realm of legal gray (and black) area is the
fact that moral harm comes from participating. Arguably, some of that is true. Some artists
might suffer in a material way because of piracy. Overall, though, numerous modes of research
have proven its largely neutral and positive impact on metrics like record sales and concert
attendance (Ecorys, 2015). Additionally, original research suggests that illegal downloading is
nearly always used in conjunction with other forms of music consumption, like streaming and
buying music. Additionally, the category of users that stream and download music “scores
highest on music involvement, Internet use, and Internet expertise. The streamers-downloaders
are most knowledgeable of Spotify and have the highest percentage of paying users,” (Weijters

& Goedertier, 2016, p. 6), further suggesting a connection between piracy and paying

181

customers.

Community
Exactly what an online community looks like is one of the key questions media scholars
currently wrestle with, and recent societal events in the U.S. like the 2016 Presidential elections
and a rash of cyberbullying might suggest that technosocial attempts at community are better at
dividing groups than unifying them. Cass Sunstein (2018) notes that two disturbing trends have
risen out of social media use: “people’s growing power to filter what they see, and also
providers’ growing power to filter for each of us, based on what they know about us” (p. 20).
Because Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, and others have narrowed the horizons for
many users rather than broaden them, the most immediate conclusion we can draw is that
community building was never the goal of these tools in the first place. Rather, larger profit
margins through methods that oppose the bolstering of community values are what drives
decision making. Similarly, we must assume that streaming services operate through logics of
late stage capitalism. Or, at best, these services are ambivalent to community formation, which
would create a blind spot at the point where such action would benefit them.
Streaming services like Spotify, then, fit snugly into the history of markets training
individuals to listen in a mode that promotes investing in popular artists, the major labels that
back them, and the resulting “scenes.” This listening also encourages and actively shapes
community formation around those items. While in the early 20th century such activity
consisted of buying popular sheet music and listening on a gramophone, and then buying
compact discs to replace vinyl records with the same music in the 1980s and 90s, streaming
services today shape listening by algorithmic suggestions. On Spotify, this includes such

182

functions as “Made For You,” “Recommendation Stations,” and “Your Daily Mix” (see Figure 1).
By sifting through millions of tracks to find the ones that you should really listen to, streaming
services seek to connect you to music that serves competing purposes, namely music that the
listener will connect with and that benefits the major labels mentioned earlier.

Figure 19: Spotify, Algorithmic Personalization

Streaming services not only seek to connect to listeners on a personal level, but also to
build a network of users that can listen collectively in these prescribed ways. They do so by
attempting to tap into extant networks that users are familiar with through Facebook or Twitter.
Spotify encourages users to connect their Facebook, Last.fm, and Waze accounts to be able to
monitor activity on those platforms, share listening activity, and integrate app functionality.
Especially with Facebook, Spotify seeks to map new information about Friends onto the network
a user has already created. In researching the motivations in using music apps in connection
with social media, Krause et al. write that “the three uses and gratifications underlying using
Facebook listening applications (communication, entertainment, and habitual diversion) indicate

183

that while some individuals derive pleasure from listening or do so as a leisure interest, there

are also more communicative and personal motivations, such as using the tool to promote not
only a musician or group, but also to express one’s own identity” (2014, p. 75). Such a finding
suggests that streaming services have succeeded in promoting a prescribed way of listening into
a user’s broader social sphere.
An important axis for community building in music communities is between artists and
audiences, which neither legal streaming services nor private trackers are very good at. While
Spotify does display upcoming performances that artists will be giving, there are no other
attempts within the app to connect users with artists. As mentioned during the discussion of
non-committance, some other platforms, including Bandcamp, have allowed for these
connections to form between artists and their audiences. Unfortunately, no other sites currently
offer similarly open possibilities, where fans can pay-what-they-want, or pay a flat fee for music
that will primarily go directly to the artist.
Furthermore, notions of community are necessarily tied to the economic survival of
artists, a prospect which is precarious at best. Damon Krukowski (2018) writes that a more
intentional community can form around digital services if subtle shifts are made by both
consumers and musicians. He also points out how deeply current musical communities are
slighted by decisions that streaming services make:

Look now at how badly their applications [streaming services] already serve entire
genres of less popular music. Spotify lists recordings by song title, album title, or
featured artist name. But that information is so limited it leaves out even the other
performers on a recording, a crucial aspect to classical and jazz. For that matter,
performers are kind of important to rock, too!

184

As an action of resistance against the anti-community forces employed by streaming services,
Krukowski suggests that musicians counterintuitively give music away. By focusing on other

possible revenue streams, artists need not worry about the specter of not earning any income
from their streaming content. If the ways in which artists seek to monetize begins to resonate
with the audiences they attempt to connect with, then forming communities does not need to
be opposed to market forces. Rather, this move should be seen as an intervention that reclaims
the power of digital distribution for the artists that are creating content.

Conclusion
This chapter has sought to contribute to a growing body of work on streaming musical
services, a sector whose importance is as undeniable as it is simultaneously tricky to culturally
and economically situate. As many scholars have explored materiality and listening, the four key
terms of control, non-committance, convenience, and community have been used to explore
connections to past formats, the present status of the streaming listener as a subject, and the
possibilities that alternative listening environments like private trackers offer. Bennett and
Rogers (2012) write that “since the widespread uptake of online digital technologies, music
listeners can now make accounts of materiality that span decades and numerous physical
manifestations of playback” (p. 12). The hope of listeners is that such possibilities remain open
as streaming services gain dominant footing in the market. Future research on the interplay of
past and present format conventions will serve to exact the nature of this materiality.
In a possibly heartening turn of events, Spotify is beginning to mature as a platform
beyond needing to be subservient to the three major record labels. By producing its own video
and audio content and curating its own playlists, its business model might drift toward that of
Netflix, which has consistently cut back on the number of movies it licenses from major studios

185

in favor of creating its own original content (Constine, 2017). The risk is that the vast library that
Spotify currently offers will be replaced by Spotify-owned content. While not that many Netflix
subscribers are interested in watching the 1969 film Easy Rider (which they currently cannot),
the technological constraints do not limit them from doing so. Unfortunately, antiquated
licensing schemes hold content back. If Spotify, the biggest streaming service, follows this
model, music “spanning decades” might be made off limits, making it more challenging to listen
to music like James Brown’s 1969 release Soul Pride (The Instrumentals, 1960-69), an album
which is currently available. In the future, the “celestial jukebox” might just be Spotify’s version
of Top 40 radio.
Does this free musicians and listeners? Being able to listen widely is beneficial to both
groups of people, and it seems clear that if we consider the broadest categories of artists rather
than those whose voices show up in the media, making content available would most readily
benefit them. Private trackers offer a possibility for what such availability might look like if we
can temporarily suspend the importance of outmoded IP governance and both traditional and
new power brokers like the three major record labels and Spotify. Furthermore, appropriate
legal and technological conventions can be mapped onto practices that musicians and listeners
find most useful, such as being able to find any music in history of the recording industry and

related artwork and metadata. For artists, finding revenue streams outside of streaming services
like Spotify, while still a precarious prospect, holds the possibility of expanding on what services
like Bandcamp have proven to be successful.
This topic ties back into this issue of private trackers as the two represent different
approaches to listening. On the one hand, private trackers represent a lineage of practice that is
at least 15 years old and is rooted in even older methods of file distribution. On the other,
streaming services utilize a nascent technology that has only accrued major listenership in the

186

last 5 years. Private trackers, while closed to the general public, are “internally open” systems in
that their content is exhaustive and available to any valid user. Streaming services, alternately,
while open to the general public, are closed in various ways to several publics: new releases are
not available to free customers, certain releases are only available users in specific geographic
locales due to licensing restrictions, and the system is just not generally “hackable” like private
trackers are 9. Moving forward, private tracker users should be cautiously optimistic about the
paradigms of the two approaches to be bridged in ways that are socially useful.

9 That is, private trackers are able to be modified at will by staff programmers and other tinkerers. Only

Spotify programmers can modify the streaming experience, and only at the behest of their superiors.

187
Conclusion
This dissertation has scrutinized the phenomenon of What.CD, a private BitTorrent
tracker, namely in its novel communicative practices. In Chapter 1, a theoretical framework and
literature review set the stage for investigating What.CD. In Chapter 2, What.CD’s users and
tools were evaluated for communicative dynamics within a particular digital context. Then in
Chapter 3, What.CD’s torrent data was mined for social significance, an exercise that revealed
the great lengths to which volunteers spent countless hours documenting and archiving a
massive volume of information, arguably a singular collection. In Chapter 4, the results of a
survey administered to about 120 former What.CD members evaluated user sentiment about
the site, finding that amid a strictly enforced governance regime, nearly all respondents
remember the site positively. Interestingly, nearly half the respondents also use legal services
like Spotify or Pandora. In Chapter 5, the legal standing of music online was inspected in relation
to how listening practices are shaped and affected. Chapter 6 considered these legal services
and four characteristics they and their customer base exhibit: control, non-committance,
convenience, and community. Altogether, these various components hopefully paint a picture of
What.CD as a vibrant, unique technosocial space shaped by a variety of external and internal
forces.
The remainder of this conclusion works through concepts related to future research and
implications of the previous chapters. These concepts include: how cultural factors interact with
the law; gatekeepers; how illegal listening can inform legal policy; the role of interaction in
revenue generation; unregulated archives; digital nativism; and the future of digital listening. All
of these topics gravitate around the themes excavated in the previous pages, namely
digitization, democratically-oriented data exchange, and power structures.

Cultural Factors and the Law

188

It has been established that legal frameworks, as they stand in several places like the U.S
and the E.U., are lingually rigid. Perhaps this is the nature of legal frameworks; providing
flexibility might also mean creating room for legal interpretations that would interfere with the
goals of policymakers. However, this dissertation has operated on the assumption that this
rigidity is also to blame for some of the massive problems that content industries have had in
the last decades, rather than piracy. Therefore, a few different terms are offered here to
stimulate collective thinking about a cultural approach to digital media policy design and
legality.
Literature that seeks to explore the intersection of culture and the law is already robust.
Perhaps most well-known is Rosemary Coombe's influential work, The Cultural Life of
Intellectual Properties: Authorship, Appropriation, and the Law (1998). The author notes that
little attention "is paid to the political economies that enable cultural forms to circulate through
the mass media--economies with legal infrastructures. The legal dimensions of cultural
production, circulation, and reception have been shamefully neglected" (p. 30). Although
Coombe was not referring specifically to digital contexts this dissertation has been concerned
with, she aptly describes the aversion that cultural scholars have to legality. The terms below
represent culturally-situated themes that could influence the legal contexts that govern digital
media.
Unfortunately, these cultural factors are not easy to measure. They do not comport with
quantitative analysis, or even traditional legal analysis found in law journals and case briefs. It is
through the sort of discursive analysis below that cultural studies of digital contexts might
contribute to current legal understanding.

Gatekeepers

189

Traditionally, intellectual property law has focused on the individual as the unit of
analysis (Heller, 1998). The author, the songwriter, the rights holder -- these are all identity
constructions in which originality is bestowed. As such, they also operate as gatekeepers to
content that listeners cannot access without their permission or someone they assign as a
proxy. It is difficult, then, to create openings for legal change when policies that benefit
individuals more than groups stand so monolithically opposed to the behaviors and desires of
digital music consumers.
To a greater extent, though, record labels aggregate the rights of individuals and
therefore can create legal policies that suit their interests. Specifically, the length of time a
copyright is valid, the ways in which a song can be digitally shared, and the penalties for
infringement are all policies shaped by these gatekeepers.
An effort to shift laws to benefit listeners would begin with the distribution of power to
listeners, both at the individual and organizational level. Some initial steps toward this
redistribution would involve drafting new copyright policies, rather than amending old ones.
Especially in the U.S., it has become evident that copyright law does not work for anyone except
content corporations (Patry, 2011). Additionally, the interests of pirate parties, tech companies,
artists’ rights organizations, record labels, and all other entities with a vested interest in the
music industry should have equal footing in this process.

How Illegal Listening Can Inform Legal Policy
Since 2001, the BitTorrent protocol has been the de facto method for pirating audio,
and has been demonized as a result (Danaher & Waldfogel, 2012). As was mentioned in the
discussion of France's sociolegal context in Chapter 5, a piece of software can be found at fault

190

for piracy as equally as the individuals committing the alleged theft. Similarly, such accusations
of guilt have been leveled at other software platforms U.S. legal contexts also like Napster,
Kazaa and Grokster.
Private trackers like What.CD center around a closed community that usually

communicates through a website and an internet relay chat (IRC) channel. The website requires
a username and password, and entry into the site is only granted through an invitation or a
strenuous interview. For music, the current most popular private trackers (at the time of this
writing) are RED and Apollo, both of which are direct descendants of What.CD (see Image 1).
This website was famous for its longevity and extremely deep, meticulously-kept catalog. In
turn, though, What.CD was built after the closure of one of the original private trackers, Oink.

Figure 20: A RED user’s graphic interpretation of the lineage of piracy.

Private trackers pose an interesting problem because, on the one hand, most of the

191

exchanges there are illegal and would certainly be considered copyright infringement. On the
other, because they are largely left alone by authorities, they offer a unique example of digital
music exchange that happens just out of the direct influence of the marketplace.
Simultaneously, though, they do not pose a direct threat to that marketplace; participation on
What.CD did not replace paid subscriptions to legitimate streaming services, and if anything,
activity on What.CD bolstered and encouraged participation in legal markets. Interview data has
proven this by demonstrating that What.CD users often simultaneously subscribe to paid
services like Spotify, and their musical interests inform their participation in each. Users would
often have uses for What.CD, such as home listening, and other uses for paid streaming services,
such as listening in the car.
In the survey and some interviews with former What.CD members explored in Chapter
4, motivations and logics that drove such an avid community of collectors, archivists, and
devoted listeners were exposed. The following insights were gleaned from that data, and they
are relevant here because they offer some insight into how cultural information can be
integrated into legal systems that might govern a wider swath of digital activity. It is understood
that this thought exercise requires imagining how communities like What.CD might exist in the
light of public scrutiny (or at least the observation of governmental authority), and as such, may
require some temporary suspension of the understanding of our current legal regimes.

Interaction = Profit
The Ecorys study mentioned at the beginning of this conclusion found that piracy does harm
some markets, namely video games and newly released movies. Generally, though, the study
noted that "the results do not show robust statistical evidence of displacement of sales by

192

online copyright infringements" (p. 7). Specifically, music was found to be relatively free of risk
of displacement (piracy does not displace sales):
For books, music and games prices are at a level broadly corresponding to the

willingness to pay of illegal downloaders and streamers. This suggests that a decrease in
the price level would not change piracy rates for books, music and games (p. 8).
While such a finding confirms the suspicions of many copyright scholars and activists, such a
glaring lack of economic evidence for the "war on piracy" that the recording industry has waged
makes about as much sense as the U.S. war on drugs and may have a similar effect: not only
does it prove ineffective, but it might have damaging repercussions that are more costly than
the original problem.
On What.CD, many users that were interviewed would participate and simultaneously
subscribe to legal services like Apple Music and Spotify because they are more portable than the
BitTorrent protocol, which requires a stable broadband connection and static files that are not
easily available through any cloud platform. It can be deduced then, that if piracy on What.CD
had no decidedly negative effect on sales, it is entirely possible that finding new artists through
What.CD could lead to purchases and streaming royalties through legal streaming services.
Furthermore, many users expressed their use of What.CD revolved around finding
releases that were no longer commercially available, either because certain titles were out of
print or because certain albums were never available in particular markets (a Japan-only release,
for instance). This behavior indicates that deeper bonds from a listener to an artist are forming
beyond what the legal digital market could offer, which ultimately results in the listener
spending more money in those markets when a new album comes out.
Also, live performances, a category of revenue other media do not have, account for a
notable share of profits that the Ecorys study finds:

193

In the music industry, live concerts generate more revenues than recorded music –
physical carriers, digital streams and downloads combined...Considering the different
measurement units, illegal downloads and streams are estimated to have positive
effects on legal downloads and streams at a rate between 16 per cent to 30 per cent...
illegal downloads or streams significantly induce more visits of live concerts, at a rate of
0.7 extra visits per 100 illegally downloaded tracks and 13 extra visits per 100 hours of
illegal streaming. (p. 9 and 134)
So, from an economic perspective, it is clear to see that private trackers can incubate
communities that do spend money on music.

Unregulated Archives Are Better
Towards the end of What.CD's existence, it was estimated that the number of albums
available were in the millions, thousands of which were not available through services like
Spotify or even for sale anymore. Additionally, one of the most noticeable requirements of the
site was a strict adherence to many sets of rules. Because of these two factors, not only was the
available music quantitatively robust, but also well documented and categorized. While abiding
by rules was held at an authoritarian pitch (and arbitrarily harsh at times), all of this was
organized without any monetary incentive or with the promise of legal protection. Quite the
contrary, in fact--when What.CD was taken down, its servers basically self-destructed, resulting
in the decimation of all stored data.
Another characteristic of What.CD and other private trackers is the availability of a
single work in a variety of file formats, often at higher bitrates than are commercially available.
This demonstrates that unregulated archives are also better at curating than many legal ones,
even though no one is being paid to watch over it.

A "Nativist" Solution

194

Digital Nativism is a term that has been met with scholarly caution at best (Palfrey &
Gasser, 2013), and journalistic scorn at worst (Economist, 2010). It refers to the cultural
birthright associated with growing up with digital devices, paradigms, and infrastructure, as well
as the resulting impact they have on an individual’s behavior, development, and prospects for
the future. While not entering this debate, it is posited here that private trackers take advantage
of networked technology in ways that "make more sense" than legal services, since they take
advantage of the internal logic of digital communication. Specifically, private trackers rely on
decentralized access to content, and they facilitate user bases for which geographic borders are
not relevant. Both factors have the potential to influence legal paradigms for digital media
consumption.
Firstly, private trackers that use the BitTorrent protocol, which is a decentralized model
whose architecture consists of a "seed/leech" structure, in which a user downloads a file from
multiple nodes at once. Such a schema bears an uncoincidental resemblance to TCP/IP, the
protocol most web services are built on. Because of this similarity, BitTorrent has become wildly
popular and easy to use, with a lower barrier to entry than some legal music services.
Secondly, the private tracker user base is not confined to a specific set of countries,
unlike services like Spotify who must negotiate in each new territory in which it seeks to
operate. This is not to suggest that national borders are erased, surely some remnants of the
digital divide exist in the representative percentages of specific users. Plus, some countries have
a harder time gaining entry to some private trackers because their Internet Service Providers
(ISPs) are less reliable. However, geographic location plays less of an overt role in membership,
which reflects the ways in which internet use transgresses national boundaries in other

195

domains, such as political influence (Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017) and retail markets like Amazon
and Alibaba.

Legal, Illegal, and Market-Adjacent Listening
Digital listening is reductively categorized because of current epistemological regimes,
and that illegal and legal listening play an equally important role in the understanding of digital
media consumption. The case of What.CD is designed to bolster this claim, although it does
require nontraditional thinking about copyright. Furthermore, if legal scholars can distance
themselves from statuses of “legal” and “illegal” in relation to digital listening, at least
temporarily, we can begin to judge technological solutions based on their merits and popularity
rather than arcane systems held in place by entrenched power brokers.
While the music traded on What.CD was not strictly legal, a majority of the music was
made popular through legal markets like radio, streaming services, and digital music stores like
iTunes. Therefore, the term “market-adjacent” is used to denote the complex relationship
between What.CD and legitimated channels of consumption, especially in how they influence
each other. Even while What.CD was being used as a music discovery engine by its users, this
activity was presumed to generally resemble the discovery taking place on legal platforms.
The BitTorrent protocol is discussed at length within technical fields like computer
science (Cuevas et al., 2013; Qiu & Srikant, 2004; Zhang et al., 2011) and mathematics (Li et al.,
2013; Wang & Kangasharju, 2013). However, from a media studies perspective, its impacts seem
to be limited to discussions regarding general piracy (Beyer & McKelvey, 2015; Smith & Telang,
2016). BitTorrent, however, also represents an important ideological value system based on
egalitarianism that opened a cultural moment in the early 2000s, in which unregulated digital
communication seemed possible. A collection of global events indicates the importance of

196

BitTorrent to this moment, including the digital-populist occurrences of Occupy and the Arab

Spring, the rash of pirate party activity in the early 2010s, the Snowden revelations of 2013, and
the passage of Net Neutrality in the U.S. in 2015. This cluster, if nothing else, highlights the
power at stake in digitization, and BitTorrent represents a moment in which a technological
protocol became a hidden driver for meaningful social interaction.
All users on What.CD had an explicit desire to participate, a shared understanding of the
cultural importance of certain musical values, and an interest in the site’s infrastructure, a space
that Christopher Kelty (2005) calls a “recursive public.” He writes that “techniques and design
principles that are used to create software or to implement networking protocols cannot be
distinguished from ideas or principles of social and moral order” (p. 186), suggesting that users
are equally enthused about the tools as they are about their use. Such a phenomenon is not
abnormal, and arguably happens all over the web in the form of digital rights activism (Baack,
2015), open source software movements (Dabbish et al., 2012), within big tech companies
(Goggin, 2012), and especially on legal music platforms of all kinds, such as SoundCloud,
Bandcamp, and Spotify. Effectively, free speech arguments concerning discourse online deal
with the platforms and networks as they do with content and censorship. All these factors
contribute to What.CD being a unique example of a networked public that acts as a model for
the expansion of legal modes of consumption.
To become a member of What.CD, users had to undergo a strenuous interview, and the
site claimed 25,000 people became members through this method, though some members were
invited. The interview process is discussed at greater length in the introduction. In a similar
fashion, legal services like Spotify erect barriers to entry based on criteria like monthly
subscription fees, device ownership, signing a lengthy end-user license agreement, and allowing
personal data to be used for a variety of purposes. While not as time consuming as What.CD’s

197

obligations, these qualifications for membership in legal streaming services are still costly, and
seem to be naturalized by the markets that assume that a user’s privacy is of minimal

importance, that expensive smartphones are ubiquitous even in the face of a digital divide, and
that users are happy to be divided into classes such as paid and free.
Because a username and password were required, What.CD could not be viewed by the
public. Therefore, it could not be searched or mined for data from external services, and its
content was only of use to its users. On the other hand, users of modern legal services are
subject to multiple invasions of privacy. Current literature that discusses data exploitation rarely
considers invasive environments like these except for Facebook (Andrejevic, 2015), and it also
downplays the number of internet users that may belong to services like What.CD. Therefore,
one of the core logics of What.CD, which centers on privacy, was that data should not leave the
site’s premises. When the site was shut down, it was deleted entirely (or at least, according to
What.CD’s Twitter account). Although administrators deleted this content to protect themselves
and the site’s users after it was shut down, it was also done based on the assumption that the
data was more valuable and unique than what could typically be found on the open web.
Two bodies of data were discussed in dedicated chapters, user data and torrent data.
Concerning both, Siva Vaidhyanathan (2012) writes that the value of data on the internet is tied
up in its retrievability, especially for companies like Spotify and Apple Music, and that the data
storage that is residual from online communication is automatically political in nature because
of the potential for exploitation. Furthermore, he argues that the internet faces serious
challenges to becoming the digital public sphere that many hoped it would be in the early 90s:
“The struggle to speak freely on the global network of networks illustrates the daunting
challenges of forging a ‘global civil society’ or a media environment in which citizens around the

world can organize, communicate, and participate openly and equally” (p. 134-135). Such an

198

indictment has equally negative predictions for illicit and legal music services.
As there are many barriers to entry for individuals to participate in legal and marketadjacent services like What.CD, such as access to broadband and digital literacy skills, there are
simultaneously challenges that hinder the ability of data storage and retrieval systems to
promote a healthy civil society. As a result of being aware of these challenges, What.CD’s data
had to remain limited in its accessibility even though it would have proved useful for discourse
to enrich musical understanding online. Such a throttling of data shaped the site to, in some
ways, resemble to the broader web, and in others, to feel the need to rigorously defend from its
threats.
The control of data is also central to how legal services like Spotify operate, and is
perhaps the most valuable commodity. Knowing where, when, and how a user listens to music is
information that can be used to sell products or to sell to companies looking for specific
demographic data. Therefore, Spotify protects its data in much the same way that What.CD did,
for similar reasons related to leverage.

How Listening Can Inform Future Market Development
There are a few factors that should be considered when thinking about how to apply
this dissertation’s findings about listening to new digital contexts. Some key issues are how the
music sounds, how communities form, and who gets access.
How the Music Sounds
To What.CD members, the fidelity of audio files was more important than to the
average listener. According to the rules of What.CD as well as the general sentiments in its

forums, lossless audio files, which do not have any less audio data than much larger

199

uncompressed files, were preferred. When the site shut down, the deletion of these lossless
files was also seen as the most egregious disappearance, and the obsessive nature with which
such audio needed to be documented attests to its cultural importance. For future listening
platforms, we should also consider the importance of fidelity. iTunes currently does allow for
the purchase of lossless audio, but the most popular streaming services offer no quality options.
How Community Forms
Like many other cultural discussions of digital spaces (Wagner, 2016), describing
What.CD is a task best suited for a hybridized vocabulary that takes the political, on one hand,
and the technical, on the other, and seeks to find their interdependencies. Consequently,
What.CD members had an identity co-constructed between social forces and technological
paradigms. Understanding the group dynamics of listeners is also dependent on a critical
approach to technosocial value systems, but as Brian Epstein (2015) notes, there is often a
mistaken connection between the activity of individuals and the activity of groups. He asks:
“What more can there be to group action, apart from the actions of the members?” He answers
his own question by suggesting that “facts about group actions and intentions are anchored to
have more heterogeneous grounding conditions. Facts about group members are just part of
the grounds” (p. 217). For What.CD, ambivalence was rooted in some of these grounding
conditions, such as the site’s organization, the nature of its digital accountability (in terms of
ratio maintenance), and the often-illicit nature of its music sharing.
Compared to What.CD, community exists in streaming services like Spotify through
connecting to a listener’s social media network, thereby allowing them to discover what their
friends are listening to, what playlists they have created, and which artists they prefer. However,

200

in the same way that social networks have been criticized for taking advantage of the flexibility
of a precarious workforce (Hardt and Negri, 2009), it is also possible to frame the convenience

value as one that both compels listeners to “bend their ears” and listen in the way that services
desire, and constructs community in an idiosyncratic manner that serves to promote the service
itself. For instance, allowing listeners to operate outside the bounds of current affordances
would necessitate rearranging coding resources to clear space for flexibility, a premise that
seems to stand diametrically opposed to those services’ core logics (what if Spotify users want
to share musical tablature of their favorite songs within the service? The absurdity of that
possibility confirms the limits of community).
Who Gets Access
Because of the strenuous interview process required to join What.CD and the limitation
on maximum user count, only a small group of people had access to What.CD. Because of this
exclusionary mechanism, a certain distance is perceived between the “real” world of marketdriven music sales and the circulation of goods on the site. A challenge lies, then, in closing that
distance in future digital markets by incorporating some of the characteristics of sites like
What.CD, especially community-driven listening. While streaming services like Spotify are
beginning to do this at a basic level by connecting social media to the act of listening, that
paradigm could be pushed further by encompassing other parts of an individual’s social sphere,
such as political ideology or communities of faith.

The Future of Digital Listening
Part of the work involved in figuring out what future digital listening looks like is to
thoroughly analyze the digital spaces where most listening takes place: streaming services,
YouTube, and digital storefronts like Bandcamp. Existing research on these spaces has served to

201

lay important groundwork in demonstrating their unique position as cultural sites of meaningful
musical activity (Aguiar & Waldfogel, 2015; Bannister, 2014). Furthermore, other studies of
online musical communities validate many of the theoretical claims made in this chapter, such
as the unique position of What.CD and the centrality of technocultural assemblages like
protocols and data. However, these concepts need to be pushed into new directions in order to
generate new knowledge.
One force that researchers must constantly resist, however, is technocultural
solutionism, an ethos that celebrates the shift in music consumption as a challenge to hit a
moving target. Eric Sheinkop (2016) sums up the assumptions of such an approach by saying
that “the relationship is clear: consumers want music, but aren’t paying as much for it anymore;
brands want more consumers, but can’t build an audience on their own; and artists want to
make music, but need a meaningful revenue stream to do so” (p. 24). However, there are two

gaps in the logics of this solutionism that put “consumers” and “artists” at peril: the possibility of
brands aligning with artists’ ideological stances, and the subsequent “meaningful” revenue
stream that results from that fruitful relationship. While tech startups and the music industry
seek to envelop resources like artist talent and capital back into their systems of productivity,
this moment of fissure may be an opportunity to reconsider the relationship between music and
the markets it serves (Sinnreich 2013, Burkhart 2010).
A further challenge associated with assessing new online musical communities is that
they are generally unprecedented in their structure and cultural development. As a result, the
research of these sites must be constantly updated to reflect the current scholarly paradigms for
online research. Richard Rogers (2013) writes that “the internet is employed as a site of research
for far more than just online culture. The issue no longer is how much of society and culture is
online, but rather how to diagnose cultural change and societal conditions by means of the

202

Internet. The conceptual point of departure is the recognition that the Internet is not only an
object of study but also a source” (p. 21). His methodological suggestion would cause a

researcher’s analytical lens to refocus on aspects of social activity outside of the small purview
of what happens within a browser tab or BitTorrent client, and possibly outside the physical
network also. For streaming services like Spotify and Apple Music (and whichever new players
may enter the market), extracting core logics will rely on building theoretical structures that can
accommodate the historically-situated act of listening that has been described in this chapter as
well as the shifts that take place as a result of technological reconfiguration.
There are currently a few descendants of What.CD that use the same site layout and
procedures that must be explored. These sites are generally difficult to gain access to and
therefore difficult to research in a timely manner. They are, nonetheless, important continuities
that connect the defunct What.CD to contemporary online activity that is constantly evolving
within listening publics. Interviewing members of these sites will provide important information
on the social conditions that are either reproduced from What.CD or emerging from new
practices and procedures.

The Future of Music
Musical practices, surprisingly, have not fundamentally changed because of digitization.
Performers still rely on audiences, and recordings, more or less, serve the same purpose they
always have: to reproduce performative gestures in a medium that listeners can take with them.
Moreover, most musicians are not materially suffering or benefiting from piracy. While
occasional artists break through to mass appeal because of social media or streaming platforms,
and while all musicians certainly would not mind that happening to them, most pursue their
craft in the best way they know how — playing out, getting feedback, and listening to their

203

hearts. In this way, digitization can be thought of as a water line that rises and everyone must

react. I would not, though, characterize it as a force that inherently makes winners out of some
artists and losers out of others.
In the future, well, we don’t know. The internet is still emergent. While some digital
practices seem to be entrenched within western culture, others are novel and experimental.
Power is distributed unevenly, as it is over any social construction, which causes some ideas to
flourish, and others, like What.CD, to unfortunately wither. Hope lies in the persistence of good
ideas to find merit among a large constituency, which What.CD also enjoyed, which has led to its
survival through the private trackers that were born out of its shutdown.