TURNING TRASH INTO TREASURE: REALITY TELEVISION, MEDIA GOVERNANCE
AND SECONDARY MARKETS
By
SEAN T. LEAVEY

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
In the wake of the Great Recession (2007-2009), a subgenre of reality television (RTV) surfaced
that focused on buying and selling old and used things, largely antiques and collectibles, at
auctions, pawn shops, flea markets and other secondary market sites. This subgenre, which I
have termed Trash and Treasure TV, included programs such as American Pickers (2010present), Storage Wars (2010-present) and Flea Market Flip (2012-present), and emerged at the
exact moment when people needed to cope with the consequences of the financial downturn.
Following media theorists Laurie Ouellette and James Hay, Trash and Treasure TV is positioned
here as a technique of governmentality that provided viewers with “how-to guides” for learning
to participate in the secondary market. This included modeling and direct instruction intended to
teach audiences the cognitive and affective skills and practices necessary to be successful
entrepreneurs. Given the dismantling of the welfare state and its social safety nets, RTV acted as
a form of neoliberal governance meant to produce entrepreneurial subjects capable of navigating
the contemporary economic landscape. Having gathered data from interviews with 44 secondary
market participants, 75 hours of field observation, and a textual analysis of the initial seasons of
the programs named above, my research is the first to combine interpretive and ethnographic
methods to study this RTV subgenre.
These methods revealed that although participants were critical of Trash and Treasure TV, they
were also informed, inspired and entertained by the programs to varying degrees. I found that
contrary to RTV’s “free market” portrayals, the local secondary market operated as a hierarchy
ii

in which those starting out with the most social and economic resources held a powerful
competitive advantage over others. Additionally, the local marketplace did not exist in a vacuum,
but within a post-Recession environment in which taste and consumption patterns had changed
due to generational shifts. This diminished the value of objects and the prevalence of practices
such as collecting. Significantly, I found that Trash and Treasure TV’s representation of
secondary markets centered on the leisure activities and tastes of white, middle-class men trading
in high-value objects. In turn, impoverished people, women, and other minoritized populations
whom I observed buying and selling everyday items in the types of secondary market spaces
depicted on the shows, were largely omitted. This allowed me to locate the limits of RTV as a
technique of media governance in its inability to reach groups who were more concerned with
survival than “treasure hunting.” Moreover, viewer-participants noted how an influx of
newcomers inspired by these TV programs had been disruptive to markets rather than
invigorating, which caused competition for objects to grow and prices to rise. Overall, using
post-Recession New Jersey as a stage, this project examined the intersections of media culture,
entrepreneurialism, material culture and economic precarity in the early 21st century.

Chapter 1
Introduction: Reality Television and Trash and Treasure TV Project Rationale, Background, and Chapter Outline
Storage Wars I can relate to since I’ve been buying storage lockers long before the program was on … When the
program came on the air, and became very popular, all of the sudden this core group of die hard storage buyers
who would show up at the local storage unit auction ballooned to 50 – 75 people. - Steve, project interviewee,
longtime collector and dealer, owner of a large antique shop, and Trash and Treasure TV viewer
Observing that people resist, or read against the grain of any individual media product, does not mean the media
lack power. – Media theorist Jenny Kitzinger (2009, p. 415)

At the end of the 20th century, the genre of reality television (RTV) emerged in its most
recognizable expression with shows such as The Real World (1992) and Survivor (2000). Over
the ensuing years, hundreds of RTV programs have been developed and aired, spawning a broad
range of subgenres that focus on nearly all dimensions of life for people in technologically
advanced, liberal societies. These subgenres have included programs about managing one’s
physical and psychological health, achieving one’s ideal aesthetic body, finding love, refining
and cultivating taste, etiquette and deportment, and navigating the myriad labor and consumer
markets. Among these subgenres is one that I have coined “Trash and Treasure TV.” This
classification of RTV programs refers to shows such as American Pickers (2010- present), and
those of the Pawn Stars (2009 – present) and Storage Wars (2010 - present) franchises, among
many others. These shows focus on secondary market sites and practices that straddle the formal
and informal marketplaces that include private homes and properties, flea markets, yard sales,
pawnshops, and various types of auctions. I argue that this subgenre should be understood as a
post-recession phenomenon emerging from a specific neoliberal political-cultural context in the
post-industrial era, in which forms of self-responsibilization and entrepreneurialism are central to
social organization and subjectivity.

2

In this framing, we can see Trash and Treasure TV through the lens of media studies
research that understands popular culture as a technology that routinely reinforces and justifies
dominant cultural and social norms, values and practices through the communication of
ideologies, the circulation of discourses, and the transmission of affect. I argue that Trash and
Treasure TV encourages viewers to be flexible, self-reliant, entrepreneurial subjects, equipped to
survive or even thrive on the contemporary economic landscape. These shows impart
information and present role models with the potential to teach audiences about standard
secondary market practices, such as appraisal or bargaining, and how to appropriately regulate
one’s emotions while buying and selling at one type of site or another. Additionally, the
influence of the subgenre could have larger consequences, such as in the creation or stimulation
of existing markets, the potential resolution of unemployment and underemployment, the
generation of tax revenue from new businesses, and the shaping of general social relations as
pertaining to how we live and labor together as co-workers, family members, consumers, and
market competitors.
Although RTV audiences do not merely consume and internalize the instruction or
representations they receive, research shows that viewers still use their favorite TV shows to
interpret the world and shape their lives (Sender, 2012; Skeggs & Wood, 2012). Therefore, even
people who read particular programs from an oppositional standpoint will likely experience the
effects of, or be affected by, a given media product through its resultant cultural impact. For
instance, in the quote above, Steve, an antique shop owner who frequents storage unit auctions
and is not particularly influenced or educated by Storage Wars had noticed a significant increase
in the amount of people at storage unit auctions after the program gained popularity. Other
interviewees who bid at storage unit auctions made similar observations, and noted the disruptive

3

impacts on sites and markets, which will be discussed in later chapters. Such social and cultural
influence demonstrated the importance of studying Trash and Treasure TV and its audiences.
This research project investigated secondary markets and practices, and the limits of
media’s intervention into how people relate to one another while exchanging objects at their
preferred sites. This was accomplished through field observation and interviews that focused on
secondary market techniques and dynamics, and how Trash and Treasure TV was perceived as a
useful source of information, an inspiration, or a disruption. These methods allowed me to access
broader dynamics concerning media culture, audience reception, and social relationships, as
related to economic practices and power, modes of consumption, and regimes of value and taste.
This introductory chapter will trace the rise of Trash and Treasure TV in the U.S., from its
beginnings in the 1990s to its current form in the early 21st century and place it into context as a
mode of governance that provides guidance for becoming a contemporary neoliberal subject.
From there, the subsequent chapters will be outlined. The first section offers a brief review of the
ways that scholars have conceptualized intersections of media, power, and social organization, as
related specifically to popular culture and RTV.
Media, Popular Culture, and Governance: RTV and Governmentality
The influence of media in relation to the production of subjectivity and social relations
has been widely theorized. Since the early 1940s, researchers have argued that the mass
production and distribution of popular music, film, fashion, and design by what has been termed
the “culture industry,” encouraged a cultural and social organizational uniformity of taste and
consumption practices, predicated on the aesthetic sensibilities and economic priorities of big
business (Barber, 1995, 2007; Horkheimer & Adorno, 2006; Schiller, 1989). From its earliest
formation, the culture industry has been understood as playing an important role in the

4

production of consumer-citizen-subjects through the convergence of popular culture, advertising,
and public relations, as operationalized through print media, and more importantly, the then-new
communication technologies of film, radio, and eventually, television (Ewen, 1996; Curtis,
2002).
In the production of media in profit-oriented environments, studios and developers have
worked to avoid losing money by relying on tried-and-true talent, formulas and stereotypes that
do not disturb the cultural sensibilities of their audiences (Turow, 1997). This routine has
resulted in particular forms of representation which scholars have discussed in regard to social
organization. For instance, media researchers have theorized the concept of “symbolic
annihilation,” arguing that there is a relationship between how groups such as racial minorities
and women are or are not represented in popular media, and their subordinate political and
economic positions in contemporary society (Gerbner, 1972; Tuchman, 1978). Scholars who
have analyzed race and social class in popular media have also argued that media representations
of minoritized and working-class populations reinforced forms of discursive power and social
ordering (Hall, 1981) and encouraged the public to blame the poor and disenfranchised for their
lower class position (Butsch 2003; Leistyna, 2009).
With the appearance of RTV programming, critical media research began to move away
from the analysis of symbolism and representation, and toward seeing media, particularly RTV,
as a cultural intervention presenting “reality” largely unbound by the need for interpretation
(Bratich, 2006). Focusing on surveillance and policing, media studies researcher Gareth Palmer
(2003) has written on the potential disciplinary power of shows such as Cops (1989 - present) or
World’s Wildest Police Videos (2012). He proposed that those programs could have a panoptic
effect, with the use of CCTV reminding viewers that at any given moment they may be under

5

surveillance (Palmer, 2003). In turn, media would play a role in the molding of compliant and
law-abiding citizens through the circulation of documentary or closed-circuit television (CCTV)
footage that depicted the “reality” of crime, the work of law enforcement and the consequences
of breaking the law.
Recognizing RTV’s place in the contours of economic life, cultural studies scholar Jack
Z. Bratich (2006, 2007 & 2009) has argued that the genre’s games and makeovers modeled a
flexibility, mobility, and interchangeability that resembled the competition and cooperation of
the contemporary labor market in which workers were required to absorb increasing levels of
vulnerability and risk. Further theorizing its relationship to power, media theorists Laurie
Ouellette and James Hay (2008) have looked at RTV as a strategy of “governmentality”
(Foucault, 2000) from which viewers could learn the skills needed to live in an environment
increasingly structured by free-market policies and values. Applying these ideas to the housing
crisis, James Hay (2010) has identified what he calls “Realty TV,” a subgenre centered on home
makeovers and property speculation which emerged with the financialization and securitization
of the housing market, and argued that it reproduced free-market practices as strategies for
economically vulnerable or exploited individuals to achieve financial security.
While these scholars have helped lay the theoretical foundations of RTV, power and
governance, others have used audience research to explore the potentials of and limits to these
ideas. Focusing on ways that viewers exercise agency, media studies scholar Katherine Sender
(2012) demonstrated that people who watch makeover programs used the shows to learn fashion,
fitness, and weight-loss techniques. Although, they adopted them reflexively and actively
accepted or rejected what was presented. Similarly, media researchers Beverley Skeggs and
Helen Wood (2012) revealed that the genre as a cultural form is, in fact, both an educational

6

intervention and a source of representation to which people have responded in relation to
performances of the self, intimacy, and perceptions of value.
Above all, the theoretical frameworks that were discussed analyzed intersections of
media and cultural and social power. This research takes the position that media, such as Trash
and Treasure TV, is a technology which reinforces and justifies the dominant ideologies and
practices of the cultures and societies that produce it (Hall, 1980, 1982; Fiske, 1992; Kellner,
2009). In this, the subgenre acts as a strategy of “governmentality” (Murray & Ouellette, 2004;
Ouellette & Hay, 2008; Hay, 2010), that teaches people the knowledge and skills necessary to
survive in the post-Recession U.S. In particular, it demonstrates for viewers how to engage in the
secondary market, by not only mastering the practices of identifying objects, appraising them,
and negotiating prices, but also through the management of one’s feelings and passions, and the
emotions of the other people who one is competing or cooperating with.
It must be noted that rhetorician Eric Jenkins (2015) has argued that American Pickers is
a tool for promoting commodity fetishism, deploying business strategies, and creating markets in
control societies. Mass communication scholars Mark Rademacher and Casey Kelly (2016) have
also discussed programs from this genre when they theorized that Storage Wars acts to mediate
the crisis of masculinity and labor by providing images of “men at work” in traditionally
feminine consumer markets. However, my research makes a unique contribution to the area of
RTV studies, as it is the first to combine ethnographic methods and textual analysis to study
these programs. By engaging with concepts and theories such as social constructionism,
subjectification, the politics of representation, and consumption as a material culture, I was able
to study the dynamics of secondary markets and how people had taken up, rejected, or ignored

7

the information and affective transmissions of Trash and Treasure TV as they bought and sold
objects in their preferred sites.
In investigating these matters, my research contributed to the area of media anthropology.
Similar to the scholarship of Lila Abu Lughod (2005) and Purnima Mankaker (1999), my
fieldwork concentrated on the norms, values, and practices of everyday life in relation to the
circulation of media texts. By taking this approach, my project advanced the study of media
governance in two ways. First, I moved beyond the “active audience” fan culture of Henry
Jenkins (1992) and Camille Bacon-Smith (1992) by considering social class, an element that
their work had ignored. Second, I conducted my research through an inversion which
distinguished itself from the work of scholars who had factored class into their analyses, such as
Katherine Sender (2012), and Beverly Skeggs and Helen Wood (2012). Instead of foregrounding
the programs as they had, I privileged the people, objects, and practices that composed secondary
markets, which allowed me to understand how secondary markets operated through hierarchies
of class power and in relation to economic inequality and precarity. This revealed the ways that
Trash and Treasure TV erased the poor, working class, women, and those of color, and portrayed
these sites as exclusively for the performance of entrepreneurialism by mostly white, middle
class men.
My research also complicated the theories on techniques of governmentality. Those
exploring the concept of governmentality have tended to assume a normative entrepreneurial
subject who has or can accumulate the cultural and social capital necessary to compete in the
neoliberal marketplace. Such presumptions cannot be made so easily due to the lasting impact of
job losses, home foreclosures, and the limited recovery from those and other negative economic
consequences of the 2007 – 2008 global financial crisis (popularly known as the “Great

8

Recession”), which has been deemed to be the worst downturn since the Great Depression
(Carnevale, Jayasundra, & Gulish, 2016; Curran & Speciale, 2018). As Social theorist Maurizio
Lazzarato (2015) has noted, the economic downturn has “imposed new forms of governmentality
and new subjective models both on the side of those who govern (‘technocratic governments’) …
and on the side of the governed (‘the indebted man who expiates his fault through taxes’)” (p.
91).1
In addition, the disruptive effects of RTV have not been addressed in past theorizations
and research of governmentality. For example, interviews had revealed that there were upticks in
participation with the emergence of the programs that had led to increased competition and
prices. These changes in conditions drove experienced people out of the local secondary market,
due to the impact on their profit margins. This demonstrated how as a technique of
governmentality, RTV’s intervention may not have always produced the intended results. Trash
and Treasure TV must be analyzed with these considerations in mind, particularly in regard to
those who may not be represented. Here I am referring specifically to the poor and working
classes, such as the immigrants and people of color who are among those groups active in
secondary market sites for subsistence and meeting the needs of everyday life, as opposed to
buying and selling antiques and collectibles. Arguably, as a result of their disinterest in the
consumption practices of Trash and Treasure TV, these groups avoid subjectification. These
matters and others that are related to governmentality studies will be discussed further in
subsequent chapters.
1

In this quote, Lazzarato (2015) is referring to debt as a strategy of governmentality, such as those accrued through
student loans. Debt held against real estate can also be placed into the same category. The subjectivity of “the
indebted” dovetails with that of “the precariat.” The latter refers to a subject formed through the flexibility and
uncertainty of labor conditions, such as the trend toward contingent employment (another technique of
governmentality) which leads to discontinuous salaries and the loss of benefits, namely health insurance and
vacation time, among others (Berardi, 2009).

9

This project also contributes to the field of media studies as a historical geography of
RTV, in that it sets New Jersey as a stage for understanding people, their labor, the impact of the
financial crisis, and Trash and Treasure TV in a localized context. Consequently, another area
this research intersects with is production studies. Some participants in the local secondary
markets I studied were involved in creating online content. In their videos, they hunted for
treasures at flea markets, auctions, and other sites, and documented their expenditures and
potential profits in ways that appeared to imitate how these practices were shown on the
programs. As informal cultural producers, these amateurs, several of whom were among the
sample of informants, had posted on YouTube, among other sites, and even offered exclusive
content for paid subscribers. From this activity, a chain of cultural and technical production had
emerged that extended the reach of media culture as produced by TV studios (Mayer, Banks, &
Caldwell, 2009). At the same time, these videos provided viewers/users with on-the-ground,
“real-world” perspectives of “real people” (who are arguably more “authentic” and relatable than
RTV celebrities) buying and selling on secondary markets. This will be discussed further in
Chapter 5 and Chapter 6.
Finally, my study is relevant to the area of media archaeology through its focus on trash,
rubbish, and refuse. As media theorist Jussi Parikka (2012) notes, media archaeology is an
“analysis of and from the ruins” which, similar to Walter Benjamin’s cultural historical method,
“takes waste, rubble, and ruins as its starting points for a multi-layered excavation of the slow
emergence of modernity” (p. 90). Secondary market practices, norms, and values as they are
enacted in the world by and on Trash and Treasure TV are concerned with uncovering the past
through objects. The media environment, which includes RTV and the Web economy (such as
online auctions and the practitioner and fan content found on YouTube, Facebook, Instagram,

10

and other social media platforms) has raised the visibility and availability of the types of objects
that circulate throughout secondary markets. Parikka reminds us that an archaeological approach
affords a Foucauldian path leading toward “the materiality of media, especially dispositif and
practice” (Hertz, 2010).
In this research, material culture practices are related to the circulation of objects
(collecting, buying and selling) and their recomposition (“upcycling” for resale, for use in
creating art by combining items - a portmanteau of “recycling” and “upscaling” or
“upmarketing”). An archeological perspective can show us how beyond the commercial
imperatives, these exchanges and creative efforts are sources for constructing histories of both
the past and present. These histories are composed of stories that are learned through the
excavation and analysis of objects which illustrate the everyday lives of people in particular
cultures and societies at given moments in time. However, they also contain strategies for the
subversion of hierarchies across time by presenting opportunities to transgress the economic,
social, and cultural order as it is justified and reinforced through objects in their aesthetic forms
and overall utility. To contain these potentially unruly practices, Trash and Treasure TV was
deployed to provide sociocultural guidance through discursive power and the modulation of
desire to conform to the priorities of the market. This is intended to affect the individual in the
process of their subjectification, and operate on a larger scale in the formation of social class, and
the distribution and accumulation of corresponding forms of economic and cultural capital.
Importantly, my research regarding secondary markets and Trash and Treasure TV is not
merely about one subgenre of RTV. This work is an intervention within the range of
programming that has encouraged entrepreneurialism and addressed personal finance. This has
included, for example, Shark Tank (2009 - present), The Suze Orman Show (2002- 2015), and

11

programs that have focused on buying and selling homes for profit, such as Flip or Flop (2013 present). Trash and Treasure TV fits among these other programs in that it brings to audiences
models and inspiration for adopting practices commensurate with neoliberalism. In terms of the
contemporary economy, the figure of “the entrepreneur” is significant, and at the center of Trash
and Treasure TV and the RTV programs discussed above. However, the flip side to the
entrepreneur is “the indebted,” a subject rarely represented on RTV, but a considerable
population that composed secondary markets as observed in this study. Before laying out the
chapters of this dissertation, I will trace the rise of Trash and Treasure TV and place it into the
social, cultural, and historical context from which it emerged.
RTV, Recession, and the Rise of Trash and Treasure TV
Trash and Treasure TV surfaced and gained popularity in the U.S. in the wake of the
Great Recession. This was a period of economic downturn in the U.S. and across the world that
was closely related to the U.S. economic crisis caused by the bursting of the U.S. housing
bubble, the subsequent "correction" that spanned the years 2007-2008, and the simultaneous
mortgage crisis which lasted from 2007-2009. This period saw millions of ordinary Americans
lose their homes, jobs, and in many cases, their life savings. While billions of tax dollars were
infused to save many of the financial corporations (deemed "too big to fail") whose questionable
dealings were responsible for the crisis, millions of ordinary people who found themselves
plunged into poverty, or one step away from it, were advised to stay positive and be creative
about new ways to survive. At the same time in an increasingly neoliberal economic landscape,
people were being called upon to become increasingly self-reliant, as the state diminished its role
in addressing unemployment and poverty in favor of one in which government was the facilitator

12

of private, free-market solutions to such social problems.2 It is in this particular politicaleconomic moment that a proliferation of “trash and treasure” RTV shows appeared.
However, these programs are not the first ones to be about objects and practices located
in informal secondary market sites and spaces. For instance, in the U.S., a program on the FX
Network called Personal FX ran from 1994-1997 before being cancelled in 1998. The show
featured people bringing their collectibles to experts for assessment and appraisal. As Personal
FX was being phased out, the U.S. Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) launched the American
version of Antiques Roadshow (1997- present), 17 years after the British version of the program
debuted. All of the Trash and Treasure TV programs on US television owe their existence to the
UK version of Antiques Roadshow (1979 – present), originally airing on BBC One. That
program originated the concept of having people bring their keepsakes, collectables, family
heirlooms, and other coveted objects to be appraised by experts, a programmatic feature which is
now part of every show in the subgenre.
Even more relevant to this discussion is the fact that the original Antiques Roadshow, first
airing 30 years ago in 1979, was also born out of a financial crisis, a time when the U.K. was
mired in economic hardship, mass unemployment, high inflation, and stagnant and falling wages.
This crisis resulted in the election of Margaret Thatcher who, while promising a remedy,
prescribed neoliberal economic policies that exacerbated the crisis, which lasted until the late
1980s (Sofat, 2012; Nunns, 2013; Medhurst, 2014). However, the U.S. Trash and Treasure TV
programs emerging in and after 2009 differ from the Antiques Roadshow franchise and Personal
FX. In the latter programs, neither the people who bring their objects, the expert appraisers, nor
2

For example, instead of addressing unemployment, underemployment, poverty, and the day-to-day struggles of the
working classes (paying for health insurance and child care through public projects reminiscent of the New Deal,
wage and benefit regulations, or mass unionization), President Donald Trump provided a tax cut to the wealthiest
people and largest corporations. These initiatives were underpinned by the belief that they would bolster the stock
market, stimulate job creation, and increase wages (Stewart, 2018).

13

the hosts are directly looking to buy or sell the items featured on the programs. Instead, they are
shown simply seeking to learn the value and history of their objects. Taking the original Antiques
Roadshow as the primary example, which emerged from the tumultuous British political
economic, social, and cultural landscape of the late 1970s, the message of the show was that,
despite the fact that people may not have had jobs, wages were low and things did not look
promising, items of value could be lurking under their noses, and if so, individuals had hidden
economic opportunities at their fingertips. Viewers were encouraged to look inward – into their
attics and basements and selves – for objects of value and to wrestle with their emotional
attachments to those objects.
Emerging in the U.S. in 2009 and 2010, the “Trash and Treasure” shows which first
spawned the secondary market subgenre were American Pickers (the History Channel), Auction
Hunters (Spike TV), Hardcore Pawn (truTv), Pawn Stars (the History Channel), and Storage
Wars (A&E). These programs materialized out of a similar yet different historical moment and
sociocultural and political-economic arrangement than Antiques Roadshow in late 1970s Britain.
Unlike the post-recession U.S., England had enjoyed a strong social welfare system that ensured
everyone had access to food, housing, and medical care. Antiques Roadshow gave the viewer
early lessons in becoming a calculating subject by opening a forum for thinking through, in
viewers' particular cultural and social framework, their relationship to their possessions. In
contrast, Trash and Treasure TV programs encouraged people to not only learn the value of their
own possessions for the purpose of resale, but to also look outward and scour the landscape for
things to sell on the secondary market, since the assumption implicit in these shows was that one
was expected to be self-sufficient. However, the political economy of post-recession America is
drastically different than both that of the late 1970’s U.K. and the later period when Personal FX

14

(1994-1997) and the U.S. version of Antiques Roadshow (1997 - present) aired. While the U.K.
version of Antiques Roadshow was developed and debuted under a strong welfare state, the latter
two programs emerged in the U.S. at a time when then-president Bill Clinton had begun
restructuring “entitlement” programs with the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Act of 1996, which was a clear expression of neoliberal “responsibilization” in public policy.
The current political economy is arranged in consideration of neoliberal rationales,
consumerism, and the country's economic dependence on consumption, rather than industrial
production. Therefore, the demands on the contemporary subject in the U.S. differ in very
important ways from those of the past, in that the current moment is one of drastic sociocultural
reorganization. Mass culture and society have transformed in various ways in recent decades,
bringing forth niche markets composed of various lifestyles and interests, unified through the
consumption and “viral” transmission of trends. The labor market has, for the most part,
decentralized into a network of independent contractors entering into agreements which are
largely temporary, to which subjects are forced to adapt through flexibility and a tolerance for
ambiguity and risk. Society as organized through the state with regard to work, healthcare,
childcare, housing or other necessities, has also fragmented into a network of private
subcontracting organizations whose work the government plays a part in facilitating, without
actually providing the services itself (Cruikshank, 1999; Ferguson, 2007; Rose, 1999).3
The U.S. TV programs that emerged from the sociocultural and political economic milieu
of the late 2000s were a response to the need for meeting economic demands made on people by
the surrounding environment. These conditions were increasingly shaped through neoliberal
logics and the maintenance of social control, as the world moved from one of hierarchical forms

3

For example, the subcontracting of the construction and management of subsidized housing, prisons, public
schools, federal education lending, and security forces, among other initiatives.

15

of organizing to those that were looser and more networked. During this time, the gap between
the rich and poor had grown exponentially in both the U.S. and U.K., where the upper classes
had become vastly wealthier since the crisis (Garside, 2015; Whitefield, 2013). Everyone else
endured their lives in a state of growing precarity, increasingly responsible for their own welfare.
In this, citizens are hailed to embrace the entrepreneurial spirit (du Gay, 1996; Freeman, 2011).
With the growing insecurity and human suffering that had surfaced, including record
numbers of homeless families and individuals,4 along with neoliberal political economic
rationales and practices (for example, the end of public pensions; deep cuts to public education
and public housing; the privatization of public utilities and infrastructure such as roads, bridges
and prisons; the weakening of labor unions and the selling off of public lands for private gain),
there were also potential openings through which people might potentially resist free market
capitalism. This could have been done by eluding, at least in part, the capture and rendering of
their total productive labor that fits the current needs of neoliberalism. As people have been
increasingly pushed out on their own, it is possible that instead of internalizing the ethos of
entrepreneurialism and competition, they could begin to build new ways of voluntary association
and mutual aid, by practicing pre-capitalist types of economies through the use of alternative
currencies or engaging in market practices such as barter, trade, or gifting.
Therefore, containing the potential of people’s productive power necessitates some type
of intervention to manage the unemployment and underemployment crisis, address issues of
consumption and waste, and shape social relations to be in agreement with the cultural norms
and values of the market system, such as “responsibilization.” I argue that this is where the Trash
and Treasure TV was deployed to intervene in correspondence with the cultural and social
4

As a result of the Great Recession the homeless population grew in the U.S., and in 2017, the number of homeless
people increased for the first time since the downturn (Cauvin, 2011; Weber & Mulvihill, 2017).

16

conditions of the current political economy. This subgenre provided models of entrepreneurial
behavior, and at times, direct instruction, intended to encourage people to find creative solutions
for economic survival. Although, this was not to be done through the pursuit of non-capitalist
forms of exchange or by collective organizing for political change, but by adopting neoliberal
attitudes of speculation, financialization and risk taking. Viewers were taught that they must scan
the post-industrial landscape in search of opportunities to make money through buying and
selling objects which often appear to be junk. This research project has established Trash and
Treasure TV as a subgenre, analyzed it, and explored the ways that it circulated among audience
members, and if and/or how they engaged with and use it when they bought and sold on the
secondary market.
Applying the above ideas, I note that Trash and Treasure TV programs present a version
of the reality of buying and selling vintage objects, antiques, and collectibles to a diverse set of
audiences. This “reality” is one that is laden with representation that prevents the ability for the
production of any neutral presentation of reality, and is instead a version of “the real” that
depicts people, their successes, and failures in ways that may or may not square up with lived
experience. The viewers composing these audiences watch Trash and Treasure TV and make
value judgments, which, while seemingly independent in their negotiated or outright oppositional
interpretations, cannot be disentangled from the culture and society that produced the programs
and the viewers themselves. Although the power of television may have limits in regard to direct
influence over the audience, nobody can ever truly exist outside of the affect of its socio-cultural
mediation.
At its foundation, governance in this study is understood through the lens of Michel
Foucault’s (2000) theory of “governmentality,” which refers to government as a strategy of

17

“disposing things,” or “employing tactics” to achieve particular goals, relying on addressing the
problem of freedom through the coercion of law. Here, media, in this case RTV, and in particular
Trash and Treasure TV, is theorized as a strategy of governmentality through which viewers can
learn the skills necessary to be independent, self-sufficient subjects who can survive or even
thrive in the increasingly austere political-economic terrain of the U.S. At its foundation, Trash
and Treasure TV encourages a spirit of entrepreneurialism, with programs showing people how
to find, buy, and sell objects at secondary market sites. Some of the cast members, such as Mike
and Frank of American Pickers, or Brandi, Jarrod and Dave of Storage Wars, are seeking
inventory for their businesses. In this, they fold the informal practices of the secondary market
into the formal system in pursuit of maximized economic success, or what can be called the
American Dream. From there, viewers are shown models, given direct instruction, and provided
with specific information on identifying, appraising, buying and selling objects at a given site
and within certain circumstances, which they can use or ignore in order to engage in secondary
market entrepreneurialism.
In this study, I conducted a textual analysis of the first seasons of three Trash and
Treasure TV programs, American Pickers, Storage Wars, and Flea Market Flip. Additionally, I
executed long and shorter form interviews with 44 people who traded on the secondary market,
42 of whom were viewers. I spent approximately 75 hours in the field, observing and talking
with people who were buying and selling at flea markets, antique and collectible club meetings
and shows, antique stores, and a pawn shop. My methodologies will be explained further in
Chapter 3.In my conversations and experiences in the field, people told me, and I was able to
see, what Trash and Treasure TV programs included and omitted in their presentation of reality,
and the significance and potential consequences of the representational politics transmitted,

18

reproduced and reinforced through the shows. These findings and their importance to the body of
literature RTV’s role in subjectification and social organization are at the center of this research,
and will be revealed in the fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters. In the last section, the chapters of this
dissertation will be outlined.
Chapter Outline
In Chapter 2, the theoretical overview guiding the project is explained, and I elaborate
and expand upon Foucault’s concepts by incorporating the ideas of Gilles Deleuze, Nikolas
Rose, Franco Berardi and other critical theorists concerned with governmentality and
technologies of social modulation. In doing so, I will further illustrate how media, particularly
RTV, can be understood as a technique of governmentality and social control, and a source of
representation and sensory stimulation for affective transmission. This will include how
information and stimulus is transmitted to audiences, and what that means in relation to
processes of subjectification and the “performance” of markets. Furthermore, I will show how
working in the recently established tradition of media research on RTV, the theoretical
framework I provide can be applied to the case of Trash and Treasure TV. Then I will elaborate
on the particular secondary market practices and ethical orientations viewers can learn from the
programs, and the consequences that the subgenre could have on resolving unemployment and
underemployment, addressing individual and social matters of consumption and waste, and
shaping social relations within an ever-evolving economic arrangement that has subsumed and
marketized nearly every aspect of the human experience.
Chapter 3 is an overview of the textual analysis, ethnographic, and audience reception
methodologies used to conduct this research. In that chapter, I will provide the background of
this project, explaining how I became interested in these programs and secondary market spaces

19

as sites of study. Then I will detail each of the methods I utilized. In terms of the textual analysis,
I will discuss the parameters of the sample in regard to the number of hours of programming I
assessed, and justify how and why I came to choose American Pickers, Flea Market Flip, and
Storage Wars for my project. The ethnographic methods included interviews and observation. In
this section, I will introduce the interview subjects and the informal market sites I observed,
using pseudonyms to identify people and places, and will describe and situate them into the
research as relevant to the sites they frequented, their practices, and elements of their identity,
such as economic class, race, and gender. Throughout, I critically engage each of the methods
and note the ways in which I attempted to remain reflexive as a researcher.
Incorporating data from my textual analysis of Trash and Treasure TV programs along
with data from my interviews and field observations, Chapter 4 will discuss these shows in terms
of their representational politics and instructional aspects. I will present my analysis of the
respective first seasons of American Pickers, Storage Wars, and Flea Market Flip in
consideration of the theoretical framework and revelations from conversations with participants
and observations at site visits. In this, I will unpack what Trash and Treasure TV reveals,
ignores, signifies and strategically deploys in its presentation of reality. The chapter is organized
by program, elaborating on each regarding their pedagogical potential, representation of people,
places, and things that constitute secondary market sites, and the social and cultural
underpinnings through which the programs are constructed. Following those sections I will
specifically address social identity and representation as these matters pertained to real-life
secondary markets and Trash and Treasure TV.
Chapter 5 will more fully bring together Trash and Treasure TV programs, audience
reception and engagement, and participation in secondary market sites, by focusing on specific

20

practices as they are performed and as markets are made. This analysis will consider how
participants have engaged with and used Trash and Treasure TV, and what secondary markets
mean to their lives in regard to their financial stability and personal interests. Within this context,
I discuss the relationship secondary markets have to the larger economic system, the significance
of objects in that system, the potential secondary markets have for constructing alternative
relationships in regard to systems of exchange and labor, and how Trash and Treasure TV may
work to foreclose those opportunities.
This chapter explains the structure and dynamics of the networked hierarchy that
composes the local secondary market, how objects circulate and value is constituted, what social
and cultural elements are responsible for the downturn in the antiques and collectibles market,
and how identity, such as gender, race, and class, are visible and active in ways not seen on
Trash and Treasure TV. The final section offers a challenge to the concept of governmentality in
theory and practice in a discussion of the disruptive aspects and interpellative limitations of the
subgenre that are related to identity, economics, and affect.
Lastly, in Chapter 6, I offer my thoughts on Trash and Treasure TV in relation to
governmentality and social control in the current political and economic landscape, by noting the
contributions my research makes to Media Studies and providing some insights and directions
for future research that pertain to the migration of secondary markets to online platforms. In
conclusion, I will attempt to historically situate Trash and Treasure TV, neoliberalism, and media
governmentality, mark the limits of their moments, and briefly argue the lasting significance of
media subjectification under the conditions of the new political economy, which in the 2010s
saw a rise in libertarian nationalism in the U.S. and around the world.

21

Chapter 2
Even You Can Turn Trash into Treasure: RTV, Governance, and Material Culture
I'm an educated individual. I know that you can't have a television show without having a premise. You got to have a
hook. Storage Wars, yeah they're going to show you a lot of the successes, and there are a couple of the losses.
They're not going to show you the monotony. They're not going to show you going in there and having to be there
for 4, 5, 6, 7 hours. They're going to compress it all down into a half hour, hour show, whatever it is … It's made me
want to become a picker. It's made me want to do that, and I want to try to make money from it. Again, you watch a
show or you watch them pick something, and they score a gem. They buy something for $200 that they're going to
turn around and sell for $1,200 and make a thousand dollars.
– Alex, project interviewee, long-time “picker,” collector, and an avid watcher of American Pickers

The statement above illustrates how audiences are active and can exhibit both skepticism
(in an oppositional reading) and enthusiasm (through a dominant reading) at the same time. This
dynamic demonstrates that the processes of mediation are complex and validates media’s
potential influence on audiences in shaping perspectives and channeling desires. In this chapter, I
draw from the fields of media theory, philosophy, sociology, and anthropology, to construct the
theoretical framework for this study. I argue that the subgenre that I have labeled “Trash and
Treasure TV” has the capacity to act as a technology of governance by modeling techniques for
survival in sites of exchange that straddle the formal and informal economies. These sites include
auctions, flea markets, pawnshops, second-hand stores, yard sales, and private residences or
commercial properties. These spaces compose the secondary market where people circulate
money and a range of goods and services.
The values and practices portrayed on Trash and Treasure TV are commensurate with the
contemporary political-economic arrangement. In particular, these programs present models of
entrepreneurs buying and selling antique and vintage objects, and provide the exemplary
knowledge and skills needed for people to participate in the secondary market. This includes
how to identify and authenticate objects, determine their worth, and successfully engage in

22

financial transactions. Simultaneously, viewers are also introduced to information about the
objects beyond identification, authentication, and monetary value, such as their cultural or social
significance. This is done through program content placed in between or during show segments
that features experts and/or text and graphics that provide “facts” about the objects, namely,
information about their manufacturers, uses, aesthetics, and cultural importance. Despite this
focus on historical and social contexts (which is often superficial), determining the value of a
given object or set of objects is most central to the programs.
Overall, I hope to illustrate that Trash and Treasure TV teaches audiences how to engage
in entrepreneurship in modern liberal democratic societies at a historical moment during which
people are called upon to bear the burden of economic restructuring and shifting labor markets.
By steering people toward the secondary markets, two major social issues are addressed. First, as
the role of the state shifts from directly managing public needs (i.e. providing a social safety net),
to facilitating partnerships with private organizations intended to distribute or maintain social
goods, people must be taught that they can no longer rely on the government for long-term
support if, for instance, they lose their job or retire. Additionally, under free-market ideology, the
government no longer sees its role as creating job opportunities for people. Instead, it provides
the framework through which jobs will purportedly emerge from the private sector and people
must learn to understand and accept this shift in the government's role.
Trash and Treasure TV fills the gap left by the dismantling of the social safety net by
showing viewers how to create their own jobs and achieve financial security. The small
businesses featured on these shows can supplement people’s incomes where the government
cannot or will not, as social security or other entitlement programs are curtailed or eliminated
(King & Groppe, 2018). Given that in recent years the U.S. has experienced a diminishing

23

middle class (which has been compounded by growing income inequality and inflation rates)
these economic conditions have whittled away at purchasing power (Henderson, 2016). Relevant
to New Jersey, between 2012 and 2016 the gaps between the poorest and wealthiest in the state
widened, and although the median wage had grown by nearly 4% during the recovery from the
Great Recession, wage disparity has remained high (O’Dea, 2017). In contrast to this reality of
shrinking jobs and wealth for average Americans, these RTV programs show examples of people
circulating vintage and antique objects which are acquired and collected, displayed, refurbished
or repurposed, and then sold or resold to wealthier consumers, generating new consumer markets
and opportunities for consumption.
RTV’s selective depictions of “reality” are indicative of the genre’s potential to be read
as a social technology that acts as both an intervention and a source of representation (Skeggs &
Wood, 2012). I contend that Trash and Treasure TV’s portrayals of people buying and selling on
the secondary market are about shaping social relations through the objects featured. In large
part, these programs show audiences a neoliberal sense of individualism and competition in
which the “losers” are disposable, dead nodes to be purged from the economic network
(Ouellette & Hay, 2008; Ouellette, 2017). At the same time, the genre models interpersonal
collaboration, including moments when cast members or contestants are cooperating across
purposes (Bratich, 2009). In this, Trash and Treasure TV is similar to, or even a derivative of
Makeover TV. It encourages a sense of “Americanness” to which people submit themselves to
normative understandings of identity and economic life, which are concerned with producing
“free” subjects and democratic citizens (Weber, 2009).
In light of the relationship between social categories such as gender, race, and sexuality,
and one’s economic class position, it is important to briefly note that the Trash and Treasure TV

24

characters on the shows I analyzed were predominantly white and male, with very few women
and people of color cast in primary roles. The working classes and poor were nearly completely
absent (Ouellette, 2017). Real world sites, such as flea markets and yard sales, are actually very
diverse. This has been famously observed by anthropologist Robert Maisel (1974) in an early
study showing that a range of people participate in the “action” of buying, selling, and coconstructing the “scene” of a flea market. In my research, that diversity lent itself, in part, to
complicating theories of governmentality. Many people, particularly those of the poor and
working classes, used secondary markets for purchasing the things they needed for their
everyday lives. Some also sold lower-end (less valuable) objects, but did not trade in antiques
and collectibles as Trash and Treasure TV has promoted. In addition, informants discussed how
the programs negatively disrupted existing market conditions through the distribution of
information and an influx of participants.
These matters will be further explored in this chapter and those subsequent, as they
related to how Trash and Treasure TV presented the “reality” of buying and selling on the
secondary market, and what that meant to audience members in terms of how they understood
and used TV in their own lives. Through the responses of study participants and field
observations, these issues will be placed into larger socio-economic contexts, such as class, race,
and gender in terms of the rise of secondary markets and their relationship to neoliberal
economic precarity, income inequality, and market forces. The next section will lay out the
theoretical underpinnings concerned with media governance, followed by a discussion of how
Trash and Treasure TV could operate as a mode of subjectification.
Power, Desire, and Media: RTV, Governance, and Social Control
Foucault, Deleuze, and Media Governance: Power, Desire, and RTV

25

The ideas of Foucault and Deleuze have been foundational in situating and analyzing
media as a technology of governance in contemporary capitalist liberal democracies, such as
those in the U.S. and Western Europe. Using Foucault’s theory of governmentality, cultural
critics Nikolas Rose and Peter Miller (1992) have observed that liberal government is heavily
reliant on technologies for “governing at a distance.” This endeavor is particularly important, as
the role of the state has been shifting away from one involved in traditional liberal statist
projects, such as maintaining a welfare system, to one which is concerned with producing
subjects that can be responsible for themselves in the absence of government intervention (Rose,
1996, 1999; Rose & Miller, 1992). These modes of governance are increasingly being applied all
over the world, although they are most entrenched in what Rose (1996) has termed “advanced
liberal democracies,” and the ideal subjects of these societies embody the mentalities and
practices associated with what is called “neoliberalism” (Burchell, 1996).
Neoliberalism, also called economic liberalism, or economic rationalism (Burchell,
1996), is a set of political-economic practices which have not merely emerged in the recent past.
It is a form of liberalism that can be traced back to the work of both the German Ordo-liberals,
who were taking on the intellectual and practical project of reconstructing Germany’s economy
after World War II, and to the Chicago School of economics, that was based at the University of
Chicago (Brown, 2003; Burchell, 1996; Foucault, 1997; Lemke, 2001). These theorists were
concerned with advancing a particular form of free-market post-war economics in the U.S.,
formulated through the thoughts of Frank Knight, George Stigler, and Milton Freidman (Emmett,
2010, pp. 1-3). This mid-20th century philosophical phenomenon was essentially a resurgence of
19th century ideas associated with laissez-faire economic liberalism.

26

Neoliberalism embraced economic policies such as privatization, fiscal austerity,
deregulation, free trade, and reductions in government spending in order to increase the role of
the private sector in the economy and society. This constituted a paradigm shift away from the
post-war Keynesian economic policies (post 1945- 1980) that had embraced government
intervention in the market and investment in social welfare programs to correct inefficiencies in
markets (such as a lack of full employment) and the resulting social inequalities. Foucault (1997)
notes that both the German Ordo-liberals and the Chicago School eschewed liberalism’s
placement of limits on the state, and developed their ideas in response to a notion of “excessive
government” (p. 78). The Ordo-liberals critiqued Soviet central planning, National Socialism,
and Keynesian interventions, while the Chicago School theorized against the policies of the New
Deal, and the massive economic and social welfare programs assembled by mid-20th century
under Democratic presidents (Foucault, 1997, p. 78).
In the U.S., these ideas began to fully emerge and were put into practice in the late 1970s
and early 1980s. At that historical moment, American culture was increasingly overcome with
anxiety and a cynical perspective regarding the effectiveness of investments in social welfare
policies, such as Lyndon Johnson’s “Great Society” programs. These policy attitudes were
expressed in 1980 with the election of Ronald Reagan, causing the Democratic Party to respond
in 1984 by nominating conservative Gary Hart as the presidential candidate for that cycle (Katz,
1989, p. 35; Rothenberg, 1984, pp. 15-16). In the U.S. through the 1980s and 1990s,
neoliberalism became more entrenched through various waves of deregulation and thenPresident Bill Clinton’s welfare reform act (O’Connor, 2002). This exemplified how the
Democratic Party was endorsing major tenets of the neoliberal platform. In the U.K., cultural
theorist Stuart Hall (1988) examined the rise of Margaret Thatcher and noted that her

27

philosophical orientation was state-centric in regard to strategizing the use of the government,
but anti-statist in terms of public spending and investment in entitlement initiatives.
In the 1990s, the neoliberal “Third Way” politics of the Clinton administration were
asserted in an international project with the development of New Labour ideology and policy in
the U.K., as enacted through the work of center-left Prime Minister Tony Blair (Atkins, 2016). It
was during this period that scholars such as Nikolas Rose (1999) and Mitchell Dean (1996) were
inspired to use a Foucauldian analysis of these formations. Taking all of this into account, the
ideas of the Ordo-liberals and the Chicago School were influential in developing the primary
architecture for the contemporary political economy in both the U.S. and the U.K. As a rationale
of governance, neoliberalism did not completely abandon the priority of “the state” to govern.
However, government policies concerned with public welfare projects, such as benefits for the
poor and unemployed, or the development of robust public schools, were seen as “failures” that
have created the need to experiment with alternative methods to address social problems
(Burchell, 1996, p. 27; Rose, 1996, p. 53).
These strategies have encouraged the movement toward total privatization, and the
utilization of government for the exclusive end of facilitating markets. Within this context,
cultural, social, and legal conditions and institutions have composed a game of entrepreneurial
competition for individuals and groups. In the process, market mentalities, models and practices
have been applied to all areas of the human experience, right down to the way individuals learn
to understand and manage their inner feelings (Freeman, 2011). As the role of the state in the
organization of the public good has continued to wither in relation to social welfare programs,
there have been decreases in benefits for the poor and unemployed, government-funded
education, and subsidized healthcare. This has been accompanied by a growth in terms of

28

contracting out to the private sector the services that had been formerly provided by the
government (Brown, 2003; Cohen, 2014; Lemke, 2001). With compounding force, increased
privatization has further eroded job security in the U.S., and has widened and reinforced already
existing income inequality (Cohen, 2014).
Within this arrangement, people live in a state of “precarity,” which is a type of
instability that had emerged with the decentralization of labor and markets. This term was
conceptualized and named in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as Italy’s economy was being
subjected to neoliberal experimentation (Berardi, 2009, p. 148). Under liberalism, the
contemporary political terrain has been constructed by neoliberal logics and affected by the
conditions of precarity. It has come to demand the composition of appropriate subjects, each
ideally able to thrive as productive nodes that continually contribute to the health of a
decentralized economy. Considering these circumstances, state and private power are implored
to encourage what governmentality scholars describe as a sense of “responsibilization,” in which
individuals are called upon to bear burdens once carried by public agencies (Burchell, 1996;
Rose, 1999).
Analyzing governance in advanced liberal democracies, Rose (1996) has incorporated the
Foucauldian concept of governmentality. In this, government is understood as taking place
through a “complex assemblage of diverse forces (legal, architectural, professional,
administrative, financial, judgmental), techniques (notation, computation, calculation,
examination, evaluation) [and] devices that promise to regulate decisions and actions of
individuals, groups, and organizations in relation to authoritative criteria” (Rose, 1996, p. 42).
Rose (1996) has explained that governmentality is “an array of technologies of government”
such as “strategies, techniques, and procedures” that different authorities seek to use, depending

29

on what resources are at hand and what forms of resistance are expected or experienced (p. 42).
Foucault called the mechanisms that deploy strategies of governmentality by the French term,
“dispositifs,” which in English translates into “apparatuses.” He argued that dispositifs organize
power relationships by regulating and normalizing discourses into “regimes of truth,” which set
the limits of power that can be exercised by individuals and groups in a society at a given place
and time (Foucault, 1990, 1995; Foucault & Deleuze, 1977, p. 207).
As author and translator Graham Burchell (1996) has reminded us, Foucault noted that
government (a mode of governing or governance) is the “‘contact point’ where techniques of
domination – or power – and techniques of the self ‘interact,’ where ‘technologies of domination
of individuals over one another have recourse to processes by which the individual acts upon
himself and conversely, … where techniques of the self are integrated into structures of
coercion’” (p. 20).5 The gap where this interaction takes place is one that implies that there is
some play between the modes of “subjection and subjectification” (Burchell, 1996, p. 20).
Techniques of domination in advanced liberal democracies seek to manage this variable through
what sociologist Mitchell Dean (2010) has described as the “practices concerned with
structuring, shaping, predicting and making calculable the operation of our freedom [emphasis
added] … [that work] off and through diagrams of free subjects constituted by forms of
governmental and political reasoning” (p. 194).
In this dissertation, I contend that RTV as a technology of government is the “contact
point” at which the economic, social and cultural power embedded in a range of media processes
“interact” with techniques of the self. I will argue that, as a strategy of Foucauldian
governmentality, RTV imparts to viewers particular forms of techne that are aligned with,
5

Burchell worked from a mimeographed transcript of a lecture given by Foucault in 1980 at Berkeley for The
Howison Lecture Series.

30

justify, and reinforce neoliberal rationales and practices, giving us particular ways to understand
what it means to be “free.”
At the same time, the work of philosopher Gilles Deleuze can be applied to access
another dimension of how RTV can be understood as a technology of governance. As
philosopher Erinn Cunniff Gilson (2014) has noted, both Foucault and Deleuze were concerned
with matters of ethics and freedom as related to subjectification. For Foucault, freedom was an
ethical ontology constituted in a particular set of embodied power relations, which produced
subjects and constructed a social order by providing guidance for the transformation of the self
(Gilson, 2014, p. 80 - 81). For Deleuze, ontological-ethical orientations were those that, at their
origin, are always moving and in constant modes of change. Freedom, in this case, is a state of
indeterminate potential that he termed “the plane of immanence” which dispositifs are designed
to stabilize and modulate (Deleuze, 1997; Gilson, 2014, p. 80).
Foucault’s theories privileged discursive “power” as the primary force through which
society is organized. In contrast, Deleuze (1997, 2006) has argued that the catalyst is “desire,”
which serves as a form of productive power to direct the objects that constitute the social field.
These objects move through the world in every direction on what he calls “lines of flight” or
“lines of deterritorialization” (Deleuze, 1997, 2006; Deleuze and Guattari, 1987). Propelling
“lines of flight,” he argued, are “investments of desire” that collapse the respective concepts of
the political and libidinal economies (Deleuze & Foucault, 1977, p. 215; Deleuze & Guattari,
1983; Smith, 2007, p. 77). This position drew directly from and decentered the philosophies of
Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud, and in doing so, opened up how we can understand formations of
sociocultural organization and control (Deleuze & Guattari, 1983; Smith, 2007).

31

Lines of flight are always in motion, constantly composing and recomposing the social
field (Deleuze, 1997, 2006; Deleuze & Guattari; 1987). In Anti-Oedipus, written with
psychoanalyst Felix Guattari (1983), he and his coauthor discussed how capitalism seeks new
environments to reterritorialize and characterize the “capitalist aggregate” as one that “decodes
and deterritorializes with all its might” (pp. 335 - 336). In this, we can see the capitalist logic as
expansive and always seeking new resources and markets. Subcultures and nonmainstream
economic markets, such as those in the informal and secondary sectors, could be influenced
while passing through the dispositifs as lines of flight. Here, dispositifs can be understood as
working to block and redirect the lines of flight, or “investments of desire,” that constitute the
types of economic markets that are moving away from or could subvert the formal capitalist
system.
At their respective essences, the difference between the social theory of governance
envisioned by Foucault and that of Deleuze is that the former is constructed through strategies of
power and the latter through the regulation of desire and affect (Deleuze, 1978, 1997). The most
overlap can be identified in the concept of the dispositif. Franco “Bifo” Berardi has used
Foucauldian and Deleuzian understandings to describe what he refers to as a “media dispositif,”
which functions as a structuring technology that composes and recomposes the social body
(Coté, 2011). Berardi poses TV as an example of a dispositif which “is able to standardize the
generation of a certain kind of social composition” (Coté, 2011, p. 383). As a media dispositif or
a part of one, TV circulates what Berardi calls “info-stimulus” which is the aggregate of and
specific content that is recorded and diffused through communication technologies. “Infostimulus” has a dual character, as on one hand, it carries within it representational or meaning-

32

making qualities (Berardi, 2009 p. 146). While on the other, it stimulates the senses, transmitting
feeling and emotion in its affect (Berardi, 2009 p. 146).
In this research, RTV was considered a televisual dispositif that circulated discourses of
power and transmitted affect. This dispositif included Trash and Treasure TV as it was
broadcasted on television, distributed in its licensed and authorized Web presence, and
reproduced by amateurs through home-made content posted on YouTube and other online
platforms. The secondary market sites featured on the programs at the center of this study were
actual spaces of exchange that people constructed together. In this, the bodies and objects that
composed the places where things were bought, sold, traded, and bartered for were organized yet
unruly, and therefore not easily governable. Through its intervention as a cultural technology,
Trash and Treasure TV was intended to redirect subjects away from noncapitalist practices
inherent to the performance of secondary markets. These included the social and affective
conditions that could displace the impetus on profit maximization, and instead encourage people
to give away things to others free of charge for whatever reason they choose.
But rather than open up spaces for encouraging people to think about alternative forms of
market interactions as a response to increasing economic precarity, Trash and Treasure TV
provided ways for market participants to conduct themselves that conform more closely to the
desires of neoliberal state-corporate capitalism. These shows presented to viewers a range of
models for “properly” engaging in the secondary marketplace. For example, the cast of Storage
Wars demonstrated a hyper-competitiveness, and sometimes “win-at-all-costs” subjectivity, in
which shifting alliances among “friends” and rivals, money, skill, cunning, and “luck”
determined who won and who lost. Additionally, in many instances the cast members were
shown running formal business enterprises that presumably contributed to the health of the state

33

through taxes, while at the same time, unburdened the government from its traditional
responsibilities in matters such as job creation or providing welfare assistance.
Their businesses also allowed society to deal with the excesses of consumerism and mass
production that have built up since the mid 20th century, particularly in regard to how people
managed their possessions and collectively dealt with waste. The secondary market as shown on
TV rendered objects into items of respective values, some of which could be sold for very high
prices in retail settings. In real-world settings, those objects that could not help a seller generate
income ended up discounted at a flea market, or relegated to a landfill. The focus of Trash and
Treasure TV shows was almost exclusively on what things were worth on the open market, and
not on the cost of disposing what the entrepreneurs acquire and/or do not want. This discrepancy
and others will be discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. By looking at RTV through Foucauldian and
Deleuzian lenses, as Berardi had, we can better understand the work of those scholars who have
applied their theories in various ways.
RTV, Governance, and Social Control
Theorists who have researched RTV in the past have placed media within the analytic of
government, arguing that RTV operates as a technology that intervenes into our realities at a
distance to influence the construction of the self (Bratich, 2006, 2007, 2009; Ouellette and Hay,
2008; Sender, 2012; Skeggs and Wood, 2012). An early work on RTV and governance is Gareth
Palmer’s (2003) focus on surveillance and policing in which he speculated on the potential
power that programs such as Cops or World’s Wildest Police Chases had in the molding of
compliant and law-abiding citizens. Jack Z. Bratich (2006, 2007, & 2009) has taken a DeleuzianAutonomist approach and argued that RTV intervenes in reality by bringing audiences models
for becoming appropriate contemporary subjects. Viewers are shown how to understand
themselves as affectively-cognitively malleable, and how to relate to others in the same ways

34

that we are called upon to do in the ever-changing workplace and labor market. Laurie Ouellette
and James Hay (2008) have discussed RTV from a Foucauldian perspective, positing the genre
as a technique of governmentality. In their view, RTV provides a range of “technologies of the
self” that people can learn from to care for themselves as the welfare state withers and
nongovernmental entities, such as businesses or nonprofit organizations, become increasingly
responsible for composing social relationships. In this system, the capacity for individuals to be
flexible and self reliant becomes increasingly important.
Scholars have followed these earlier conceptualizations of RTV’s role as a technology of
subjectification, and analyzed programs that have focused on people’s “conduct” across a range
of areas. For example, Galit Ferguson’s (2010) work theorized ways that people could govern
themselves through UK shows about managing “the family” such as Supernanny, Honey We’re
Killing the Kids, and Brat Camp. Ferguson emphasized the psychocultural aspects of “televisual
looking,” which entailed the formation of the inner self through contact with the outer world. In
this case, he concentrated on RTV programs that provided models and “expert” guidance for
parenting that encouraged viewers to engage in forms of self observation while they watched the
subjects on the screen. According to his research, the primary device on these programs was
shame, an affective and ideological social emotion that filled the gap between one’s environment
and interior. The experts used the language of psychoanalysis and psychotherapy within the
discourses of self help to make judgments. The evaluations were those that the audience
presumably made about themselves and the people on the program who were seeking assistance.
Media theorists have thought about RTV and governance in relation to not only class, but
race, gender, sexuality, and the performance of the self. Dara Persis Murray (2015) analyzed
America’s Next Top Model, and argued that the program advocated for a postfeminist

35

subjectivity of motherhood which is based on branding oneself as “fierce.” Through the process
of becoming “fierce,” the subjects on the program learned to change themselves emotionally and
physically which was understood as a path toward “access[ing] a positive sense of self and career
promise” (Murray, 2015, p. 232). Allison Page (2015) has written about From G’s to Gents, an
MTV contest program produced by actor, comedian, and pop culture personality Jaime Foxx,
who is situated as a role model for the contestants. The show is hosted by musician and author
Fonzworth Bentley, who was once the personal valet to celebrity rapper and producer Sean
Combs, known in the past as “Puff Daddy.” The participants were black men who are not
particularly “refined” (possessing the cultural capital of middle-class whiteness) and in most
situations in their lives, tended to rely on either not showing their feelings, or only displaying the
capacity to be “tough.” Through their transformation, Bentley coached the men in “proper”
etiquette and other social skills, which included learning to manage one’s emotions. In turn,
becoming a “gentleman” involved renouncing a “particular type of blackness” while under the
impression that doing so will lead to financial success.
Assessments of RTV’s capability to act upon the biological body have also been
conducted. Katherine Sender (2012), whose work will be discussed further below, focused on the
potential for Makeover TV shows, such as The Biggest Loser, to act as a technique of
governmentality and influence how people managed their health and shaped their aesthetic
selves. Meanwhile, Melissa Zimdars (2017) has discussed RTV as a technology of
governmentality as deployed in relation to militarism. She argued that military themes, styles,
and plotlines were deployed on weight loss and fitness television to reinforce the disciplinary
logics presented on the programs of that subgenre. At the same time, she noted that in order to
manage what is understood as a “fattening” or softening among its ranks, the military had

36

become increasingly reliant on commercial training and weight loss practices that include what
was found on TV (Zimdars, 2017). All of the scholarly literature referenced thus far posits RTV
programs as sources for learning techniques of the self that are considered useful for being
successful on the neoliberal socio-economic landscape.
Relevant to this project, Hay (2010) has looked specifically at real estate TV programs
and their rise within the context of the U.S. sub-prime mortgage crisis, which was a central part
of the Great Recession. He designated these shows as a “transactional reality and transactional
technology” that emerged from this turbulent period, and called this reality and technology
“Realty” TV. He suggested that these shows emphasized the entrepreneurial skills needed by the
“new homo oeconomicus,” particularly in terms of surviving the housing and economic
meltdown by learning how to extract value in the “new political economy” through the financial
securitization of personal property, which in this case is the home (p.393).
Writing specifically about the programs that I refer to as Trash and Treasure TV, Eric
Jenkins (2015) has made a Deleuzian argument that American Pickers is a tool for promoting
commodity fetishism, deploying business strategies, and controlling markets. He contended that
this occurred through what Deleuze termed “images-of-affection,” specifically, “action images”
(those depicting “reality”), “affection-images” (those showing that positive affections are a
possibility), and “impulse images” (those naturalizing production as a source of value).
Additionally, Mark Rademacher and Casey Kelly (2016) have discussed programs from this
subgenre when they theorized that Storage Wars acts to mediate the crisis of masculinity and
labor by providing competitive images of “men at work” in traditionally feminine consumer
markets. The ideas of these scholars are applied to this study to discuss RTV as a mode of
governance.

37

However, Jenkins’ (2015) work only pointed out how American Pickers presented
audiences with models for laboring as “pickers” and encouraged the valorization of antiques and
collectibles. He did not engage with the scholarly literature on RTV and neglected the element of
Trash and Treasure TV that seeks to formalize the informal market. These shows encourage
entrepreneurs to build their own businesses that resemble those such as Antiques Archaeology,
the large-scale brick-and-mortar and online enterprise featured on American Pickers, the
Harrison family’s Gold and Silver Pawn shop of Pawn Stars, or the various companies and stores
that were owned and operated by the cast of Storage Wars. In addition, I contend that a thorough
theorization and analysis of Trash and Treasure TV and its potential to operate as a technology of
subjectification cannot be Foucauldian or Deleuzian alone. It is necessary to access the registers
of both power and desire, as RTV the televisual dispositif deploys information and affects that
carry meaning and conjure feelings. My research is the first to comprehensively investigate these
programs and the audiences who watch them in terms of the power to shape ethics and direct
desires.
Finally, Ouellette (2017) has made a contribution that is also directly related to this
project. She placed shows focused on pawn shops, repossession services, foreclosed home
flipping, and storage unit auctions into a category she called “dispossession TV.” Ouellette has
argued that these programs presented enactments of “bare enterprise” that operate via a
“biopolitics of disposability.” This is a concept borrowed from cultural critic Henry Giroux that
is concerned with the social processes of rendering invisible the bodies of those that are of no use
to the neoliberal project. To demonstrate this, Ouellette has noted the near complete absence
from the small screen of those who have had their homes and cars repossessed, or have defaulted
on their storage locker payments. When the poor and working classes were represented, they

38

were stripped of their property and treated as merely a part of the undeserving, anonymous, and
disposable masses.
Such depictions were central to the storylines on Hardcore Pawn, a program about a
family owned pawn shop in a poverty-stricken area of Detroit that serves a clientele largely
composed of underprivileged people of color. Here it is important to point out how postRecession economic conditions have changed the significance of the televisual dispositif, which
is a significant challenge to governmentality theory. Neoliberal discourses and affective images
in RTV have tended to assume a particular type of subject who will enmesh themselves within
what they are seeing on TV. Because of this, the poor and indebted may be out of reach of the
RTV dispositif. This limits its power of subjectification, since scouring the secondary market for
rare antiques and collectibles may not be seen as a priority or a viable way to make money for
these groups.
Laurie Ouellette’s (2017) work dovetails with that of those scholars who have critically
engaged with garbage as object and concept. Cultural theorists Stephanie Foote and Elizabeth
Mazzolini (2012) have noted that garbage is “productive of subjectivities … constitutive of
social relations” and “embodies a story about the larger refusals and values of contemporary U.S.
culture” (pp. 12-13). In this, they cited authors such as John Scanlon (2005), Gay Hawkins and
Stephen Muecke (2003; Hawkins, 2006), and Dominique LaPorte (2002), who “take seriously
the experience of everyday life, the way that social actors interact with the metaphors and
material that create their worlds, and from which they create their sense of selfhood … [and]
address the ambivalent politics of recycling and repurposing as well as the affective attachment
people feel about trying to make a difference in the sheer volume of trash” (Foote & Mazzolini,
2012, p. 12). My analysis of Trash and Treasure TV and secondary markets was concerned with

39

subjectification and the composition of social relationships, specifically as directed by the ethics
of neoliberalism within the context of U.S. culture and society. This included how we constitute
the world through wanted and unwanted objects.
The limitations of theories of RTV as a technique of governmentality have been
discussed by critics. For instance, cultural studies scholar Lawrence Grossberg (2010) has
pointed out that these concepts ignore the biopolitical, and noted that everyone is not always
working on the same neoliberal project. Taking another perspective, media theorist David
Morley (2010) has distilled these ideas on media and governance down to pure functionalism.6
Bringing viewers into the analysis, the respective audience studies of Katherine Sender (2012)
and Beverly Skeggs and Helen Wood (2012) have helped parse out the strength of RTV as a
source of social and cultural influence. Sender’s (2012) contribution concerned audiences of
makeover television programs, and illustrated viewers' agency. Her investigation into how
people have used these shows as guides for self care helped clarify the potential and limits of
media as a technology of governmentality. It demonstrated that the audiences she studied had
applied what they learned and were inspired to transform themselves through their engagements
with the programs. However, they did so “reflexively” and often critically, and made evaluations
regarding which techniques to apply to their own lives and which to leave behind (Sender, 2012,
pp.13-14).
Skeggs and Wood’s (2012) study recognized the relevance of governmentality theory, yet
complicated it in their claim that RTV is not only an intervention into reality, but also a
representation of it (p. 80). A major conclusion of their research is that people reacted to RTV
from their position within the dominant social relations, and criticized the participants on the

6

As pointed out in Skeggs and Wood (2012, p. 137).

40

programs with the same culturally-driven evaluative scrutiny that they imagined being subject to
as well (Skeggs & Wood, 2013, pp. 184, 215 - 216). This understanding, in conjunction with
Stuart Hall’s (1980) theorization that audiences are active readers of media products, rather than
merely passive receivers (which will be explained further in Chapters 4 and 5), guided the
interpretation of the data generated from this study's interviews.
This section has provided an overview of the rationales and practices of neoliberalism,
the precarity of everyday life that has emerged within the contemporary political economy, and
the foundational ideas involving media as a technology of governance as they have applied to
RTV. These ideas will serve as the foundation for the rest of this chapter, and in the next section,
these theories will be applied to the subgenre of Trash and Treasure TV to explain it in relation
to the particular cultural and social conditions of the historical moment from which it surfaced.
Trash and Treasure TV and Governance: Viewers, Subjectification, and Material Culture
In this dissertation, Trash and Treasure TV has been positioned as a component of the
RTV televisual dispositif designed to normalize and regulate the neoliberal economic discourses
that constitute the secondary marketplace. The sites of exchange that have composed the
secondary market intrinsically deviate from formal consumer and wholesale markets in their
distribution of new merchandise, their role in the state-corporate institutional structure, and the
social relations that are established through consumption practices such as going to a shopping
mall. Also, in contrast to formal consumer markets, the secondary market is something that
people in advanced liberal democracies engage in out of the desire to accumulate and circulate
used and old objects. This is done in order to make money and purchase things for personal use
or resale. Although the informal and formal sectors are a part of the same marketing system, the
informal market sites (e.g. flea markets, yard sales, peer-to-peer “picking,” auctions) provide

41

greater options for consumers in regard to the variety and uniqueness of objects available for
purchase, and avenues for building interpersonal relationships (Sherry, 1990).
Therefore, Trash and Treasure TV works to draw that productive power, as it is a
deviation from idealized forms of capitalist consumption (i.e. buying lots of new products at
formal sites in close alignment with the larger neoliberal capitalist arrangement). Ultimately, as a
form of media governance, the genre is intended to redirect the ways people have understood and
enacted economic practices. This is done through providing guidance for the circulation and
assignment of value to the objects being bought and sold, and by setting the parameters for
disciplining the social relations that constitute the secondary markets of post industrial,
technologically sophisticated, advanced liberal democracies. Overall, Trash and Treasure TV is
focused on labor and material culture, namely that which comes in the form of consumption
(Miller, 1987; 2013), collecting (Belk, 2013; Benjamin, 1955/1969), hoarding (Frost & Steketee,
2010), and appropriating and repurposing objects (Hebdige, 1979).
I propose that Trash and Treasure TV programs impart techniques of the self that viewers
can decide to take up or leave behind, which are capable of opening up and closing down
pathways toward the construction of new forms of subjectivity and coproduction. This occurs
through the subjection and subjectification of the contemporary person into a form that is largely
a combination of two classifications of people. One is the homo oeconomicus, who is guided by
rational market action in this new political economy (Hay, 2010, pp. 389-392). The other is a
strain of the homo consumericus, who is preoccupied with consumption. This type is specifically
concerned with the ethos and practices of consumerism that were borne out of the industrial
production of goods and desire that emerged at the turn of the 20th century (Curtis, 2002; Leach,

42

1993) and adapted for negotiating the current cultural, economic, social, and technological
terrain (Augouard, 2008).
The environment that produced Trash and Treasure TV was that of a post-recession
economy guided by the practices and rationales of neoliberalism. As a result of the “Great
Recession,” (2007-2009) millions of workers in the U.S. were rendered unemployed or
underemployed, tens of thousands of people were left without homes, and those with the largest
bank accounts had acquired even more wealth (Lee, 2014, June 22). In the subsequent years that
the U.S. had been in recovery from the economic crisis, thousands of people were still
unemployed and dealing with sluggish housing and employment markets (Demos, 2013, October
14; Lee, 2014). This was in spite of the rebound in the amount of available jobs, as many that
had been created were low-paying and lacked benefits or opportunities for advancement,
particularly for those without college degrees (Carnevale, Jayasundra, & Gulish, 2016; Demos,
2013, October 14; Lee, 2014).
On top of the continued erosion of financial compensation and working conditions, such
as job security, there was intensified competition for existing positions. The year 2009 saw the
emergence of Trash and Treasure TV with the debut of A&E’s Pawn Stars (2009 – present). It
was also the year that the ratio of jobs to applicants was the highest since the Great Recession
began, with more than six people competing for each job (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017). As
of January 2017, the ratio had dropped significantly, to 1.2 to 1.4 people per job opportunity
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017). However, again, the benefits of this “recovery” had been
largely limited to college graduates who have earned a bachelor’s degree or higher. Those with
an associate’s degree or some college credits, and those with a high school diploma or less, had
seen little to no improvement or even further decline in their job prospects (Carnevale,

43

Jayasundra, & Gulish, 2016). In light of these circumstances, the much hailed "recovery" did not
have a strong effect on easing the economic anxieties that had loomed in the psyches of many
Americans (Saad, 2013, September 2). This was evidenced by the results of the 2016 presidential
elections. In fact, Donald Trump beat Hillary Clinton in counties which relied on jobs that were
susceptible to automation or outsourcing, and where people felt threatened with regard to what
little economic vitality has remained since the recession “ended” (Kolko, 2016).
Paradoxically, neoliberal rationales and disciplines, which were central to the emergence
of the financial crisis in the first place, have only become more deeply embedded in both the
private and public spheres in the wake of the Great Recession, and have been called upon to
guide the effort of “recorrecting” the market (Peck, Theodore, & Brenner, 2012).7 After the
Recession was said to have ended and Donald Trump arrived on the political scene, there were
public debates during the 2016 presidential campaign over neoliberalism as an economic
organizational form, as compared to more nationalist or protectionist economic orientations.
Regardless of the nationalist political rhetoric and posturing of President Donald Trump during
his campaign, his administration has not deviated significantly from neoliberal policies, and in
fact, has further entrenched them in the form of tax cuts for the wealthy, and the encouragement
of deregulation, privatization, and anti-unionism (Bessner & Sparke, 2017).
Neoliberal late-capitalist markets and the corresponding precarious conditions of
everyday life demand appropriate subjects and subjectivities in order for the market to thrive and
for those individuals constituting it to endure or prosper. The televisual dispositif is a significant
part of the production of those subjects and subjectivities. Its influence can affect how people
learn to constitutively “perform” markets by directing people away from practices that create and
77

In free market theory, “natural” economic fluctuations are understood as “corrections.” Efforts to improve
conditions are attempts at “recorrection.”

44

encourage alternatives to traditional capitalism (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham, 2015). Such
arrangements would involve barter, trade, and mutual aid, rather than the pure pursuit of
individual financial gain and intense competition. This latter concept of “performing” and
therefore constructing markets will be discussed in further detail in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5. The
following sections will elaborate on specific ways that Trash and Treasure TV provides practical
instruction and presents cultural messages to viewers in regard to self fashioning as directed by
neoliberal rationales.
Embodying Flexible Entrepreneurialism
As a technique of governmentality, Trash and Treasure TV programs impart to viewers
what Ouellette and Hay (2008) call “guidelines for living,” with TV serving as techne for
cultivating oneself into a neoliberal subject (pp. 2, 14, 15, 75). The personalities who are the
hosts and other protagonists of Trash and Treasure TV demonstrate ways of buying and selling
objects in secondary market sites, and encourage subjective aesthetic judgments of objects as
directed by the practices of neoliberalism and consumerism. Within these practices are modes of
consumption that take place through aesthetic judgment and self fashioning that fill the gap
between the processes of subjection and subjectivity (Bennett, 2011). In this, there is an ability to
disrupt the discursive power of capitalism, which in turn demands an intervention through the
presentation of social and cultural guidelines (Bennett, 2011), such as neoliberal and
consumptive techne. At the foundation of Trash and Treasure TV’s instructional techniques is
the neoliberal rationalization of personal responsibilization, with these programs encouraging
viewers to become “entrepreneurs of the self” and embody the ideal “neoliberal spirit”
(Bourdieu, 1998; du Gay, 1996; Freeman, 2011; Giddens, 1991; Harvey, 2005; Ouellette & Hay,
2008).

45

Every Trash and Treasure TV program is about entrepreneurialism, and conveys to
viewers the practices and rationales necessary for shaping themselves as economic actors within
the framework of the formalized neoliberal economy. For example, the earliest programs of the
genre, which have also been the most popular, were American Pickers (2010 - present), which is
about two antique dealers who own a store; Storage Wars (2010 - present), a show focused on a
group of competitors at storage unit auctions; and Pawn Stars (2009 - present), a program about
a family-owned pawn shop in Las Vegas. On all of these programs, cast members took part in
business transactions which, at some point, would deliver tax dollars to the state or profits to
corporations. This transfer of money to the government and private sector brings secondary
market activity, which is largely informal, into the formal system. It also reminds us that
although neoliberalism and its subjectifying power are often understood as pertaining to the
private, the state is always present (Lazzarato, 2015). Trash and Treasure TV presents viewers
with examples of ideal neoliberal subjects. The entrepreneurs of the secondary market programs
model practices that are, as anthropologist Carla Freeman (2011) notes, concerned with being
competitive, and “fashion[ing] [oneself] as flexible, self-aware, and innovative actors in the new
era,” who are “self propelled, autonomous, economic actor[s], ever responsive to a dynamic
marketplace” (pp. 355-356).
In terms of flexibility, the personalities on the respective Storage Wars programs traveled
around their respective areas of California, Texas, New York, and Ontario, Canada to compete
against one another at auctions held at storage unit facilities. It was at these auctions that the
possessions of people who could not afford to pay their storage fees were taken home by the
highest bidder. “Pickers” Mike and Frank of American Pickers were perhaps the perfect
embodiment of flexible entrepreneurs. On their show, they traveled from their home base in

46

Iowa, sometimes long distances, to “pick” through amassments of objects such as collections or
hoards (the distinctions and commonalities of these terms will be set out in future chapters) and
look for objects of value for resale.8 They obtained leads and utilized existing relationships to
find new inventory, and incorporated what they call “freestyling” into their business model. This
latter practice entailed spontaneously finding “picks” on the road by looking for visual clues such
as older homes, antique cars parked in driveways, and cluttered-looking properties that appeared
to be owned by “hoarders.” Upon their arrival, one man, the other, or both would knock on the
door, and gave the person who answers their pitch and a flyer detailing the categories of items
they were interested in buying.9
At times, the subjects interviewed for this project also traversed very long distances
during irregular hours to buy and sell objects at different sites in the hopes of making good
money. While Mike and Frank performed what some of the interviewees termed “house calls,”
the people I spoke with traveled to auctions, antique and collectible shows, and flea markets,
among other secondary market sites. The sites that participants in this study frequented were
mainly in central New Jersey and the Jersey Shore, although they also traveled across the New
York-New Jersey-Pennsylvania Tri-State area. This will be discussed further in Chapter 3.
On Trash and Treasure TV, entrepreneurial flexibility was not just limited to the
disruption of conventional business practices concerned with acquiring commodities and
8

Mike and Frank have also talked about how they travel long distances and have to take care of their bodies. One of
the ways they have mentioned is by eating “healthy” food. In true entrepreneurial and corporate form, the pickers
have tied the transnational sandwich chain store, Subway, directly into their program. You can see a low-quality
version of this American Pickers product placement segment here: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KRHhuiSiJik

9

In an example of “freestyling” from season 1, episode 2, Mike and Frank saw a house with an outbuilding covered
in old and weathered advertisement signs (portrayed to viewers as a “clue” to the discovery of potential “treasure,”)
and were shown knocking on the door, in what is known as a “cold call.” After they spent some time chatting with
the owner in a friendly way and looking at his collection, they bought a rare vintage moving promotional statue of
the Phillip Morris Mascot. In this way, viewers are taught how to find treasure and manage interpersonal
relationships in ways that can give them access to it.

47

facilitating exchanges (for example, drumming up unique business opportunities by knocking on
doors and negotiating prices, as opposed to going to a mall where homogeneous products are
displayed and pre-priced for purchase). The portrayal of malleability was also incorporated into
showing viewers how to manage their emotional and affective states, and recognize and
understand the financial possibilities for objects and markets. This was necessary in order to be
effective in interpersonal exchanges with take place within shifting economic relationships and
settings. These modes of instruction will be discussed in the following sections.
Reimagining Objects, Recognizing Markets
As flexible entrepreneurs, celebrity pickers Mike and Frank were very creative and
responsive to the market environment, and able to see the potential in what others see as “junk.”
In one episode, Mike saw a very rusty Vespa motor scooter which he had been trying to buy for a
year from the person he was bargaining with, and said that it looked more like a “sculpture, a
piece of art.”10 In a private aside following that scene, he told the audience a bit about his and
Frank's business strategy by saying: “we’re not just looking for antiques, we’re looking for stuff
decorators can use, you know, art directors can use, I mean, we have a lot of different clients.”
So, the pickers are not simply concerned with having collectors as clients, but they also adhere to
the neoliberal ethos in which one is always seeking out new markets. Trash and Treasure TV
works to intervene in the overall consumer marketplace by encouraging an entrepreneurialism
that operates in the niches and fringes of taste culture.
As communication scholar Sarah Banet-Weiser (2012) has pointed out, mass culture and
the mass consumer market has become fragmented, transforming into a near infinite array of
lifestyle interests and categories. Entrepreneurs on the contemporary sociocultural landscape

10

American Pickers season 1, episode 2

48

who seek out or even create new money-making opportunities are taking part in extracting value
from and composing niche markets. This practice is something that was also brought up by
interviewees, who talked about buying objects for resale that could be repurposed. For example,
at one flea market auction house, I met an African-American man in his late 60s named Ed who
was negotiating with the proprietor over a steel radiator that no one had bid on the previous
evening. After successfully buying the item at a price that would leave him the opportunity to
bargain upon resale, I asked him what he was going to do with it. He explained that he would
clean it up and sell it, as there are people who will take one of those old radiators, adorn it with
flowers, and place it in the corner of a room as art.
In seeking out these new opportunities to fulfill the consumption needs of specific
markets, the entrepreneurs on Trash and Treasure TV called upon viewers to have an open mind
about the potential new uses of objects found in the field, and to recognize the value that
different things can have to potential buyers from various niche groups. While Mike discussed
the Vespa motor scooter, he talked about aesthetics and design, and declared that “it’s cool when
you take something that’s rusty and dirty and sun-baked, and you hang it in a completely abstract
area and all of the sudden it’s in somebody’s home.” Frank interjected and finished Mike’s
statement by saying, “it takes on a whole new life.” In this instance, the pickers demonstrated
their adaptability in terms of seeking out markets and seeing new possibilities for unwanted
“trash,” while making aesthetic judgments and reimagining how we should see and relate to the
objects around us. In another episode, while they assessed a man’s amassment of items, Mike
said that there was a lot of “junk.” Then he quickly qualified his statement by saying: “I use the

49

term loosely and not disrespectfully, junk to me still has potential, like those old sewing
machines, I’m sure there’s someone out there who is just dying for that kind of stuff.”11
This suggests that Trash and Treasure TV may work to unify the fragmented market and
energize consumer purchasing power found outside of the formal retail marketplace. In other
words, disparate consumer niches that compose the marketplace, particularly in regard to the
secondary market, can be identified and tapped into as people learn about these lifestyle interests
from Trash and Treasure TV. Indeed, Trash and Treasure TV entrepreneurs are model neoliberal
subjects with businesses operating within both the formal economy, such as antique shops,
second-hand stores, pawn shops and online storefronts, and more informal modes of exchange,
such as auctions, flea markets, yard sales, and peer-to-peer picking and trading within social
networks.
Direct Instruction, Knowledge, and Expertise
As an example of a Trash and Treasure TV program which can be read as a strategy of
governmentality, American Pickers explicitly teaches viewers the technologies of the self which
are most useful for learning how to successfully perform secondary market practices. Mike and
Frank model and provide direct instruction to the viewers regarding techniques such as
bargaining and price setting. In a scene from Season One, episode one, Mike even set up a
“school masterly” tone, saying: “This is Picking 101” and proceeded to give a quick lesson to the
audience on price setting. That phrase – “This is Picking 101” - is uttered by the pickers in future
episodes whenever something arises that can be used to teach the fundamentals of picking.
American Pickers and programs such as those in the Pawn Stars and Storage Wars franchises,

11

American Pickers season 1, episode 3

50

among many others, also explicitly educate the audience concerning the moment of negotiation
and transaction.
Expertise, a key feature of these programs, brings legitimacy, and in turn, power, to the
educative content. On American Pickers, Mike has given the audience quick lessons on vintage
bicycles, as that is one of his core areas of interest. Outside expert appraisal and analysis were
often featured on all of the Trash and Treasure TV programs when no one in-house had the
necessary expertise, or when outside confirmation was wanted by the buyer or the seller. After a
main personality on a given program such as Mike or Frank on American Pickers, or Rick
Harrison of Pawn Stars, looked at an object and made their assessments, experts from different
organizations and businesses were often brought onto the shows to confirm what was already
known and/or bring new information to light. In these appraisals, the experts talked about a
particular object, its use or novelty, its history and/or the manufacturer, what the object means
within a cultural-historical context, and the significance of the object’s design or other aesthetic
features. They also provided the most important detail which was explicitly stated as such,
namely, the object’s worth.
The presence of experts and their function on the programs is in line with the mentalities
of neoliberalism which privilege the authority of expertise in efforts to govern (Rose, 1996, p.
46). Often, these experts were able to inform those on the show about whether an item was
valuable or not and consequently played a role in setting a dollar amount from which to start the
negotiation. On Pawn Stars, experts told clients how much money can be made through selling
or auctioning off an item, which then provided a point of departure for the exchange. Experts
also told their clients on Trash and Treasure TV programs when a mistake was made, such as the
time Frank of American Pickers notably flubbed with his purchase of a 1939 Plymouth “business

51

coupe” for $5,500 dollars, appraised later for $3,000-$5,000. Frank did not know enough about
what he was buying. He was also committed to bringing the car home because he really liked it
and became emotionally invested. The seller was reluctant to part with the vehicle, and raised the
price, which resulted in Frank paying much more than the car was worth. Frank also failed in
buying antique World’s Fair milk glass vinegar bottles, picking up two for $40 dollars, under the
mistaken assumption that they would be valued at $40 dollars each, when these items, in reality,
fetch under $20 dollars each at auction.12
There are ways to use technology that could help avoid such mistakes. At the very least,
one could look up an item online to identify it or check closed listings on online auction sites
such as eBay. This allows browsers to gauge what an object could be worth. With the exception
of Bubba and Ricky from Storage Wars: Texas, technology was not used by those on the picking
and storage auction programs when they are out in the field, as possessing accumulated useful
knowledge in the field was valued and a point of pride. Bubba and Ricky, in contrast, responded
to a competitive market by taking routine advantage of using a wireless tablet for quick on-site
assessments of items. The device came in handy after finding several signed mini football
helmets in a storage unit. Access to that information helped them determine these items’
authenticity and value. However, the cachet among pickers and collectors of personally
embodying the necessary appraisal skills is exemplified by Ricky’s condescending attitude
toward Bubba’s preference for using the tablet. Ricky dismissively referred to the device as the

12

This observation was noted by John, a collector, author, historian, antique glass expert, numismatist, and
deltiologist in a pilot interview conducted on May 6, 2012.

52

“wizard box,” and stated that one should rely on their internal abilities, as has been traditionally
done by those who participate in that secondary market venue.13
In the interviews, I found that possessing a breadth of knowledge on a range of
categories was revered as a point of pride and admiration and that it took making mistakes to
truly learn. Neoliberal subjects are called upon to be responsible for their own successes and
failures (Türken, Nafstad, Blakar, & Roen, 2016). This perspective on failure is one that has been
promoted in Silicon Valley as a pathway to innovation and success as evidenced by the phrase
“fail early, fail often” (Trapp, 2014). MIT Sloan Business School scholar Anjali Sastry and
former MIT fellow turned management consultant Kara Penn (2014) have authored a book on
the topic, titled “Fail Better: Design Smart Mistakes and Succeed Sooner.” Their work
encouraged embracing failure as a part of the learning process, which requires resilience, yet
guarantees progress over time.
The knowledge people amass trading on the secondary market is something that, while
guarded in some ways to maintain status and competitive advantage, is shared among people
who have the same interests. However, devices such as smart phones do come in handy. They
have become a part of how people buy and sell objects beyond their circulation in physical sites
by utilizing online auctions, specialized “apps,” and “groups” on platforms such as Facebook
(this will be discussed further in Chapter 6). Some interviewees talked about how they and others
have used smart phones when buying and selling objects to identify and assess their authenticity
and value. There are websites such as EBay, and those that specialize in particular subject areas
that can serve as on-the-spot research tools. However, on the TV programs, this is generally
13

This is an instance in Storage Wars: Texas season 2, episode 10. It is important to note that self-sufficiency is a
strong neoliberal value, and that the preference for avoiding technological help and “going it alone” is illustrated in
this behavior.

53

downplayed and discouraged to emphasize a “do-it-yourself” survival mentality evocative of
rugged individualism.
Regarding the determination of authenticity, theorists have discussed aspects of such
processes. For instance, archaeologist Siân Jones (2010) has set out two broad ways in which
authenticity has been thought about over time: a materialist approach and a constructivist
approach. The materialist approach sees authenticity as objective and measurable, identified by
characteristics that are “inherent in the material fabric” (p. 182). The constructivist approach
complicates materialist notions of authenticity, and understands authenticity as culturally
constructed, with objects “embedded in regimes of meaning and exchange,” largely “produced
and negotiated” through “experts” [emphasis added] (Jones, 2010, p. 182). These two means are
named and described as “dual processes” which operate in practice, and in “how people use
authenticity to negotiate their own place” in the world (Jones, 2010, p. 184).
Moreover, it is important to understand that authenticity, while arbitrated within cultural
enclaves, is also taken up across borders and cultures. This was demonstrated by media scholar
Regina Marchi (2009) in her study of the Day of the Dead traditions in the U.S. and Mexico.
Authenticity involved the verification of an object's use value as well as a cultural value that
came from symbolic associations connected to consumption (Marchi, 2009). Following Regina
Bendix (1997), she also noted that whether or not an object or practice is “authentic” is less
important than who is making the authenticity claims and why (Marchi, 2009).
Being mindful of such cultural contexts is crucial for practitioners in secondary markets,
due to the co-phenomenal relationship between globalization and neoliberalism. Successful
entrepreneurs and specialized collectors (who circulate objects within their extended networks)
possess an understanding of the uses, histories and values of objects across cultures. This helps

54

to explain why so many people appreciate and respect Antiques Roadshow as a source of credible
information regarding identifying, authenticating, and appraising objects. Having discussed some
of the lessons viewers of Trash and Treasure TV shows learn regarding being entrepreneurial and
creative in trying to make money from items that many onlookers might consider as “junk,” I
will next explain how these shows teach viewers to manage their emotions and relate to others as
they perform the affective labor involved in this type of livelihood.
Affect and Affective Labor
What has been outlined above can be understood as rooted in the cognitive, but
entrepreneurs must also understand and engage in the management of emotions. Trash and
Treasure TV provides guidelines for doing so. Carla Freeman (2011) reminds us that the
embodiment of flexibility, responsiveness, and self awareness is not just reducible to the
restructuring of the labor market, but has reached so deeply into all areas of life that “feeling and
subjectivity itself is being constituted, managed, and experienced in new ways” (p. 356). One
approach to understanding this is to think about affective labor, which involves feelings and
emotion, as the flip side of the calculative labor we perform (Freeman, 2011; Hardt, 1999).
The primary underpinnings of the affective dimensions of this study were forged from
Deleuze’s (1978) lectures on philosopher Baruch Spinoza’s theory of affect. He begins by
explaining two terms: “affectio” (affection), which is “a state of a body insofar as it is subject to
the action of another body,” and “affectus” (affect), which is a “non-representational” “mode of
thought” (p. 1) To Spinoza, “affection,” or action, “always implies a contact, and is even a
mixture of bodies” (p. 3). In this framework, the variations of affect as experienced by bodies
pivots on whether an idea, even before conscious register, contribute to an impression that one’s
“power” to act is being enhanced or diminished (Deleuze, 1978, pp. 2-3). This results in a feeling

55

that falls in a zone between two poles that bind gradations of joy and sadness (Deleuze, 1978, pp.
2-3).14
Theresa Brennan’s (2004) research is also important here, as it established that affects
can be transmitted, and demonstrated that people are not just self-contained capsules, but
permeable in their capacities to affect and be affected by others. Related is the work of Anna
Gibbs (2008, 2010), who has written on the topic of “affective contagion” and mimesis, and
argued that subjectivity is modulated through the circulation of affects and forms of suggestion
that encourage mimetic communication. Such conceptions are useful for thinking about trends
among secondary market consumers, such as collectors, or the psychological workings of the
competitive market practices people perform in bidding wars or other scenarios. Affect can also
operate through what cultural studies scholar Sarah Ahmed (2004) has theorized as “stickiness.”
In this, affective intensities are attached to objects and bound up in emotional states and
contradictions (Ahmed, 2004). As an example, she posited the affective dynamics of racism,
specifically that of white supremacists, noting that according to Aryan racialism, white bodies
are associated with feelings of love, while those of “othered” groups are associated with derision
and melancholy.
Ahmed (2010) has also advanced a notion of “happy objects,” which are those that we
desire that potentially embody a simultaneous sadness in their unattainability or inability to meet
expectations. These concepts are applicable to further understanding object relations in
secondary markets between the bodies of people, the objects being bought and sold, and those
that construct the physical and virtual sites of exchange. Finally, Elizabeth Wissinger (2007) has
14

Affective intensities, resonances, and transmissions confound scholars since both ideas and the affective register
are bound up in these phenomena, causing stark divides regarding how to think about the concept of affect. For
social theorist Brian Massumi (2002), the preconsciousness of the affective defines it, which essentializes affect as a
psychosocial phenomenon that is always removed from representation.

56

reminded us that the emotional dimension of affective labor only exists after the naming of an
affect as a particular emotion. The salient aspect of Wissinger’s (2007) work on affective labor in
regard to this project is derived from her research of the high-end food service and modeling
industries. She demonstrated that one of the primary skills possessed by models and servers is
the transmission of affect and emotion during the performance of their jobs. These ideas are
useful for analyzing secondary market phenomena on TV and in the field, such as the in-themoment dynamics of negotiation or the composition of business alliances, including those which
are extremely temporary.
The social bonds on RTV are primarily affective and convey to viewers models for how
to understand, experience, and manage emotion in the encouragement or discouragement of
cooperation and divergence at given moments (Bratich, 2009). For example, on the original
Storage Wars program, the regular cast played out their loyalties and rivalries during bidding
competitions. These relationships have manifested themselves in heated and competitive
interactions between major characters Darrell Sheets and Dave Hester, and between Dave Hester
and married couple Brandi Passante and Jarrod Schultz. These conflicts illustrated the
psychological games at work in the temporary alliances which are made and betrayals which
may need to happen in an environment of cutthroat competition. The message viewers learn from
these programs is that it is a dog-eat-dog world, and that the individual entrepreneur can only
rely on his/her own hard work and emotional fortitude to be successful, without being able to
count on help or true loyalty from those around them. At the same time, in order to thrive as a
market actor, he or she must also know how to massage and “work” the emotions of others to
obtain desired objects at desired prices.

57

In the episode of American Pickers titled “Frank’s Gamble,” we can see two examples of
affective labor being discussed and used consciously to facilitate business.15 When dealing with a
particularly apprehensive and intimidating seller that Mike and Frank met, Mike showed
audiences how to stay calm and composed. He explained that when he and Frank “try to warm
up an intimidating guy,” they don’t treat the person as if they are threatening, but as “just another
collector.” In another scene that demonstrated the role of emotional work, their assistant,
Danielle, informed Mike and Frank that the son of a client at an upcoming “pick” may be
resistant to selling things off. This was because he was “interested in stuff” and had an
“emotional attachment” to the things being sold since they belonged to his late father. However,
she said that if they are able to “charm” his mother, they should be able to buy quite a bit,
because she is less emotionally connected to the items and ready to start selling. This particular
engagement illustrated how these entrepreneurs need to be able to “read” people and understand
feelings in order to be successful in their line of work. They have to be mindful of the
complexities of human life such as the grieving process of family members engaged in an estate
sale, being careful not to offend some sensibilities while specifically exploiting others to their
benefit.
The personalities on Trash and Treasure TV also performed affective labor when doing
“care work” that was not aimed at softening up a negotiation, but at sincerely making people feel
better when they are disappointed. This was most commonly seen on these programs when a
person looking to sell an item believed an object to be worth more money than it was. The
personalities encouraged the disappointed party to remember and appreciate the other forms of
value that the object in question possessed, whether it was historical, culturally nostalgic,

15

Season 1, episode 7

58

sentimental, or otherwise. For instance, when informing a seller that her 1924 $20.00 gold coin,
which would be very valuable if authentic, might be counterfeit, Rick Harrison of Pawn Stars
attempted to provide some comfort. In doing so, he reinforced the idea that although there was a
chance it was a reproduction, at the very least it was still worth its weight in gold, which made
the seller feel better. Overall, these depictions teach audiences the appropriate and inappropriate
ways to feel and respond, and how to successfully modulate their affective capacities to fit the
needs of particular moments, being affectively flexible in order to maintain productive
relationships with clients and potential clients (Wissinger, 2007).
This is important to sustaining neoliberal subjectivities because as people engage with
others and are put into new situations, affective flexibility allows them to be responsive to
successfully navigate unpredictable social interactions as they unfold. However, the scenario
involving Rick described above shows that there are limits to the cultivation of economic and
consuming actors and that managing emotions is not always done merely for business reasons.
Rick asserted his humanity to make a distressed client feel better in that situation. Still, it is in his
best interest to treat all clients respectfully, since someone may not have an item of value during
one interaction, but in the future that person may seek him out to do business if they acquire
something new to sell. This practice of positively managing affective relations was raised by
several professional dealers I spoke with who regularly bought objects for resale. Other
affectively driven engagements were seen in secondary markets. Some of these phenomena
diverted sharply from the profit-seeking orientations promoted by capitalist ethics, and will be
discussed further in later chapters.
Additionally, Trash and Treasure TV can show viewers (who are also potential buyers
and sellers), the culturally appropriate ways to feel about their own possessions or the things they

59

may want to buy. For instance, many of the entrepreneurs on the shows are collectors, and have
emotional attachments to the things they like or would like to possess. On American Pickers,
Frank’s strong feelings for the 1955 Plymouth led to his mistake of paying too much for it, and
Mike has admittedly overpaid for motorcycle parts out of a love for them. This demonstrated that
to be successful in the business of trading on the secondary market, one must learn to manage
such emotions, even if one's attraction to a particular object is inexplicably strong. Regarding
sellers, Carol and her son who were mentioned above, like many characters featured on
American Pickers, were parting with things that had personal sentimental and nostalgic value,
such as heirlooms or coveted possessions of deceased relatives. These sellers were shown as
coming to an intrinsic understanding that the right thing to do, for financial reasons, was to break
their emotional attachments and sell their things.
Then, there are those individuals who have enormous amassments of junk, as seen on
American Pickers who, as literary scholar June Deery (2012) has pointed out, are not
pathologized as are those on the program Hoarders, but are instead revered for having so many
old and unusual things (p. 154). Although not therapists or organizational specialists such as the
experts coaching hoarders on the TV show Hoarders, Mike and Frank also want people to let go
of their emotional attachments to their things (Deery, 2012, p. 154). In contrast to the show
Hoarders, in which compulsive accumulation (overconsumption) is portrayed as problematic,
American Pickers frames hoarder's relationships to their objects as culturally (and financially)
beneficial or not. In one episode, Frank said of his efforts to get a hoarder named Dan to sell
something that “the strategy is to keep on him” [i.e., to be persistent]. However, Dan did not part

60

with things easily, and said of his consumption habits, that what “started off as a hobby, ended
up as a disease, I guess.”16
The forms of affective labor discussed above were all touched upon by interviewees, who
talked about their own experiences in similar ways that were reflected on the Trash and Treasure
TV programs. Multiple people reported that dealing well with failure was important, because, as
they noted, everyone makes mistakes and may do so if their excitement about an item is not
properly tempered. Those I interviewed also mentioned that they took into consideration how
others perceived them and felt about the terms of a negotiation while they interacted with people
during house calls. They expressed that this was crucial, since the buyer is often permitted to
come into the seller’s personal space. Acting as if one is conscious and appreciative of that fact
can help build trust and potentially cultivate an ongoing commercial relationship.
Interviewees also talked about their personal presentation and tone when they had
appraised items. For instance, Colonel Mark often kept in mind the emotional investments that a
seller may have if an item is an heirloom or something that the owner is convinced is more
valuable that it is. As research on collecting and hoarding has revealed, attachments to objects
are inherently emotional, and recognizing this fact can help practitioners in their financial
interactions (Akhtar, 2005; Cromer, Schmidt, & Murphy, 2007; Frost & Steketee, 2010). More
importantly, affect and emotion are central to how people organize themselves. Trash and
Treasure TV focused on intensities of feeling as associated with business relations, such as the
“rush” of competition or making a big “score,” which reinforced capitalism as a cultural norm
over other priorities, such as social justice. The affective as it circulates and organizes social
relationships secondary markets will be discussed further in chapters 4 and 5.

16

American Pickers, season 1, episode 2

61

Conclusion
In this chapter, I have argued that the programs of Trash and Treasure TV offered
strategies of governmentality, and provided models for living in the contemporary moment of
advanced liberal democracies, particularly in the post-recession U.S. The personalities featured
on these shows, whether the primary cast or the guest experts, guide our understanding of how to
perform as free agents in secondary markets. They teach us the self-starting principles of
entrepreneurialism concerning strategies for buying and selling, general and particular
knowledges about a range or niche categories of objects, costly mistakes that can be made, and
how to understand and manage emotions during cooperation and competition. The successful
entrepreneurs on Trash and Treasure TV also owned formalized businesses that were integrated
into the greater economy. In turn, their small enterprises provided revenue to the state and the
private sector through taxes and business-to-business consumption (purchasing supplies,
shipping through FedEx or UPS, communication costs, etc.) respectively.
In addition, Trash and Treasure TV programs show us appropriate and inappropriate
ways to relate to our own possessions, playing a role as Foote and Mazzolini (2012) have
asserted, in the conversation on how the consumptive excesses of consumer capitalism are to be
managed (pp. 256-257). Moreover, the attention given to the consumption practices of
individuals and groups must be concerned with matters that go beyond pathological psychologies
such as hoarding or compulsive shopping, and the larger consequences for markets, capital, and
class relations. Crucially, they are directly related to the contemporary environmental crisis that
has resulted from the extraction, production, distribution, and disposal cycle of industrially
produced, new consumer goods. In this instance, the exchange and utilization of existing objectresources through buying second hand objects, fixing broken things, or other alternatives to

62

buying new items in a retail setting are potential solutions to the environmental problems that
consumption has wreaked.
However, Trash and Treasure TV shows largely ignored these potential challenges to
mainstream capitalist consumption, and reduced buying and selling old and used objects to just
another form of consumerism, rather than a set of practices which people might deploy to
critique and counter the broader culture of over-consumption and its socio-environmental
consequences. Most importantly, these shows teach viewers how to be “flexible” and creative
agents in response to difficult economic times, turning “trash” into “treasure.” Importantly, these
lessons reinforced the status quo of capitalist mentalities and practices, as opposed to inspiring
viewers to perform alternative economies that deviate from the ways the contemporary market
operates. Analyzing these programs can help us understand media as a technology of governance
and RTV as a strategy of governmentality, meant to capture our productive power as subjects of
the new political economy.

63

Chapter 3
Method: Textual Analysis and Ethnographic Techniques
Findings about television use are also findings about the articulation of personhood. – Media researchers Beverley
Skeggs and Helen Wood (2012, p. 120)

The methodologies used for this study entailed 1) executing a textual analysis of Trash
and Treasure TV programs, 2) conducting interviews with viewers who also buy and sell on the
secondary market, and 3) engaging in field observation at secondary market sites such as flea
markets, antique and second hand stores, a pawn shop, and collector’s club meetings. Within the
field of RTV studies, my approach differed from those such as Katherine Sender (2012) and
Beverly Skeggs and Helen Wood (2012). Their research investigated how viewers used and
“reacted” to RTV, and foregrounded the respective TV programs watched by the audiences they
studied. In contrast, my methods resembled those used by media anthropologists Purnima
Mankaker (1999) and Lila Abu Lughod (2005). These scholars were not only interested in
media’s influence on viewers, but the strength of its presence in their everyday lives as they
evaluated and integrated what they were watching on TV into their own subjectification. Both
Mankaker and Abu-Lughod went beyond focus groups, interviews, and surveys, and integrated
themselves into the worlds of those who participated in their research.
In this project, I observed buyers and sellers on the secondary market, and spoke with
them about their participation in the context of their economic lives. This opened up
opportunities for gaining a greater understanding of how media texts circulated among those who
constituted markets, and the significance, or lack thereof, of Trash and Treasure TV to the
practices of the individuals and groups involved at the various sites. In turn, this project is a
historical geography of RTV, with New Jersey as the stage for mapping out the pathways Trash

64

and Treasure TV has or has not taken through the hierarchies and networks of people who
perform the local secondary market. Throughout the textual analysis and ethnographic portion of
the study, I attended to matters related to social identity categories such as economic class, race,
and gender. In doing so, I teased out the representational politics embedded in the programs, and
analyzed the hierarchical and networked structural arrangements and dynamics at work in the
organization of real-world secondary markets. Within this, my approach allowed the observation
of Trash and Treasure TV’s range of circulation, and the limits to the RTV televisual dispositif
as a technology of governmentality.
At the same time, this research fits into the field of production studies, as it was able to
show how participants had built themselves into the televisual dispositif and reproduced media
culture through online activity. This included the creation of web-based shows and short-form
videos that documented the act of treasure hunting and/or the yield from a day out “picking”
(which will be discussed in chapters 5 and 6). My methodology also offered a media
archaeological approach in its focus on dispositifs and material cultural practices as they
involved trash, waste, rubbish, and old objects in their excavation, circulation, restoration and/or
recombination for new uses, and artistic endeavors, among other purposes.17 All of what has
been detailed above will be further illustrated in subsequent chapters. In this chapter, the
methods used in this study will be elaborated upon, which includes specifics about the programs
I analyzed, coding, how the participants and sites were selected, and subject recruitment.
This project began in 2012 as a paper for my graduate research practicum, but its
beginnings long predated that. My father had been a collector since the mid 1950s, and had been
17

By “recombination” I am referring to the ways objects are used when being restored or “upcycled.” The latter
refers to when one or more objects are reconditioned and modified for use in creating a final product that they were
not originally intended to compose. For example, on Flea Market Flip, contestants used a vintage bicycle, and a fire
extinguisher and a piece of a countertop from the early 20th century to make a rolling table.

65

buying and selling antiques and collectibles on the secondary market since the late 1970s. From a
very young age, I would accompany him to flea markets, auctions, yard sales, estate sales, swap
meets, and antiques and collectibles club meetings and shows. When my sister was old enough,
she would come along too. Over time, my participation waned, and became limited to the
occasional flea market or record show, where I would scour bins for vinyl records and musicrelated items. My father would continue to be a connection to the secondary market and feed my
collection of political ephemera when he would see things of interest to me, particularly
postcards and pamphlets advocating radical positions (such as an activist produced booklet about
the opposition to the 1965 U.S. invasion of the Dominican Republic).
The subgenre I have coined “Trash and Treasure TV” emerged as a televisual subgenre
when I was in graduate school. When I was home visiting during school breaks, my father and I
would watch Pawn Stars, American Pickers, and Storage Wars together. We would talk about
how these shows presented reality. In particular, we would discuss how the cast members,
experts, and others with on-camera roles identified, appraised and priced objects, and how
accurate the information and performances were in relation to my father's lived experience and
those of the many people he knew. That community of collectors and pickers that my father was
a part of eventually served as the initial snowball sample through which I recruited interview
participants. These interviewees were all long-time members of clubs for those who collect
antique bottles and “paper” (photographs, postcards, and ephemera). Some of them made their
primary living or supplemented their incomes as dealers in antiques and collectibles, although
many bought and sold only to fund their hobby of collecting.
Since the time frame in which we watched together was just after the Great Recession
(2007-2009), I thought about how the various programs portrayed what the people did, and what

66

that meant vis-a-vis lived reality. Some of my earliest observations on the subject concerned
media effects and the economy. On Storage Wars, the units up for bid were described as
“abandoned.” This struck me as a sanitizing term that hid the dire economic circumstances that
forced growing numbers of people to give up their belongings. It was also disturbing in its
normalization and reinforcement of the dog-eat-dog ethics of neoliberal capitalism. From there, I
began to theorize that the subgenre of Trash and Treasure TV had the potential to influence
viewers as a mode of governance aimed at producing subjects agreeable to the contemporary
economic arrangement. It is from those origins that this project developed. The following
sections will provide a detailed summary of the specific methodologies used to conduct this
research.
Textual Analysis: Reading Trash and Treasure TV
This is a cultural studies project in which I used the qualitative method of textual analysis
to understand the cultural meanings, utility, and broader social contexts related to Trash and
Treasure TV. I did this by analyzing the first season of three of the subgenre’s most popular
programs. These were A&E’s Storage Wars (2010 – present), History’s (The History Channel
was rebranded to “History” in 2009) American Pickers (2010 – present), and HGTV’s Flea
Market Flip (2012 – present). Each program was chosen for its popularity and longevity, and the
diverse formats and sites that each one respectively offered (explained further in the next
subsection and in chapters 4 and 5). Methodologically, textual analysis has long been a practice
that cultural studies scholars have relied on in their research, while questioning and remaking it
over time (Kovala, 2002). The problem of interpretation has been at the center of these critiques
and adjustments, particularly in terms of how reception processes are reduced to explain how

67

shared meaning is constructed through texts, and often assume that all audiences understand texts
the same way (Kovala, 2002).
I address these issues by taking to heart Lawrence Grossberg’s (1998) prescription that
the field of cultural studies and the methods of scholars, such as textual analysis, should not only
be concerned with what texts mean and what people do with them, but also with how discourse
operates in the larger world. This brings meaning and utility into broader contexts that go beyond
the reciprocity of text and culture, and considers how media organizes power relationships
(Grossberg, 1998). Similarly, Douglas Kellner (2009) has called for a textual analysis and
cultural studies that places media within the political economy of how texts are produced,
distributed, and consumed. He noted that texts are to be analyzed from a multiplicity of
perspectives, and that media reception research must recognize how audiences understand and
use media culture in vastly different ways (Kellner, 2009). At times, this engagement with media
works to constitute oppositional subjectivities and cultural forms (Kellner, 2009), which will be
discussed in the section addressing this project's ethnographic methods.
Programs, Total Running Times, and Selection Rationale
In terms of the textual aspect of this study, I analyzed the full first season of each
program, which entailed a total of 16 hours and 30 minutes of Trash and Treasure TV. This
included 12 episodes of American Pickers, totaling 7 hours and 3 minutes, 19 episodes of
Storage Wars, amounting to 6 hours and 39 minutes, and 8 episodes of Flea Market Flip which
came to 2 hours and 48 minutes. I chose to analyze only three shows because while TV shows
are at the center of this study, audience engagement with the genre was my larger focus. These
programs were chosen in part because they have been sustained over time, while many others
have been cancelled since the subgenre emerged. Additionally, American Pickers and Storage

68

Wars were two of the original programs that established the Trash and Treasure TV subgenre, as
they aired just after the very first one, which was Pawn Stars (2009 – present), a show about a
family owned and operated pawnshop in Las Vegas.
American Pickers retained and gained viewership in the years after it debuted (Medialife,
2014). It’s popularity eventually spawned the short-lived imitator Picked Off (2012) and the Breel compilation show American Pickers: Bonus Buys (2016 - present), a program of new content
and outtakes featuring cast members Mike, Frank, and Danielle acquiring stock for their shop.18
High ratings and sustained popularity have also been enjoyed by Storage Wars. Their secondseason debut scored the highest ratings for any show in A&E’s 30 year history (Sellers, 2011),
and continued even after accusations surfaced that the “finds” on the program were faked
(Hibberd, 2012). The immense success of Storage Wars also produced a number of spinoffs,
including Storage Wars: Texas and Storage Wars: New York. Finally, Flea Market Flip also
maintained and developed a large enough set of audiences to remain on the air for 12 seasons,
and continued to be in the top five daytime programs on the HGTV network for upscale women
25 - 54 (Broadway World TV News Desk, 2015). It was also nominated for an Emmy (HGTV,
2015), and outlasted competitors that aired around the same time, such as PBS’s Market
Warriors (2012 – 2013).19
High ratings and other indicators of success, such as awards and the phenomena of
imitators and spinoffs are important in demonstrating the value of these programs in terms of
potential reach and influence - indicators of cultural importance and power. These shows were
also chosen because the sites and practices were relevant to the ethnographic portion of this
18
19

Both of those programs aired on History.

Even PBS has embraced the competitive, aggressive tone of these commercial TV shows, as indicated by the title
of their program Market WARRIORS (the capitalization is for emphasis).

69

study. The people I interviewed bought and sold items at the same kinds of places, and I was able
to observe them and others in action. For example, on American Pickers, Mike and Frank are
shown going into people’s homes and properties to make deals. The cast of Storage Wars
competitively bids against each other on storage units that are being auctioned off, and on Flea
Market Flip, experienced flea marketeer and celebrity host Lara Spencer brings contestants to
buy and sell at flea markets, coaching them along the way. The interview subjects I worked with
bought and sold in peer-to-peer arrangements (which many termed “house calls”), at storage unit
auctions, and at flea markets, making their perspectives particularly salient in terms of the
specific programs analyzed, which a number of them watched regularly.
Coding: Language and Imagery
This analysis was concerned with both language and video imagery. In regard to
language, there were a number of codes that surfaced. On all of the programs, the theme of
“entrepreneurialism” was primary and applied to the way cast members and others on camera
engaged with the people and the objects they encountered. In American Pickers, a program with
a heavy emphasis on modeling “best practices” and “how to” instruction, entrepreneurial
“tactics/techniques” emerged as codes, such as “freestyling” (or, stopping at houses and making
“cold calls”), “price setting,” and the “treasure hunt,” which focused on finding and identifying
objects of “value.”
The theme of “value” was also found across the programs. Those modes of “value” broke
down into the sub-codes of “historical,” “cultural,” “aesthetic,” and “monetary” categories. The
latter was the most common in all three shows, particularly in segments that presented the
expenditures and projected profits being totaled up or calculated for the audience’s benefit. On
Storage Wars and Flea Market Flip, the theme of “competition” was emphasized (which is a

70

dominant feature of neoliberalism), along with the calculative labor of “bargaining,” “price
setting,” and “strategy,” a greater catch-all code for how these practices were being performed
strategically. These programs also modeled “relationships” and “affective labor,” which
produced related codes, such as “emotional attachments.” That code referred to the feelings
individuals developed for their objects that fueled a desire to keep them. In those instances,
people were coded by such terms as a “difficult seller,” who either would not part with an object
at all or required significant persuasion. Or, they were coded as a “hoarder,” which is a person
who has amassed an enormous amount of things that, to the eyes of most people, would be
indistinguishable from trash (Frost and Steketee, 2010).
Some other codes worth mentioning here concerned “knowledge” and “expertise.” These
two related concepts were prominent across the programs. These features were also easily
identifiable on other Trash and Treasure TV shows such as Pawn Stars or the short lived Combat
Pawn (2012), the latter of which was about a family-owned pawn shop in Spring Lake, North
Carolina, that specialized in firearms. The possession and ability to recall “knowledge” is an
epistemological capacity and ontological position valued among those who buy and sell on the
secondary market. Having and conjuring knowledge can be an advantage on the secondary
market, whether placing a bid at an auction, making an offer at flea market, or identifying a rare
item at a yard sale that has an unbelievably low price tag. Unlike retail shopping, these items are
often one-of-a kind or hard to find again if an opportunity to purchase them is lost. “Expertise” is
also seen on these shows, which like “entrepreneurialism” is another marker of neoliberal
mentalities and practices, since with increasingly few well-paid jobs for low-skilled laborers, one
needs “expert” specialization to survive in the new economy (Rose, 1999).

71

Cast members have their own bodies of knowledge, which include forms of “expertise.”
For instance, Frank Fritz of American Pickers is extremely well versed in early 20th century
German-made tin toys, such as cars or zeppelins. Lara Spencer on Flea Market Flip has built an
expertise in assessing items’ value and the potential financial risk that is inherent with
repurposing. Repurposing or refurbishing objects does not always increase their value and can, in
fact, decrease it through alterations. For example, removing patina (a form of metal oxidation)
from the base of a Tiffany lamp will diminish its desirability and monetary command.
Additionally, “experts,” certified as such through their affiliations with high-end specialty retail
stores, museums and universities, are brought on to Storage Wars, American Pickers, and many
other Trash and Treasure TV shows to engage in identifying and appraising the “finds.” The
History website has provided a list of experts that have appeared regularly on Pawn Stars (a
program about a family owned and operated pawn shop in Las Vegas).20
In terms of visual images, codes also emerged involving social identity and class.
Regarding the coding of people from lower economic and social strata, they were portrayed as
“rural” or “backwoods” in their eccentricity, such as “Charlie” the hoarder, or “Bear,” the old
“carnie” (someone who works traveling with a carnival). Also commonly shown on TV (via pan
and close-up shots) was a focus on the ramshackle or disheveled places where these people lived,
often crammed with hoards of things stored in barns, garages, or other structures, if not inside
their primary residence. For instance, Bear had a long white beard and wore blue jeans and a
tucked in shirt with a “gypsy-style” headscarf (like a bandanna) on his head. He also had a belt
with a buckle that said “carnie power.” Although some of the sellers had the flamboyance of

20

Here is the URL, as accessed July 25, 2017 http://www.history.com/shows/pawn-stars/articles/experts

72

Bear, the others dressed simply, often in clothes made of denim or flannel material (pants or
jackets) and baseball hats.
In season 1 episode 8 (“Five Acres of Junk”) Mike and Frank met a very knowledgeable
man named Vic who owned an enormous hoard spanning five acres. His amassment contained
rusted cars, motorcycles, advertisement signs and other objects. Vic’s appearance was that which
is associated with “vagrants” or the “hobo” lifestyle. He had a bushy white beard, wore an old
dirty zip-up fleece, was missing a tooth, and in one scene was shown sitting in front of his
dilapidated home accompanied by two “junkyard” cats. In another shot, Vic was warming up
next to a fire that was in a 50 gallon metal drum, similar to what homeless people or “bums,” in
the pejorative, are portrayed doing in popular media depictions of the poor. Mike and Frank
frequently claimed to revere those who embodied these authentic “down home” characteristics,
as they implied that such people possessed innate wisdom about all types of “rusty gold” (a term
for valuable things that may not be in pristine condition).
Similar to American Pickers, the first season of Storage Wars also had very few women
or people of color, all largely in the background. The primary cast contained one woman, Brandi
Passante. She was white, blonde, conventionally attractive, and the long-term romantic and
business partner of Jarrod Schultz, with whom she owned a second-hand shop. The other woman
regularly on the program was affiliated with the company that conducted the auctions, and
played a minor “supportive” role. She was placed in the background with a clipboard for the
administrative work, while her business partner and husband facilitated the “main” action of
auctioneering. Otherwise, there were no women or people of color in the primary cast or in any
significant role. Socioeconomic class could also be read in the cast members, in regard to the
way each person spoke and dressed. Lead characters often portrayed as rugged individualists

73

with a working class, “roll up your sleeves” attitude. For instance Storage Wars cast members
Darrell Sheets and Jarrod Schultz both wear inexpensive-looking clothing and do not appear very
educated or well spoken.
The presence of those on Trash and Treasure TV casts who do not embody middle-class
norms and values, such as Darrell and Jarrod, implies that buying and selling storage units is
something that one does not need to have a college degree to do. This is relatable to a large
portion of the total viewership, as nearly two-thirds of Americans do not have a bachelor's
degree (Ryan & Bauman, 2016). Additionally, the country as a whole has developed a growing
“anti-elitist” sentiment against college educated leaders and others (Smith, 2011; Boot, 2016).
Because so many under-educated, unemployed or underemployed people (the very demographic
that brought Donald Trump to the White House) are seeking ways to make money, given the
disappearance of well-paid, unionized jobs for less educated workers, this population may
comprise a considerable quantity of the viewership. While precise socioeconomic data were not
available regarding the viewership, it was clear to me, not only from watching the shows, but
also from my ethnographic observations, that this demographic is significant in the world of
pawn shops, flea markets, auctions and other secondary markets.
Regarding identity politics and coding, Flea Market Flip deviated from Storage Wars and
American Pickers in that the star and sole recurring cast member was a woman. Her name was
Lara Spencer, and she was also a co-host on ABC’s Good Morning America. She was white,
middle class, and clearly possessed economic and social capital. This was evidenced by her highprofile TV hosting jobs, the stylish clothes and jewelry she wore. Additionally, she spoke and
carried herself with confidence and authority. On the program, the contestants that Spencer
guided and judged were also middle class, at least in regard to cultural and social capital, visible

74

from the clothes they wore, cars or homes they owned and ways they spoke, among other
indicators. These features also produced codes related to social identity categories.
Many of the teams competing on this show were composed of artists and designers whose
lives were not necessarily economically stable, although they clearly came from the middle class.
While they shared economic precarity with less educated members of society, they were better
able to claim cultural knowledge and harness social relationships than people with lower
educational status, due to their higher levels of learnedness, more affluent social circles, and
more sophisticated or “cultured” presentations of the self. Additionally, the teams on this show
were diverse in terms of race, gender, and sexuality/gender performance, as composed of men
and woman of various races who at times could be read by audience members as gender-queer
and possibly homosexual.
As far as the coding of the “economic,” “cultural,” and “social” forms of capital related
to physical space, the flea markets shown on TV where the teams bought and sold items were
more upscale than most actual flea markets, including those I visited. For instance, at the time
this research was conducted, the rental cost for a space at the Elephant’s Trunk, a flea market site
on Flea Market Flip, was $75 per day. This is opposed to the weekend rate (often the highest
fees charged) at Farmingswood Flea Market (the site I frequented the most), which was $19 per
day. Farmingswood spanned a large, treeless area covered by hundreds of worn tables with their
various shades of green, brown, and blue chipped paint. Garbage littered the outer aisles and was
blown up against the fence line. Several people I had become acquainted with had said that the
accumulation of trash on that edge of the property had been much worse until the management of
the neighboring motel complained and threatened to take legal action if there was not an effort to
clean it up.

75

Compounding the unruliness of Farmingswood, the junk peddlers who sourced their
stock from dealers that brokered house cleanouts or bid on storage units sold their goods at the
market all weekend and would leave their things on the premises under tarps, “camping out” for
the duration.21 This practice was so common that I began referring to one particular section
where dealers stored their stock as the “junk corner,” which was readily understood by people I
spoke with that were familiar with that flea market. In this area, vendors would place objects on
the ground displayed in categories, jumbled up in piles, or out on the market tables for sale.
These included used clothes and shoes, old rusted tools, opened and partially used cleaning
agents, dented cans of food, expired dry goods, art and home décor, furniture, pre-owned kitchen
supplies, and other miscellaneous things.
Overall, the coding I used with regard to identity involved terms such as “gender,”
“race,” “class,” and “sexuality.” Other than the handful of instances in which Mike or Frank
made an off-handed male-oriented gendered joke, these codes were gathered from what could be
read visually in terms of people, places, and things.22 Importantly, visual imagery was coded by
what was absent just as much as what was present. For instance, on American Pickers, other than
when someone would cite the death of a spouse, reasons why people may have been selling their
collections or heirlooms were sparsely mentioned. On Flea Market Flip, while working class
vendors were shown, the poor – a group that frequents flea markets in large numbers in real life were completely missing from the program. Also absent were the economically strapped owners
of the “abandoned” units that are auctioned off on Storage Wars. This section detailed the coding

21

It was not uncommon for local homeless vendors or traveling “antique” and junk peddlers to stay at the local
campground, which was a quick 10 minute drive from the flea market.

22

For example, in episode 1 season 1 of (show name), Mike and Frank make an offer to Bear, the carnie, to buy his
belt buckle. He refuses, and in a candid scene Frank remarks to Mike’s great amusement that Bear “wouldn’t have
sold that in a lifetime. That’s like his penis. He wasn’t going to let that go. That thing is on, you know?”

76

process and some of the codes that emerged from the textual analysis data. The next section will
describe the ethnographic methods.
Ethnographic Methods
This project is not an ethnography; although, it incorporated ethnographic methods,
particularly in-depth, individual interviews and observation. From June through December of
2016, I conducted semi-structured interviews with 44 people who watched Trash and Treasure
TV. All of the participants bought and sold merchandise in the types of secondary market sites
portrayed on the shows I analyzed. I often conducted the interviews in the secondary market sites
that these people frequented, whether at the flea market tables they rented, in the antiques shops
that they owned, or at other meeting places of their choosing. Forty-three of the people I
interviewed had watched Trash and Treasure TV shows regularly over time. One person, who
did not own a TV, only watched the programs online once in a while or when visiting friends.
Twenty two of the interviews were audio recorded, while 22 were recorded via pen and note
taking.
The subject pool was generated through snowball sampling, using contacts from
networks of people interested in antiques and collectables. Many of these individuals were
contacted by email or phone, and through a call I put out on a popular Facebook page for
“pickers.”23 Recognizing that Facebook attracts an economic demographic that generally does
not include indigent people, recent immigrants, and others who may lack Internet access, I also
recruited participants by physically going to flea markets and striking up conversations with
people who were selling things. I spent approximately 75 hours in the field, observing
transactions and typical goings-on, as well as courting interview participants at flea markets,

23

The Facebook group was called “Jersey Pickers – Antiques and Collectibles in NJ.”

77

auctions, antique shops, and a pawn shop. I will discuss this methodological process further in
the next subsection.
This research was conducted in central New Jersey in the counties of Monmouth and
Ocean, an area that includes beach town areas known as the Jersey Shore. This region was
chosen due to my access to a rich network of buyers and sellers located there, but also because it
exemplified specific regional and economic challenges, issues, and conditions relevant to my
study. Like many other states, New Jersey suffered large-scale deindustrialization in the 1980s
and 1990s, which left many formerly prosperous towns down-and-out (Hanley, 1980; Courtney,
1987; James 1989; Reuters, 1994). However, New Jersey was more insulated from the economic
blow than the Rust Belt areas of the Midwest and Great Lakes regions. This was due in part to its
proximity to New York City. The state was also the home for the executive offices and
production facilities of some of the leading companies in the pharmaceutical, food science and
chemical industries. Many organizations had their headquarters and factories located along the
profitable corridors of Route 1 and the New Jersey Turnpike. In addition, New Jersey possessed
the robust commercial hub of Port of Elizabeth, which is the largest seaport on the East Coast.
Regardless, the trend of outsourcing jobs to countries such as India and the use of
automation in manufacturing changed the composition of the New Jersey labor market to one
more focused on highly-skilled information and technology services (Hughes & Seneca, 2015).
These jobs require high levels of training and education that those who would have worked in the
manufacturing sector do not have and often lack opportunities to obtain. This environment does
not sustain the employment needs of people living in central New Jersey, and in particular the
Jersey Shore, which has always been limited in its industrial development and traditionally
catered to summer tourists visiting from elsewhere.

78

The service and retail industries that comprise the economic system that serves the
tourists and locals on the Shore cannot absorb everyone who lives there. On reason is that when
business incomes dip during the off-seasons, hiring new workers or even retaining year-round
workers is unnecessary. In addition, New Jersey’s once-robust state economy suffered the impact
of Hurricane Sandy. That storm caused millions of dollars in devastation by seriously damaging
or destroying thousands of homes, and laying waste to the beach area resorts and businesses the
region relied on to employ people and generate private and public revenue. The storm could not
have been timed worse, striking the shore in 2012, just as the economy was beginning to recover
from the Great Recession, which had caused the greatest job loss in New Jersey’s history
(Hughes & Seneca, 2015).
As the trend in deindustrialization continued, companies closed their doors in the state.
Between 2013 and 2016, New Jersey lost 15 manufacturing plants (NJ.com, 2016), several close
to the areas where I conducted my research. With jobs scarce, affordable housing in short supply,
and a lack of social services such as homeless shelters and food pantries that are found in larger
urban areas, many people in central Jersey found themselves in dire straits, and some have
formed homeless camps in wooded areas in Ocean County (Napoliello, 2017). The poverty in
these areas created fertile ground for the rising number of pawn shops, thrift stores (that sold
used clothing, books, housewares, etc.), flea markets, low-end antique shops and the growing
numbers of people who make up the client base that depends on these sites for subsistence. In all
of this, my project amounts to a historical geography of RTV that illustrates the emergence of
New Jersey from the global downturn of the Great Recession in terms of media culture,
entrepreneurialism, and precarity.
Participant and Site Selection

79

As selection criteria, interview subjects were viewers of Trash and Treasure TV programs
or earlier incarnations of these shows, such as Antiques Roadshow and Personal FX. Most had
significant experience with these programs. Heavy viewing was not required, but a familiarity
with the programs was necessary. Subjects were also selected based on their engagement with
buying and selling goods on the secondary market, ideally in sites and spaces featured on the
programs analyzed.
The interview sample contained people with a range of interests and experiences in
collecting and appraising. However, white men were most heavily represented. One primary
reason for this homogeneity may have been the use of snowball sampling, which produced the
initial pool of people who came from common racial and class backgrounds. Another
explanation is that in the antiques and collectibles communities, there are gender divisions based
on interests. For instance, middle class and working class white men tend to be involved in
antiques and sports memorabilia, two areas that are reflected on Trash and Treasure TV shows.
In light of these phenomena, I attempted to diversify the group of people I spoke with by seeking
women and people of color for interviews, and taking notice of social class dynamics in my
observations. A breakdown of the interview subjects, and their ages, races, economic statuses
and other characteristics will be discussed later in this chapter.
Observation and participant recruitment took place primarily at two major flea markets
and three antique shops. Several other locations were also sites for observation and discussion.
These included an antique/vintage shop, a pawn shop, and another flea market. The flea markets
differed in the way they operated, the types of dealers they attracted, and the clientele. The first,
Farmingswood Flea Market, operated on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays. The management
offered tables for $2 to $4 on Fridays and $19 to $36 per table on the weekends. Table space on

80

Fridays was designated on a first come first served basis, and participants reported that there
were often arguments over desirable spaces that, at times, erupted into physical violence. As part
of the flea market space, there was also a building filled with tenants who sold new and used
objects, clothing, food, and services such as screen printing, tailoring, and cellular phone and
cable plans.
A large cross-section of people appeared to shop at this site, which included antique and
pop culture collectors (such as Robert Bruce, producer of AMCs Comic Book Men which was
similar to Pawn Stars, but involved comic books and pop-culture related toys and memorabilia),
artists looking for unique media, vintage clothing enthusiasts and other secondary market
consumers spending their money on “leisure” or “luxury” items. However, this market was also a
place for lower working class and poor people to find daily necessities, including used
housewares, clothes, and even outdated or nearly-expired dry and canned foods. Many of these
items were not in good condition. In other words, while there were people exchanging in the
“rusty gold” (hidden treasures) similar to those which are sought after by Mike and Frank, there
were many others picking through piles of second-hand items that many people from the middleclass would see as garbage and would never consider buying (e.g., used clothes, pre-worn shoes,
dented cans of food, outdated boxes of cereal).
The second observation site was called The Country Village Flea Market which was set
up as a “village” and operated on Wednesdays and Sundays, with an auction on Tuesday
evenings. The site was composed of individual buildings, some of which were U.S. military
surplus barracks sourced from a nearby Army installation.24 The buildings were constructed of
wood in two primary designs. One looked like a small narrow cottage that could be called a

24

This was confirmed through the market’s website.

81

“shotgun style,” meaning that the layout runs the rooms from the front door through to the back
door, which made it necessary to pass through one room to get to the next. This style of building
had one to three rooms that contained small storage spaces. The second building type was set up
in a “ranch” layout, and known as the “barracks.” Vendors paid monthly rent for the buildings,
with some people having more than one edifice that they stored their things in and sold from. As
part of this flea market research site, there was also an auction house that opened on Tuesday
evenings and approximately ten roadside tables that were available for $2 per day to anyone
interested in vending during the market’s hours of operation.
This market was rustic, as the colorful schemes of paint on some of the buildings were
faded and chipped. There were also structures along the edge of the property that were in
disrepair and filled with what many would identify at first glance as garbage. However, this
market was also actually much less transient than Farmingswood. At that market there were
“regulars,” but at the same time, there was a great variation week-to-week and even day-to-day
among those at the outside tables, which composed the majority of the market. As noted above,
the Country Village had some tables to rent daily, but the primary vendors operated individual
shops that they occupied through lease agreements. Many of the buildings had been occupied by
the same sellers for years. Each offered a particular specialty, such as vintage or unusual gifts,
toys and collectibles, low-cost and practical furniture and appliances, and mid-century clothing
and housewares. The buildings had locks and heat, and vendors ran their enterprises like mini
retail stores. Therefore, the sellers worked to build reputations for having higher-quality items
than Farmingswood, a flea market they were all aware of. For instance, vendors Rich and Dana,
who operated a toy and collectables shop, prided themselves in having items in the store that
would “wow” their customers, even if they did not sell them right away because the price was

82

too high. Their perspective was that they would show customers that they had the ability to
obtain high-value toys and collectibles, and they felt it was worth waiting for the right buyer.
The arrangement at “the Village” did not bring in the same socioeconomic clientele as the
first market, Farmingswood, as it attracted mainly middle and upper middle class customers.
Michael, one of the market managers, was in charge of the social media accounts. In promoting
the market, he consciously branded The Flea Market Village to draw a more upscale clientele.
However, while poor people did not come there to purchase specialty items, they did come to try
to sell items to the vendors, which if bought, would be resold at a profit. During my interview
with Michael, a woman around 20 years old drove up in an older, weathered car. As we were
talking, she approached us and said she had heard that he was looking to buy a rocking chair.
Michael replied that he was no longer looking for one, but that he would help her to sell it if he
knew anyone who was. Dejected, she asked if he was sure that he did not want the chair. When
he said no, she returned to her car and drove away, presumably to find another buyer. When I
asked him if that was a common occurrence, he said that people who need money frequently
went to the flea market to sell things to vendors.
The antique shops where I observed and met people were all located in towns on the
Jersey Shore, and owned by single proprietors who sold their own stock and rented out space for
other vendors to sell theirs. Those vendors were also allowed to “work” the shop floor (or serve
as sales people for the owners) for an agreed amount of time per month in return for a discount
on their spot. These shops provided me with opportunities to talk to a range of people dealing in
a variety of subject areas with a consistency that allowed relationships of trust to develop. It is at
these places and others that I had on-the-spot conversations and recruited subjects for off-site
interviews held later. Each site offered a different pool of people to talk to and observe as they

83

performed market practices in varying ways. My analysis based is on this field work which will
be incorporated into the discussion in subsequent chapters. The next subsection will provide
some more information about those who participated in this study and the recruitment process.
Interview Participants and Recruitment
The total amount of subjects I spoke with numbered 44. Out of that sample, 22 were
formal, audio recorded, longer-form interviews. The other 22 were informal conversations
notated via pen and paper with lengths ranging from 10 minutes to upwards of an hour.
Thirty-two were men, of whom 28 were white. Of those, 16 were over 60 years of age, five
ranged from their late 40s to 60, five were in their 30s to mid 40s, and two were in their mid to
late 20s. I also spoke with three black men (two African-Americans and one man from the
Caribbean) and a Latino. One of the African-American men was in his mid 60s and the other
appeared to be in his late 30s or early 40s. The Latino was in his 40s, and the man from the
Caribbean was approximately in his early 50s. The remaining 12 interviewees were women,
none of whom were people of color. One of the women was in her 70s, three of the women were
in their 60s, three were in their 40s, two were in their 50s, one was in her 30s, and two were in
their 20s. I recruited my participants through three techniques mentioned above that I will
elaborate upon and use as a way to group those I spoke with.
I started recruiting using a snowball sample that began with a single participant active in
antiques and collectibles clubs, particularly those formed by people interested in antique glass
(bottles, decorative ware, etc. from the 18th, 19th, and early 20th centuries), paper (postcards,
photographs, and ephemera), and coins (numismatics). This pool consisted of 10 people total and
was largely made up of white men over the age of 50 and a few women who were in the same
age bracket. This grouping was also largely composed of middle-class people who were either

84

still working or retired. However, while there were college graduates, there were also many
among them who were non-college educated “blue collar” and “white-collar” workers. To
expand my search, I asked one of the subjects from the snowball sample, the moderator of a
Facebook group called “Jersey Pickers – Antiques and Collectibles,” if I could post a notice to
find participants. From that call I interviewed two more white men over the age of 40. I did have
several women respond, but was unable to secure any interviews within the time frame of this
study.
Throughout, I expanded my search to include those I met at flea markets, antique and
second-hand stores, and a pawn shop. From this approach, I spoke with 32 people. This portion
of the sample was composed of those from a broader range of backgrounds than I had found
through the snowball technique and the Facebook page. It was at these sites that I was able to
expand the pool of women, people of color and younger participants by starting conversations
with shoppers and vendors alike. However, most of those who I interviewed were sellers. To
initiate an interaction I would browse flea market tables or store sections, ask some general
questions, and possibly make a purchase in order to take steps toward establishing a rapport, and
over time, trust. Subjects I recruited out in the field also introduced me to their peers who bought
and sold in the same sites. In addition, there were participants in the initial snowball sample who
owned antique shops where I met other interviewees who had floor space in those stores.
Observing these connections unfold over the course of the research, among others within the
sample, helped to illustrate how secondary markets are performed in both networks and
hierarchies, which will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Conclusion

85

This chapter served to outline the methodologies used for this dissertation, and explain
how combining textual analysis and ethnographic approaches allowed me to access to multiple
dimensions of media and cultural production related to secondary markets and Trash and
Treasure TV. In turn, my research can be distinguished from that of previous scholars in the field
of RTV studies who were primarily concerned with how people responded to and used their
favorite programs. This project’s design did not only allow for an understanding of how viewers
used and judged the shows, but it also allowed access to a particular vantage point for observing
the range of the subgenre’s circulation and significance among the potential audiences available
for the capture and formation of audiences and secondary market segments. The remaining
chapters will illustrate what I found through the course of the investigation.

86

Chapter 4
Shows and Sites: Trash and Treasure TV as Intervention and Representation
These shows have caused people to be experts in their own mind. They’ll come to me. I rent a shop, I have
merchandise, I pay for the electric here, and I pay for my rent. I deal with people all of the time who feel they are
more knowledgeable than me because they watch these shows - Michael, long-time “picker” and vendor and
manager at the Country Village Flea Market
Ideologies are of course, worked on in many places in society, and not only in the head. The fact of unemployment
is, among other things, an extremely effective ideological instrument for converting or constraining workers to
moderate their wage claims. But institutions like the media are peculiarly central to the matter, since they are, by
definition, part of the dominant means of ideological production. – Stuart Hall, cultural theorist (2003, p. 90)

In this chapter, the Trash and Treasure TV programs analyzed as part of this study will be
discussed within the context of the theories laid out in Chapter 2 and data generated through both
the textual analysis and ethnographic methods. People who watched Trash and Treasure TV and
bought and sold on the secondary market were often resistant to the presentation of “reality” on
the programs. In the interviews conducted for this research, viewers were critical of what people
did on the shows, such as when things were bought and sold for unrealistic prices, and skeptical
of information that concerned the supposed scarcity and value of objects. At the same time, they
were motivated by the shows, and saw some of what was presented as potentially useful for
learning about how to participate in secondary markets. For instance, I interviewed Alex, a
Caucasian man in his early 40s, who had been buying and selling at flea markets, yard sales,
shops, online auctions and websites for over 25 years, after attending his first auction with a
high-school friend in the early 1990s. My conversation with Alex illustrated a contradiction
found in numerous interviews. On one hand, he saw himself as a savvy media consumer,
knowing that “reality” is produced on reality television programs, such as American Pickers.
While on the other hand, he was at times “inspired” by the successes of the characters when they
found treasures.

87

Criticism of the programs among the participants was rooted in their cynicism about
media. Commenting on the production of reality on Trash and Treasure TV, one of the
participants, Thomas, who was in his early 60s and had been trading on the secondary market for
over 40 years, summed up his perspective after being asked if he had learned anything useful
from the programs:
I’ve learned some things, only that antiques are very territorial, that rusty stuff only sells
in the West, not the East. Just watch them for entertainment. Don’t take them at face
value. I think they are mostly bogus. I don’t trust any of them as being on the up-and-up
because they are only there for ratings, and now that they have become famous they don’t
even spend their own money. They spend the producer's money. They spend whatever
they want, and they do overvalue stuff, and it’s just to make people [watch]. They should
follow me around (laughing)!
In an exchange with Jeff and Paula, a couple in their late 60s who were long-time pickers and
the proprietors of a small vintage-goods shop in a flea market for approximately six years, Jeff
commented on what they considered to be Pawn Stars' deviation from realistic business practices
and pricing:
Pawn Stars pay too much for everything. If you are a pawn broker, you are going to pay
no more than 25 percent because it’s going to sit in your store for a long time, and it’s
going to sell for less than retail. They’re paying full retail for this stuff! Yeah! Because
they’re making too much money too. That’s the trap, the Hollywood trap. It’s just fiction.
Most commonly, participants reported suspicion connected to the frequency of "big
finds," which participants said were much rarer than Trash and Treasure TV implied. Many were
aware of how Dave Hester, one of the primary cast members on Storage Wars pulled back the
curtain on the show by making the public aware that the producers had planted objects in the
units, a practice called “salting” (Paskin, 2013). Hester claimed that he was fired after
complaining and filed a lawsuit against the A&E station, and accused producers of asking him to
place his own stock of items in storage units and deceiving the public by failing to depict the
auctions accurately (Gardner, 2013; Paskin, 2013).

88

Fabricating finds and inflating prices instills hope in viewers that they may turn trash into
treasure, which lays the groundwork for “investments of desire” (Deleuze, 1997). In our
conversation, Paula lamented the consequences of this, noting that “the unfortunate thing for
customers is if they watch this sort of thing, they have the idea that there is gold out there in
them hills. It just doesn’t work that way.” According to interviewees, this mentality did not just
inflate expectations of what could be found, but also impacted how buyers interacted with
sellers. Thomas, the veteran picker mentioned above, said the shows have taught viewers that
“antique dealers get all of this stuff for nothing, and they have a hundred percent mark up on it.”
He said that from his own experiences, this encouraged people to “go into [a dealer's] booth and
offer them half [of the asking price]” based on an unrealistic perspective on pricing and market
dynamics.
These accounts, along with others to be highlighted in this chapter and in Chapters 5 and
6 suggested what has been termed the “CSI effect.” This means that media portrayals of
procedure, in this case, secondary market entrepreneurial techniques, influenced public
perceptions of how they are supposed to be performed (Brewer & Ley, 2010; Harriss, 2011;
Mauratonio, 2012). All of the people I spoke with came to the secondary market in different
ways and at differing points in their lives, as well as at varying times in history. This influenced
the ways that they interpreted the programs, as well as in how they used them. For instance, older
and more experienced antique collectors and dealers reacted dismissively or were agitated by the
practical information and the representation of secondary market practices. Less experienced and
potentially younger counterparts responded more positively to the shows.
As covered in the Chapter 2, Trash and Treasure TV can be understood as an intervention
in reality that provides models for self fashioning, and a representation of reality that is

89

embedded with cultural meaning (Bratich, 2007; Ouellette & Hay, 2008; Skeggs & Wood,
2012). Keeping this in mind, each of the next sections will respectively focus on a particular
program and the interview and field observation data that was relevant to each show. First,
American Pickers will be addressed. That will be followed by separate sections that concentrate
on Storage Wars and Flea Market Flip. Each will be concerned with the respective shows'
broader comparisons and relationships to secondary markets, and the ways people that
participated in them. Chapter 5 will delve more deeply into the secondary market sites by
examining the practices and objects exchanged in real life and their relation to what was
portrayed on Trash and Treasure TV.
American Pickers: “House Calls” Across America
This History Channel, simplified to History in 2008, debuted American Pickers in 2010
to great success. The show featured primary cast members, Mike Wolfe and Frank Fritz, who
bought objects in homes or on private property, such as outbuildings on farms, and then resold
them through their store called Antique Archaeology, a brick-and-mortar business that also had
an online component. Since this program first aired, their retail operation expanded to two
locations, one in Le Claire, Iowa, and the other in Nashville, Tennessee. They also had one oncamera assistant, Danielle Colby Cushman, who became an integral part of the storylines. On the
program, Mike and Frank acquired leads in geographic areas all over the U.S. by working with
established clients and contacts, and fielding phone calls from people looking to make a deal.
They then traveled to specific states or regions to visit those they have arranged to meet, and
“pick” what they can find to buy for resale.
Mike and Frank were shown on the road driving in tight quarters over great distances and
long periods. While they were away from their home base in Le Claire, their assistant, Danielle,

90

fed them information in real time about new leads in the area that she acquired in order to
maximize their productivity. The intimacy created through the close shots and camera angles
inside the cabin of the van as the two men traverse the country gave the appearance that they
were out on the road, in the "wilderness" and "alone," and unsupported by a production team
during the filming. This was in keeping with the theme of "do-it-yourself" rugged individualism
promoted on the Trash and Treasure TV shows. Therefore, these images and portions of each
episode were in keeping with the values and practices of neoliberal mentalities (Ouellette & Hay,
2008) and the free-flowing openness of traversing the terrain of control societies (Jenkins, 2015).
Along with the leads they received from Danielle, Mike and Frank engaged in what they
called “freestyling.” This involved looking for homes along the way that have cluttered
properties, antique cars and other visual cues. Once they picked one, they knocked on the door,
and gave the person who answers their pitch and a flyer. These cold calls were often
unsuccessful, which was demonstrated in the episode White Castle on the Farm.25 During one
segment, there was a montage of freestyling failures that culminated in an interaction between
Mike and Frank and an unknown man at the front door of his house. In line with neoliberal
mentalities, this clip was meant to convey the need for self-determination if one wants to make
money in the picking business.
To reinforce the inherent risk in being a full-time picker, Mike explained that he and
Frank “don’t get a regular paycheck,” and followed up by bluntly stating “if we don’t buy and
sell stuff we don’t make any money.” This declaration operated beyond warning viewers of the
instability that came from drawing an income from picking, which is an experience similar to
being a freelance worker. The explicit enunciation and acceptance of such terms as if they were

25

Season 1, episode 3

91

merely “natural” and “normal” served to make enduring austere social conditions and the
challenges of performing atomized, non-organized labor, both prominent features of
neoliberalism, into “common sense.”
Throughout their travels, the duo is shown meeting different people, who were referred to
in a voiceover during the opening credits as being “a breed of their own.” These words were
accompanied by a shot of an older white man wearing overalls and a baseball cap, who was
identifiable as “rural,” or a “redneck.” He was also behaving strangely, which suggested that he
was potentially “inbred” and as a result, developmentally disabled or mentally ill – a stereotype
of “backwoods” rural people. This was particularly evident in the first shot, which was a close up
of the side of his face as he turned wild-eyed toward the camera. It was also noticeable in the
second shot, during which he looked directly into the lens with a crazed glare, and then,
surrounded by his hoard, rushed forward holding an old oil can and squeezed the trigger as if he
was firing it like a "weapon" at the viewer. He then stared out at the audience with a distant gaze
that one would associate with someone who may have been unstable.
Again, this type of imagery reinforced the unpredictability and potential danger of
dealing with this "special breed" and doing this type of self-motivated work. The message was
that one needs to be prepared for the unexpected. The final shot was at first slightly more
redeeming. It showed the unnamed man in front of his home, which appeared to contain a hoard
that had spilled onto the front porch. However, when the man smiled at the end, he was shown in
a close-up to be missing a tooth, which further instilled the idea that he was a “hillbilly.” This
was immediately followed by the end of the voiceover, when Mike declared that he and Frank
made “a living telling the history of America, one piece at a time.” By saying that this show is
“telling the history of America” immediately after the “hillbilly” montage, there was also a

92

recognition of a largely unnoticed “history” of rural poor people who often lack a social safety
net. This included loner vendors like Mike and Frank, who precariously piece together their
living on their own, without help from the government, or the expectation of any should they
experience hardship or crisis.
Despite the often heart-wrenching realities of thousands of people in similar situations
throughout the U.S., this scenario was treated with humor and an adventurous “wild west” tone
that was seen on this and other Trash and Treasure TV programs. Here American Pickers moved
between stereotyping poor people from rural areas and tapping into the folksy aesthetics and
nostalgia associated with a romanticized idea of working-class America. The words and images
that were supposed to pay homage to “the past” and the “regular people” who curate it through
their objects helped to move the representation of the exchanges on the program away from the
rhetoric of crass capitalism that was expressed at the very beginning of the opening credits. In
that portion of the show it is declared that they will “buy anything [they] can make a buck off.”
Viewing this through a cynical lens, this posturing can be seen as designed to help Mike and
Frank avoid accusations of being solely concerned with money and lacking reverence for the
objects that potential sellers may hold dear due to personal attachments, an interest in historical
or cultural significances, or other reasons.
This is particularly important. As anthropologist Paul van der Grijp’s (2002) study on
philately has shown, communities that engage in exchange as a hobby and in some professional
trading for money are subcultures motivated by their passions for the objects of interest, as
opposed to simply a desire to generate income. Since many of the people who composed these
“informal” or “underground” economies were amateur dealers (collectors who do not solely rely
on their trade for income), monetary value was important, although not necessarily central (van

93

der Grijp, 2002). In Dutch stamp collecting communities, van der Grijp (2002) had found that the
sale of a collection rarely turns a profit, which demonstrated that money was spent to invest in
objects for reasons beyond money. In this, speculators were not always considered serious
collectors, as they were more interested in doing business through the trade of the objects, rather
than being passionate about the objects in and of themselves (van der Grijp, 2002). In other
words, one’s authenticity as a collector was connected to their motivations for participating on
the secondary market.
Therefore, one can understand Mike and Frank’s presentation as intended to create a
baseline for ethical “pickers” (in terms of being “virtuous”) on the neoliberal landscape. This
included a self-monitoring and consciousness in consideration of the norms and niche
subcultures of collectors and dealers in specific subject areas. In addition, such behavior was also
affective in nature and shaped social relations. This resonated with some informants. For
instance, Rich and Dana, young pop culture toy and collectible dealers (both in their late 20s)
from the Country Village Flea Market, mentioned in our conversations that they believed that
Mike and Frank’s performance was authentic, and cited moments on the program when the
Pickers would offer more money than they had to for an object, or offered to return to pay more
if they turned a greater profit than expected (a practice that participants in my sample reported
doing). In our conversation, Dana explained how she felt about the ethical direction provided by
American Pickers:
I feel that they are definitely more honest. Ya know? Where as somebody says “I’ll take
50 for this,” and Mike looks at them and says “I’ll give you a hundred and fifty because
it’s worth more.” I feel like [compared to the other programs], they are definitely more
whole hearted about the business, and I like to try and think that we are gonna try and
follow them as much as possible. Like, I can see the good in them.

94

In this same discussion, their friend Hank (a picker in his late 20s who had long hair, scruffy
beard, “gauged” earrings, 26 and wore a leather jacket adorned with pins and patches with the
logos of heavy metal rock-and-roll bands) had claimed to have met Mike and Frank when scouts
for the show came to an antique shop he was working at and said that they were “nice guys.”
This pointed to the value placed on “nice” or respectful human interactions in the field. It must
be noted that under particular circumstances, offering or returning to pay more money runs in
contradiction with the profit orientation of capitalism. Such practices reorganized social relations
as based on values other than the desire to make money, such as a common affection for a
particular subject area of antiques or collectibles (this will be discussed in detail in Chapters 5
and 6). Nevertheless, the mindfulness on American Pickers was largely motivated by market
logics, which are specific virtues that extend into other practices that consequently provide the
foundation for building relationships. This is discussed further in the following sections.
Neoliberal Pickin’
On American Pickers, Mike and Frank were the embodiment of neoliberal subjectivity.
They are flexible entrepreneurs traversing the landscape in search of opportunities to make a
profit from the objects they found. Because every encounter was different in terms of the
personalities they met, the array of objects they came across, and the physical spaces and
conditions in which they conducted their business, Mike and Frank were best served in being as
malleable as possible. On the program, they were shown discussing how to psychologically
understand and communicate with the different people they bought from, even going as far as to
frame particular moments as instructive for audiences. In a scene from an episode titled Frank’s
Gamble, Mike and Frank were given a tip by a seller they were dealing with in regard to a friend
26

This term refers to earrings that widen the hole in the ear. They are commonly associated with heavy metal
fashion and other popular subcultural styles.

95

who also had a lot of things up for purchase.27 They were only given an address, but were not
introduced, and were left on their own to knock on the door and present themselves. As they
pulled up to the house, they saw that it was surrounded by large fences adorned with signs
bearing anti-government messages, such as “God, guns and guts made America free, let’s keep
all three,” to which Frank muttered, “I don’t know about that.” This indicated that he was already
feeling uncomfortable.
This tension was maximized through the close-up camera angles that focused on Frank’s
face as they pulled onto the property and saw another sign. That next message threatened death
for trespassing. The drama built. Although afraid to knock, Frank noted that the resident or
owner appeared to be very direct, which could be an advantage in bargaining, since one would
not have to guess what the person was thinking. Mike retorted that trust might be tough to get, to
which Frank replied: “money usually builds trust.” They then met the owner of the property. His
name was Galen, and he was a tall, intimidating looking middle-aged Caucasian man with a long
white beard. He was wearing traditional-looking working-class clothing consisting of blue jeans
and a blue denim button-down shirt. Immediately, Mike and Frank began to size Galen up. After
trying to “break the ice” (the term they used to name the first purchase which normally opens up
an engagement), they decided that although the visit did not yield any purchases, they would
keep this man on a list of potential sources for the future.
In that segment, Mike and Frank taught the audience skills for success, which included
the need to be flexible in various ways. At the core of the scenario was the spontaneity of
meeting their new contact, which required them to change their original course. Adding another
layer, they were willing to establish a relationship with someone who might be antagonistic,

27

Season 1, episode 7

96

which showed another kind of flexibility. Before even getting to the door, Mike and Frank
exhibited proactive attention to this person’s potential psychological and affective-emotional
conditions, in order to know how to respond. Therefore, the episode demonstrated that subjective
flexibility is just as required of neoliberalism as is the acceptance of irregularity in the frequency,
location, and type of labor someone performs (Wissinger, 2007; Freeman, 2011).
Across the first season, there were multiple instances in which Mike and Frank were
explicitly concerned with the personalities of the people they met in regard to psychological and
affective-emotional conditions, starting prior to even arriving at their location, and continuing
until they were packing what they had bought into their van. The scenario described above
depicts a situation that was laden with risk and uncertainty and showed viewers one of the wide
range of risky possible interactions a “picker” may encounter. This included a lesson: money
alone cannot always build trust. There are other factors that need to be considered when asking if
something is for sale and making an offer. For instance, there are emotional attachments the
seller may have to their things and whether s/he is hoarding, collecting, or merely possessing the
objects. In a confessional-like debriefing at the end of each encounter, common to RTV and an
integral part of the American Pickers format, Mike and Frank discussed Galen’s personality as a
potential future business contact. While pondering Galen’s disposition, Mike psychoanalytically
opined that “it was as if Galen was locked in this world with all of his memories, all of these
things represented all of these memories around him. He just wasn’t going to give up his stuff.”
Pickin’ Practices: Modeling and Instruction
With modeling flexibility at the foundation of American Pickers, Mike and Frank have
taught audiences specific practices (both directly and indirectly) regarding how to find things to
buy, bargain, and assess condition and value. As noted above, they found valuable objects by

97

obtaining solid leads or “freestyling.” Once the Pickers were given access to browse, they went
to great lengths to find objects they want. At times, they went into decrepit and potentially
dangerous old buildings, and squeezed into small crawl spaces, sacrificing comfort, risking their
safety, and getting very dirty in the process. For instance, in an episode titled Moleman, the
pickers climbed through a 26-room underground tunnel network. These tunnels were packed
with an enormous hoard amassed by a man who went by the name “Mole Man.” 28
The pickers were also known for having great knowledge about things from very specific
categories. For instance, Mike was passionate about bicycles, motorcycles and automobiles, and
collected objects related to those things. Frank was more interested in antique and vintage oil
cans, old signs related to oil and gasoline companies, and early 20th century tin toys. Both had a
great degree of amateur expertise in their respective areas. Similar characteristics were held
among the participants and reflected in the sample. For example, John, a long-time antique glass
collector, knew a significant amount about many categories of antique glass, which ranged from
soda bottles to “carnival” glass (decorative glass pieces popular in the early to mid 20th century).
So he was generalist, but in actuality he was an expert in the antique bottles (such as milk
bottles) and stoneware (such as jugs and crocks) that were used or produced by businesses in his
local area.
In another subject area, pop culture collectibles dealer Rich was very familiar with the
rarity of a variety of toys, such as G.I. Joe and Star Wars action figures. Although, when it came
to expertise, he had a firm command over what one could know about the enormous amount of
objects produced in connection with the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise. Regardless of
possessing a vast amount of knowledge, prior to committing to making a deal (and often

28

Season 1, episode 6

98

afterwards), Mike and Frank normally consulted an actual expert in the particular type of object
they were buying. This gave the audience a chance to get professional guidance, as many
viewers may not have the robust knowledgeable networks that Mike and Frank and those among
my participants had. Developing expertise is central to neoliberalism in that it transmits the skills
and insights people need to adapt and survive in the contemporary economic arrangement (Rose,
1996), and is seen across the programs. Although Mike, Frank and their guest experts were all
proficient in regard to general knowledge concerning the range of categories of vintage or
antique objects they may encounter, their actual expertise is very narrow. When professional
experts were consulted, they looked at an object within the breadth of their specialization and
provided detailed information on the manufacturer, history, cultural significance, scarcity, and of
course, it’s market value.
The Pickers also incorporated lessons on specific techniques. Mike and Frank did not
merely model how to be a picker. They also gave direct instructions and at times referred to these
moments on the show as “picking 101,” a term that alluded to the basic-level college courses.
During a scene where Mike explained price setting,29 he advised the audience to allow the seller
to start the negotiation, but also suggested that the buyer could also ask “what do you think it is
worth,” so that both parties are not far off from one another at the outset. In another instance,
after the segment described above in which Mike asked Galen if he knew any other people in the
area who might have things to sell, Mike informed the audience that asking for a referral is
“picking 101.” In this he emphasized that looking for referrals was something that all pickers
should remember to do when they were unsuccessful at one site and want to find another. These

29

Big Bear, Season 1, episode 1

99

were blatant examples of Trash and Treasure TV’s pedagogical potential to teach viewers how to
engage in the secondary market.
When the Pickers were not modeling or instructing, they were indirectly educating the
audience when they passed on information to the sellers they were talking to or when they were
talking to each other about an object. For instance, in one episode Frank was talking to someone
who had a tin toy car he was trying to buy. In that conversation he had noted to the seller (and to
the audience by glancing toward the camera) that the label on the bottom of the car was in good
condition, which added to its value.30 That type of information was transferrable to other objects
that may have a paper label or sticker affixed to them. Thus, the Pickers provided general
knowledge that people could apply regardless of what they were trying to buy. One of their
modeled techniques is what they called “bundling.” This entailed a buyer finding several things
s/he wanted without establishing a price right away. It is only after the desired items were
gathered that Mike and Frank suggested a fixed cost for everything in the pile. They would then
find immediate agreement or engage in further negotiations with the seller.
On the program, Mike and Frank bundled when there are many similar items, or when
they feel there is momentum with an agreeable seller. This yielded reasonable prices for putting
the objects back out on the market for resale. As evidenced by the testimony of Michael, a long
time picker and dealer and the social media manager at the Country Village Flea Market, viewers
have employed this practice at his shop. In a recounting of these experiences, he noted how he
has “had multiple people come in, and I [knew] what they are doing right away - they’re
bundling. I [would] say ‘let me guess, you’re bundling,’ and they’re like ‘how do you know?’
And I’m like, ‘because I’ve seen the show’ (laughing)!”

30

Back Breaker, season 1, episode 5

100

What Mike and Frank did with their business is what people interviewed for this research
refer to as making “house calls.” These participants obtained their leads by posting flyers, using
social media, getting direct referrals and/or having a word-of-mouth reputation, or a successful
shop to help generate interest. None of the people I spoke with “free styled” exactly like Mike
and Frank. One informant, John, who was mentioned above, reported that long before the show
debuted, he knocked on people’s doors when he would see authentic antique glass displayed in
their windows. However, he was not interested as a professional dealer prepared with a pitch and
a flyer, but as a passionate collector who occasionally sold items to fund his hobby and earn
some extra money. Regardless, many interviewees had opinions on Trash and Treasure TV in
terms of its pedagogical usefulness and authenticity, the effects they felt it had on the market and
how it impacted their own experiences. The modeling and instruction of American Pickers was
extensive and Mike and Frank bring viewers many lessons that composed what can be called an
“ethics of picking.” This ethos emerged through Mike and Frank as embodiments of the
contemporary philosophical and material neoliberal milieu.
This milieu included the actual markets that participants in this study performed and
constructed through practice (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham, 2015). As Marxist geographers
Kevin St. Martin and J.K. Gibson-Graham (2015) have theorized by taking up ideas of Deleuze,
Foucault, and Judith Butler, markets are performed. "Performing" refers to the ways people
behave while constructing heterogeneous economies as they mobilize and transform their desires
while forging new social identifications and bonds to make markets together with others (St.
Martin & Gibson-Graham, 2015). This concept of performing recognizes the agency of market
actors and their capacity to create relationships that move away from the formal capitalist
arrangement and toward organizational forms that breach limits of the state and private power

101

and become what could be understood as alternative economies (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham,
2015).
As a part of the televisual dispositif (Coté, 2011), the show American Pickers modeled a
subjectivity to illustrate how people should understand how to perform secondary market
economies. These sites and commensurate practices were already propelled away from the
formal market structure, where much of the business had been traditionally facilitated via cash
exchanges and taxes are not paid. Out of the three Trash and Treasure TV programs analyzed
here, American Pickers provided the most detailed picture of how to buy and sell on the
secondary market, particularly in regard to making “house calls.” The program also brought the
most explicit modelling for “formalizing” the secondary market through its depiction of Mike
and Frank’s business, Antique Archaeology. In this, American Pickers can serve to direct people
from using the secondary market as the foundation for building a robust alternative economy,
and toward state-capitalist models informed by neoliberal rationales.
The show instructed viewers how to extract value from what Mike and Frank have found
while out picking, which were informal exchanges in which cash was paid on the spot to the
sellers. From there, the objects were placed up for sale in their brick-and-mortar locations and
their online store, through which people shopped in a formal retail setting or while they
interfaced with an e-commerce platform and paid a fixed amount of money. This removed the
price or exchange flexibility that is inherent in secondary markets, in which people were free to
bargain, barter, or trade – types of payment that are not normally used in the formal retail
environment. By making this conversion from the informal to the formal economy, the pickers
took previously unwanted or overlooked objects, much of which would be identified as trash,
and brought them to a wider consumer market.

102

This approach watered down their claim of having an authentic reverence for the objects
and people that composed secondary markets. Their telling of the “history of America, one piece
at a time” became a story told through mass consumption, rather than one that recognized the
place of consumption in the emergence of modernity in the U.S. In other words, from the
perspective of media archaeology, the televisual dispositif intervenes through RTV to direct
people’s passions toward entrepreneurialism and consumerism. This shapes the material cultural
practices for the excavation and circulation of old, used, and broken things that fit into the
categories of antiques and collectibles (Hertz, 2010; Parikka, 2012). At the same time, the
historical and sociocultural significance of the objects traded on the secondary market is reduced
to monetary value and superficial trivia, as opposed to a rich, layered narrative of the past
resembling that which an archaeologist would unearth.
Several individuals from the pool of informants had formal businesses for which they
sourced their stock through house calls. Others had ventures that straddled the formal and
informal economies that supplemented their primary incomes beyond funding the building of
collections. These people and their enterprises will be discussed and elaborated upon in Chapters
5 and 6. The next two sections of this chapter will focus respectively on the shows Storage Wars
and Flea Market Flip, both of which also produced and reproduced neoliberal subjectivities that
included culturally specific manners of understanding and performing modes of labor and
conceptualizing the value of objects circulated on the market.
Storage Wars: Auctions, “Abandoned” Possessions, and Vulture Capitalism
First airing in 2010 on A&E, Storage Wars was a program focused on a group of
entrepreneurs who competed for valuable objects at auctions held at storage unit facilities. The
cast has remained largely stable since the initial season, and has consisted of veteran auctioneer

103

and shop owner Dave Hester, long-time independent dealer Darrell Sheets, avid collector and
retired businessman Barry Silver, and young married upstarts Brandi Passante and Jarrod
Schultz, who co-own a second hand shop. The program was very formulaic. Each episode
entailed the cast converging at storage unit auctions, largely across Southern California, and
engaging in tensely competitive bidding wars during which cast members make and break
temporary alliances in cooperation and competition for the best lockers.
At its foundation, the modeling that Storage Wars provides in the form of competition
and competitive selves can be drawn into dialogue with theories on RTV programs as reflective
of the flexibility of the modern work environment (Bratich, 2009) in which people are always
switching jobs, teams, tasks, and even companies. Through the formats of games and challenges,
these programs showed people how to be affectively and cognitively malleable, which are
invaluable capacities necessary for refining the self into a subject of contemporary capitalism
(Bratich, 2009). However, the competition and cooperation of Storage Wars was not predicated
exclusively on contrived games and challenges, but was represented as taking place in the “real”
world, and incorporated the notion that cutthroat competition is necessary for participating in a
market. This program exemplified Trash and Treasure TV as a form of “capitalist realism,”
which refers to media theorist Michael Schudson’s (1984) observations regarding the way that
capitalist aesthetics promote ways of life centered on private consumption rather than social,
public achievements.
Even before actually watching an episode, based on the program name alone, viewers
received the message that it’s a cutthroat world, and that one has to look out for oneself. The
entire premise of the show is built upon what is, in essence, a form of “vulture capitalism.” This
is a practice in which people seek ways to make money off of the financial misfortune of others.

104

For instance, people who enriched themselves after the subprime mortgage crisis through buying
up foreclosed homes and turning them over for a profit engaged in “vulture capitalism.” In the
case of Storage Wars, the units up for auction are understood (as indicated by the program’s
introduction) as “abandoned,” which can be read as a euphemism for the many ways of losing
ownership of one’s possessions. These “abandoned” storage units are auctioned off because the
lease holder lapsed in his/her monthly payments and are contractually obligated to release their
property to the storage facility for auctioning in order to recoup the money owed for past fees.
The use of the term “abandoned” placed the responsibility squarely on those whose
things were at auction, and obscured the economic realities of how people fall into arrears. As
Ouellette (2017) has noted, the absence of the former owners of the objects is representative of
their “disposability.” This is indicative of the contemporary economic arrangement that
privileges the “bare market” over any concern for the unfair conditions the people within that
market endure. In this case, people are disposable, just as objects are understood to be in the
context of a “throw-away society” that is focused on mere consumption of new products which
are eventually discarded when they have served their purpose, or have become fashionably or
practically obsolete.
Reasons someone may default on their monthly storage unit bill can range from losing a
job due to downsizing, cuts in hours or pay, contracting an illness while lacking quality health
care, or dying. The cast members of Storage Wars never raised these concerns, which erased the
lives and problems of the property's original owners and the circumstances which led to the loss
of these units. Many of these factors may have been out of the owner’s personal control and
rested on larger economic structures absent from these shows. Unlike those on the Trash and
Treasure TV, several people interviewed for this project that participated in storage unit auctions

105

specifically discussed these economic considerations, which will be detailed in the next chapter.
The next section will elaborate upon the instructional potential of Storage Wars. This will
include the greater context from which the show had emerged, that was composed of elements
related to media culture, consumerism, precarity and entrepreneurialism in the post-recession
economy. Following that conversation will be a discussion the program Flea Market Flip.
A Formula for Learning: Practices and Larger Phenomena
Overall, as a means for teaching people how to engage in storage unit auctions, Storage
Wars lacks the pedagogical richness of American Pickers, which, as noted above, provided direct
lessons on a variety of aspects related to buying and selling in that particular manner. In contrast,
Storage Wars followed a rigid formula, in which the cast went to an auction, bid on lockers, and
then assessed the value of what they have won. Whatever they could not identify that may have
been worth significant amounts of money was taken to an expert for appraisal. During those
segments, information and pricing popped up onto the screen for viewers to see what the objects
were and what they were worth. In regard to neoliberal-capitalist subjectivities, the cast members
of Storage Wars largely modeled how to perform as ideal competitive subjects as they
strategized how to outbid their opponents and demonstrated their individual mastery over forms
of knowledge about the objects.
Direct instruction essentially came in the form of the cast’s commentary about what they
thought the things they acquired were worth and from the input of experts who appraised objects
as a service or prior to buying them for sale in their own businesses. Interviewees in this study
reported that they considered Storage Wars as a representation which was generally
straightforward, and relatively reflective of reality. Long-time auction participant and antique
shop owner Steve, also an RTV skeptic, said that the drama and fierce competition of Storage

106

Wars reminded him of his own experiences. Nonetheless, he noted that the program did not
depict the downsides, including what he called “the disposal problem.” Elaborating, he said that
“rotten mattresses and … other things you … find even if you’re careful, … can be buried in
units … There’s a cost to disposing of this stuff, time, and if you’re not equipped with a truck, a
helper, and a permit to use the dump, it’s a headache, and so they don’t show that aspect of it.”
The value of Storage Wars as a transmitter of specific practices applicable to storage unit
auctions was not as detailed as American Pickers in terms of the specificity of instruction
promoted by house calls. However, the show can be seen as exemplary regarding Trash and
Treasure TV in relation to addressing the excesses of consumer capitalism, by rendering the
abundance of objects into being suitable for the marketplace or resigned to the landfill. The
phenomenal rise of storage facilities over the past two decades speaks volumes about the
excessive consumerism in the late capitalist U.S. (Vanderbilt, 2005), what philosopher Bernard
Stiegler (2006) calls “hyperconsumption.” According to a 2015 fact sheet from the Self Storage
Association, a self-storage industry trade organization, out of the approximately 58,000 self
storage facilities worldwide, 48,500 are located in the U.S. (Self Storage Association, 2015). In
the contemporary consumer culture of the U.S., people are continuously encouraged (whether or
not they can afford it) to buy things as a way to de-stress, reward themselves and “live the good
life.”
Interestingly, while people in older generations who lived through the Great Depression
and WWII were taught frugality as a national value and emblem of pride, the national response
to recent economic meltdowns (as well as violent attacks such as on the World Trade Center on
September 11, 2001) has been “keep shopping America.” The evolution of this “shop ‘til you
drop” mentality has supplanted the older American values of thrift and debt avoidance as a

107

matter of personal honor, and the nation’s earlier emphasis on saving over spending. In the end,
many Americans today purchase much more than they can use or store and need to rent storage
units for a monthly fee in order to keep the things which cannot fit in their living spaces. In many
cases, they are paying to store objects that they will never actually use, and when the burden of
paying rent to store excess objects becomes too great, storage facilities are “abandoned.”
According to interview participants, the debut of Storage Wars inspired many to try their
hand at the auctions. This increase in attendance raised unit prices due to having more
competition for the best units, which were very scarce to begin with. Steve, mentioned above,
said that after the show aired “all of the sudden, this core group of die-hard storage buyers who
would show up at the local storage unit auction had ballooned [from 5 – 15 people] to 50 – 75.”
Anthony, a dealer who had been attending storage unit auctions and performing house calls for
nearly seven years at the time of the interview, noted that “real rooms,” units that are “about a
ten-by-twenty full of nothing but collectibles,” came up in reality only “two to three times a
year” in contrast to the common frequency shown on TV. This was an observation shared across
the sample of interviewees, many of whom were skeptical that the casts on Trash and Treasure
TV would be able to find such high-quality items at the same frequency “in reality.”
Anthony pointed to his personal experience to explain his skepticism. He had been
present for a filming of the TV show Auction Hunters when the production company chose New
Jersey as a site for the show. In his recounting of the experience, he said that it was shot by a
small crew using one camera, and elaborated:
Yeah, it wasn’t [a] big [production]. A room went up [and] they bought it for three
hundred dollars. You can see the whole room, and all of the sudden when they went on
TV, there was a horse drawn chariot that was in the room that they bought for three
hundred dollars. It wasn’t in the room. So those shows are all staged.

108

However, the perception of the other participants (with the exception of two who were at the
same taping as Anthony) was substantiated in large part due to the public accusations noted
earlier in this chapter that were leveled by Storage Wars cast member Dave Hester (that objects
were being placed in storage units for television purposes).
My informants who went to storage unit auctions said they usually found less valuable
things, including lower-end vintage and antique items, coffee makers, microwaves, televisions,
clothes, shoes, furniture, stationery supplies, office equipment, and furniture from businesses that
had folded. These, among many other things, were originally destined to be disposed of as trash.
As opposed to heading to a landfill, these objects were sold at flea markets to poor people in
need of clothes, shoes, furniture, and standard household items, among other things. This
dynamic created and sustained the secondary market while managing the excesses of consumer
capitalism (overconsumption and the waste associated with the consumption of a “throw-away”
society). In addition, the effect on pricing as demand grew made it difficult for new people to
participate successfully in the auctions, and eventually pushed them out of the market. This
impact on the practice even motivated cash-flush dealers such as Anthony to stop sourcing his
stock from auctions and turn to “house calls.”
This called into question the power of the RTV dispositif in its effectiveness in producing
entrepreneurial subjects and invigorating the larger economy through the secondary markets.
These matters related to the limits of governmentality and power will be expanded upon in
chapters 5 and 6. The next section will focus on the program Flea Market Flip, which teaches
viewers how to buy things at flea markets at a low cost and sell them for a profit. As a site, flea
markets were “fed” by the people who do “house calls” or bid on storage units. This meant that
the things that were acquired at private properties or auctions were sold at the flea markets. This

109

included things that under different circumstances would be destined for landfills. Thus, these
shows had the potential to teach people how to deal with the challenge of managing trash in a
consumer society that valued convenience and organized consumption through life-cycles of
disposability that were driven by planned obsolesce and aesthetic innovation (Haug, 2005).
Flea Market Flip: Flea Markets, “Free Markets,” and Do-It-Yourself Entrepreneurialism
The final program analyzed for this research was Flea Market Flip, which first aired in
2012. On this show, host Lara Spencer pitted “design teams” against each other to scour flea
markets for the best items to buy and resell. Each team must find one or more objects at a flea
market in less than an hour, and then take their respective objects to a shop, where, with the help
of professional craftspeople, they recycle, repurpose, or rehabilitate the items and then sell the
things they have made. The team that made the most money from their transaction won a cash
prize of $5,000. The recycling and rehabilitation process was referred to on the program as
“upcycling.” Upcycled objects were not necessarily restored to their original condition, but were
radically repurposed, redecorated, or redesigned with the goal of selling the object for the
maximum amount of profit possible. Like on American Pickers, neoliberal-entrepreneurial
discourse and practice shaped the ways participants sourced, traded, and gave purpose to the
things on Flea Market Flip, particularly in their appropriation for works of art and craft.
For instance, in an episode titled Creative Best Friends, a team bought a vintage bicycle,
an antique fire extinguisher and an old wooden tabletop.31 From these components they made a
table by affixing the fire extinguisher to the bike frame in order to build a creative support
structure for the tabletop, while they took advantage of the wheels which gave the table the

31

Season 1, episode 2

110

ability to roll. Another example can be seen in the episode Stormville Flea Market Flip,32 during
which a team bought two Flexible Flyer snow sleds with the intention of building a bench. The
team had planned to use one sled for the seat and the other for the back of the bench and add
cushions.
However, sometimes contestants had to assess whether or not they should restore what
they had found, rather than incorporate their pieces into a Do-It-Yourself (DIY) art project.
Restorations were normally done on furniture and entail some creativity, such as reupholstering
or repainting pieces which are not the original color or texture. In one instance, a design team
reupholstered a pair of midcentury modern chairs with a different colored fabric than the
manufacturer had used, and after not selling them, were left pondering whether or not they
should have made the change.33 This demonstrated the extent to which decisions are made based
on marketability and maximizing profits, rather than authenticity.
Drawing from media archaeology, one can analyze the products of upcycled, restored or
repurposed objects on Flea Market Flip through a political-economic lens. This can lead toward
comprehensive understandings of their life-cycles in historical sociocultural contexts, as they
were moved from their nascent phases as new technologies or aesthetics, into those in which they
are consumer commodities, and finally into their use for DIY projects (Hertz & Parikka, 2012).
Additionally, an archaeological view can allow us to see how discursive power directs material
culture practices. Like the other programs discussed above, Flea Market Flip can be understood
as a means of instruction and representation. Its purpose is to show viewers how to use their
creative talents to become entrepreneurs who can see objects, envision an enormous range of

32

season 1, episode 3

33

Creative Best Friends, season 1 episode 2

111

potential uses for them and reap profits out of castoffs, rather than interfacing with objects for
sake of art, knowledge, or social justice. This production and deployment of the creative
application of taste through the recognition of desirable aesthetics and the market logics which
underpin this skill on Flea Market Flip will be discussed in the next section.
Free Market Flip
As a Trash and Treasure TV program, Flea Market Flip has presented the gamification of
secondary markets and reinforced and encouraged a notion of competition. In season 1, episode
6, “design bloggers” (team members) Andrew and Jessica talked about their strategic approach
when they told the audience, “We’re thinking, we’re thrifting, we’re building, we’re selling.
We’re not here to shop.” In saying this, they emphasized the creative imagination work required
to be successful in the market, as opposed to the passive, less creative action of simply
“shopping.” In each episode, as the teams looked for objects, host Lara Spencer followed along
and asked for their rationales for choosing certain pieces and about their plans for them. During
the search for things to upcycle, contestants were shown bargaining. As an experienced designer
and flea marketeer, Lara Spencer occasionally provided input on the necessary strategies. This
guidance served to give the audience ideas for “flipping” as she interacted with the teams.
After the objects were selected, each episode had an extended montage of the
rehabilitation and/or repurposing phase of the upcycling process that provided an easy-looking
and accelerated glimpse into how the projects were carried out. For instance, in episode 8 of
season 1, one of the team members and an in-house specialist were shown reupholstering stools
just at the moment that they are tapping in one of the last tacks that held down the new covering.
That emphasized a hands-on DIY ethos, but in no way could serve as a how-to tutorial, as the

112

complicated nature of the work is hidden. The viewer was not shown the specialized techniques
required for upholstering furniture that must be learned over long periods of time.
Labor was often reduced in this way on RTV programming, as shows have largely placed
the focus on dramatic interactions between cast members and their everyday lives running their
respective businesses, instead of on the actual hands-on work being performed (Leistyna, 2009).
As with the object selection process, the attention of audience members was directed toward
thinking about what styles were most desired and marketable for upcycling. When contestants
were shown selling the objects, Lara Spencer gave tips to the teams on how to most effectively
market their creations and how to think about what offers to accept and when. At the end of the
program, the total amount of money made by each team was revealed while Lara Spencer
congratulated the “winners,” debriefed the competitors and discussed how each succeeded or
could have done better.
At its core, this program was focused on providing guidance for aesthetic practices
(Bennett, 2011) by anchoring them in speculation and monetization. It also promoted a classoriented taste culture (Bourdieu, 1984) in its presentation of stylish objects that appealed toward
middle-class sensibilities, such as mid-century modern Danish-designed furniture and other
vintage objects that command high prices even prior to their “upcycling” or restoration. Flea
Market Flip was also overflowing in representation. During each episode, the flea market was
portrayed as a space where people are engaging in the free exchange of objects and money,
unencumbered by the interference of the state or corporations. Cash was exchanged, tax was not
calculated, and there were no receipts. Individual sellers were shown verbally agreeing with
buyers on terms decided upon mutually in the moment, which gave the impression that the flea
market space is one in which everyone accepts the same risks and yields rewards.

113

Steve, the owner of a successful antique store extolled the virtues of the flea market as a
free market when he said:
The flea market’s a great thing in my opinion … I hope it never changes. But it could
with Big Brother and everything else that’s closing in on us in all directions. It’s just
basic buying, selling, trading, bartering, untampered with, ungovernment regulated, and
I shouldn’t even say this [knocking on wood], well once in a while they send tax people
through, but basically there aren’t taxes. It’s open, free, fun, enjoyable. It’s a great thing.
My fieldwork has shown that this is a romanticized view, as people entered these markets with
differing levels of economic and cultural capital (glossed over by Trash and Treasure TV) that
determines one’s success level. This will be discussed further in the following chapter to
demonstrate how the secondary market is a part of greater economic arrangements at work in the
ways that determine how social relations are shaped, and how money and objects circulate in
those sites. These are the dynamics that did not appear in the TV portrayals of the flea market
spaces seen on Flea Market Flip.
These structural features pertained to those of the larger secondary market in all of its
sites and niches. The secondary market straddled the underground/informal and formal
economies in how they operated in relation to the overarching formal consumer marketplace. For
now, it is important to see how this program functioned in terms of subject formation as it taught
people that they can use their creativity and DIY spirit to make money in a flexible, open,
marketplace of entrepreneurs. This was seen in terms of cultural trends and their streamlining
into the economic system such as “shabby chic” design (wearing "old" clothes as high fashion,
buying old furniture that has been refurbished or that looks aged and distressed), and the
emergence and growth of online storefronts. Among these storefronts was Etsy.com, a website
on which individuals sold their handmade, individually designed objects such as decorative
items, clothing and other things for people to wear or use. The next section will discuss how Flea

114

Market Flip worked to subsume DIY ethics and practices into neoliberal capitalism by
combining objects, aesthetics and entrepreneurial values.
The Object and Power: Creativity, Capitalism, and DIY Entrepreneurialism
As a widely successful program for eight seasons, Flea Market Flip merged DIY
creativity, individual entrepreneurship and profit motivation. In this, the show also worked to
erase the tension between these profit-motivated activities and other types of exchange that
occurred in countercultural spaces, such as those associated with environmentalism, feminism or
punk rock. As examples, one could point to the feminist-oriented “stitch and bitch” sewing,
knitting and embroidering circles. These groups tended to uphold DIY ethics as being
inseparable from anti-capitalism and asserted that craft practices and the product of their labor
were sources of power in the pursuit of social justice (Bratich & Brush, 2011). In embracing
entrepreneurial competition, the contestants on Flea Market Flip had to be adaptable and creative
in terms of how they saw the objects found at the market, not mainly for the creative expression
that motivates many artists and do-it-yourself vendors on sites like Etsy, but rather, for the
expressed purpose of generating profit.
The contestants were encouraged to reimagine how objects can be used and to be as
creative as possible, although solely in the pursuit of selling their projects for as much money as
a buyer is willing to pay. As evidenced by the creation of the table from the vintage bicycle,
antique fire extinguisher and old, rustic tabletop, the two young artists that made up that design
were not concerned with restoring the objects to their original conditions by using as many
“authentic” replacement or reproduction parts as possible. They weren’t thinking of the fire
extinguisher as something that could be cleaned up, or left with its patina and then used as a
decorative object on its own. Instead, they modeled “American ingenuity” by creating something

115

new out of something old. This prioritized an aesthetic for the purposes of making a sale, rather
than being concerned with the pure value of preservation. In this, the team desired to produce
entrepreneurial power through an object's potential to hail a buyer in the marketing of taste.
Similarly, in the example of the rusty Vespa discussed in the previous chapter, Mike and
Frank of American Pickers also modeled for viewers how to be imaginative with envisioning the
potential for objects encountered in the field, and even gave direct instruction. However, the
Pickers did not engage in DIY projects on their own, and tended to sell objects to people who
could do what they would liked with them, often using those objects for purposes other than
what they were intended for, such as for decoration. Also, although Mike and Frank were well
known for buying and selling “rusty gold” (objects that are not in perfect condition but still have
an aesthetic and monetary value), they also looked for items which are in conditions that fell
within the upper region of the varying grading scales that exist for different objects and markets.
As on other programs such as Pawn Stars, these higher-end objects were revered for their
status in regard to their particular historical, cultural, and social values, while monetary value
was given primary importance. Commensurate with neoliberal rationales and practices that seek
to move away from the past and encourage constant change in the name of enterprise, Flea
Market Flip gave viewers permission to go beyond those conventional treatments of objects that
accompanies such orthodoxies, such as accurate restoration, or the incorporation of items into a
public or private collection, archive, or display in a museum. The things featured on Flea Market
Flip which were in their original condition and largely “affordable” on the actual market, were
transformed from being accessible to a large cross-section of flea market consumers into new
pieces that are very expensive and obtainable by only relatively few affluent people. On TV,
starting prices on these transformed objects were high and the asking resale prices were even

116

higher, which was not representative of what I saw in the field, and what interview participants
reported as their regular experiences. According to my interviews and observations, not only was
the almost effortless repurposing of objects and high prices they commanded on TV programs
not realistic, but the potentially anti-capitalist ethos existing in real-world flea markets and DIY
spaces was also erased on the TV shows.
While there were some real life flea markets where objects commanded high prices
which were similar to those on Flea Market Flip, such spaces were not typical of flea markets in
general. Maisel’s (1974) illustration of flea markets from his ethnographic study of those sites
showed a diverse array of participants in terms of race, class and gender. In addition, his research
demonstrated how the markets were spaces that represented openness, freedom, and community,
in which things, at times, were even given away for free or at deep discount because of
interpersonal relationships (Maisel, 1974). This is consistent with my observations and the
interview data, representing aspects of a pre-capitalist or alternative market ethos, which will be
discussed further in the next chapter in all of its complexities.
Flea Market Flip, American Pickers and Storage Wars, as sources of representation,
ignored these potential alternatives to capitalist market ideals and reinforced dominant neoliberal
ideologies. Trash and Treasure TV programs also presented a narrow framing of people who
participated in secondary markets. Social identity categories tended to be distorted in both their
limited selection and stereotypical presentations. This disallowed for an accurate reflection of the
composition of secondary markets in all of its economic, social and cultural complexity. This
included the ways that different groups accessed informal economies. Additionally, focusing on
these arrangements opens up pathways for analyzing the power of RTV as a technique of
neoliberal governmentality, in its capacity to reach and influence audiences to create new

117

subjects and robust markets. These matters will be addressed in the next section and further in
subsequent chapters.
Representation and Social Identities: Gender, Race, and Class on Trash and Treasure TV
In contrast with most real-life flea markets, the sites where contestants were shown
buying and selling on Flea Market Flip were more upscale, such as The Elephant’s Trunk in
New Milford, Connecticut, The Rose Bowl Flea Market, in Pasadena, California, and The
Brooklyn Flea, in Brooklyn, New York. All of these locations were very clean, orderly, safe, and
on the program, appeared to be attended by mainly white, middle-class people, with the
exception of few middle class people of color who were on the design teams. In general, the
design teams were almost exclusively middle-class or bourgeois bohemian,34 who often had jobs
in the fashion industry, design, or technology fields.
This does not mean that the individuals on the program were actually economically
middle class, or that their incomes placed them in positions that we associate with “middle class
American” status, such as having home ownership or retirement savings. The people on Flea
Market Flip had social and cultural capital bound up in their associations and tastes, which carry
and reinforce structural power (Bourdieu, 1984), that allowed them to pass for middle class,
while clouding the material salience of the class structure. Their cosmopolitan fashion sense,
attractive straight-toothed smiles and educated mannerisms carried symbolic capital that
communicated their membership in the middle class in regard to social, cultural and economic
capital. As discussed in the last chapter, on Storage Wars the class politics played out largely
through the cast, with Darrell Sheets and Jarrod presented as stereotypically working class by

34

By this term I am referring to people who embraced and performed counter-cultural, artistic and/or hedonistic
practices, yet did so through modes of consumption which included the adoption of “lifestyles” achieved through
middle-class, capitalist sensibilities.

118

lacking sophistication in how they talked and dressed. At the same time, Barry, the collector who
was well off after selling his produce distribution business, and Dave Hester, a second-hand store
owner and auctioneer, were portrayed as being more educated and, therefore, identifiably middle
class. Mike and Frank of American Pickers were also very middle-class in their performance in
contrast to many of the poor, rural people with whom they interacted. Finally, on both Storage
Wars and American Pickers, the experts called in to assess items also carried the capital
associated with being middle-class, with most being middle-aged white men. This was similar to
the dynamics of the collector communities I was able to meet, such as those groups who were
interested antiques and sports memorabilia (which are categories featured on Trash and Treasure
TV).
In terms of gender, the Trash and Treasure TV programs analyzed here and others, such
as Pawn Stars, also tended to feature very few women. They were more masculine in their
presentation of “reality.” For instance, Storage Wars highlighted values, attitudes and behaviors
stereotypically associated with hegemonic masculine practices, such as competition, aggression
(at times) and "face off masculinity,” the latter of which means to never reveal a weakness
(Bordo, 2008). Up until the most recent seasons, and excluding the spin off, Storage Wars: New
York, the primary cast of Storage Wars has been male with the exception of one female
character, Brandi Passante. This was also true of the experts on Storage Wars, who were almost
all men, which exemplified Rademacher and Kelly’s (2016) argument that the program mediates
the crisis of masculinity and labor in contemporary society by highlighting males as authority
figures.
American Pickers was very similar. Mike and Frank are the “pickers,” and Danielle is
their female assistant who plays a “helping” role. At times, the show reinforced gender

119

stereotypes. For example, in one instance, Mike and Frank assigned Danielle to clean a jukebox
after they had returned from a trip. The episode closed with Danielle playfully polishing an
already clean jukebox while she mimicked 1950s burlesque striptease sensuality before the
credits ran.35 Danielle is an actual burlesque dancer in real life (Hawks, 2010) but displays
intellectual and professional competencies that go far beyond those assigned to her through
patriarchal discourses.
However, her representation on the show as a subordinate and a sex object, regardless of
claims to agency, brought American Pickers into the web of stereotypical TV programming past,
present, and future. This contributed to media portrayals of women as passive subjects who
should not be taken seriously. During the first season of American Pickers, there were very few
women on the program with prominent roles other than Danielle, particularly in regard to
knowledgeable traders in antiques and collectibles. Out of this small sample, one was named
Laurie “The Junk Lady.” She was white woman in her mid to late 40s who bought entire barns
and their contents with the intention of selling the objects and the reclaimed wood from the
structures. Aside from those exceptions, a small handful of women played relatively minor roles,
mainly as sellers liquidating the collections of their deceased husbands and were not given
significant camera time.
Overall, the sellers dominantly portrayed on these shows were middle-aged white men
who were long-time collectors or hoarders, which was also a significant representation of my
interview sample. As opposed to Storage Wars and American Pickers, Flea Market Flip
explicitly portrayed feminized labor in its depictions of secondary market practices and DIY
projects. These efforts were largely focused on products for the domestic sphere, which has

35

Season 1, episode 5, Back Breaker

120

traditionally been the domain of women. Although this may be a sharp critique, since women are
featured as sellers at times and the dynamic is not necessarily the same on all shows, by and
large, on Trash and Treasure TV, women are shown to have lesser agency than men, which is not
necessarily the case in real life.
Through my research I learned that different categories of vintage and antique items, such
as housewares, furniture and clothing, attracted more women. According to sources (such as
Mara, a long-time “picker” who sold in Kenny’s shop, experienced and established postcard
collector-dealer Lorene, and vintage-store owner Michelle), it was common for women to
concentrate on items such as antique furniture, jewelry, vintage clothing, and other “feminine”
objects. I saw this in the field when I met Bernadette (a white woman in her mid 60s) and her
daughter Katie (a white woman in her mid to late 20s) in their section of long time dealer Oscar’s
antique emporium. They were an upscale duo that concentrated on vintage clothing, books, and
unusual curios and knick-knacks. The mother-daughter team procured their stock in high volume
through their appraisal and estate sale business in New York City, of which the family patriarch
was also a part. Corinne, who I met while she was working in Steve’s shop, also focused on
vintage clothing. She had a thriving enterprise both online and in the store where she had a
section of higher-end women’s clothing from the early 20th century onward. These women, and
others, were just as involved, if not more so, than many of the men who were a part of this study.
Regardless, Trash and Treasure TV programs on History or A&E, or even TruTV, the networks
where the genre originated in the late 2000s, did not often feature items from the subject areas
considered more “feminine.”
However, women were also collectors and amateur dealers alongside the baby boomeraged men I mentioned, such as Lorena, who was interested in collecting from an early age and

121

started with commemorative plates about Atlantic City, which is where she grew up. While she
said that she had never experienced discrimination or vulgar sexism when dealing with men
while buying and selling postcards, photographs and ephemera, she did confirm that her gender
did play a role in limiting her ability to travel to shows. Although her husband believed in having
an equitable marriage, her responsibilities as a traditional mother took up time when she could
otherwise have been out treasure hunting. I also found that women engaged in secondary markets
by acting as auxiliary agents for their husbands in the collectors’ clubs. Through their
involvement they often found an interest in some element of collecting, such as Myrtle who
began collecting antique “car vases”36 after she married Charles, a long-time collector of antique
glass.
With the younger child-free women I spoke to, the dynamics seemed to shift a bit. They
were in partnered relationships, but were unencumbered by domestic life and able to attend trade
shows and make time to find things of interest. Dana and Jan, both in their late 20s – early 30s
and involved in pop culture toys and collectibles were much like Lorena. As mentioned above,
she collected objects related to the hometown of her youth, Atlantic City. Dana and Jan became
interested in specific toys from their childhood, such as My Little Pony and Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles.37 Popular culture fan “nerd culture” or “geek culture” are spaces often dominated
by men, as represented on the sitcom, The Big Bang Theory, and on and RTV show Comic Book
Men, which is similar to Pawn Stars, but focused on pop-culture collectibles. In light of these
cultural conditions, I asked them if they had ever faced sexism and misogyny. Both women had

36
37

Popular items, largely in the 1920s France, that were affixed to the dashboards of automobiles to hold flowers.

Long-time dealer, Steve, had noted that nostalgia was very important to the secondary market, particularly with
antiques and collectibles. In our interview, Oscar, a successful owner of an antique store touched on this too, and
said that he was in a very “psychological business.” This makes sense, as like Dana, her partner Rich said that what
motivated him was that he was able to have all of the toys he did not get to enjoy as a child.

122

reported that they had experienced some problems, such as the questioning of their credibility as
“fans.” However, Jan and Dana said that those instances were extremely rare. Among their
communities in New Jersey, they largely felt very welcomed and supported, and that there were
other young women involved in the same capacities.38 This shows that collector’s niches of the
real world secondary market are much more diverse than portrayed on Trash and Treasure TV.
Other than on Flea Market Flip, the Trash and Treasure TV shows I analyzed also
included very few people from minority ethnic or racial groups. For instance, throughout the
entire first season of American Pickers there was one person of color. He was an affluent
African-American man with an interest in gas/petroleum related items, such as pumps and
advertisement signs. Everything was in mint condition and displayed in a pristine garage
dedicated to his collection. Overall, the racial and ethnic diversity on Trash and Treasure TV was
limited to that which conformed to and enforced middle-class norms and values. Whereas in the
field the sites I observed, there was a strong diversity in terms of gender, race, and class,
particularly in the flea markets and second-hand and antique shops. However, it was at the flea
markets where I found the broadest range of social groups.
The flea markets I visited were radically different than the representations on TV. There
were significant numbers of people of color, immigrants and lower income white people with a

38

Some of the changes in gender relations as a result of the second-wave feminist movements of the 1960s and
1970s may account for how these women reported how they and others were able to engage in the pop culture
collectibles and fan communities. In addition, the influence of third-wave feminism and contemporary liberal sexual
and gender-queer politics may be present too, in constituting more inclusive collector communities. Although men
are heavily involved in fandom (and the associated secondary markets), these cultures, while rife with issues of
racism, sexism, and homophobia, are also fields from which nonnormative performances of gender emerge in the
form of cosplay (a portmanteau for “costume play”) among participants. One example is the phenomenon of the
“brony,” a subset of the “furry” subculture (people who dress up as Anime characters or cartoon inspired furry
animal costumes) that consists of men that enjoy the children’s TV cartoon My Little Pony, a program largely
marketed toward young girls, and who therefore like to dress up like the characters of derivatives of (Gilbert, 2015).
This affects the gender dynamics of who purchases certain fan products.

123

smaller presence of those who were recognizably from the solid middle class or above. For
example, at the Farmingswood Flea Market’s open-air section and its building hosting indoor
shops, one could find vendors specializing in services claiming to lower or eliminate cable bills
and offering cell phone plans that worked on month-to-month payments or by purchasing
minutes - two services primarily sought out by low-income people. There were also places to buy
used and discounted work uniforms for nurses, janitors, people in the building and culinary
fields, and those who held other working-class jobs. At the outdoor tables, I observed people
who did not look prosperous picking through and buying used clothes and housewares.
Ultimately, this flea market served as a source for everyday goods and services needed by the
working classes and poor – the same people who are omitted from being represented on Trash
and Treasure TV, as they are disposed of in the physical world (Ouellette, 2017).
Yet, there were also dealers there selling antiques and collectibles for people with more
money to spend. These objects ran the gamut in price and quality. Antiques dealer Neidermier (a
white man in his early to mid 60s, who I came to learn had known many of those I met through
my original snowball sample of collector-dealers) was a weekly fixture who sold higher-quality
objects that he “picked” at auctions and private residences, as well as things he had dug out of
the ground, such as antique bottles. His items were intended for people who were serious
collectors, or for those who desired upper-end vintage or antique items to decorate their homes or
businesses. One object he had was a 1950s-era automotive testing device designed to run
diagnostics on electrical systems. The machine was in original condition and only lightly used.
What made it appealing to passersby were its unusual blue color and the “atomic” motif which
consisted of artistic renditions of atoms adorning its exterior. It was eventually sold to a business
owner who bought it to decorate the reception area of his auto repair shop.

124

However, in these real-life flea market scenarios, there were not many people who could
afford or who had the cultural capital necessary to be able to do what Neidermier had, or what
the self-described pickers Larry and Ivan, contestants on Flea Market Flip did when they “make
treasures into trophies.”39 Additionally, Farmingswood Flea Market was known for its
unruliness. Multiple people talked to me about the violence that occasionally happened in
disputes over table space. Thomas (Caucasian, early 60s), a “picker,” collector and part-time
dealer who had been trading in antiques and collectibles for over thirty years, commented:
[The market has never] been junkier. The guys that clean out the storage units might be
the only chance to catch something out there. It wasn’t [always] like that. This year in
particular … it’s like instead of throwing it in their garbage [they]can go to
[Farmingswood]. They get into fist fights over tables at 3 o’clock in the morning, and
then put out five tables of [25cent items] and then not even make 10 dollars to pay …
rent.
Thomas’ statement illustrates the deterioration of the conditions at the flea market and the
violence and poverty that have emerged there that are related to the current state of the economy
and its impact on people’s everyday lives.
The Country Village Flea Market differed in that it promoted itself as a place to buy
vintage and antique objects for the purposes of both style and function. As described in Chapter
3, each building housed a dedicated vendor who operated a different small business that largely
sold vintage and antique used and unused objects (collectibles, knick-knacks, clothing and
furniture, etc.) in mid-range to low brackets in regard to price and scarcity, along with the
occasional more expensive piece. While Farmingswood Flea Market attracted “pickers,” the
Country Village Flea Market was primarily a destination for “antiquing” and scouting for
unusual objects, and buying higher-quality items. This market was also less transient than

39

season 1, episode 1, Barb on a Wire

125

Farmingswood as it as it only offered 10 tables for rent at daily rather than hourly rates, and the
shops were secured through monthly rents by longer term tenants. Although there were regular
vendors at Farmingswood, there was also considerable variation week-to-week due as different
people came to rent one or more of the hundreds of tables available for the day.
There were also buildings that contained newer used objects, such as furniture or
appliances. These items were bought by working-class people who were on a budget and needed
things for their own home. They also bought things for their adult children, who had moved out
of the home to work or attend college and needed inexpensive things to start their lives. Henry, a
dealer mentioned earlier with over 50 years of experience, had two buildings at the Country
Village Flea Market, both of which were filled with furniture that he had acquired through
making house calls. Some of his inventory included antiques, but most of it consisted of newer
used pieces, such as oak dining room sets and hardwood bedroom furniture. Corroborating the
views of other informants, he explained that because of changing popular tastes, large pieces
such as oak dining room sets or large hardwood bedroom sets were not as desirable today as they
were in the past, which made his asking prices very low, and therefore accessible. Like other
participants in this study who performed house calls or bid on storage units, he said that those
pieces of furniture were important to his bottom line, and that the shift in market conditions had
put a dent in his profits, since that stock just sat in his shop, permanently on display.
Henry and others offered a generational explanation for the changing dynamics of the
furniture market. This rationale relied on the presumption that many “millennials” did not want
big, bulky furniture sets, particularly those who lived in small, urban apartments and frequently
moved. These generational and other economic trends that were recognized by participants

126

included the salient aspects of race, class, and gender, and will be elaborated upon in the next
chapter.
These aspects of the research will be discussed as informed by the representative
composition of Trash and Treasure TV programs and the ethnographic data of this study. In
terms of the shows addressed here, Flea Market Flip narrowly presented people, places and
things in ways that did not reflect the poverty and class struggles of those who actually
frequented these secondary market spaces. In this, the form of “diversity” shown on TV
portrayals of the sites on Flea Market Flip was limited to younger, stylish, city dwellers, while
the poor and economically disenfranchised were absent. In addition to having unbalanced class
and gender representations, American Pickers and Storage Wars were also very racially
homogenous in terms of the primary cast, invited experts, and those in supporting semi-scripted
“roles” on the show. This will be covered further in the next chapter, particularly in relation to
the ways that race, class, and gender exist in the real-life world of secondary markets.
Conclusion
In this chapter I have explored the three Trash and Treasure TV programs analyzed for
this study, American Pickers, Storage Wars, and Flea Market Flip. This was done in light of the
theories discussed in chapters 2 and 3, along with additional literature and insights gleaned from
my interviews and field observations. I have argued that Trash and Treasure TV is a technology
of subjectification that has the capacity to show people how to buy and sell objects on the
secondary market, within a framework informed by and composed through the performance of
contemporary capitalism. The consistent cultural and social messages and presentations of these
shows contributed to a cultivation of media subjectivity which is active, yet not outside or
immune to structures of power (Gerbner, 1997; Hall, 1980; Kitzinger, 2009).

127

Trash and Treasure TV has the capacity to shape the perceptions of viewers within the
cultural and social frameworks provided by the discursive power and affects of neoliberal
capitalism and consumerism. Among these perceptions are specific models and representations
of how to perform secondary markets according to neoliberal logics, and those of the new
political economy. Within this were portrayals of social class, race and gender which often either
masked or reified real-life inequalities that were created and/or exacerbated under neoliberal
regimes. However, as noted earlier, there are limits to the power of Trash and Treasure TV to
reach and create subjects. This will be covered in the following chapter as I discuss how people
engage in secondary market practices in relation to labor, leisure, consumption, financial stability
or productivity, and other aspects of market activity.

128

Chapter 5
Treasure Hunting at the Jersey Shore: The Hierarchy and Distribution of Objects and Market
Power
Well the main thing, the fun, the best most fun is the thrill of the hunt, is going and finding it. I love getting into the
old house and rooting through the stuff and see what I can discover in there. The same thing with collecting the
bottles going out digging them up, ya know? There’s a chance you can find something real good every time you go
out, sort of like hitting the lottery! - Colonel Mark, project interviewee, auctioneer, collector, dealer with nearly 40
years of experience in the field, and Trash and Treasure TV viewer
In high school I was dating a girl who brought me to my first auction. She says that she's going to go over to [an]
auction house, so I said, "Oh, can I go?" She goes, "What do you want to go for?" I says, "You never know." We go
over and sit there at an auction. Auctions always seem to me like whenever we would see them broadcast that there
was a lot of energy, and it was cool. It being antiques: "What treasure am I going to find?" That's what it seemed
like. It seemed like a treasure hunt. - Alex, project interviewee, long-time “picker,” collector, and an avid watcher of
American Pickers

Thus far, this dissertation has established how Trash and Treasure TV can be a
technology of governmentality and social control and demonstrated some of the ways that
viewers have engaged with the genre in terms of audience readings and media influence. I
explored these phenomena through the incorporation of data from interviews and observation
that illustrated the economic structure and social relations that compose the secondary market
scene along the Jersey Shore. This research revealed the importance of flea markets, auctions,
and second-hand stores as sites of exchange where people circulated material objects and money.
It also explained the potential and limitations of Trash and Treasure TV as a strategy of
governance. However, we can only understand the significance of these shows through a closer
examination of the real-life dynamics of secondary markets.
Opening this chapter, I explain the broader economic arrangement and touch on matters
of labor, profit and power within those processes. This includes how different tiers of
participants performed and co-constructed the secondary market in the area of New Jersey at the
center of this study known as the Jersey Shore. Specifically, I will discuss how top-level dealers

129

sold in volume and traded in the highest-end objects. They also fed less affluent vendors who
traded on a smaller scale or sold lower-quality items that they eventually passed on to individual
consumers, or occasionally to other sellers. After that section, I will move toward further
fleshing out the ways that social identities, such as economic class, and changes in generational
populations, were relevant to the workings of the secondary market at the Jersey Shore. I will do
this by explaining what participants had characterized to me as a serious downturn in the
antiques market. This dip in the trade involved larger issues. These include the multiple
economic recessions that have occurred since 2001, shifts in taste that have come with changes
in the consumer market and a related culture of disposability that has influenced people’s
relationships with objects and each other. The final section will detail how economic and
affective conditions shape the performance of the local secondary market, and draw conclusions
about the reach and power of Trash and Treasure TV in its circulation and subjectification.
The Distribution of People, Objects, and Money
As discussed in earlier chapters, the people I interviewed bought and sold objects on the
secondary market economy at the Jersey Shore. These exchanges took place at private residences
in pre-arranged meetings, or spontaneously at auctions, flea markets, estate sales, yard sales,
second hand stores, and collector’s trade shows. The trade shows attended by those I had met
were focused on particular interests in antiques and collectibles, such as antique glass, postcards
and ephemera, comic books and toys, records and pop culture memorabilia, coins and stamps.
Participants also conducted transactions on eBay, Craig’s List, and increasingly on mobile
“apps” such as letgo.com and Instagram40 (the use of secondary market digital platforms is

40

letgo.com is an app for mobile phones dedicated specifically to buying and selling objects. People take photos of
their used goods and set a price. Then browsers searching a particular geographic area can buy a given object
through the application.

130

detailed in the next chapter). Many of the deals that were made within these physical and virtual
sites involved individuals selling items in small quantities to consumers who were not buying
wholesale. Those who bought and sold in the most volume and in the highest-end objects
acquired their stock by performing what are referred to as “house calls” and by attending
auctions.
These actors wielded substantial power over less established competitors with little
experience, such as individuals who were potentially inspired by Trash and Treasure TV. They
also held an advantage over those who may have had a history of trading on the secondary
market, but did not possess as many resources. Operating at these upper levels of the market
(buying and selling high-priced objects and/or in large volume) required dealers to keep large
amounts of cash on hand. They needed access to such sums of money so they would always be
prepared to take in-the-moment, on-the-spot risks, such as in an auction setting, where outcomes
can be unpredictable. A similar situation involved buying the contents of entire rooms and even
homes that may have contained only a few objects of value once a more thorough assessment
had been conducted. A significant amount of economic capital is required to make that type of
investment. This financial and practical risk-taking creates a barrier to entry for most everyday
people.
That barrier has been exacerbated by the influx of new participants entering the market
who were inspired by the TV shows. For instance, as noted in the last chapter, informants who
had frequented storage unit auctions for years reported that they witnessed an increase in
participants after the debut of the show Storage Wars. This illustrated the effect these shows had
on the public. One interviewee, Steve, who had been attending storage auctions for
approximately 20 years, said that with the rising popularity of these TV shows, he noticed that

131

the average amount of people in attendance at the auctions he regularly attended rose from 5 – 15
participants per day to 70 – 100 per day. He added that the newcomers could not compete with
established traders. This is not only due to a knowledge deficit, but also a lack of capital. Having
fewer resources meant that newer participants could not sustain the losses that came with the
mistakes they made while adjusting to the learning curve.
This steady stream of newcomers largely consisted of inexperienced people who would
spend their resources until exhaustion, and eventually, if not rapidly, exit the market. Although
according to Anthony, another long-term auction participant, there was no shortage of new
bidders and emphasized that they “just ke[pt] comin’” and over time, “ruined the business” for
him. By “ruining the business,” Anthony was referring to the resulting uptick in competition that
dramatically drove up the prices of units. Regarding these effects, he explained how “people are
really not in this business take a thousand, two thousand dollars and roll the dice.” However, the
popularity of programs such as Storage Wars and Auction Hunters and their emphasis on the
potential for quick profit “bought a lot of people in, so the rooms that [people] were paying a
hundred, two hundred dollars for [in the past] were now fifteen hundred dollars.”
Eventually, like those new buyers that lacked staying power, Anthony stopped buying
and selling because he felt that it was too much of a risk. At the time of the interview, Anthony
had not “bought a room in six to seven months,” when he “used to buy eight to ten rooms every
week.” To him, it was not worth investing time and money into bidding on units since “real
rooms,” those full of valuable antiques or collectibles, only came up two to three times per year.
With the increased number of people bidding, a single unit of that quality was now commanding
upwards of five thousand to six thousand dollars. Hence, the rise in auction participants brought
on by the TV shows was not only economically disappointing for most newcomers, but also

132

harmed long-term auction bidders such as Anthony, who could no longer compete due to the
inflated costs of rooms.
This dynamic illuminates the limitations of the televisual dispositif in terms of Trash and
Treasure TV’s power to create entrepreneurial subjects and invigorate markets. In fact,
reminiscent of practices in investment capitalism, the new participants had their labor and money
rapidly siphoned away, and once completely drained of their resources, they were disposed of
along with the worthless items that were sent to the flea markets and the municipal dumps.41
Instead of creating solutions for the problems people struggled with after the Great Recession,
such as finding options for employment, the efforts of those who attempted to enter the market
were thwarted. Moreover, as evidenced by Anthony’s exodus, the influx of bidders disrupted the
already-existing order. This complicated how techniques of governmentality have been
theorized, and in turn, demonstrated how their power to organize society could have adverse
outcomes.
Additionally, Anthony asserted that the educational aspect of Trash and Treasure TV
“taught people what to rob out of the rooms,” as it brought information about antiques,
collectibles and other valuable items to a broader audience, particularly the owners and managers
of storage unit facilities. This increased the difficulty of turning a profit for long-term bidders,
since knowledge about what was and was not valuable (once held only by experienced bidders)
was now made common by the TV shows. Since buyers commonly do not know what is in the
unit they are bidding on until it is opened in front of them, those with access to the lockers have
the chance to unscrupulously take an object that a bidder would have won if it had not been
stolen by an insider prior to the auction. Much like the way that Trash and Treasure TV glossed
41

For instance, Bain Capital, an investment firm founded by one-time U.S. Presidential candidate Mitt Romney, has
often purchased struggling companies, extracted all of their value, and filed them for bankruptcy (Kosman, 2017).

133

over the labor involved in the process and cost of disposing unwanted items from a unit won at
an auction and the stories of those people whose property is being sold off (both mentioned in
earlier chapters), this is another layer of “reality” that programs such as Storage Wars and
Auction Hunters had regularly omitted. This phenomenon was also evidence of Trash and
Treasure TV’s disruptive potential, beyond the increased number of legitimate participants,
which further revealed the limits of the televisual dispositif.
After abandoning the storage unit auctions, Anthony focused his efforts on “house calls.”
This was a practice performed by Mike and Frank from American Pickers, and all of the largerscale dealers in my sample. This group included auctioneer “Colonel Mark,” antique store
owners Steve and Kenny, and flea market salesman Henry, who had a used furniture shop that
consisted of two buildings at the Country Village Flea Market. Working through word-of-mouth
communication and peer-to-peer recommendations, these dealers visited homes to buy specific
objects, the contents of entire rooms, or even everything in a house. Sellers were people who
were moving, downsizing their lifestyles, liquidating their own possessions due to a personal
financial crisis, clearing out those things that once belonged to a deceased relative such as a
parent, or merely seeking to sell one or more objects for any number of reasons. Buying
everything in a room or home allowed dealers to acquire a range of objects for their stock at a
low cost.
However, according to those I spoke with, most of houses they visited largely contained
newer, mass produced furniture and housewares that were of limited value in regard to antiques,
collectibles, or other high-value items (such as new professional-grade musical instruments and
equipment, expensive electronics, firearms, luxury clothing, jewelry or boutique fashion
accessories). For instance, auctioneer Colonel Mark, who made house calls for approximately 30

134

years had noted that “the average estate … if [the owners] weren’t collectors or anything is
maybe only worth $2,000.” His quote referred to the physical objects contained within the home,
not to the homes themselves, additional properties, automobiles, or other select items that would
comprise a total “estate.” Many times, for the informants, “house calls” were actually “house
cleanouts,” as there were few things of value that the dealer had paid for or been paid to take.
This meant that most of the things acquired in house calls were low value items in need of
disposal, much like the unwanted items that come with storage units.
The most common and profitable mode of getting rid of these items was through “bottom
feeders,” a term used to denote people who are hired by dealers and paid to dispose of excess
merchandise. The bottom feeders then took whatever they believed had some value to the flea
market, antique shops, or individual dealers or collectors who they thought would be interested
and sold those objects to pay for the fees at the municipal dump, where the remaining items
would be brought. Any other money that was generated beyond those expenses was their profit.
Illustrating the economic hierarchy of the local secondary market, many “bottom feeders” were
poor and lower class working people. Some of those I met, based on visual markers such as
rotting or missing teeth (a condition associated with extreme dental neglect and/or drug use, such
as that of a “crack head” or heroin addict), appeared to have lived lives of struggle with poverty
and substance abuse.
During the period that I conducted observation at the Farmingsood flea market, one group
of bottom feeders that met the description above set up their wares in the same place every week.
They sold what they had acquired in “clean outs.” These are the disposal ends of “house calls”
when there few objects of actual value left in the home. However, more affluent individuals also
built relationships with bottom feeders. For instance, Oscar, a successful shop owner, had several

135

bottom feeders he worked with who would go to flea markets, yard sales, estate sales and
auctions to find stock. They would scour the sites and receive compensation for the objects and
their efforts when they returned to his store. This practice was not restricted to those who operate
businesses and possess the most capital, such as Oscar, Steve, or Anthony. Collector and amateur
dealer, Thomas, who bought and sold to fund his collection, had built a rapport with the bottom
feeders at Farmingswood who performed house clean outs. He gained a reputation for his love
for old photographs and postcards, and willingness to pay cash for on-the-spot "finds."
Often, the bottom feeders Thomas knew went directly to his home where he engaged
with them in what he called “porch picking.” In our interview, he discussed his dealings, when
he recalled:
I found out that they used to call me ‘Beer Guy Thom.’ They would drop a banana box
on my porch at the end of the day, I’d give them $20 and they’d go get their beer. That’s
changed … now that they know I am making a little money at it when they come they
stay and look at everything. They get a little more money but I still win.
This quote exemplified the way that stereotypes of lower class people may have encouraged the
reproduction of power inherent within the capitalist system at the level of the local secondary
market. It is possible that some of the money made by bottom feeders did not go toward alcohol.
It could have been that some money made on the porch may have gone toward buying beer (or
not), while the rest of their profit was dedicated toward etching out a meager existence.
Additionally, his insistence on having “won” in the end signaled the presence of a spirit
of individualism and competition in which there are “winners” and “losers.” Success and failure
under extreme competition was often portrayed on Trash and Treasure TV programs such as
Storage Wars as being determined by an individual’s entrepreneurial capacities alone. The other
aspects that affect success on the secondary market (such as education, investment capital, and

136

the financial security and leisure time needed to develop expertise) were not depicted. This
example shows how in real life, outcomes of “winning and losing” fell along class lines.
Defined more broadly by other people in the sample, the term “bottom feeder” did not
necessarily only apply to those who occupied the lowest tiers of the socioeconomic hierarchy.
For instance, when talking with Country Village Flea Market vendors Jeff and Paula about the
term and its associations, they looked at each other in recognition, and Jeff said “we use the term
too, and we are them sometimes.” They had bought and sold valuable objects, but largely traded
in everyday items with nostalgic or kitsch value, such as Pyrex dishes from the 1950s and 1960s
(some being very rare), vintage aprons and kitchen appliances, or costume jewelry. Although
these items were of higher quality than the “junk” sold by the bottom feeders at Farmingswood,
they largely fell into the lower-end category of the things exchanged, particularly when referring
to old, used, “vintage,” or “antique” objects that commanded high prices. There were many
others like Jeff and Paula, people who not associated with the classist stereotypes bound up in
the term “bottom feeder.” Many, if not all of my participants and those I observed, scoured the
“bottom” for objects to resell, and did not suffer from poverty and the corresponding pathologies
such as substance abuse that often accompany living under poor conditions.
However, boundaries were drawn as distinguished by one’s socioeconomic position and
the extent to which their reliance on bottom feeding was a means of subsistence. Amateur dealercollectors, such as those who traded antiques and collectibles for what is largely expendable
income and owners of successful stores all utilized bottom feeding as merely one of their
avenues for acquiring or unloading items. This was in addition to their primary means of
generating income. Jeff and Paula, for example, were semi-retired, and used their participation
bottom feeding in the secondary market to supplement their finances and manage with

137

emergencies, which will be discussed later in this chapter. Participants such as Thomas and those
further up the chain (Oscar, Steve, and Anthony) utilized bottom feeders for sourcing stock to
sell in order to supplement their collection and/or generate profits. The Farmingswood bottom
feeders were comparable to salvagers who scavenged the landscape for scraps in a constant
hustle to render as much refuse into cold, hard cash as possible. Such is the lower end of the
class hierarchy on the secondary market, and in the greater social order, as these arrangements do
not emerge in a vacuum.
The next section will discuss the local secondary market in regard to larger contexts,
namely the economic downturns of the early 2000s and demographic shifts in New Jersey’s
population that have impacted the value and circulation of objects. Following that will be a
section that focuses in detail on how people used the local secondary markets, and how
economics and affect were factors in identifying the limits of the interpellative and subjectifying
power of the RTV dispositif.
“The Downturn”: Recessions, Generations, and Disposability
According to long-time buyers and sellers, the current downturn in the value of antiques
(mentioned in Chapter 4) is not just a short-term slump. The most cynical interviewee, Oscar,
saw the overall antiques trade as having been in such poor health that he declared it to be “dead.”
Other long-term dealers felt similarly. Citing unnamed online sources combined with his
observations in the field, Colonel Mark believed the “antique business” and “hobby” would be
completely gone in 10 to 20 years. Kenny, who had been buying and selling antiques and
collectibles for approximately 40 years and owned two successful shops had noticed the trend
early on, well before the Great Recession. He noted that it corresponded with the early
downward spin in the economy following 9/11:

138

…it started around 9/11. I don’t know if it was a coincidence, or if it had something to
do with it, but if you go back into the 80s and 90s, it was probably the best the antique
business has ever been. Every time you turned around you said “it just can’t keep getting
better,” and stuff just kept going up, and up, and up, and up. And …you can sell
[something] the minute you got it. And right about 2001, whether it was a gradual
thing coming up and nobody saw it coming, but business just started falling. Then,
month after month, and year after year, it just got worse. All of the sudden, people were
in the position, big time dealers, who bought this tiger maple highboy at an auction at
Sotheby’s in 1997 for $150,000 and … they are scrambling to get 50,000 for it. Now if
you read the Maine Antiques Digest, which is, in my opinion, the Bible of the antiques
business you can see things that sold in 1986, 1989, 1994, 2001, are now selling for a
fraction of what they were selling at auction back then.
Kenny’s observation was not one of mere coincidence. Within the 12 months after the attacks on
September 11, 2001, the U.S. spun into a recession, saw a brief period of recovery, and then
began to show signs of a slowdown (Doward, 2002). Efforts to jumpstart the economy between
2001 and 2007 were not as successful as proponents had predicted (Aron-Dine, Kogan, & Stone,
2008). The expansion that did occur was weaker than during comparable business cycles over
time and mainly related to corporate growth (Aron-Dine, Kogan, & Stone, 2008) as opposed to
increased consumer spending. These conditions certainly could have had an impact on the
higher-end antiques market.
Although New Jersey’s economy was somewhat insulated due to fiscal inertia,
entrenched industry and the state’s proximity to multiple metropolitan areas, the state had also
experienced periods of job loss and stagnation, with the Great Recession being the longest and
most impactful (Hughes & Seneca, 2013). Along with economic rationales, participants reported
two explanations for the downturn in the antiques market. The first posited the issue as
generational, and had at its core the assertion that “millennials” were not interested in antiques.
An important factor here is that those who were the most adamant about this theory were baby
boomers - people mostly in their 50s and 60s at the time of the interviews. This then began to
make sense as another potential factor within the economic milieu. It coincided with a trend

139

experienced in New Jersey since the year 2000, in which the state’s age demographic began to
shift from one that was dominated by baby boomers to one that became more heavily centered on
millennials (Hughes & Seneca, 2013). This suggests that tastes had changed with the societal
make up, which had diverted spending patterns into areas other than antiques, particularly midcentury modern objects, industrial items, and pop culture toys and collectibles.
A second and related reason for the shifts in the secondary market as elucidated by longtime established members of the antiques and collectibles community pivoted on disposability.
Participants argued that the mass-production of the mid 20th century had created a “throw-away”
culture among younger generations, in particular, “millennials.” In this narrative they used things
until they were broken, obsolete, or unwanted, and then relegated them to a landfill or recycling
center, only to then buy a replacement that would have the same life cycle. This subjective
orientation was characterized by interviewees as one that lacked a desire to fix or refurbish old
items, accumulate possessions or build collections. This included family heirlooms or other
valuable objects acquired through inheritance or other transfers of generational wealth. Both
explanations and their correlations with one another will be discussed the following sections.
“Millennials” and the Local Market: Taste and Class
Four participants whose primary source of income came from their antique businesses, all
baby boomers, had each acknowledged that tastes had changed with the new population of
consumers. Preferences had shifted away from old antiques and toward European, mid-century
modern designed furniture, stark industrial aesthetics, and other items, such as vintage clothing
and assorted objects with 20th century nostalgic value. The latter classification included old
technology and pop culture collectibles.

140

Home décor as a category was particularly significant, as furniture sets for bedrooms,
kitchens, and dining rooms had once been staple commodities for dealers who sourced these
pieces from house cleanouts for very small initial investments and yielded high returns. As tastes
and need had morphed, some dealers understood that they had to respond by shifting their
behaviors. Steve, a long-time trader on the secondary market who owned a popular shop
acknowledged this, saying “guys like myself have to change their buying habits.” This is
something he actively tried to do, by stocking more mid-century modern home fashions, popculture collectibles, rock and roll memorabilia, and expanding his vinyl record section.
This change of tastes noted by participants was apparent to me by the prevalence of these
items in the shops and flea markets that I had visited. In one Jersey Shore town, there was an
entire store dedicated to the mid-century modern aesthetic that was right around the corner from
a larger antique “emporium” (where I observed and recruited participants) that also sold pieces
from that category. I met individuals who sold from these categories, such as Lamont, a younger
dealer in his late 30s who used Instagram to sell mid-century modern furniture, home décor, and
other objects from that period. Another vendor, Bruce, who was in his early 30s, scoured the flea
markets to acquire stock, which also consisted of mid-century pieces. Trash and Treasure TV has
portrayed this shift as a larger trend beyond New Jersey. For instance, objects in mid-century
modern styles and those possessing an industrial aesthetic were often “upcycled” (the process of
repurposing, recycling, or restoring objects for resale) on Flea Market Flip.
Although money had been diverted from the formal antiques market to trade in midcentury modern and industrial design, it had also gone into the pop-culture collectibles and
memorabilia market, which long-time dealer, Oscar, said can be “for the very wealthy.” This is
because some of these objects have commanded extremely high prices. In our conversation,

141

Oscar referenced objects related to the popular Pokémon card game as being very expensive.
This was an accurate statement. For example, in 2016, a single card, the “Pikachu Illustrator”
fetched $54,970 at auction (Whitten, 2016). Even though none of the pop culture collectors I met
had items of this order, such prices were not an anomaly, as coveted objects across the collectible
categories have the potential to be highly valued. In my sample, five of the people interviewed
who were aged 30 and under were in the pop-culture collectibles market. Four out of the five
were in paired couples. One couple, Jan and Pete, had gotten married shortly after our
conversation. They were the producers of a long running and popular web series referred to by
their fans as “the American Pickers of toys and collectibles.”
On their program, they are shown driving throughout the state of New Jersey and
scouring toy stores, trade shows, second hand shops, flea markets, yard sales and other sites to
buy objects for their collection. The difference between them and TV portrayals on American
Pickers is that Pete and Jan are primarily collectors who rarely part with anything. Therefore, the
premise of reselling is not a part of their show. With a middle-class budget to fund their program
and hobby, they had a very large collection that they had to pare down after marrying and
moving into their new home. This decision was made due to a lack of storage space and because
they wanted to offset the cost of their wedding. Additionally, their objects were higher-value,
since they preferred their collectibles “mint-in-box” (which means in top condition and still in
the original packaging). They have worked to find bargains and expressed that it was important
to pay “fair” prices. To them such gestures signified acts of good faith meant to create and
promote the close-knit community spirit that was established among the toy and collectible
enthusiasts in their extended network.

142

At the same time, there are those in the pop culture collectables market who did not
privilege the objects that were in the most pristine condition. Couple Rich and Dana, who
introduced me to Pete and Jan, were the operators of a toy and collectibles shop in the Country
Village Flea Market. They corroborated Jan and Pete’s portrayal of how people interested in
pop-culture toys and collectibles tended to relate to one another as friends or associates, and kept
front and center their needs as fellow humans. Rich and Dana teamed up and combed the flea
markets, swap meets, yard sales, and cans of garbage to acquire things for their collections and
their shop. Their philosophy was that they wanted to have something in their store for every
price bracket. Rich explained that this was not just about being able to cater to a wide variety of
consumers. He specifically noted that parents who did not have a lot of money should not have to
spend excessively on toys (which in better condition would be a collector’s item, and therefore
priced higher) that their child may not take care of. In addition, while condition was important,
both he and Dana were not preoccupied with mint-in-box items for their own accumulation.
Notably, their financial situation was different than Pete and Jan’s. Rich and Dana were
positioned as more working class than middle class. Additionally, Dana explicitly discussed her
childhood coming from a poor background and how that influenced her to become a picker:
When I was little … I was still embarrassed [by having second-hand clothes, toys,
and things]… but I grew up in poverty. I always thought my mom. I didn’t know she
didn’t resell. She just brought it home and decorated our house with it. So I didn’t see
the value in the resale process until I got older, and I realized, ‘oh my, gosh! I can sell
this stuff? I can... make money?’
Their class status and comments suggested that there could have been a correlation between their
social position, taste preferences, and perspectives on objects that many others might have
considered to be garbage (Bourdieu, 1984). Dana and Rich, in juxtaposition to Pete and Jan (who
almost exclusively collected mint-condition objects), exemplified the range of social classes of
the people who participated in the local pop-culture collectibles secondary market.

143

As shown in this section, the demographic shifts in the population had moved taste
culture away from the antiques market and traditional staples, such as large oak dining room and
bedroom sets, and toward mid-century modern aesthetics and the pop culture collectibles that
were nostalgic to younger generations. This meant that collecting as hobby and the antiques
market were not in a process of death, but one of transformation. In this state of change, the
interest in some categories or means of accumulation was dying along with the older generations
who collected in specific subject areas (e.g. stamp collecting and coins). However, people still
fashioned their spaces with old things, or built collections in ways that were underpinned by
affection for the objects and the communities that desired them.
Some participants noted that trends over time had been cyclical, and that the categories
that have lost collectors will eventually regain them. Regardless, the emergence of consumer
markets composed of younger generations had occurred within the context of mass production
and consumerism, which were always-already in their influence on material culture. The next
section will discuss the cultural practices of disposability encouraged by what has been described
as the “throw-away society.” These social virtues will be connected to the larger trends of the
general downturn in particular subject areas and categories of the antiques market, and the
corresponding generational shifts in tastes.
Consumption and the “Throw-Away Society”
The second explanation given by long-term collectors and dealers for the downturn in the
antiques market is the cultural practice of disposability. Multiple participants commented on the
impact that the mass production of inexpensive objects, intended for replacement at the end of
their “lifespan,” had on the development of a “throw-away society.” Oscar felt strongly about
this development and its impact on the secondary market, particularly in regard to antiques:

144

… living in a historical neighborhood I always was amazed at the craftsmanship and the
workmanship. You know I used to custom make furniture, and when I used to touch a
piece of wood, and see how these guys - you know they have a saying - “those were the
days when men were steel and tools were wood.” You know how they did it with hand
tools was amazing, so I had a great appreciation for things from that period. Now, since
the late 60s and early 70s everything is disposable. That’s one of the things we’re finding
as antique dealers. We go out looking for stuff, forgetting that the generation that’s out
there that’s 40 and 50 years old - the stuff they were buying was made during that period
when they started making disposable crap. So they don’t have really anything that’s
worth anything, it’s all garbage - that’s 50 years already!
Here, Oscar pointed out how long disposable objects have been present on the consumer market.
To him, the integration of these items into the lives of consumers had shaped people’s
relationships with the various things they used in everyday life that in the past were not
necessarily understood as “disposable.” Although he named Generation Xers (those born
between 1965 and 1981),42 Oscar saw even younger generations as most affected by the cultural
practices of disposability. On this matter he declared, “They want nothing. Most of the young
kids today, especially the Millennials, collect nothing.”43
Oscar’s expert perspective was one laden with cynicism in regard to what younger
generations do or do not see as valuable. Yet, his assertion that younger people do not collect
was not completely true. As Steve noted, it is just that “a small percentage of young people are
interested in the old antiques,” and vendors like him had to change their buying habits if they
wanted to engage younger market segments. This is because “people that [grew] up in the
computer age [are] now maybe in their 20s or early 30s, [and are] collecting video game stuff,
and Pac Man and things from their childhood.” Other data gathered through my interviews
supported Steve’s statement, including comments made by vendors Rich and Dana, their friend
42

https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2014/03/here-is-when-each-generation-begins-and-ends-accordingto-facts/359589/

43

Millennials are those born between 1982 and 2004.

145

Hank (a young veteran of the secondary market) and collectors Jan and Pete. However, what
Oscar, Colonel Mark, and others who complained about the changing tastes of millennials were
concerned with was a perception that younger people lacked the desire to keep the things that
were being left behind by previous generations who were dying off.
Kenny blatantly said that he had seen “things which may have been in [a] family for 200
years that this generation [didn’t] want … The heirs to whoever said ‘I don’t want this old crap’
and you look and say, ‘this isn’t old crap, its old, but it’s not crap.’” Colonel Mark’s tone was
softer, and offered a sociocultural assessment of why younger generations may not have wanted
to collect antiques and other objects:
… It’s the lifestyle of the kids. Ya know, they don’t go and get a job anymore in General
Motors and they’re there their whole life. Maybe they work here for two years, three
years over here, and they’re not working in the same locale. They might get shipped
across the country, moving a lot. Kids aren’t driving much anymore. They want
microunits now, these small units, and they’re minimalists, ya know, they want to travel
and look at the world. They don’t want to be caretaker of the stuff, but they want to
see it. They have an interest in looking at it, but they want to look at it in museums.
Oscar also connected the downturn in the antiques trade and aspects of the secondary market to
larger social trends related to job security and frequent moves. He made a similar argument about
why young people did not want to accumulate things:
Nothing is stable anymore. Everything is transient. You get on a job, and you don’t go on
with the idea that you are going to stay there until you retire like our parents and
grandparents who were on the job for forty or fifty years. Today you’re lucky if you get
four years out of a job until it downsizes, moves, or merges … Now, we have six
apartments above the store. I never see a moving truck, ever! They buy Ikea and
abandon it. They just leave it! We end up throwing it out! It’s cheaper than hiring a
moving truck!
His response toward those he understood as the “Millennials” was based on his perception of the
lifestyles of contemporary young people. This view was formed through what he saw as a
negative change in social and cultural conditions that he thought had occurred through material

146

culture. For example, over time, Oscar saw things such as sterling silverware sets that were
produced by designing houses such as Tiffany and ornate silver candlesticks made in Russia sent
to the recycling smelter.
Without explicitly expressing it, these explanations implicated global capitalism in these
shifts in the local secondary market and larger antiques trade. The industrial manufacture of
goods using inexpensive labor had made everyday things affordable enough to replace rather
than repair them once they have worn out. In addition, the neoliberal arrangement privileged
flexibility. This, as pointed out by Oscar and Colonel Mark, implored subjects to accept the
demands placed upon them to be increasingly mobile. The material culture of disposable
consumption combined with the economic recession and changes in taste had lowered demand,
and consequently, the value of objects in many categories of the antiques market. These
circumstances had made it more permissible to dispose of unnecessary things. These unwanted
objects included those that did not fit into the practical needs or aesthetic tastes of younger
generations of secondary market consumers. There is little demand for high-end flatware and
silver candlesticks due to a lack of need and a change in taste. Having little worth, people discard
these objects, along with, for example, broken toasters, obsolete technology such as VCRs, and
furniture from IKEA.
As Stephanie Foote and Elizabeth Mazzolini (2012) have reminded us, “garbage” is not
an objective thing, but a subjective category. In the context discussed here, unwanted objects
were the equivalent of refuse. “Worth” was contingent on how much money an item can
command on the open market, or that item was destined for the landfill. People are also subject
to such rendering under neoliberal or control society rationales. This occurs when these
mentalities (that underpin social relations) allow people to be considered as disposable as trash.

147

Those who are not creating value as productive human capital and are unable to adapt to the new
political economy as it unfolds lose their worth until they are classified as garbage and
essentially disposed of. This mode of governance is what cultural critic Henry Giroux has called
a “biopolitics of disposability,” a Foucauldian concept that media scholar Laurie Ouellette
(2017) has applied to the analysis of reality television programs she called “dispossession TV.”
By this she meant a broad category of programs focused on “recessionary boom businesses,”
such as the “predatory lending, repossession, and foreclosure industries.” Storage Wars and
Pawn Stars are two Trash and Treasure TV programs that could be counted among them.
Additionally, in my field observations I saw those who may have fit into the categories of people
considered “disposable,” which will be discussed in the next section.
As I have shown above, within a post-recession context, demographic shifts had a strong
impact on the local secondary market by diverting interest and money away from the trade of
traditional antiques, and toward pop-culture collectibles and mid-century vintage decor.
Moreover, the greater economic arrangement encouraged people to downscale their lifestyles by
owning fewer possessions and living in smaller spaces. These factors, along with cultural
rationales of disposability shaped perspectives on the value of what were once desirable objects,
and the “worth” of people who participate in constituting our market economy. In the final
section of this chapter, I will illustrate in greater detail how local secondary markets are
performed under the cultural and socioeconomic conditions discussed thus far.
Economy and Affect: Performing the Local Secondary Market
Many people I spoke with commented on the significance of socioeconomic and cultural
phenomena related to the recessions of the early 2000s. For instance, Kenny, the owner of two
large and successful antique shops observed that when the Great Recession hit, people sold

148

things based on a perception that they were in financial jeopardy or on the verge of it. He was
skeptical that the Great Recession had a devastating impact on the economy or people’s lives in
general, and thought it was overblown in the media. However, he still saw this trend among
people who felt that they were on the verge of financial peril. On this he commented:
I do think in some respect that the recession, if you want to call it that, got some people
nervous. They thought “we’re gonna run out of money, we’re gonna lose our house, my
jobs gonna get lost” and they sold whatever it may be, whether it was an antique or a car.
Oh we’ve got that storage unit? Get rid of it. You know? And I think what happened is
that it scared people that it’s the end of the world, and that they’re going to be waiting in
line for a slice of bread for three hours. You know? And I think what happened was, well,
it’s a chain reaction they get nervous and somebody else went into foreclosure, and they
look and say oh my God my mortgage is $1400 a month and if I lose my job what are we
gonna do? But you know, I think it just scared people into doing what they didn’t need to
do.
Regardless of his views on the economic downturn, Kenny noted that people sold their
possessions when they felt in financial danger. They also did so as a way to make their postretirement years more comfortable, since children often did not want their parents’ things. The
phenomenon of younger generations having little interest in inheriting their parents' or
grandparents' prized objects (no matter how valuable in terms of money or sentiment) was
mentioned in multiple interviews, and was explained in terms of generational differences.
Contemporary young people are living much more transient lifestyles than previous generations,
due in no small part to economic conditions demanding that they “flexibly” change jobs and
geographically relocate often, typically into tiny apartments that cannot accommodate numerous
personal effects.
However, Kenny’s perspective on the Great Recession was not shared by everyone and
my interviews revealed diverse perspectives. Oscar, a serious, intense, but good natured man
who owned a very profitable shop on the Jersey Shore described poverty trends that he had been
seeing over the recent years. He noted that there were many living in the area that had difficulty

149

keeping their heads above water. In our interview, he said, “people are selling their personal
goods just to survive. I mean, people are selling things just to buy food … and I see [this]
because I walk around the flea markets and I talk to all [kinds of people].” While interviewees
had differing ideas about why people were selling their objects, there was a common belief that
people were selling much more since the Great Recession. Anthony, a higher-level dealer
mentioned earlier, thought it was possible that his house cleanout business had picked up
momentum over time due to people needing money. I also met Evelyn, a middle-aged white
woman selling knick-knacks, Christmas and Halloween decorations, books, and children’s toys
that she and her husband Vijay acquired while cleaning out homes that he sold through his real
estate business. She said that they had more opportunities due to the downturn and the
corresponding upswing in home foreclosures, along with the voluntary and involuntary scaling
down in people’s lifestyles.
The tepid economic climate regarding wages, employment opportunities, and social
welfare assistance for the working class has also prompted people to become secondary market
entrepreneurs as an alternative to finding work in the formal marketplace. Lower middle class
people depended on these sites to survive day-to-day, particularly in terms of paying the rent or
mortgage, or at the very least, to supplement their incomes. Given the whittling down of access
to pensions and the diminishment of the social safety net that have occurred since the 1980s, this
was especially the case for older people, such as those who were at or approaching retirement
age. For instance, Glenn, a dealer in his early 60s, decided to work full time in his business
selling pop culture memorabilia and used records after his job at a factory became unstable
following the Great Recession. He sold at flea markets, rock-and-roll collectibles shows and
through platforms such as eBay and Amazon. His wife, who was unable to work due to health

150

issues, packed and shipped their online orders. It was with her help that they were able to keep
up with sales as their enterprise expanded. In another example, vendors Jeff and Paula - retirees
who lived on a fixed income - found that their business helped them substantially when they had
to pay a very expensive and unexpected debt. In their situation, their electrical provider had been
billing them inaccurately, charging them monthly less than was owed. When the utility company
informed them of the actual amount due, their vintage shop at the flea market helped keep their
household afloat.
I also encountered younger people who used the secondary market as a means of
generating an income. Despite both being white and college educated, Matt and Amy were in
their early thirties, under-employed and among the working poor at the Jersey Shore. As
relatively new vendors, they had been buying and selling for a little over six months at the time
of our interview. During my conversation with Matt at Farmingswood Flea Market, we sat in his
and Amy’s dilapidated recreational vehicle surrounded by piles of used and broken toys, old
knick-knacks, and boxes of random objects. The entire back of the vehicle was filled with 40 old
bicycles. Some of them were complete and in acceptable condition, while others were missing
parts and rusty. They told me that they were going to rehabilitate and resell the bikes, and that
they had plans to open a small used bicycle shop at the Country Village Flea Market, where
many of the participants in this study bought and sold.
Prior to vending at flea markets, they had used the secondary market to sell homemade
jewelry that Amy made. However, it was Matt who wanted to pursue working at the flea market
full time, as he saw value in objects that are often written off as mere garbage. In our discussion,
he raised the instructional capacities of RTV and explained that Storage Wars could teach people
what they could sell on the secondary market, particularly in terms of lower end objects. He

151

noted that the TV character “Barry,” who is dubbed on the show as “The Collector,” was known
for “kicking [less valuable] things over and saying that ‘it’s all junk.’” Illustrating how one
man's trash is another man's treasure, Matt explained:
Everything he’s kicking over is my merchandise. I’m watching him kick over 10 dollars,
five dollars, and see how like the other guy is there with his son, and he’s like ‘here’s five
dollars, here’s five dollars.’ You need to know. You don’t want the gold to slip through
your fingers, but you need to understand the value of the other stuff or it doesn’t work.
Matt likened his practice of buying and selling lower-end objects to those of media mogul Ted
Turner, who he admired for recognizing the potential and therefore the value of “garbage.” He
explained that Turner would purchase failing radio stations, ultra high-frequency TV
broadcasters, and professional wrestling leagues, and rehabilitate those businesses to make them
profitable.
Matt’s sourcing strategy for his flea market business entailed browsing sections
dominated by the “bottom feeders” who were employed to perform house cleanouts. Then he
located individual pieces and boxed items that piqued his interest. After that he would point at
full tables and declare to the vendor that he was willing to buy all of the things on and/or around
them for a lump sum. On the day of our interview, he paid $30 for several tables of things that
were “what [the bottom feeders] bought last week and didn’t sell.” Since the vendors would have
had to pay to dispose of the objects, or as Matt pointed out “rent more tables or a storage unit,”
they normally accepted his offers, as they had done that day. He appreciated his opportunities to
buy things for “pennies on the dollar,” and insisted that by purchasing that way, it was possible
to sell things for .50 cents or $1.00 and “no matter what, you are going to make your money
back.” Demonstrating that there is a market for everything and that not all buyers are concerned
with making huge profits (in contrast to the kinds of buyers shown on TV), Matt summed up his

152

perspective by saying that the term “garbage” just meant that the objects were “undervalued,”
and they were merely an “unsorted resource.”
Amy told me that she reluctantly agreed to work at the flea market full time, which was
evident in her tone and demeanor, even as she tried to be supportive of Matt. He believed these
items could sell for very low prices and still allow him to generate profits, and she chose to
remain hopeful that his business model would be successful. For William, a Caucasian man in
his late 40s, hope was nearly all he had left. After losing his job due to diabetes-related health
conditions, he began selling his personal possessions at the flea market as a way to supplement
his meager monthly Social Security/disability benefits. When we discussed the TV shows,
William said that he was influenced by them, and used to look for deals on objects while he was
at the flea market to sell at his own table, but stopped doing that when he realized that it was not
lucrative enough. By the time I had met him, it was several years after his diagnosis and he was
attempting to get rid of the last of his personal property in order to raise funds to move to
Florida. William had hoped to take advantage of the lower cost of living in that state and live
with his aging mother to care for her and save money on his day-to-day expenses. In our
conversation, it became clear that if it were not for his family support system, his quality of life
would further diminish under the current economic conditions.
These accounts, along with the markers of poverty that I personally witnessed in my field
work among flea market participants, highlighted the fact that secondary markets were not only
ways to try to make a weekly living but, for many, ways to literally survive. In New Jersey over
the past decade or so, the suburban homeless populations were relegated to living in
encampments located in wooded areas, or concentrated in more urban locations such as in the
town of Asbury Park. That made the intensity of the regional poverty relatively invisible. I saw

153

people buying used cans and dented boxes of food, used underwear and well worn shoes, or
other castoff goods that are unwanted by most people but essential for the daily survival of
America's growing numbers of poor. William and others I met and observed represented the
“disposable” classes of people who have been cast off as “garbage” into the informal flea-market
economy along with the objects that surround them.
This was the aspect of the secondary markets that was not shown on the Trash and
Treasure TV shows, but cannot be ignored, particularly as people are expected to become
increasingly self reliant in the neoliberal economic landscape. Although people across the
spectrum of social identities were affected by the economy and used the secondary market for
daily survival and a main source of consumption, it was clear from visual observation that there
were many people of minoritized racial and ethnic groups that frequented the Farmingswood and
Scotlandville flea markets.44 Because the participation of minoritized and lower income people
in the antiques business was low, my main contact with people of color was at the flea markets,
where people bought and sold objects that more middle class individuals might identify as
garbage.
Martin, a Latino in his mid 40s who sold at Farmingswood, was one of the bigger dealers
who catered to working class and poor immigrant and minority population. He procured his
stock from storage unit auctions where he tried to win lockers that contained business supplies

44

Scotandville is a flea market I had frequented over time, but visited once while conducting research. This market
was much larger than Farmingswood and the Country Village and attracted a large cross-section of people that
included working-class and poor people. Many of these people from the lower-working classes were vendors and
patrons. During my observation, I saw many families who had set up tables to sell their personal things (mostly
mothers with their children).

154

and equipment or antiques and collectibles, which were lucrative categories. He was a regular
fixture at Farmingswood. His black converted jitney-style bus was packed with boxes and loose
items and parked behind his tables in the same aisle and space always in the same aisle and
space. Martin’s spot normally encompassed six to ten tables, covered in merchandise that ranged
from stacks of paper, bundles of pens, piles of notebooks, boxes of post-it notes, paperclips and
rubber bands from defunct companies of all types, to used clothes, shoes, and housewares, such
as small appliances, cutlery, dishware, and drinking glasses. When he would acquire a locker that
included more valuable items he would place those for sale too. At the time of our interview he
had a vintage jacket from an outlaw motorcycle club. Such objects commanded high prices. But,
unlike other entrepreneurs, he did not sell the rest to other vendors, donate it to a charitable
organization for a tax break, or pay someone to take it to a dump. He took those down-market
objects, in his words, “junk and clothes,” and put it out “for the poor people,” such as “the
Haitians” who limited their spending to 50 cents or $1.00 per item.
While discussing his buying practices, I asked Martin if the economy had any influence
on his business. He replied “of course,” and referred to storage units he had acquired containing
a previous owner’s clothes, shoes, and housewares. He continued: “lots of people are losing their
shit, and there’s lots to go around. I can buy a 40 foot storage locker for five dollars!” According
to other informants, competition for units with antiques and collectibles was high, which drove
the prices up. The types of lower-value units that Martin bought for his lower-income customers
were abundant, although less desirable to those searching for high-ticket items, which made them
an affordable source for acquiring merchandise.
This exchange with Martin illuminated a business practice that was not shown on RTV
programs such as Storage Wars. He did not place high importance on finding “treasures” for

155

collectors and their expendable incomes. Rather, value was placed on winning bids for storage
units that were filled with basic goods to be sold to ordinary people who could not afford to pay
full price for everyday items. These experiences were a far cry from those that were mostly
shown on Trash and Treasure TV. On the programs, pickers were predominantly collectors and
dealers who were largely white, middle class, baby boomers – a demographic that benefited from
a robust post-war economy that had provided opportunities for economic stability and the
acquisition of a middle class lifestyle that did not require incurring overwhelming debt. My
research revealed that while this latter group was present and active in secondary markets, many
participants were those of the lower working classes and the poor who were not interested in
antiques and collectibles. These people composed market segments in the broader economy that
were left out of the Trash and TV narrative and were therefore further out of the range of RTV’s
interpellative power.
Importantly, the performance of the market was not entirely informed by competitive
entrepreneurialism and the desire for profit. At the most basic level, informal secondary markets
allowed for flexibility in how goods and services were exchanged that the formal sector does not.
Individuals were able to negotiate prices without being governed by a policy determining if,
and/or how business can be conducted. Frequently, participants reported interactions in which
they sold an item for a lower price because of how strongly the buyer felt about the object,
specifically in terms of their mutual appreciation for the subject matter, content, aesthetics, or
another quality. This was common among the various collector communities represented in the
sample which ranged from those who appreciated old antiques (glass, postcards, etc.) to those
who accumulated contemporary popular culture collectibles (comic-books and rock and roll
memorabilia).

156

In my interview with Rich and Dana, they discussed a well-known member of the popculture collectibles community who had a hoard of toys and memorabilia on his property.
Reportedly he had so many items that they spilled out of his house and were scattered around the
surrounding area. Having the opportunity to “pick” through his amassment was something many
people wanted to do but never had the opportunity. Eventually, Rich and Dana were invited to
his home. Regarding that visit, Rich said that they “would pick a hundred things, and he would
just, say in that hundred things there were four things that he cared about enough to put a price
on.” Because they shared a passion for the same pop culture categories, the rest of what they
selected was given to them free of charge. This manner of relating to one another was
occasionally shown on Trash and Treasure TV, and Rich and Dana compared their experience to
an episode of American Pickers. However, on RTV such interactions are folded into the business
practices that are meant to build strong relationships for the purpose of establishing ties for
future dealings, as opposed to a pure love for the objects.
At times, connections between people on the secondary market were made through the
objects and did not involve a mutual interest in collecting areas, but other affective bonds
instead. Michael, Country Village Flea Market vendor and social media manager, described an
interaction he had with a customer who walked into his shop one day to make a purchase:
I had a guy come in, a rough looking biker guy, sorta grumpy. He’s looking for a gift for
his daughter, and he happened to pick up this little bottle of perfume that I actually found
in the corner of a couch that I trash picked. I actually had a dream the night before that
there was a diamond ring in the couch. There was no diamond ring but there was this
bottle of perfume … He asked me to open up the bottle. I opened it up and he has tears in
his face. He says “oh my god, that’s the smell of my grandmother whose been dead
since I’ve been a kid.” Again, they stopped making this perfume in 1961. So I’m
basically hugging this biker guy in here with tears, both of us. He’s like “how much do
you want for it?” I’m like, “dude, just take it.” He’s like “aren’t you here to sell.” I’m like
“no, I am a karma guy.” Like, he was meant to have that.

157

In another story, a woman shopping in his store found a lunchbox that caught her eye. Upon
further inspection, she found a piece of tape with the name of her childhood sweetheart written
on it and attached inside. She revealed that they dated through high school, and then he was
drafted and killed in the Vietnam War. After an emotional moment, the shopper offered Michael
$1,000 for the lunchbox. He turned her down and then gave her the item for free. Both of
Michael’s accounts show how money could be considered secondary to the human relationships
at work in the performance of the market.
Other participants also deviated from the profit-oriented motivations most prominent on
Trash and Treasure TV. For instance, at Farmingswood I met dealers Lou and Fran, a middleaged couple who had played supporting roles on a short-lived RTV program on TruTV. They
facilitated “estate sales,” operated an antiques and collectibles “showroom” and occasionally
sold at flea markets.45 As serious traders on the secondary market, they not only had “flea-market
grade” items (those less valuable), but also higher-end objects, some with provenance. For
example, the day I met them, they had an early 20th century Chinese ornamental jade bowl that
they claimed to be from the estate of someone from the Modell family (relatives of the sports
magnate Art Modell).
One of Lou and Fran’s flea selling techniques I observed at the flea market included
progressively dropping the prices on objects each hour by a certain percentage before they
departed. After taking 25%, then 50% and 75% off, they announced that everything left on their
tables was available to be taken for free. Lou noted that on one hand, this served the purpose
invigorating sales, and lessened the amount of unsold stock they needed to transport back home.
Although on the other hand, giving things away for free allowed shoppers without money to have
45

After someone dies, estate companies appraise, price, and sell objects on behalf of the deceased person’s family.
Often, this happens at the deceased’s home.

158

the objects they desired. Since they had not been to Farmingswood prior, and had discussed not
returning, this was not driven purely by business imperatives. Lou and Fran truly enjoyed seeing
people excited when getting something they wanted without having to pay.
Participants also reported that they had benefited from the abandonment of objects. For
instance, pop-culture collector and dealer Rich recalled a time when he procured a BMX bicycle
he wanted that was in good condition that a vendor left at a flea market. These practices are in
direct contradiction with neoliberal capitalist priorities as they were presented on Trash and
Treasure TV and throughout culture and society. RTV programs about the secondary market
largely encouraged profiting from objects rather than giving them away. Outside of a few
examples from Storage Wars, the shows also did not focus on the circulation of “disposable”
everyday items (such as kitchenware, toys, and even bicycles) that the formal market desires to
produce and distribute as mass-consumed commodities. The entrenched norms and values behind
giving things away and the recycling and reuse of objects are also the foundation for a stage that
can be constructed for the performance of alternative economies. Such conditions demonstrated
the limits to the power of the televisual dispositif, as it is already at odds with an established
informal secondary-market culture. At the same time, these cultural phenomena justified the
televisual dispositif as necessary because of the social unruliness of secondary markets.
However, the televisual dispositif may not be a suitable strategy of governmentality for
producing subjects to perform markets in the post-Recession economy. Beyond the skepticism
about the “realism” of Trash and Treasure TV, RTV assumed a particular subject for
interpellation. These ideal subjects were those that could relate to and develop middle-class
sensibilities about labor and the material culture of consumption. Many people I encountered in
my fieldwork did not fit this audience profile. These conditions limited the range and power of

159

the televisual dispositif in its circulation of Trash and Treasure TV and ability to form audiences,
particularly among those who are more concerned with survival than attempting to trade in
antiques and collectibles. These groups included people such as William, or those of the large
immigrant population served by Martin. In this, we can see how theories of governmentality
were complicated by the economic conditions of the post-recession environment, as the era of
neoliberalism has appeared to have eclipsed while we moved into a new age of austerity and
sociopolitical organization. This will be elaborated upon in Chapter 6.
Conclusion
In this chapter we discussed the hierarchy of sellers, buyers, and the objects they
circulated in the secondary markets of Central New Jersey, specifically at the Jersey Shore. The
ethnographic details provided in this chapter of daily life in the secondary market “junk” scene
illustrated very different realities than those depicted in the Trash and Treasure TV genre, where
“pickers” and “dealers” are mainly white, middle class males who make a good living
discovering “treasure” from “trash.” What the Trash and Treasure TV subgenre does not show is
the way that social class and level of economic stability organized the secondary market, as those
with the most resources could absorb the most risk and made the most money. Because of this,
labor hierarchies existed, much like in the formal sector. This ran contrary to the portrayals of the
classic entrepreneur on Trash and Treasure TV, who is in complete control of his own destiny.
Although there is a structural element to secondary markets that is derivative of the
formal capitalist system and relationships are formed on economic premises, the people who
comprise the communities who buy and sell in these sites also have social bonds that run deeper
than the commercial exchanges they enact with one another. This was particularly evident among
collector networks that have forged friendships beyond the common interest in a category of

160

objects. Affective ties also emerged between unacquainted buyers and sellers, such as in
Michael’s accounts. He turned down considerable sums of money due to connections made with
customers that pivoted on nostalgia and shared understandings of the human experience as they
were attached to objects in his shop. While Mike and Frank of American Pickers have made
connections with people on their show, their expressed focus on forging ties was for the purpose
of making present or future deals. This created the appearance that they are merely adding people
to their Rolodex and not building heartfelt relationships that went beyond the profit motive.
Moreover, this chapter addressed the downturn in the antiques and collectibles market.
This dip in the trade impacted many areas of merchandise due to the effect of various economic
recessions on people’s buying power, changes in the consumer market as younger generations
become dominant drivers of the economy and an intensifying culture of disposability. From there
I addressed the ways that gender, race and class were at work in the constitution of secondary
markets, in terms of social relations and market performance. Finally, this chapter attempted to
illuminate the desperation and poverty of many people who participate in the secondary markets,
a glaring matter that Trash and Treasure TV has ignored. While it was clear that the status of the
antiques trade overall and in New Jersey was changing due to economic and demographic shifts
affecting consumer choices and taste culture, this has not happened in a sociocultural vacuum.
Historical and contemporary inequalities were a part of how the market was ordered and
performed.

161

Chapter 6
Into the Dustbin: Conclusions, Online Markets, Future Research, and Historical Considerations
This dissertation theorized Trash and Treasure TV (a term I have coined) as a part of the
RTV televisual dispositif that works to direct people toward performing secondary markets
according to mentalities associated with neoliberalism and the social arrangements of control
societies (Bratich, 2006, 2007, 2009; Deleuze, 1995; Foucault, 1997; Hay, 2010; Jenkins, 2015;
Ouellette, 2017 Oullette & Hay, 2008). On the programs I analyzed, these shows taught people
how to “pick” in peer-to-peer settings (American Pickers), buy and sell at flea markets (Flea
Market Flip), or bid at auctions (Storage Wars). The cast members provided direct instruction
and modeled practices that encouraged individualistic entrepreneurialism and competition
(Ouellette & Hay, 2008; Hay, 2010). In this, they imparted lessons in cognitive and affective
labor related to tasks such as seeking out objects, bargaining in the purchase or sale of items,
determining authenticity, and identifying new consumers and markets (Berardi, 2009; Hardt,
1999; Wissinger, 2007). Through its depiction of market competitiveness and the flexibility of
labor practices and conditions, Trash and Treasure TV programs also encouraged forms of
cooperation reminiscent of contemporary employment conditions (Bratich, 2009).
Throughout these shows, aesthetic guidance (Bennett, 2011) was given on how to select
and/or create marketable items that fell within the boundaries of taste cultures, such as “shabby
chic,” industrial design, and mid-century modern styles for secondary market consumption. Most
central was the profit motive. This was most prominently featured on programs across the Trash
and Treasure subgenre during segments when the expenditures and anticipated gains of the cast
members or contestants are tallied. The results were then used to determine the “winners” and
“losers.” As a function of the RTV televisual dispositif, Trash and Treasure TV reinforced and

162

justified discourses of power and transmitted affects meant to influence and stimulate viewers to
join the secondary market. In their subjectification, people were called upon to regulate their
conduct and feelings according to the desires and needs of dominant institutions (Berardi, 2009;
Coté, 2011; Deleuze, 1995, 1997, 2006; Foucault, 1990, 1997).
Trash and Treasure TV’s reach extended into multiple areas of society and culture. For
instance, the subgenre made an intervention into the issues of unemployment and
underemployment by presenting alternative ways to make money. It also addressed the crisis of
masculinity by modeling aggressive, competitive “male” breadwinning techniques. Additionally,
it was concerned with the economic health of the state, as the small enterprises started by those
inspired by RTV would ideally grow, formalize, and pay taxes. At the same time, it was aimed at
invigorating the private sector through the creation of new markets in terms of secondary-market
consumerism, and as a result of new business-to-business transactions generated through the
costs associated with conducting commercial exchanges (such as paying for shipping objects
through private carriers, rent, and other expenses).
Trash and Treasure TV also provided solutions for rectifying the excesses of consumer
capitalism by managing the “waste” generated through production and consumption at the
individual and social levels. Overall, it had the capacity to train people how to cooperate and
compete in the brave new political economy, which included skills in the appropriation of
objects and style. I argue that by coordinating and limiting the ethics and affective dimensions of
secondary markets, these shows could close off potential avenues leading toward alternative
economic relationships based on communitarian egalitarianism (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham,
2015). As a result, people’s productive power would continue to be informed and redirected by
capitalism, specifically in the spirit of neoliberalism and the new political economy, which

163

values self-reliance, individualism, and the accumulation of profit (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham,
2015).
In researching these programs and their circulation among secondary market participants,
I first executed a textual analysis of the respective first seasons of American Pickers, Storage
Wars, and Flea Market Flip. Then I observed people buying and selling at flea markets, antique
stores, collectors’ club meetings and a pawn shop. Additionally, I conducted interviews with 44
people who had regularly participated in secondary market sites and were familiar with the
specific shows featured in this study. The data and insights gathered through those efforts
composed the chapters of this dissertation. The related findings and contributions made to media
studies, among other areas, will be summarized in the next section. Following that, there will be
a discussion of how the participants performed the secondary market using digital technologies,
and the potential that such online activities have to serve as site for future research. This chapter
will then close with some perspectives on how neoliberalism, RTV, and governmentality can be
viewed through a historical lens.
Conclusions: Summary of the Research Findings and Contributions
In Chapters 1 and 2, I introduced Trash and Treasure TV and situated it historically,
socially, and culturally as a media product that emerged in the wake of the Great Recession, at
the exact moment when people needed ideas for how to cope with their deteriorating economic
reality. This was done, in part, by elaborating on how scholars over time have theorized on the
ways that popular culture and media have operated as technologies of governance. The literature
review included the critiques of media industries and the production of mass culture that began
in the early 20th century (Barber, 1995, 2007; Horkheimer & Adorno, 2006), the modes of
analyses concerned with representation and social power that surfaced from the post-war period

164

(Fiske, 1992; Hall 1980, 1981, 1982), and finally those theorizations from the early 21st century
that argued how media was a pedagogical tool that intervened in reality for audiences to
internalize the models, lessons, norms and values embedded in the programming (Bratich, 2006,
2007, 2009; Ouellette & Hay, 2008; Sender, 2012; Weber 2009).
Additionally, I explained where the genre began, stylistically, culturally, and socially, by
tracing the lineage of Trash and Treasure TV back to the BBC’s Antiques Roadshow, which
debuted in 1979. During that time, the U.K. experienced an economic downturn as the U.S. had
when Trash and Treasure TV surfaced. However, there is an important distinction to be made
between Antiques Roadshow and the Trash and Treasure TV shows. While the format of
Antiques Roadshow included appraisals, arranging and depicting actual exchanges was not a part
of the program. Beyond assessing the authenticity and determining the monetary worth of
objects, the actual behaviors of buying and selling were central features of Trash and Treasure
TV. British audiences of the late 1970s Antiques Roadshow were encouraged to dig through their
basements, attics, crawlspaces, and closets for heirlooms, keepsakes, and other coveted objects in
order to learn about their background and value. The message was that despite the lack of jobs
and stagnant wages, there might be hidden economic opportunities existing right under one's
nose. In contrast, Trash and Treasure TV viewers have been prompted to look outward toward
flea markets, storage units, and other people’s homes, outbuildings, and garages for things to sell
on the secondary market.
It is from this point that I have argued that at its foundation, RTV is a mode of
“governmentality” (Ouellette & Hay, 2008). As such, the subgenre of Trash and Treasure TV is a
part of a televisual dispositif that provides “techniques of the self” (Foucault, 1988) against
which people are to model their values and behaviors, and learn the necessary skills required to

165

survive or even thrive in the contemporary economic environment. As neoliberal mentalities and
organizational forms have continued to shape social relationships and determine the
commensurate networked and hierarchical arrangements of power, people have been called upon
to take on additional burdens once managed by the government (Brown, 2003; Ferguson, 2007;
Rose, 1996, 1999). In lieu of public job-creation initiatives, vocational training, or other
assistance services provided by the diminishing welfare state, Trash and Treasure TV can bring
audiences inspiration and ideas for generating income through site-specific “how-to” manuals
and emotional stimulation associated with the “treasure hunt.”
In this, RTV programs of this subgenre acted as a Foucauldian technology of governance
as they supply audiences with the appropriate ways to shape their own subjectivities through
ethical frameworks and techne designed for engaging in secondary markets. These included
values such as entrepreneurialism, individualism, and competition. These priorities informed the
application of skills such as conducting appraisals, setting prices, or mastering the management
of affect and emotion. Possessing proficiency in these practices is an advantage over others when
making a deal at a flea market, bidding on a locker at a storage unit auction, or negotiating in a
private setting. These shows also modeled the construction of formal businesses from informal
practices, such as how Mike and Frank’s Antique Archaeology business operated, which
consisted of two brick-and-mortar stores and an ecommerce site.
At the same time, Trash and Treasure TV can be viewed through a Deleuzian lens. To
Deleuze, dispositifs seek to harness and orient people’s affects and productive power as preferred
by the elites in particular places at different historical moments. Similar to my conceptualization
of Trash and Treasure TV, Jenkins (2015) has theorized that American Pickers encouraged the
production of what he called “enterprise-subjects” who roamed the open landscape seeking

166

objects to buy and sell. However, I argue that on American Pickers and the other programs there
was a particular type of economic desire portrayed, which is that of the “formal entrepreneur.” In
other words, the RTV televisual dispositif had two orders that operated through Trash and
Treasure TV. As Jenkins (2015) has also pointed out, the first order is in the presentation of
successful secondary market business models and the transmission of affective stimulation meant
to direct people’s desires toward buying, selling, and fetishizing antiques, collectibles, and other
old and/or used objects. The second order was intended to formalize these practices, which
Jenkins never specifically indicates.
As dispositifs are designed to work under neoliberal state-capitalism, this intervention is
necessary due to the unruliness of real-life informal trade between individuals at private homes,
flea markets, yard sales, and other sites. As examples of unruliness, oftentimes people did not
pay taxes on income from their small enterprises, as they are not registered with the Internal
Revenue Service (I.R.S.). Also, rather than exchanging money, many traded, bartered, and even
gave items away. During these interactions, taxes are not paid. In fact, concerns about taxation
were mentioned by several interviewees. For instance, Glenn, a pop-culture and rock-and-roll
collectibles dealer, was very careful about how large his small business grew so he could avoid
reporting his income to the I.R.S. Martin, a flea market vendor who sold to the poor immigrant
population at Farmingswood mentioned that he tried to keep from leaving a paper trail that could
alert “the tax man.” The shifting role of the state under neoliberalism is not an indicator if its
complete absence (Lazzarato, 2015). In Deleuzian control societies, as with Foucauldian
governmentality, governance is diffused throughout the body politic, although the state is still a
prominent organizational institution and requires resources to govern.

167

Trash and Treasure TV’s potential to inspire viewers to act through the imparting of
information and the transmission of affect can organize social relations and modulate our
feelings and emotions. As a technology of subjectification, the subgenre’s role as a part of the
televisual dispositif is to regulate power and desire and guide the performance of secondary
markets in physical spaces. Through discourses of power and the modeling of affects, Trash and
Treasure TV is meant to provide audiences with the appropriate ways to conduct themselves
within neoliberal mentalities, which are the norms and values of the new political economy.
This, in turn, would defensively block and redirect people’s desire and productive power away
from alternative ways of organizing economic systems and the relationships, spaces, and
practices that compose them (St. Martin & Gibson-Graham, 2015).
Based on the theoretical-historical framework above, I investigated Trash and Treasure
TV through a textual analysis and the ethnographic methods described in Chapter 3. I found that
the programs I analyzed (the respective first seasons of American Pickers, Flea Market Flip, and
Storage Wars) did promote a neoliberal approach to the modeling and instruction of secondary
market practices. The formation of relationships and the exchanges as presented were primarily
entrepreneurial and mainly concerned with generating profits. In addition, all three shows largely
depicted those working in the secondary market as white and middle-class, in striking contrast to
the actual racial, class and gender dynamics existing in the real world secondary market scenes I
observed. On American Pickers and Storage Wars, the casts were composed of almost all men
who are cisgendered and presented as heterosexual. The array of subjects on Flea Market Flip
was more diverse in regard to gender, race, and sexuality. There were more people of color,
women, and non-normative gender performances, potentially indicating characters with nonnormative sexual orientations. This is likely because Flea Market Flip was on HGTV, and the

168

audience was largely composed of women (Broadway World TV News Desk, 2015). It is also
more focused on “feminine” practices such as art and design. However, on all three of the
programs the poor and lower working classes were largely absent, with few exceptions.
From the ethnographic data, I found that Trash and Treasure TV acted as a source of
representation and intervention and was at work in the construction and performance of markets.
All of the interviewees approached the programs with caution and positioned them as
entertainment products, yet found use and/or value in some of the information that they
contained. Those who had extensive experience in the secondary market were more critical of
Trash and Treasure TV than those who were less practiced, particularly with finding and
appraising the types of objects featured on the programs. Sometimes increased knowledge and
experience correlated with age, as many of the older participants possessed a wealth of wisdom
after having traded for many years. In other cases, proficiency was determined by the frequency
of their activity, or the extent of their immersion within collector communities and their
corresponding markets.
Regardless, there was an overall skepticism about Trash and Treasure TV based on
knowledge of media production. Although, interviewees reported that they were inspired by it
and found some of the information useful. Many had also observed upticks in participants at their
preferred sites after particular programs debuted and gained popularity. Additionally, some had
been involved in interactions during which it was evident that the other party had been
influenced by the shows. They also noted an influx of goods. The latter was explained as a result
of economic anxieties and necessity (increases in people selling their possessions as a precaution
or to survive in the new economy), changes in styles and consumer trends (that have come as

169

new generations in New Jersey replace the previous in the composition of market segments), and
a potential increase in storage unit defaults and home foreclosures.
However, the majority of the objects that were streaming into the market were those that
younger generations of buyers did not have any interest in. Dealers noted that younger people did
not collect, use, or care to inherit the types of objects that used to command high prices,
particularly old antiques and certain styles of furniture. Many of these items sold for less money
than in the past. The remainder was sent to the flea market, and then whatever was left went to a
landfill. This was believed to be driven by lifestyle constraints brought about by contemporary
economic arrangements (lower-paying jobs, living in smaller accommodations, and frequent
moves due to changes in employment). Interviewees also cited a culture of disposability that has
surfaced with mass production and consumption. These phenomena were not addressed on Trash
and Treasure TV. However, these conditions impacted how the local secondary market was
performed by those who occupied the hierarchies and networks that composed it.
Thinking more specifically about my findings, this project is a historical geography of
RTV that uses New Jersey as a stage on which to engage issues of media culture, governance,
social class, precarity, and material culture in the 21st century. As such, my research has
contributed to a range of areas in media studies, in particular, RTV studies. In the past, RTV
audience research concentrated on how “fans” read and used what was presented on their
favorite programs, and often neglected to address matters of class (Bacon-Smith, 1992; Jenkins,
1992; Sender, 2012; Skeggs & Wood, 2012). My methodological approach more resembled
those of media anthropologists Lila Abu-Lughod (2005) and Purnima Mankaker (1999), in that I
ventured out and into the field to interview and observe people as they were buying and selling
on the secondary market. This afforded me opportunities to interact with people beyond those in

170

my initial snowball sample who were very experienced traders and almost entirely white, male,
middle-aged, and from the lower-middle classes and above.
Although very critical of the programs, the group that was produced in the snowball
sample could relate to them. This is because the shows were an RTV depiction of what they had
been doing in real life. They also saw some educational value in them. To various extents, others
among those I interviewed who did not fit that demographic profile had similar perceptions of
Trash and Treasure TV. Despite the differences within that pool of participants, they were the
types of subjects that neoliberal rationales have assumed would engage with and potentially
embrace RTV in ways that viewers have been theorized to do when responding to techniques of
media governmentality.
At the flea markets, I met and observed those who were not a part of the idealized
audiences of Trash and Treasure TV. These people were of the poor and working classes, and
many of whom were from immigrant and minority groups who used the flea market for day-today existence or even to survive. They also did not have any connections to the more upscale
collector’s markets which would have made the programs relatable and/or potential sources of
information for engaging in secondary market activity. For instance, I spoke with Ralston, a
black West Indian man in his 50s who bought “lots” (large bundles) of items at auctions all over
central and southern New Jersey. He then sold whatever people would buy from him. The goods
on his table were lower-end items, mostly assorted kitchenware, nuts, bolts, brackets and some
small toys. When I asked him if he collected anything as a hobby, he bluntly said “no” and
questioned the true value of the objects featured on Trash and Treasure TV. He saw those things
on the programs as merely destined for a shelf, rather than being of use, and thought that was

171

“stupid.” He also saw little value in American Pickers and no reason to fetishize antiques and
collectibles.
To Ralston, “things” were not sacred to him. He did not care about collecting or
accumulating, and elaborated by saying that “a wine glass is just a wine glass. I’ll use it until it
breaks.” Although he wanted to make money, the entrepreneurial lessons and models of how to
resell to upscale markets were not of interest to him. This is because he purchased things for his
everyday use rather than to sell or refurbish, and in his flea-market enterprise, he catered to poor
and working class market segments by providing them with similar items. These varied
relationships to Trash and Treasure TV among participants who constitute the local secondary
market demonstrated how media circulated for the purposes of keeping or capturing the attention
of potential audiences that were already formulated or have yet to be.
This is important in its relevance to governmentality studies, particularly pertaining to
RTV, in that my research highlighted the limitations of Trash and Treasure TV in its reach and
influence. As noted above, theorizations of governmentality have assumed a normative subject
with the cultural and social capital necessary for competing in the neoliberal marketplace. The
limited recovery from the 2007 - 2008 global financial crisis known as the Great Recession (the
worst downturn since the Great Depression) has complicated these presumptions about audiences
(Carnevale, Jayasundra, & Gulish, 2016; Curran & Speciale, 2018). In addition, people have
been immigrating to the U.S., and are expected to account for 88% of population growth through
2065 (Lopez & Bialik, 2017). In the case of New Jersey, the recovery from the downturn was
still lagging in 2017 (Cheney & Friedman, 2017), and the immigrant population was growing,
particularly due to flows of people from Latin America and Asia (Petenko, 2017; Wu, 2012). The
economic and demographic conditions of the U.S. and in New Jersey, and the predictions of the

172

future, have called into question the efficacy of RTV as a technique of neoliberal
governmentality.
Finally, my research has contributed to the respective areas of media archaeology and
production studies. In regard to the former, this project was concerned with old objects often
considered waste, garbage, and refuse, in terms of their significance for understanding cultures
and societies in their historical and contemporary contexts. The data generated from my textual
analysis of Trash and Treasure TV and the ethnographic methods brought to light how objects
featured on the programs were excavated and used, and what people did with the things they
found in real-life secondary markets. This archaeological approach intersected with the field of
material culture studies, as the depictions on Trash and Treasure TV illuminated how the
discourses and practices related to the way that things (including those items classified as
“trash”) were rendered into sociocultural narratives.
From the data, I discovered that on the TV shows entrepreneurial practices were primary
in the circulation of objects, while historical, cultural, and social value were secondary. In the
local secondary markets, entrepreneurialism was a feature. However, it did not primarily
determine the relationships between participants, as business rationales were not exclusively
behind all of the decisions people made in their exchanges. Important here, is that neoliberal
entrepreneurial values also did not determine how people understood and used the things that
they found while hunting for treasure or shopping for everyday items. On Flea Market Flip, old
objects were combined to make aesthetically marketable products for middle-class consumers.
Creativity was deployed for commercial purposes. In the real-life secondary markets I
frequented, items were used to create art for art’s sake. For example, I saw old paintings
appropriated for other artistic purposes and junk sculptures constructed from parts of different

173

mannequins, various random industrial objects and fashion accessories. These works were not
produced for the purpose of satisfying a particular market segment and generating profits, but for
the sake of art itself.
Media archaeology did not just provide a lens through which to analyze the objects seen
on Trash and Treasure TV and in the local flea markets as they related to art. It also allowed me
to identify some differences in how the story of the emergence of modernity in the U.S. has been
told on the shows, versus what can be observed in secondary markets. The TV programs featured
certain types of objects, primarily those that the cast members preferred and could be used to
create the most excitement. Monetary value was central and the information given about the
objects amounted to trivia at best. On the shows, the social and cultural history of the U.S. was
portrayed as one of industrial production and mass consumption alone, and did not directly
address matters of overproduction and hyperconsumption and their environmental and social
consequences (such as islands of plastic floating in the oceans, the creation of consumer debt, the
entrenchment of precarious labor conditions, etc.). These repercussions were visible in real life
spaces of exchange. This was evidenced by the vast amounts of objects and people that had been
relegated to the flea markets and other secondary market sites before their ultimate disposal due
to the “worthlessness” of these products (and those interested in buying them) to the consumer
and labor market.
Finally, this project has contributed to the area of production studies, primarily through
illustrating the ways in which the Trash and Treasure TV milieu was expanded through the
creation of digital content by secondary market participants. For instance, as mentioned above,
young pop-culture collectibles enthusiasts Jan and Pete had their own web-based series that
chronicled their travels around New Jersey’s pop culture collectibles shops, second-hand stores,

174

flea markets and other sites in search of the objects of their desire. Their fans have called their
online show “the American Pickers of toys and collectibles.” Although unlike Mike and Frank,
Jan and Pete did not resell what they had found. Other participants also created online content
that closely resembled Trash and Treasure TV. One interviewee, Alvin posted his finds on
YouTube with narration about how much he had paid and what his expected returns were after
resale. These examples demonstrated the emergence of a chain of cultural and technical
production that extended the reach of media culture (Mayer, Banks, & Caldwell, 2009). At the
same time, this content provided viewers/users with on-the-ground, “real-world” perspectives of
buying and selling on secondary markets. The next section will further illustrate the secondary
market as it is performed online and indicate directions for future research.
The Online Secondary Market and Future Research Directions
With the emergence of digital communication technologies, secondary markets had
moved more noticeably to the Internet and World Wide Web towards the end of my research
period. Participants in this study bought and sold objects through online auction sites (eBay),
mobile applications (letgo), and social networking platforms (Facebook and Instagram). Prior to
this, the larger network of collectors connected through major regional antique trade shows and
snail-mail periodicals such as Antique Week and Antique and Auction News. These newsletters,
and those focused on more specialized subject areas currently have a web presence. This allows
people to easily learn about antiques and collectibles, their values, and collector events in places
far from their local area. Additionally, social media has brought people together around their
objects of interest and provided a platform for the development of immediate relationships at a
distance. This includes the local “pickers” Facebook group I recruited subjects from and lurked

175

in (Jersey Pickers – Antiques and Collectibles), among many groups (or pages) that exist on
Facebook and Instagram.
These social networking groups allow people to communicate information regarding
object identification, pricing, scarcity and background, arrange peer-to-peer sales, or merely
show off new additions to their collections. Therefore, online trading has made the exchange of
information, goods, and services (such as antique restoration) easier than it had been in the past,
and widened the availability of objects in places where they had previously been scarce. This has
had an impact on prices across geographically dispersed markets. According to John, a collector
and amateur dealer who had traded on the secondary market for well over 50 years, the Internet
has regulated prices that were once inflated due to local supply and demand conditions and had
created a false sense of scarcity within regional markets. This is because platforms such as eBay
have unified markets and created the conditions for multiple “rare” objects of similar condition
to be up for auction everywhere at the same time without geographical barriers. Prices then
adjust if they drop relative to demand due to the increase in the supply. This makes some objects
more affordable while whittling down a dealer’s profit margin.
Dealers are also able to purposefully increase the scarcity of some items online to
maximize their revenue. This has occurred particularly with objects that are inexpensive relative
to those on the higher-end with broad appeal, as opposed to those things that were strongly
desired by a small niche of collectors familiar with the market. For example, Alvin, a collector
mentioned above, had been active for nearly 30 years and cultivated a strong presence online as a
dealer across various platforms. At one time, he had used his eBay storefront to sell small
bundles of vintage Polynesian-themed cocktail stirrers from the 1960s in limited quantities and
spread out over time. This marketing technique presented buyers with the impression that what

176

they were purchasing was in short supply and worth the price they were paying for a “valuable”
object. In fact, Alvin had bought an abundance of these items for a very low price and had plenty
in reserve to sell to the next person who clicked on the “buy it now” link. After exhausting his
posted supply, he would merely wait for a period and then release the next batch.
Dealers have also learned how to use online platforms to manage risk. Lamont, a vendor I
met in an antique store, took pictures of objects that people wanted him to sell on their behalf. He
then posted them on his Instagram page with a price and asked people to reply if they were
interested. If the object sold, Lamont would purchase it from the client and deliver it to the
buyer. If he was not able to generate any attention, he would not make the exchange with the
object’s original owner. This eliminated the potential for taking a loss when buying on
speculation. Although Lamont used social networking for commercial purposes, these sites,
particularly Facebook’s social media groups, were spaces where people gathered and
communicated. Many of the groups were inspired by the culture of these programs, and possibly,
at least in part, by Trash and Treasure TV. For example, the Facebook group from where I drew
participants had the word “pickers” in its name (“Jersey Pickers – Antiques and Collectibles”), a
term popularized by the show American Pickers.
As mentioned above, online platforms were also utilized by people to document and
distribute their participation in buying and selling on the secondary market for collecting or
turning a profit. For instance, Alvin took videos of his finds and posted them on his YouTube
page. In these posts, he would lay out all everything he had bought after returning from the
auctions and flea markets. Then he would tell the audience how much money he spent and what
he anticipated making by when he sold the items through his online eBay storefront. Also, Jan
and Pete, participants noted earlier in this chapter, had a YouTube show about their adventures

177

finding pop culture toys and collectibles that their fans compared to American Pickers. While
researching the media culture of online secondary markets, I found that making videos as some
of those I had met while conducting this study was very popular.
A cursory search after typing in the words “pickers” and “antiques” into the YouTube
search engine (without the quotation marks) yielded 15,400 results. The first two pages were
related to the show American Pickers. Following those entries there were countless videos of
amateurs and “semi-professionals” that talked about antiques and collectibles, and appeared to
emulate Trash and Treasure TV. Studying the secondary markets and their representation online
can lead toward revelations pertaining to the potential for creating alternative markets through
digital technology, and in regard to the instructional power of social media video sharing sites,
including the role of mimesis in the creation of videos and their part in the processes of
subjectification.
People have also used social networking sites after they had gone into default on their
storage unit payments, which resulted in the auctioning off of their possessions. In a post on the
“Jersey Shore Buy Sell Trade” Facebook page, a family appealed to the group members to help
them find the contents of their storage unit that had gone to auction. The author of the post noted
that the winning bidder was a frequent buyer of storage units and was hoping to find “him.” The
locker contained “sentimental items” such as the author’s son’s “crib cards … newborn bracelets
[, and] pictures.” The child’s documentation, namely his “birth certificates” and “ssc” (Social
Security card) were also lost. Closing the post, the author emotionally wrote of their dilemma,
“this is bothering me so bad I wish I could find the guy. I can’t believe I lost all my son’s toys,
clothes, everything. I would give anything to find this guy and make a deal.”

178

By providing a platform for affective interaction among users, online secondary market
spaces have the potential to encourage relationships that are disruptive to the preferred outcomes
of elites. In this, they open up opportunities for developing alternative markets that encourage
trade practices less concerned with individual profit and aimed at social justice (Wolfson, 2011;
St. Martin & Gibson-Graham, 2015). Although without philosophical praxis, the potential of
digital communication tools to aid in social change will likely never reach full realization, and in
many ways, may just play into the interests of those who hold political and economic power
(Wolfson, 2011). Such outcomes have been seen since the 2016 Presidential campaign that
brought Donald Trump into the White House in the political fragmentation of the U.S. electorate
on social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook (two sites with great potential for fostering
social change).
Long after President Trump’s victory these conditions continued to leave the country
paralyzed in a state of anger, anxiety, and confusion. The inevitability of the subsumption of
communication technologies to capitalism in the absence of alternative praxis is also apparent in
social media and web platforms that host online auctions. As people use these sites, the owners
profit from the use of their infrastructure. In addition, the algorithms and interfaces encourage
forms of connectivity and subjectivity that reinforce contemporary market relationships. These
designs are intended to invisibly and efficiently extract and exploit data that is freely given, and
consequently, reap great profits and reproduce the existing socio-global order. The final section
will contain some closing thoughts on Trash and Treasure TV, neoliberalism and media
dispositifs from a historical perspective.
Historical Considerations on Neoliberalism and Media Governance

179

The moment of Trash and Treasure TV’s emergence, at the time of the worst economic
crisis in the U.S. since the Great Depression, is gradually becoming a part of history.
Neoliberalism’s ascendance since the post-war period has seen its decline since the Great
Recession, as people have become increasingly attracted to forms of populism and nationalism
that reject the flexibility of labor and finance - the key features of the type of economic
globalization that moved jobs in manufacturing and other sectors to the developing world. This
frustration with neoliberalism's effect on labor has been expressed around the world with such
developments as the rejection of the European Union by the United Kingdom that resulted in
“Brexit.” Similar sentiments and rising levels of protest have surfaced in countries such as
Russia, Hungary, France, Poland, Austria, and India where right-wing, authoritarian, and
populist candidates and policies have been coming to prominence and power in their respective
political systems (The Economist, 2016).
In the U.S., this frustration and anger was seen in the 2016 election, in which former First
Lady and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton (associated with the free trade policies of her
husband, former President Bill Clinton) lost to real estate tycoon and reality television star
Donald Trump (who portrayed himself as anti-free trade and in favor of helping the working
people who had been left behind by it). Hillary Clinton was associated with “establishment”
politics, particularly the neoliberal global policies of her husband’s administration, such as the
North American Free Trade Agreement, and the private banks (e.g. Goldman Sachs) that were
blamed in part for the Great Recession. Donald Trump approached the race portraying himself as
an outsider and maverick. He vowed to “make America great again” through protectionism and
strongman tactics, as opposed to conventional politicians who were bound by their existing
entanglements and stifled by “political correctness.”

180

With Donald Trump’s Presidency and the popularity of right-leaning populist movements
around the world, neoliberalism, as it has existed since the 1970s, may diminish in the specific
aspects of its transnationalism. However, since these reactions are rooted in free-market
capitalism, any mutations within the contemporary political economy will be superficial and the
foundational characteristics of neoliberalism will be retained, namely, responsibilization, labor
flexibility, and the limited role of the state as a friendly facilitator of private arrangements. These
priorities fit well within the political culture of the U.S., with its values and myths of the “rugged
individualism” of Manifest Destiny and the “Wild West,” that are complimented by the antistatist tendencies inherited from the rebellion of the colonial period and the history that led up
the Civil War.
These foundations of U.S. cultural and social psychology provide the deep frameworks
for economic libertarianism. The form of neoliberalism the U.S. has had from the 1970s through
the early 2000s can be seen as moving further rightward culturally, and may be unrecognizable
in the future. However, it will likely retain its “bare market” features while incorporating greater
sovereign and disciplinary power (Foucault, 1995). This would still necessitate instruction from
the media apparatus on how people are to operate within its parameters. Trash and Treasure TV
and the forms of neoliberal rationales from which it had emerged may soon be swept into the
dustbin of history, but the deployment of televisual dispositifs to train and influence conduct for
economic subjectification will not fade into obscurity or irrelevance.