THE EVERYDAY LIFE AND INFORMATION PRACTICES OF A NATURAL IMMUNITY ADVOCATE

Samantha J. Kaplan

ABSTRACT
Samantha J. Kaplan: The Everyday Life and Information Practices of a Natural Immunity
Advocate (Under the direction of Ryan Shaw)
Parents continue to decline or delay immunizing their children resulting in outbreaks of
vaccine-preventable disease across the United States. Efforts to profile these parents struggle
to find demographic consensus or create a consistent profile of which parents make these
problematic decisions. These parents are often assumed to be under the sway of
misinformation, exacerbating the division between them and healthcare providers. Research
about this population typically studies the behavior in isolate and in relation to the mainstream
view where it is normative to vaccinate one’s children.
This dissertation, a grounded theory embedded chronological case study of a vaccineavoidant mommy blogger, describes a worldview where vaccination avoidance and delay is
normative and documents related behaviors and beliefs that accompany not vaccinating one’s
children. This was accomplished using multiple methods, particularly inductive coding,
memoing, quantitative and qualitative content analysis, bibliometrics, and digital ethnography.
Data streams included seven years of blog posts, videos, comment threads, information
citations, artifacts endorsed or created by the blogger, and an assessment of family
resemblances between the blogger and her digital peer network.

iii

From the data emerged a theoretical model that overlapped with Ludwik Fleck’s theory
of thought collectives and Elfreda Chatman’s theory of information poverty. The findings
include a set of family resemblances observed in the data and artifacts and assessed against a
network of nearly 90 other cases. The findings include bibliometric evaluation of the
information the blogger cited and discussion of her information behavior and how information
operates within her worldview, where vaccine avoidance and delay is normative.

CHAPTER 1: LITERATURE REVIEW
1.1 Introduction
Octavia Butler’s short story, “The Evening and the Morning and the Night” depicts a
world that has cured cancer—with devastating results. Those who used the miraculous cure
have passed an incurable disease to their children, a disease that will cause them to become
psychotic and mutilate themselves. To delay disease onset, these children must follow a rigid
diet that marks them as a future sufferer and makes their stigma visible. The parents’ cure
came at the expense of their future progeny’s health.
A hallmark of the anti-vaccine movement, or vaccine safety advocacy, depending on
your position, is linking vaccines to future suffering because parents chose to vaccinate their
child. Advocates for and adherents to this belief remain convinced that the risk of their child
contracting a vaccine-preventable disease is less than the risk of exposing their child to the
disease remnants and chemical additives comprising a vaccine. Minute amounts of aluminum,
mercury, thimerosal and formaldehyde (among others) are of greater concern than the
perceived low susceptibility to and perceived treatability of measles or pertussis.
Unlike Butler’s story, where there are numerous children who can testify to the longterm costs of their parents’ choices, there are relatively few who can speak with authority
about life before vaccines. In an article for Gizmodo, Jennings Brown interviewed the few
remaining users of iron lungs – a medical device that helps polio survivors breathe – and they

shared their stories because one “thing they all had in common is a desire for the next
generations to know about them so we’ll realize how fortunate we are to have vaccines”
(Brown, 2017).
1.2 Phenomenon of Interest
According to Hinshaw et al. (2013), “Ever since vaccines were introduced in the 18th
century, questions and concerns about their safety have been voiced” (p. 18). Of course,
“Vaccines—like all drugs or medical interventions—are neither 100 percent risk-free nor 100
percent effective” (Hinshaw et al., 2013, p. 2). Still, vaccination ranks among the most
successful public health interventions of all time. Zhou et al. (2014) report
because of vaccination, US children born in 2009 will suffer 20,000,000 fewer cases of
vaccine-preventable diseases and 42,000 fewer early deaths related to those diseases
during their lifetimes. From a societal perspective, at a program cost of $7.5 billion, the
routine immunization schedule will save a total of $76 billion in direct and indirect costs,
resulting in a net savings of $69 billion and a BCR of 10.1. In other words, from a societal
perspective, every dollar spent ultimately saves at least 10 dollars. (Zhou et al., 2014, p.
581)
However, despite these successes, anti-vaccination behavior persists with preventable
outbreaks of disease and loss of life (Centers for Disease Control, n.d.). Confronting this
phenomenon is complicated because the number of parents who do not vaccinate their
children in full compliance with the childhood vaccination schedule is difficult to calculate and
the nature of deviation is as multi-faceted as the reason(s) for deviating.

1

Most researchers make a distinction between children who have received no vaccines at
all and children who have received some or all vaccines but not in accordance with the
recommended schedule, pursuing an alternative schedule. Researchers have estimated the
number of children who receive no vaccines to be between 0.3 percent and two percent of all
children in the United States (Dempsey et al., 2011; Gust, Darling, Kennedy, & Schwartz, 2008;
P. J Smith, Chu, & Barker, 2004). The number of children who are vaccinated along an
alternative schedule is even less precise, with estimates ranging from 13 percent (Dempsey et
al., 2011), 13 percent (Glanz et al., 2013), 21 percent (Robison, Groom, & Young, 2012), 22
percent (Smith, Humiston, Parnell, Vannice, & Salmon, 2010) to 37 percent (Smith, Chu, Barker,
2004). Despite the large numbers of parents who do not vaccinate or partially vaccinate their
children, “Conflicting findings demonstrate that there is no firm profile of people who do not
vaccinate” (Bossaller, 2014, p. 233).
Rationales for opposing, avoiding, or delaying vaccines typically include but are not
limited to one or more of the following factors; falsified research that suggests vaccines are
linked to Autism Spectrum Disorder (Wakefield et al., 1998), endorsement from high-profile
figures like celebrities and politicians (Flaherty, Tayag, Lanier, & Minor, 2014; Gottlieb, 2016;
Rupert, 2017), lack of direct experience with many of the diseases for which we vaccinate (Fine,
Eames, & Heymann, 2011), broad and specific safety concerns (Dempsey et al., 2011; Freed,
Clark, Butchart, Singer, & Davis, 2010; Luthy, Beckstrand, & Callister, 2010), a calculated risk
assessment (Feikin et al., 2000), and conscientious objection to government regulation of the
body (Busse, Wilson, & Campbell, 2008).

2

We cannot definitively say who engages in the wide range of anti-vaccination
behavior—hesitancy, avoidance, delays, and so on—nor can we clearly say why.
1.3 Literature Review
Research about anti-vaccination behavior and attitudes typically attempts to profile the
population in some way (P. J Smith et al., 2004) describe the rhetoric and themes of extreme
anti-vaccination material (Davies, Chapman, & Leask, 2002); catalog a skew toward antivaccination materials in digital spaces (Buchanan & Beckett, 2014; Guidry, Carlyle, Messner, &
Jin, 2015); or center the issue around what happens in the office of a health care provider
(Luthy et al., 2010).
Each of these approaches is valuable and has made significant contributions to
understanding this phenomenon despite the inherent trade-offs of every methodological
decision. Studies using the strictest definition of anti-vaccination behavior still have a very large
population segment to work with. Even if one adheres to that strict definition, it is a
problematic choice because it falsely suggests the problem is only limited to those who engage
in the most extreme behavior. Understanding outliers is valuable, but the evidence suggests
this is a much more commonplace concern. Demographic and socioeconomic profiling of one
percent of the population versus twenty percent of the population defines the problem by
focusing on the one in one hundred parents who oppose all vaccines rather than the one in five
parents who oppose some vaccines and have a lot of questions. Once the issue expands to such
a large percentage of parents, statistical profiling seems to answer the wrong question. Instead
of answering who doesn’t vaccinate, we would be better served to ask why they do not

3

vaccinate. It is necessary to “engage with the spectrum of vaccine acceptance behaviors [and]
the complexity of parental beliefs” (Gottlieb, 2015, p. 154).
Documenting “the magnitude, interest, and purpose and validity of the information
regarding vaccination available”(Buchanan & Beckett, 2014, p. 228) in digital spaces enhances
our understanding of the pitfalls awaiting parents on the Internet and how these places can be
manipulated. Understanding why places like this are trusted, other ways individuals may come
to them, among other questions, is outside of the scope of these content analyses. Given the
high public costs to vaccine opposition and a large body of research that suggests there are
communication issues between parents and providers (Busse et al., 2008; Dempsey et al., 2011;
Diekema et al., 2005; Offit & Moser, 2009), there is surprisingly little research about the literal
information used by parents and activists and anti-vaccine websites to justify their decisions.
Offit and Moser (2009) addressed the claims of popular and problematic book, The Vaccine
Book: Making the Right Decision for Your Child by Dr. Robert Sears, but a factual dressing down
plays into anti-vaccination advocates’ hands—that they are persecuted by “scientific evidence.”
It also ignores how information objects are endowed with legitimacy, authority, and credibility
by individuals, institutions, and communities. While the book’s claims are not evidence-based,
it is probably a bigger problem that it is a national bestseller and sits on the shelves of many
libraries.
Studies of vaccination behavior in health care provider’s offices have consistently found
issues of communication, trust, time constraints, and competing values (Hinshaw et al., 2013;
Luthy et al., 2010; Yaqub, Castle-Clarke, Sevdalis, & Chataway, 2014). This has also confined it
to being studied as a health behavior, editing it out of other contexts where it occurs. To avoid

4

vaccinating a child altogether or even partially requires regular discussion and potentially
disagreement with a health care provider, with school personnel, even with gatekeepers to
certain extracurricular activities like summer camp. This is not a decision accepted as final or
finite. Instead parents must renew it repeatedly and reaffirm their commitment to doing so.
In addition to health, vaccination choices should be seen as everyday life behavior.
There is another element of vaccination behavior that has received little to no
attention—stigma. In an ethnography of California mothers who lived in southern California
and had at least one child under 18, Gottlieb asserted that parents who do not vaccinate their
children are portrayed as “unsophisticated or disengaged” (Gottlieb, 2015, p. 154).
Exacerbating this, “mainstream US media and vaccine advocates have vilified parents who
refuse to vaccinate or who under-vaccinate their children,” (Gottlieb, 2015, p. 153-154). The
“mainstream” treats almost any deviation from the immunization schedule as a norm
violation which typically is stigmatizing. However, the research has not thoroughly examined
why a parent would violate this norm and take on this stigma and how they manage it over
time. Of course, it is a norm that parents make the best decision for their child, and it seems
likely that for these parents, not adhering to the immunization schedule is, in their eyes,
adherence to this norm. Perhaps because they are violating the norm to vaccinate in service
of the presumably higher norm, they feel they are wrongly stigmatized. The roles of stigma
and everyday life in vaccination behavior deserve examination.
When discussing the participants in her ethnography of southern California mothers,
Gottlieb (2015) asserts, “The information these women may use to justify their choices may be
highly flawed, but they are not made without reflection” (p. 160). This language suggests their

5

information use deviates from a correct or normative standard, but also positions their
behavior within a scientific paradigm—evaluation and selection of information to justify and
defend a choice.
Perhaps this is not a “scientific” decision, but these mothers felt they had to present it in
this format, and doing so reveals their outsider status (the use of flawed information).
Regardless, “Constant affirmation of their decision requires commitment” (Gottlieb, 2015, p.
166). Parents who choose not to vaccinate or to under-vaccinate do not choose this one time.
They must reaffirm this stance at doctors’ appointments, with school officials, and other
reoccurring everyday life situations. To portray this decision as anything other than mindful,
considered, and intended does these parents a disservice. Additionally, it perpetuates feelings
of stigmatization, which adds to the “adversarial notion of ‘us versus them’” (Davies et al.,
2002, p. 22) found on many anti-vaccination sites—also reported in half of the websites
evaluated by Kata (2010) in her content analysis of anti-vaccination websites (p. 1713).

6

CHAPTER 2: PROPOSED STUDY
2.1 Purpose of this study
Among those who do not adhere to the immunization schedule, there is considerable
nuance and range. Too often research focuses at the ends of the spectrum—those who are
virulently opposed and those who follow the schedule, leaving a rich range unexamined. Some
research looks at alternative schedule use, making it distinct from complete abstinence
(Dempsey et al., 2011; Robison et al., 2012), but there is still much to learn. We also lack an
understanding of the worldview of someone in this unexamined range. Within those who are
not completely anti-vaccine, but are also not following the schedule, how does this fit into their
lives? What information and sources do they use, engage with, find, look for, share, and trust?
Does that information tell a larger story? I answered the following questions in this research:
•

R1: How does vaccination avoidance and delay fit into everyday life?

•

R2: What information practices does someone who has not vaccinated their children
employ?

•

R3: What is the story and impact of the information and information sources (including
people) the case uses?

•

R4: What “family resemblances” can be discerned about Mama Natural and her
network?

•

R5: What theoretical framework can describe this context?

7

Significance of the study
Much of the existing research on people who do not vaccinate, who hesitate, or who
delay, is demographic or centers the behavior in the health care provider’s office. Because
parents must repeatedly reaffirm and maintain this decision over time, it is not just a health
behavior, but an everyday life behavior. The first question I asked provides insight into how this
behavior functions in everyday life. Everyday life is “the acquisition of various informational
(both cognitive and expressive) elements which people employ to orient themselves in daily life
or to solve problems” (Savolainen, 1995, p. 267).
Within the research about this phenomenon, parents frequently perceive information
about vaccination to be biased and partial (Petts & Niemeyer, 2004), thus the information they
use and how they use it is of interest. Lingel and boyd (2013) consider information practices “to
refer to the ways that people locate, use, share, and evaluate information” (p. 981). There is
evidence that vaccine opposition is louder than support online (Buchanan & Beckett, 2014;
Guidry et al., 2015; Kata, 2010; Wolfe & Sharp, 2005), but limited insight into other information
behaviors, which the second question could begin to answer. Lingel and boyd (2013) ask
“whether information itself constitutes a kind of stigma” (p. 990), and my third research
question is framed with this in mind. If mentioning belief in the retracted, falsified Wakefield
study can discredit a person, then the information and the information’s story is of interest.
Further, while the Wakefield study may be the most well-known, it is in no way the only
information object that functions as a marker or source of division between those who support
vaccination and the many classes of vaccine opposition.

8

Given the limited demographic understanding of this population and how large it is, I suggested
the fourth question as a frame to describe the “complicated network of similarities overlapping
and criss-crossing: sometimes overall similarities, sometimes similarities of detail”
(Wittgenstein, 1967, p. 32). Learning what, if any, family resemblances can be discerned
between my case and the information objects and sources she uses helps identify what family
this behavior belongs to—for example, is someone likely to avoid or hesitate on vaccines if they
want a natural birth, or if they use cloth diapers and amber teething necklaces?
The fifth question enhances our understanding of how stigma functions in vaccine
opposition. Not vaccinating a child is a stigmatizing choice—the American Association of
Pediatrics (Committee On Practice And Ambulatory Medicine, Committee On Infectious
Diseases, Committee On State Government Affairs, Council On School Health, & Section On
Administration And Practice Management, 2016) allows doctors to decline to treat families who
do not want to vaccinate their children. Content analyses of anti-vaccination sites, which
represent the most extreme behavior, report themes of wrongful persecution (Kata, 2012).
However, there is also evidence that wealthy, white parents are more likely to engage in this
behavior (McNutt et al., 2016). How (if) this normally privileged group experiences, manages,
and negotiates stigma in this context is of interest.
Observing the interplay between vaccine behavior, everyday life, and management of
stigma required a methodological approach that allowed for studying a phenomenon in its
natural setting, as it is the interaction of these variables with their context that has not been
examined. Because it is a contemporary phenomenon intertwined so tightly with its context, it

9

demanded a methodology that could absorb the interconnected network of variables, rather
than isolating them or removing them to preserve the integrity of the method.
There is evidence that parents who deviate from the immunization schedule consult
more information sources than those who do not (Brunson, 2013). There is also extensive
evidence that regardless of the choice parents make, they consult multiple source types
(Brunson, 2013; Gottlieb, 2016; Jones et al., 2012) including their own parents, peers,
healthcare providers, books, pamphlets, social media, and websites—to name a few. All of this
information and these sources demanded equal consideration, rather than just tabulation of
type.
I studied this phenomenon via a case study. This approach has not, to my knowledge,
been utilized (or utilized extensively) in this context before. The case study was uniquely suited
for studying this phenomenon because “A case study is an empirical inquiry that a) investigates
a contemporary phenomenon (the ‘case’) in depth and within its real-world context, especially
when b) the boundaries between phenomenon and context may not be clearly evident” (Yin,
2014, p.16). The case study provided advantages to studying anti-vaccination behavior that
other methods do not. It is well suited to answering how and why questions—answers that
content analyses and large-scale surveys are not designed or able to provide. Further, it is a
behavior of the moment, out of the researcher’s control, and influenced by a wide array of
variables. An additional strength was the case study’s appetite for multiple sources of evidence
and allowance for multiple methods to evaluate data.
Individuals who oppose vaccination rarely cite just one information source, instead
drawing from many sources and source types. They make and maintain anti-vaccination choices

10

over a period of time. The behavior and attitudes result in complicated decisions that
individuals must defend and reinforce. The case study was ideally suited to explore and
describe this instead of reducing it to a false binary of anti- or pro-vaccination.
2.3 Methodological Design
I conducted a case study of the information practices and everyday life behavior of a
parent who has not vaccinated their children using multiple methods. Mixing methodological
approaches is appropriate when the “research problem may be one in which a need exists to
both understand the relationship among variables in a situation and explore the topic in further
depth” (Creswell, 2002, p. 76). I will now review the theoretical frame, the single-case design,
my proposed case, the sources of evidence, and how the questions were answered.
2.3.1 Theoretical lens
The case study methodology “differs from other qualitative methods because it has
theory development prior to data collection” (Yin, 2014, p. 37). Similar to mixed methods
studies, theory serves as a “lens or perspective to guide the study” (Creswell, p. 136). The case
is “the opportunity to shed empirical light about some theoretical concepts or principles” (Yin,
2014, p. 40). I employed grounded theory because, like the case study, it is “systematic, yet
flexible” and prioritizes “iterative strategies of going back and forth between data and analysis”
(Charmaz, 2014, p. 1) which, given the numerous evidence streams, was necessary. The
constructs and propositions of Elfreda Chatman’s theory of Information Poverty served as
sensitizing concepts, which Charmaz (2014) defines as “initial but tentative ideas to pursue and
questions to raise about their topics” (p. 30). The constructs and propositions of Information
Poverty “provide[d] a place to start inquiry” (Charmaz, 2014, p.31).

11

Chatman’s theory of Information Poverty rests on four constructs and six propositions.
The six propositions of information poverty; which draw from the constructs of insiders and
outsiders, secrecy, deception, and risk-taking; are
Proposition 1: People who are defined as information poor perceive themselves to be
devoid of any sources that might help them.
Proposition 2: Information Poverty is partially associated with class distinction. That is,
the condition of information poverty is influenced by outsiders who withhold privileged
access to information.
Proposition 3: Information poverty is determined by self-protective behaviors which are
used in response to social norms.
Proposition 4: Both secrecy and deception are self-protecting mechanisms due to a
sense of mistrust regarding the interest or ability of others to provide useful
information.
Proposition 5: A decision to risk exposure about our true problems is often not taken
due to a perception that negative consequences outweigh benefits.
Proposition 6: New knowledge will be selectively introduced into the information world
of poor people. A condition that influences this process it the relevance of that
information in response to everyday problems and concerns. (Chatman, 1996, p. 197198)
These constructs and propositions guided me in determining which questions to ask.
My first question, “How does vaccination avoidance fit into everyday life?” drew from
the proposition that not vaccinating a child is a stigmatizing behavior and the management of
that stigma touched upon all four constructs of information poverty. My second question was
informed by the third and sixth propositions of information poverty. The third question was a
question embedded in the findings of my second question but was also influenced by the sixth
proposition of information poverty. My fourth question derived from the second proposition of
information poverty. My final question considered the need for a theoretical framework to
explicate this context.
Research Questions:
• R1: How does vaccination avoidance and delay fit into everyday life?

12

•
•
•
•

R2: What information practices does someone who has not vaccinated their children
employ?
R3: What is the story and impact of the information and information sources (including
people) the case uses?
R4: What “family resemblances” can be discerned about Mama Natural and her
network?
R5: What theoretical framework can describe this context?

2.4 Proposed case
I conducted a case study of Mama Natural, the online moniker and website of a woman
named Genevieve Howland (alternately referred to as Genevieve and Mama Natural). I
previously conducted a small case study of Genevieve for an end-of-course project in Spring
2015 (attached in Appendix B). For that paper I was only able to read and view a portion of
Mama Natural’s posts and videos—about two years’ worth. While I think I answered the
questions I set out to, the study generated additional questions I could not attend to and during
data collection I observed ways I could improve the methodological rigor of the study, which
due to time constraints I could not implement.
Mama Natural could be described as a “mommy blogger.” According to Friedman
(2010), “Mommy blogs are online journals (Web logs) written by women documenting the
experiences of motherhood and motherwork. Most mommy blogs have been written since
2005.” The concept of mommy blogs has a greater presence in popular culture than scientific
literature. Of the attention given them, it has mostly noted the demographics of who writes
them (Lopez, 2009; Song, 2016), their motivations (Pettigrew, Archer, & Harrigan, 2016), and
issues surrounding monetization (Hunter, 2016), fraud and authenticity (Whitehead, 2014). The
actual content these bloggers produce has been treated as secondary to the communities they
create. This is surprising given the amount of conflict the activity has provoked. At a conference

13

for women who blogged, one non-mommy blogger spoke of mommy-blogging in a dismissive
way and “Alice Bradley, who writes about her children in a blog called ‘Finslippy’
(http://finslippy.typepad.com), declared: ‘Mommy blogging is a radical act’” (Lopez, 2009, p.
730). Lopez notes that the next year the statement was the name of a conference session.
However it must be mentioned that this “radical act” is mostly performed by “white,
middle-class, partnered women in heterosexual relationships” (Friedman, 2010). Lopez (2009)
agrees that “white, married, heterosexual women dominate this conversation” (p. 733). Their
blogs are also similar in appearance and functionality:
the most successful feature lively writing, gorgeous photos, iTunes playlists, Twitter,
Facebook, and Instagram feeds, and most importantly, thousands of active readers and
commenters. Many of them are also monetized, carrying multiple banner and side ads
and featuring contests, promotions, product reviews, and giveaways. Bloggers have
developed sophisticated public relations strategies and advertising policies to deal with
the multitude of eager marketers clamoring for a piece of their audience (Whitehead,
2014, p. 128)
This “radical act” is also, potentially, a profitable one. Some readers feel this has compromised
the integrity of the once “radical act” and “what was once an act of resistance through which
communities formed has become simply a shallow marketing tool” (Hunter, 2016, p. 1307). The
markers Whitehead (2015) identified as synonymous with success in mommy blogging have
detractors who see them as signifiers that the bloggers are “glib, trite, and focused solely on
creating content that will appeal to advertisers” (Hunter, 2016, p. 1307) when they should be
“providing alternate narratives of what it means to be a mother, and a woman” (p. 1307).
The shift toward commercialization and sanitized content has catalyzed backlash, most
notably visible on the website, Get Off My Internets (GOMI), which “is generally very critical.
GOMI participants refer to what they do as ‘snarking’ and when a participant does say

14

something positive about a blogger, they are often accused of ‘white knighting.’” (Hunter, p.
1312). Hunter analyzed the threads relating to several very popular bloggers (popular on the
Internet and popular on GOMI) and found that in addition to distrust of sponsored content and
annoyance over clickbait, GOMI commenters expressed criticism that “bloggers monitor their
comments sections, censoring anyone who does not agree with the blogger, or is any way
negative. Part of the reason people have come to GOMI is precisely because bloggers do not
allow for any dissenting viewpoints” (Hunter, p. 1316).
The “radical act” performed mostly by white, heterosexual, married women with high
technological literacy and access, that has become a means to make a living, has generated a
massive website for those who feel censored by it. Hunter (2015) concludes that
The growing consensus on GOMI is that rather than fostering communities that allow
for multiple points of view, blogging is more of a performance than anything else; a
performance designed to sell an aspirational lifestyle where there is only room for
applause and accolades. (Hunter, 2015, P1316)
Why are these white, heterosexual, married women performing this “radical act”? Song (2016)
interviewed numerous bloggers, in addition to attending many social media conferences for
women and mothers, and noted:
Like so many other mom bloggers who are privileged in their race, education, and
economic status, Kim opted out of a flourishing career to become a full-time mother,
only to find the culturally circumscribed sphere of influence for mothers to be
distressingly confining and undervalued (Song, 2016, p. 49)
Kim did not realize that by choosing motherhood as her primary role she would sacrifice much
of the privilege she had previously been accorded. Given the majority of highly successful
mommy bloggers—women who can earn an income commensurate with a full-time job—are
white, heterosexual, well-educated, and married, the role of lost privilege or privilege forgone

15

cannot be ignored. Blogging is, in this lens, a path to legitimacy, an attempt to reclaim power
and restore past privilege.
In a survey of Australian mothers who blogged, Pettigrew, Archer, and Harrigan (2016)
reported five themes for blogging motivations, “connection, stimulation, validation,
contribution, and extension” (p. 1027). I read these themes as “peers, intellectual activity,
legitimacy/affirmation of choices, desire to be viewed as person with expertise, and desire to
influence.” Women who are blogging about motherhood are, in some regards, attempting to
create or mimic a workplace and a career by treating it as such. In that regard, mommy
blogging is a radical act because it pushes against “Motherhood … as part of the private or
domestic sphere that women are supposed to occupy and not challenge” (Lopez, 2009, p.731),
which is why it is even more the pity that “there appears to be relative absence of selfconsciousness within the mamasphere” and the homogeneous women who compose it
(Friedman, 2010, p. 2).
These criticisms are especially interesting given the tricky and contradicting nature of
vaccine opposition. Anti-vaccination activists often claim they are being persecuted by provaccine authorities or are the victim of larger conspiracies at work (Davies et al., 2002; Kata,
2010). However, they also position vaccine avoidance as a more natural way of life, the way it
“should” be. Are they stigmatized or are they an aspirational way of living? The intersection of
vaccine opposition and a profitable mommy blog will pull these tensions taut and allow for a
close examination.
Genevieve maintains a blog at mamanatural.com and has channels or a presence on
many other areas of the Internet, such as YouTube, Twitter, and Pinterest. Her online presence

16

is her full-time job and career. She purports to help “mothers-to-be and moms of young
children lead healthier and more natural lives” (“About Mama Natural,” 2011). I considered
Genevieve an ideal case for several reasons. Petts and Niemeyer’s (2004) asserted that
“maternity appears a significant factor forming views on MMR” (p. 14). Mama Natural is a
mother of two children and devotes herself to helping women who are mothers or are
preparing to become mothers. Pregnancy is one of the main subtopics of her website; she has
written a book on the topic and offers an online class about it, and sells several products for
expectant mothers. This makes her an ideal case to examine the intersection of maternity and
anti-vaccination attitude formation.
In line with her moniker, Mama Natural embraces and encourages natural living. This
contributed to her suitability as a case because an affection for or pursuit of natural living has
been reported in many studies of anti-vaccination parents or anti-vaccination advocates and
content (Dempsey et al. 2011, Gottlieb, 2015, Kata, 2010, Davies, Chapman, and Leask, 2002).
Davies, Chapman, and Leask (2002) suggested this alignment occurs because “Along with
alternative health and natural parenting, antivaccination sites represent a return to an
idealised, natural existence” (p. 24). Zimmerman et al.’s (2005) content analysis of antivaccination websites also reported a strong presence of encouragement for pursuing
alternative medicine.
Mama Natural’s expertise with online platforms and tools is another facet of what made
her an excellent case. Jones et al. (2012) reported “a relationship between Internet use and an
acceptance of alternative views to traditional medicine about vaccination,” although the
authors could only speculate on the direction of the relationship (p. 5). Mama Natural obviously

17

uses the Internet and accepts and promotes alternative views. Not only is she this parent, but
she is also the type of source to which this parent is potentially receptive. Jones et al. (2012)
found Internet users “were less likely to agree with accepted tenets of vaccine science, less
likely to agree that children need or benefit from vaccines, and more likely to have obtained
nonmedical exemptions from vaccination for their children” (p. 5). It was important to study
both sides of this—a parent who met these criteria and the information they interacted with,
Mama Natural was at this intersection.
Mama Natural provided a window into how stigma fits in vaccine opposition. To the
outside eye, Mama Natural enjoys much privilege—she is white, attractive, in a heterosexual
marriage, Christian, and appears to live in relative comfort. However she has also made videos
like “Sh*t crunch mamas say” (“Sh*t Crunchy Mamas Say,” 2012) which goes through common
things “crunchy” parents say that make them distinct (and possibly alienated) from other
parents. She also addressed a question from a reader struggling with the reaction of family and
friends to her parenting choices with the video, “What to do when people think you’re nuts ;)”
(Mama Natural, n.d.). Perceived and felt stigma are something she experiences and engages
with, though her relative privilege surely shapes how much this actually influences her, her
parenting choices, and the community she builds online.
Selecting the case, for a single case study design, was of inestimable import, especially
because the “case may later turn out not to be the case it was thought to be at the outset” (p.
53). Yin identifies five rationales, “critical, unusual, common, revelatory, or longitudinal” (p. 51).
Flyvbjerg (2006) describes four types of cases: extreme/deviant cases, maximum variation
cases, critical cases, and paradigmatic cases (p. 230). Stake (2006) asserts that in selecting a

18

case, the researcher also selects a situation (p. 2), suggesting that the types of cases could also
be seen as situational labels. Walton (1992) does not delineate with specificity, rather asserts
“cases are chosen for all sorts of reasons, from convenience and familiarity to fascination and
strategy” (p.125).
Considering these possible labels, Mama Natural fit in several categories. In some ways
she was a common case—an Internet-savvy mother who has not vaccinated her children. She
was also a critical or extreme case—an Internet personality and information resource who has
not vaccinated her children, who is open to and endorses natural living and alternative health
practices. She was also a longitudinal case, as her blog and videos provided more than 7 years
of insight into her life. Adding another layer, Platt (1992) asserts “that the kind of a case a
whole work is may change over time” (p. 41). Ultimately, what kind of a case Mama Natural is
matters less than that she was the right case to answer the research questions.
2.4.1 “A single case”
A single case design is frequently subject to criticisms of rigor and representativeness.
The latter is perhaps easier to dismiss—a single case study is not representative of the larger
population from which it was selected because it is not designed to be. Expecting
representativeness from a single case study is akin to expecting quantitative data to talk, if you
tried very hard you might manage it but it would be a challenge for you and for the data. Case
studies can generate theoretical constructs that may transfer to or “represent” other contexts,
and the content of the case study report may highlight elements worth exploring in the larger
population, but they will never be a substitute for survey work, just as a television will never be

19

a substitute for a chair. You could sit on a television if you had to, but it is really not designed
for that.
Whether a case study can be representative of any population or theory is frequently
called into question because its N of one is used to diminish its potential rigor. Yin (2014)
discourages equating a case to samples and instead compares a single case to a single
experiment. One experiment examines isolates variables and analyzes them in a particular
situation at a particular time and then tries to replicate it or expand the situation(s) or time(s)
when those findings occur. A case study follows a similar path, except instead of empirical
findings, it generates theoretical constructs and rich descriptions and explanations that can
answer questions other approaches cannot.
But is any case only one case? Even a single experiment often contains embedded
experiments. A single-case study design can still “involve units of analysis at more than one
level” (Yin, 2014, p. 53). Embedded case studies which collect and analyze data at multiple
levels may struggle “to return to the larger unit of analysis” (Yin, 2014, p. 55). Mama Natural as
a case was difficult to define because it existed at multiple levels and the delineation between
them was murky. Her website, her blog, her family life, her social media channels, her
information use—co-occured.
According to Hennion (1989), “The intermediary is not at the interface of two known
worlds: he or she is the one who constructs these worlds by trying to bring them into relation”
(p. 406). Hennion (1989) suggested a popular music producer could be seen as an intermediary
between culture and technology, that the producer mediates between society and the artist.
Mama Natural is an intermediary between many worlds, but also, like the case of the music

20

producer was used as a proxy to understand how production and consumption intertwine to
create objects, she is a representation or an instance of a process we do not fully understand—
and provided an opportunity to examine it in depth.
White (1992) acknowledges “a case study takes a single count and opens it up, with
attention to context” (p. 83). Mama Natural was potentially a single count. However, the single
instance of her and her blog consists of numerous decisions, another way of looking at cases,
according to Yin (2014, p. 15). Mama Natural documented numerous decisions that are not
normative—a set of decisions that are each “cases.” How she presented her decision not to
vaccinate, compared to her decision to cosleep with her newborn, or whether she should have
her son circumcised provided rich opportunities for comparison. While she may was a single
instance, comparing the “cases” of her deciding to make controversial childrearing decisions
was an opportunity for insight and compromised the idea of her as a single case. Instead her
presence and website become a context in which I had the opportunity to examine multiple
“cases.”
2.5 Sources of evidence
Case studies are unique because of their allowance for multiple types of evidence—Yin
(2014) identifies the 6 most common sources of evidence as documentation, archival records,
interviews, direct observations, participant-observation, and physical artifacts (p. 106). While “a
good case study will therefore want to rely on as many sources as possible” (Yin, p. 105), Yin
acknowledges “Any of the preceding sources of evidence can and have been the sole basis for
entire studies” (p. 118). Multiple sources of evidence are important and were sought because
particularly when working with a single case it protects against the implicit omission of relying

21

on one evidence type. For example, survey work can tell you who participates in a workforce,
but only conducting interviews with the workers will tell you why. Findings arise from
convergence across types of evidence—if they do not converge they also can identify points of
tension between different facets of the context’s fabric.
Mama Natural was an excellent candidate for the case study because, in addition to the
characteristics already listed, there are numerous evidence streams related to her that are
publically available. The first and foremost was her website, MamaNatural.com. On this site she
writes about her everyday life and usually posts videos to accompany her posts. Her posts
typically focused on educating the reader about a specific topic or about sharing her life with
the reader. Educational posts provide an additional opportunity for evidence—Genevieve
usually cited her sources, opening an avenue for bibliometric analysis. This was an excellent
opportunity to study in-depth the information and sources utilized by a parent who has chosen
not to vaccinate their child—to make that choice but also in her day-to-day life. Her posts also
allow visitors to comment, to which she or someone from her team sometimes responded.
On her website, Genevieve also has a section where she endorses specific artifacts (in
addition to talking about them in her posts) and also a storefront where visitors can purchase
artifacts she has created. Examples of created artifacts included the book she authored and
pregnancy affirmations. Examples of endorsed artifacts included books, natural food products
and supplements (purchasable from Amazon, she is an Amazon affiliate and can receive income
from people purchasing items they found via her site). Genevieve also maintains public
accounts under the MamaNatural handle on Pinterest, Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and
GooglePlus where, depending on the platform, it is possible to observe what she shares, follows

22

and “likes,” and if she engages with her followers. Artifact analysis was confined to information
objects because limited value was seen in purchasing and trying the foods and supplements
Mama Natural endorses. I also refrained from studying her social media usage because after a
quick perusal they seemed to function as echo channels for her blog, rather than featuring
distinct content.
In addition to the channels she controls, Genevieve does appear in other settings to
promote her website. Her site mentions appearances on Daily Mail, The Doctors, CBS News,
and in Newsweek. She also has appeared on the channels of others and written posts for other
venues, possibly to promote herself or the channel hosting her. This was an additional stream
of evidence and a possible place to assess the propositions—if her narrative, behavior, and
information practices are consistent across contexts. I observed they were very consistent and
usually focused around amplifying her blog and YouTube channel, so I did not evaluate them in
detail. Genevieve also advertises a class on her website; the Mama Natural Birth Course
(“Mama Natural Birth Course - The #1 Online Childbirth Class,” n.d.). There are also forums,
such as Get Off My Internets (GOMI), where online personalities, such as Mama Natural are
discussed—sometimes, even frequently, in unflattering terms. This was an additional source of
evidence, along with comment threads on the MN site to understand how others perceived
her. More evidence can be obtained from the Wayback Machine at the Internet Archive where I
observed how MamaNatural’s website changed over time, with particular attention to how
posts about stigmatized topics changed or were no longer available.
Mama Natural is, at this point, a public figure and enterprise. Currently her website
indicates that she does not respond to email inquiries, though visitors are invited to leave a

23

comment or visit her Facebook page instead. Because of this, and the likelihood that this
research would be perceived as threatening—I did not try and contact Genevieve. Additionally,
I did not think direct contact with Genevieve would reveal more than the video logs and web
posts she has made over 7 years.
2.6 Operationalizing the questions
To answer these questions, I conducted a case study of an anti-vaccine mother who is a
natural living advocate via an online social media presence. I proposed a single case and that
the case constitutes the image created and cultivated by the person it represents. Antivaccination attitudes and choices have been studied extensively out of context via large-scale
survey research without producing an accurate characterization of who does not vaccinate,
much more providing a deep answer to how they made their choice, and why. Anti-vaccination
behavior is a contemporary behavior, with historical precedent, but the context of those
engaging in it has changed significantly due to digital age information access and relaxed
gatekeepers. The table below lists each questions, the evidence sources and methods of
analysis.

24

TABLE 2.1 RESEARCH DESIGN

Research Question

Sources of Evidence

Method of Analysis

R1: How does vaccination
avoidance and delay fit into
everyday life?

Blog and video posts,
artifacts, comment
threads

Convergence of qualitative
analysis from coding multiple
evidence streams

R2: What information practices
does someone who has not
vaccinated their children
employ?
R3: What is the story and impact
of the information and
information sources they use?
R4: What “family resemblances”
can be discerned about Mama
Natural and her network?

Blog and video posts,
artifacts, information
sources

Analytic memo-writing,
capture of information use
instances

R2, artifacts

Bibliometric tools, altmetric
tools

Blog and video posts,
artifacts, R2, appearance
on other channels

Analytic memo-writing,
quantitative content analysis
of MN and her peers/
network

R5: What theoretical framework
can describe this context?

All evidence streams

Analytic memo-writing,
qualitative coding

2.7 Formal Data Collection Techniques
“The emergent nature of the investigation means that very often it is impossible to say
exactly what data collection techniques will be applied until” research begins (Pickard, 2007, p.
89). However, this also means the design can adapt “for confirmation or refutation of emerging
themes as the researcher is aware of them before vacating the site and can adapt the data
collection to respond to these emerging themes” (Pickard, 2007, p. 90). Due to inherent
qualities of the case study approach it was difficult to anticipate exactly which data would be
collected and how they would be analyzed. Despite or because of this, Yin argues for a detailed
protocol and, if possible, the creation of a database(s) to ensure internal validity within a case
study. The protocol ensures that every time data is collected it is collected in the same manner;
that regardless of who collected it they would collect the same data. Of course, this is not
25

always feasible—for example, in a semi-structured interview the data would be different each
time—but the stronger and more detailed the protocol, the more feasible such replication is.
Replication in case studies means another researcher, using the protocol(s), could replicate the
case, not replicate the case’s findings in another case.
Pickard (2007) notes, “You will collect and store multiple sources of evidence. This
needs to be done comprehensively and systematically, in formats that can be referenced and
sorted so that converging lines of inquiry and patterns can be uncovered” (p. 89). Because I
collectd and evaluated multiple data types, there were multiple databases of evidence and data
collection protocols. The collection protocol and storage plan for each evidence stream is in the
table below. The data collection protocols are outlined in Appendices B, C, and D. As the design
may shift during data collection and analysis, I intended to “keep a methodological journal in
which you jot down your methodological dilemmas, directions, and decisions” as Charmaz
(2014, p. 165) recommends. This did not suit my working style. Instead I kept a master task list
that documented where I was at each phase of analysis and wrote about my methodological
decisions in memos.

26

TABLE 2.2

Evidence Stream

Data Collection Protocol

Storage

Blog posts

Detailed Qualtrics entry form
(Appendix B)

Each post was saved as a PDF, the data
collected about each post will be stored
in Qualtrics

Videos

Detailed Qualtrics entry form (if
part of a blog post, Appendix B,
other video will be Appendix C)

Data collected about video were stored
in Qualtrics

Artifacts

Inductive coding and memoing
in Qualtrics or on the artifact
when possible

Physical artifacts were stored in a safe
space, some data collected about them
were stored in Qualtrics and other digital
tools

Information Used

Collected during different
rounds of data collection (from
posts, videos, & artifacts) in
different Qualtrics databases,
then entered into protocol in
Appendix B

Stored in Qualtrics, analysis stored in
Excel and Stata files

Other Evidence
Streams

Determined which of existing
protocols was most suited for it
or developed new one

Stored in Qualtrics and other spaces as
needed

2.8 Formal Data Analysis Techniques
The nature of the research design meant the anticipated data analysis techniques were
just that—anticipated. It was possible other methods would be deemed necessary or even that
planned analysis would be altered. Based on the research questions I thought quantitative and
qualitative content analysis would be used, as well as bibliometric methods, and descriptive
statistics, and digital ethnography.

27

2.8.1 Digital ethnography
Hine (2015) considers the role of ethnography when studying the Internet and mediated
communication and how it challenges basic assumptions, such as
When we watch a fight break out on Twitter we cannot be sure whether any of the
followers of those involved are seeing the same fight, at the same time, and
understanding it in the same way that we do. The very notion of a singular “situation” as
a pre-existing object breaks down (p. 3).
Ethnographers strive to observe and do what those they study are doing, in many ways I was
observing and doing what Mama Natural’s followers do. I could only see the interactions they
chose to publish, but reading the blog without leaving a public comment, “lurking,” is an
extremely common behavior. Like a case study, an ethnographic study cannot be wholly
premeditated (Hine, 2015). Hine’s (2015) view of the Internet as “an infrastructure that
underpins the things that people do, rather than a foregrounded activity that they do in its own
right” (p. 8) is a helpful frame for looking at Mama Natural. The Internet is the infrastructure
that has allowed her to store years of the “mundane aspects of everyday existence” (Hine,
2015, p. 164) that I think shape the phenomenon of interest but that would be difficult to
obtain in other forms of data collection.
This work was also driven by “a belief that engagement with the field should be driven
by a pursuit of the ways in which a setting uniquely makes sense, rather than the application of
a particular model of what a field should be” (Hine, 2015, p. 31). As case studies must
triangulate evidence, “Ethnographers need to triangulate their own perceptions with those of
other participants” (Hine, 2015, p. 50). I did not triangulate my own experiences with Mama
Natural’s participants, but did debrief them with people who were proxies for facets of her, as
discussed in section 2.10. Other than not interviewing participants, this research included
28

typical ethnographic “learning-by-doing, observation, recording activities and archiving
documents” (Hine, 2015, p. 15) and “the embodied experiences of the researcher [will be] one
of its primary means of discovery” (p. 19).
However, the primary methodological approach was still the case study. While I do not
“aspire to develop depersonalized and standardized instruments of data collection” (Hine,
2015, p. 19), the data were collected in a systematic, standardized way that could be replicated
by another researcher following the same protocol. Though our findings would differ, the data
we collected, for the most part, should match. Like an ethnographer, I did not make an
“objective account independent of the specificities of a particular ethnographer’s engagement
with the setting” (Hine, 2015, p. 20), if only because such an account is, when examining such a
contested topic, impossible.
Unobtrusive digital ethnographic methods were embedded within this research design.
Hine (2015) does “not claim that unobtrusive methods applied to online settings are necessarily
in themselves sufficient to enable a robust ethnographic account to be constructed” (p. 157)
but “for an ethnographer interested in those aspects of the minutiae of everyday life which
participants may find it difficult to talk about retrospectively in an interview situation” (p. 157)
they can be illuminating. These methods were essential to my work and also underlined the
rationale for avoiding face-to-face data collection because “non-reactive research methods are
very useful where it may be difficult for respondents to give honest or authentic answers about
their behavior, possibly because answers might be seen as socially undesirable” (Hine, 2015, p
159). Asking a parent why they have not vaccinated their child, or anything about possible
vaccine opposition almost always puts them in a defensive position—particularly when the

29

person questioning them is associated with the scientific community. Mama Natural’s site and
content are “a form of data that can readily be collected and interpreting it as a proxy for a
behavior that the researcher is interested in but cannot necessarily ask about or observe
directly” (Hine, 2015, p159).
2.8.2 Qualitative content analysis: Inductive coding analytic memo writing
I utilized certain grounded theory methods as articulated by Charmaz, particularly
inductive coding and analytic memo writing. Coding is a place to “define what is happening in
the data and begin to grapple with what it means” (Charmaz, 2014, p. 113). Grounded theory
coding typically involves multiple rounds, an initial broad phase and then a focused selective
phase (Charmaz, 2014, p. 113). Via memo-writing I accessed the “implicit, unstated, and
condensed meanings” (Charmaz, 2014, p. 180). These codes and memos were distilled into
themes, “outcome[s] of coding, categorization, or analytic reflection, not something that is, in
itself, coded” (Saldaña, 2013, p. 14).
2.8.3 Quantitative content analysis
Quantitative content analysis “applies preconceived categories or codes to the data”
(Charmaz, p. 114). In assessing family resemblances, I utilized quantitative content analysis. The
Mama Natural site exists within a network of mommy blogs that advocate natural living. Just
the blog page advertising her book features endorsements from 13 other authors or digital
creators (“The Mama Natural Week by Week Guide to Pregnancy & Childbirth | Mama
Natural,” 2017). A cursory look at their descriptions and web presences reveals some obvious
similarities in demographic characteristics, general areas of focus, and specific topics or stances
on topics (for example, circumcision or cosleeping). Additional elements included some of the

30

information sources identified in my third research question, such as the book, Nourishing
Traditions. The creators of some of Mama Natural’s favorite artifacts, other blogs she appears
on, or individuals she regularly cites, could have been included in this assessment, but
ultimately were not because they were seen as experts she admired, rather than peers. Other
individuals were identified by looking at who Mama Natural follows and interacts with on her
social media accounts, particularly YouTube. To ensure a robust comparison, I aimed for a
minimum of 30 individuals, though I was able to obtain over 80 cases to contrast.

2.8.4 Metrics, impact, story
The website RetractionWatch, a blog devoted to “tracking retractions as a window into
the scientific process” reported a surprising story—the top ten most cited retracted articles had
continued to be cited after they been retracted and some had received more citations since
retraction than before (Oransky, 2015). This list included the infamous article by Wakefield et
al. which alluded to a causal link between the MMR vaccine and Autism Spectrum Disorder. In
my previous study of Mama Natural, I noticed she engages with information sources of all types
—scholarly, government, informal, et cetera. It is possible that some of the information she
uses is a special case, such as the Wakefield article, but without examining the metrical aspect
of such information it would be impossible to know. Thus, when possible, I intended to tell the
bibliometric story of the information object’s influence.
While for some this was as easy as retrieving its information in the major bibliometric
sources (Web of Science, Scopus, Google Scholar) and checking the Altmetric plug-in, for others
it was a decidedly more complex task. The citations for popular materials are not tracked, and

31

stating the influence of a blog or a specific newspaper article is a nebulous task. However, that
does not mean it is not worth attempting. Many researchers who study online spaces state the
space’s impact via Alexa ratings. Flaherty et al.’s (2014) work about the Jenny McCarthy effect
noted how many libraries the controversial book was available in via WorldCat. Sometimes the
influence of an information object can be discerned in ways other than measurement. For
example, the Dr. Sears Vaccine book inspired Offit and Moser (2009) to write an article
specifically addressing it and many of its claims. I had intended to devote more time to
analyzing the information objects cited, but because of the difficulties in understanding their
influence, the amount of cited objects, and the relatively low importance Genevieve placed on
them, I did not pursue this line of inquiry.
2.9 Summary
2.9.1 Ethical considerations—Anonymizing the case
Mama Natural is a website and an online personality. She is also a person who shares
much of her personal life with whomever comes to any of her digital platforms. Studying her
meant studying her livelihood and her family in great detail. While her husband chooses to be a
part of this digital presence, her children cannot, however they are an integral part of her story.
It was necessary at all times to remember that these are real people and not all are consenting
adults.
There was also the matter of how to report the findings of this case study. Yin (2014)
advocates not anonymizing the case whenever possible. Considering Mama Natural is a public
figure and all data collected will be publically accessible or paid for (such as artifacts available
for anyone to purchase), I did not study anything confidential or hidden. Because the

32

identifiable aspects of her site make her distinct and a good case, anonymizing her threatened
the integrity and salience of the findings. In addition, prior research that has focused on
mommy blogs has not anonymized them. Bruckman, Luther, and Fiesler (2015) even “argue
that anonymizing [Internet names] … would be unethical” (p. 244) because “we are studying
people who deserve credit for their work, and who are entitled to respond to our
representations of them” (p. 244).
2.9.2 Institutional Review Board
This research was found exempt by the UNC Office of Human Research Ethics on
September 1, 2017, IRB Notice 17-2009.
2.10 Challenges
It was foreseeable that the research design, questions, and direction would change
during data collection and analysis. The qualitative elements of this study relied on my
interpretation—and another researcher might interpret the data differently, for “multiple
realities exist because we each perceive and interpret social life from different points of view”
(Saldaña, 2013, p. 8). Charmaz notes “Every researcher holds preconceptions that influence, but
may not determine what we attend to and how we make sense of it” (p. 156).
The main limitation of this work was that it is a single-case design. One case is not
representative of or generalizable to others, nor is it designed to be. Mama Natural does not
stand for all mommy bloggers or mothers who do not vaccinate their children, or any of the
other facets that make her of interest to researchers. A case study about her cannot be used to
tell us about all others like her, but that is acceptable because it is not designed to do so.
Instead, it can shed light on theoretical constructs that broader research cannot be sensitive to,

33

the empirical depth reached by a single case can contribute by generating thorough description
and theoretical understanding that can be sought in other cases and contexts. There were
aspects of this case that I could not say with certainty are pertinent to other cases and contexts,
though they held great import to understanding Genevieve. This is discussed further in section
5.5.1.
One methodological limitation of this work was that it did not utilize direct interaction
with the case as an evidence source. Yin considers the interview “one of the most important
sources of case study evidence” (p. 110) though he notes that “interviews should always be
considered verbal reports only” (p. 113) especially because “Corroborating these views against
other sources would not be as relevant as when you are dealing with behavioral events” (p.
113). At the time the research was undertaken, Mama Natural’s website said she did not
respond to email inquiries (“About Mama Natural,” 2011), making contact a challenge.
Interviewing her would have presented such significant challenges in building rapport and trust
that I did not think it would be a worthwhile use of time, especially given the immense amount
of video diary-like evidence already available. Interviewing her followers also presented
challenges, as doing so with or without her consent would have disturbed the site more than
necessary—something Creswell (2002, p. 181) cautions against.
2.10.1 Debriefing
Because I was the principal and sole investigator in this study, I chose to improve the
validity of the findings with peer debriefing. Via my own social network, I have access to and
friendly relationships with a chiropractor who has never been vaccinated and is opposed to
vaccines; Dr. Alice Callahan of the blog, Science of Mom; a certified nurse midwife, and several

34

new mothers. All agreed to participate in discussions with me to discuss findings, themes, and
ask for their insight and experience. In practice, interviews with the new parents and the
midwife were the most necessary to check my interpretation and gain subject matter expertise.
2.10.2 Researcher as instrument
Holloway and Biley (2011) assert, “The self is always present” (p. 971), implicitly or
explicitly in fieldwork. In qualitative research it may be more so, thus more necessary to directly
assess one’s own standing in the work and how that can shape one’s interpretation. While I am
fond of children, I do not have my own and could not draw on personal experiences of childrearing and maternity (though this same lack also meant my own experiences could not bias
me). However, if I have children I have every intention of adhering to the CDC’s vaccination
schedule. I am able to separate my perspectives on how I view the decision not to vaccinate as
a researcher and as a member of society.
When I first began to study parents who choose not to vaccinate, it was from a place of
consternation. I had numerous assumptions; that the scientific evidence was crystal clear, that
all of these parents were listening to Jenny McCarthy, and so on. Quickly, I saw the complexity
of the issue and the numerous segments who had been coalesced into one group. I also was
repeatedly exposed to my own assumptions in the literature and in media about the subject
and began to see how they exacerbated my misreading of the phenomenon which contributed
to my misunderstanding, false conflations and oversimplifications. While I can now assert I view
the phenomenon as considerably more layered and complicated, the science as science, rather
than delivered with the ten commandments, I still must recognize my own views and how they
shape my interpretation. Despite or because of everything I have read and studied, I still believe

35

choosing to vaccinate is the right decision for virtually every child. In fact, studying it has
intensified this belief.
Considering how my own views have evolved has shaped this research design. After
working on my comprehensive exams for several months I concluded that I believed even more
firmly in vaccination, but that I now had different language for it and could articulate why in a
much richer way. Surprisingly to myself, the science became supporting evidence and
vaccination became a way to operationalize one’s values. As I began to see vaccination as a
choice made to align with values (for some, not for all), I wondered how it fit into everyday life,
particularly as it is not a normative choice and can involve stigma, though the values-aspect
likely imbues the parent with much conviction.
I was limited in certain ways that shaped my interpretation, but I am and was able to
empathize with making a decision that is stigmatized for reasons the decider feels are unfair
and wrong. I did not think Mama Natural and I make many of the same choices, but I thought
we made our choices in similar ways. Also, while some of her behaviors are not the choices I
make, many are choices my friends and family have made. At a reductive level, this research
will be conducted by a pro-vaccine woman who is not a parent studying a woman who is a
parent who has not vaccinated her children. The limitations were obvious, but also less limiting
than they appeared.
2.11 Impact
At the completion of the case study, I have generated a case study report that describes
how vaccine opposition fits into everyday life, the worldview where it is normative, and

36

theoretical model that describes this worldview. This report describes the information practices
and information used by my case, as well as the family resemblances of those in this context.

37

CHAPTER 3: METHODS
3.1 Summary of Data Collected
A summary of all data I collected can be found in Table 3.1. The first data I collected
were blog posts, along with comment interactions and citation data. During this phase, I viewed
some of her videos, identified artifacts and began that analysis, conducted several interviews
with peer debriefers. After all blog posts were read (and comments and citation data collected),
I viewed all Mama Natural videos on YouTube but not on her blog—artifact analysis was
concurrent. After the completion of all videos, I registered for her birth course—an onlinedelivery education artifact consisting of 10 sessions with videos, quizzes, and handouts.
Concurrent with this period was iterative coding of blog posts. After completing the course and
completing all of the other artifacts, I cleaned the bibliometric data and descriptive data from
the blog posts. At the completion of these phases, I reviewed hidden blog posts and an external
forum thread about Mama Natural discovered during the first phase. I then reviewed and
distilled all memos, comments, and data from earlier phases. Nearing the completion of these
phases, the set of family resemblances was finalized and the list of Mama Natural’s potential
network was cleaned, reduced to 85 cases, and assessed for exhibition of each resemblance.

38

TABLE 3.1

Data Type
Blog posts
Comment interactions

Volume
554 (+10 hidden posts)
426 comment exchanges

Videos
Artifacts

534 (36+ hours)
6 (approximately 2400 pages)
1 video (90 minutes)
1 deck of 50 affirmation
cards
1500 citations
5 (about five hours)
9 hours of video
1 forum thread of 154 posts
85 cases with 51
characteristics

Information Objects Cited
Interviews with PDs
Birth Course
External perceptions of MN
Network

Note
Selected from 20,743 total
comments

3.2 First Phase of Data Collection:
The first phase of data collection began on September 1, 2017 upon receipt of
exemption from the UNC IRB. Mama Natural’s blog, mamanatural.com, was the focus of the
first phase—specifically every available blog post listed in sequence. I reviewed each post input
data into a Qualtrics form I designed. The form is available in Appendix B. I created this form
based on the proposal and previous experience in the pilot content analysis of Mama Natural
conducted in Spring 2015. The form included structural components—the post’s title, URL, and
file name (all blog posts were saved as PDFs for future qualitative coding), descriptive aspects—
date, category, number of comments, and space for researcher’s notes, both methodological
and qualitative. In addition to this data collection tool, there were two other Qualtrics forms
open for use during this phase—a general memo capture tool and a comment collection tool. In
addition to this, there was a Google Sheet where potential members of Mama Natural’s
network were entered (their names and handles, the MN post they were featured in, and any

39

notes); a Google Document where possible family resemblances were listed, and an additional
Google Document where artifacts were listed.
I analyzed the posts in chronological order of their appearance on the site (during data
collection I discovered that some posts were reordered, sometimes by years). I viewed each
post in a new tab while the data collection tool was viewed in a different window. For every
blog post reviewed, the I entered the URL into the Wayback Machine (https://web.archive.org/)
for dating, and I opened and cataloged every hyperlink as information or as a product for
purchase. When Mama Natural included links to her own posts, I noted this (in a Yes/No
format) but did not tabulate how many because which posts was not of interest—only that she
was self-citing. I never counted Mama Natural’s own posts in the information cited section
because that question aimed to capture all external information use and her reliance on herself
as a source was measured in a different question. Frequently Mama Natural would include an
Amazon link to information objects, such as reference books, I counted these as sources rather
than products because theoretically one could acquire them without paying and still experience
the benefit, unlike a food product. I treated embedded links to digital storefronts as products,
not as information, because they are primarily for purchasing. I did not count products because
she frequently linked to a whole page of products, not just one specific item, because it
changed over time; because she would list items without linking to products; and the links
changed over time.
Dates for posts reflect, as precisely as possible, the date they were first published. Many
had been edited and revised and republished so that they appeared in sequence with more
recent posts.

40

3.2.1 Comment Collection Rationale
Early in the first phase of data collection I found collecting every single comment
unwieldy and unimportant. Mama Natural’s readership was not the primary point of interest—
how she interacts with them was. However, even isolating only to comments that she
responded to still would have included hundreds of non-substantive comments that were not
useful. For example, when a reader wrote “Thank you so much for this post” and Genevieve
responded “you’re welcome!” I did not observe anything that would add to the understanding
of the phenomenon of interest. I typically collected longer comments, more detailed responses
where Genevieve or someone from her team made specific recommendations or shared
something revelatory—such as when Genevieve told a reader she had to remove a video
because its content did not comply with the FDA (“Hospital Bag Checklist,” 2016). Other
comments were collected for reasons I could not easily articulate but intuitively felt to be
important and possibly of interest in future stages of analysis.
Of course, something is lost in ignoring the comments to which Genevieve did not reply.
It is possible and likely to uncover patterns in who she responded to, but it would not be
possible to understand why she didn’t reply to others. Even proposing a reason would be a
guess—perhaps she was busy, maybe the commenter wrote a comment years after the original
post. That, combined with the community of commenters not being of primary interest pushed
those whose comments were not responded to outside of the scope of this research. Further,
commenters are a distinct group of Mama Natural’s audience, especially given what we know
about lurkers (Sun, Rau, & Ma, 2014), individuals who are active users of online spaces but
never post.

41

Overall I entered 426 comment interactions into the collection form. It is important to
note that sometimes I entered one comment and one response, on other occasions I entered a
longer thread of 3-8 comments where it was unclear which Genevieve was responding to or if
she was responding to many, but I counted all of these as a single interaction.
I reviewed this collection of comments several months later. I discarded over 300
comment exchanges and kept the remainder in a separate document with notes and codes as
applicable. I treated the comments as an opportunity to observe Genevieve interacting with
members of her community, so I gave preference to observing interactions that revealed new
facets and details of Genevieve, the website, and her information practices.
During the initial review of blog posts, other than visitors, I noticed three distinct blog
commenting accounts attached to the site in some way. These included Team Mama Natural
(perhaps Genevieve’s husband, Mike, and/or Maura, the nurse who helped create the birth
course), comments from Genevieve, and another account called Genevieve Mama Natural.
These accounts were offset in a different color font that made them distinct from the
comments of readers.
3.2.3 Conclusion of first phase
At the conclusion of the first phase, I collected 544 posts 426 comments 20 memos and
identified 130 network members (including duplicates).
3.3 Secondary Phases of Data Collection
3.3.1 Review of videos on YouTube but not on Blog
I watched 220 videos between October and November of 2017. Video titles and links
were collected along with a short abstract, notes, and relevant quotes.

42

3.3.2 Coding of blog posts
I began the first round of coding of the 544 blog posts on November 9, 2017 and
concluded it several weeks later. I coded the posts inductively in two rounds. During the first
round, I read each post and applied codes and notes with annotations. I did not read posts in
any particular order, to mark a post as read, “XXX” was added to the file name. During the
second rounds, I read posts again, along with the codes and notes, sometimes further codes
and notes were added. At this point I removed the “XXX” from the file name. Additionally, I
entered any coded text or notes into a separate document for later review.
3.4 Artifacts
During the first phase of data analysis, I identified many artifacts as relevant research
objects, they are listed, along with rationale for inclusion, in Appendix A. I considered artifacts
relevant if they were recurring threads in Mama Natural’s public videos—such as the cookbook
Nourishing Traditions, which she repeatedly mentions changed her life and would reference all
the time. I identified other artifacts as relevant because they were central to the landscape and
necessary to absorb the multiple layers of meaning embedded within the worldview.
I purchased books coded them inductively in ink. I saved digital text artifacts as PDFs
and coded them inductively with text notes, and coded selections were later compiled in a
separate document. I watched artifacts like documentaries in formats friendly to frequent
pausing and rewinding. As codes emerged, I wrote multiple memos to define the codes, and
abstract them. Artifact consumption was concurrent—finishing a book was not a requirement
to beginning another. I did this to prevent researcher fatigue and hinder the tendency for later
artifacts being too heavily compared to artifacts studied first.

43

I collected a bracelet and a deck of affirmation cards as physical artifacts. I described
these items in notes and memos. The final artifact was Mama Natural’s birth course, a digital
class comprised of ten sessions, all featuring a video, quiz, downloadable resources and
weblinks. Each class video and materials were described in lengthy memos. Class videos were
typically upwards of forty minutes long, but due to pausing and rewinding for note-taking,
usually took twice as long to view. To register for the birth course, I had to enter an expected
due date, as I was not and am not expecting, I falsified one. This was the only act of subterfuge I
had to perform to obtain data.
3.5 Information Used
On December 24, 2017, all of the information citations I gathered during the first round
of data collection were entered into a spreadsheet. I collected them en masse and had to
separate them, so from 554 posts, of which 273 had external citations (citing information other
than MamaNatural posts), came 1499 citations. During this first cleaning, I had to remove some
because they were not clear citations or did not contain links or enough information. For
example, I did not enter one citation because my entry for it was “she talks about Bruce Fife a
lot” but she did not directly link to him. Another example was an in-text reference to a Biblical
verse—this was excluded. Alternatively, some were included—such as a mobile phone
application, because she directly linked to it and because it was free, I considered it information
rather than a product. Ultimately less than 10 entries required this kind of consideration.
Once all 1499 citations were in a format where they were individual cases (rather than
attached en masse at the level of a blog post), I examined and entered metadata for each case
using a modified Dublin Core format (Title, Creator, Publisher, Date, Type, Format, Source, with

44

Duplicate and Notes as added fields). I assigned all citations a case number. I gathered
metadata about books from WorldCat.org when possible, or publisher sites, booksellers, and
Goodreads when not. I tagged items that appeared to be or were definitely duplicates as such. I
had to remove certain items, such as broad search results rather than specific information
objects, for example “Christian soaking music” is a genre, compared to Nourishing Traditions, a
cookbook. Once I had cleaned the information citations, I found there were actually 1500
citations—two citations had been entered into one row. From there, I found and removed 120
broken links and 134 duplicates for a total of 1246 citations.
3.6 Evaluating the scholarly information used
I entered the title of each scholarly article into Google Scholar, Scopus, Web of Science,
and Altmetric to obtain its citation count. If additional metadata was needed, I entered that as
well. If an article could not be located, I indicated that with an “X” as opposed to a “0” which
meant it could be found but had a citation count of zero.
I was also interested in which journals were cited and how often, because the number
of scholarly citations was relatively small, assessing duplicates was relatively easy and done via
simple sorting techniques and then counting the number of tallies. I wanted to know if the
journals cited were peer-reviewed and open-access, as during the initial cleaning of data, I
noticed Genevieve sometimes linked to abstracts and sometimes full-text, depending on what
was available (surprisingly I have never heard her express upset about this).
3.7 Mama Natural’s Network
While reading Mama Natural’s posts, any time she included a link to a friend’s blog,
profiled a friend, allowed someone to guest post, or collaborated with someone in anyway, I

45

recorded their name and website in a spreadsheet for future analysis of family resemblances.
While cleaning Mama Natural’s information citations, I expanded this criteria to include blogs
she cited—for their posts or recipes, with the rationale that she was familiar with them and if
some of their material supported her ideas, they might be members—if not direct links—of the
natural lifestyle community.
At the beginning, there were 205 names. First, I removed duplicates, then I assessed the
cases against inclusion and exclusion criteria. To be included, a case needed to be a web
presence which supported and sought public engagement and which had a relationship with
Mama Natural, such as a collaboration or a guest post. I excluded cases if they had no evidence
of activity within the last 12 months (since January of 2017); if they were part of a larger
presence but did not have their own individual presence (an author whose article appeared on
The Huffington Post but who did not have their own blog/website); and finally, if their digital
presence did not primarily feature one of these four topics: natural lifestyle, pregnancy and
childbirth, parenting, or food/recipes. At the conclusion of this phase, there were 85 cases.
I collected these cases with the goal of identifying a set of family resemblances that
were common or common enough across the community that the presence of one increased
the likelihood of another. I kept the set of family resemblances in a document that was always
open when collecting and evaluating any part of my dissertation data. I distilled these into 6
categories with a total of 51 characteristics. The full list can be found in the section 4.9. I
generated these characteristics from the data I collected and analyzed during the first rounds of
the study, they are in no way exhaustive or definitive.

46

I marked the presence of a family resemblance with a zero, yes, or no. A zero meant no
presence, yes meant it was addressed or endorsed, and no meant it was addressed or
mentioned but in a negative manner. For example, Mama Natural has a post about baby-led
weaning, but she does not personally feel it is the best choice for her child, I considered this a
yes.
Measuring or scoring cases along these characteristics was difficult. First, I could not
assess some fields, such as race, partnership status, religion, or orientation, in a zero-yes-no
manner. A zero did not necessarily mean a characteristic was not shared by a case—only that I
could not detect its presence. For some cases, this bias may be more pronounced than others—
such as cases whose primary presence is YouTube. These cases likely share more family
resemblances than I detected, but it was not reasonable to watch hundreds of videos listening
for a casual reference to baby-led weaning or Ina May Gaskin. Other characteristics are prone
to researcher bias, such as race and ethnicity (determined by researcher’s examination of
photographs) or the presence of a personal redemption arc. Overall, it is more likely I
underestimated a case’s resemblances due to my own limitations or the case’s own nondisclosure.
3.8 Statistical data analysis
I downloaded all first round data from Qualtrics. I then resolved cases with missing data.
I revisited and resolved cases with ambiguous or erroneous data (for example, when a year was
entered 201, this was an error). I stripped the body of data to relevant variables (fields
containing memos, titles, et cetera were dropped) and entered remaining data into Stata. I

47

calculated summary statistics and cross tabulations in Stata. I followed the same protocol when
calculating bibliometric summary statistics.
3.9 Hidden and invisible posts
I did not collect or analyze posts that were no longer accessible except via the Wayback
Machine until I evaluated all other blog data. I had identified a set of 10 posts related to
vaccines in earlier phases of collection. I entered these URLs into Wayback Machine and saved a
version of each as a PDF. From there, analysis followed the same iterative pattern for all other
blog data. I entered the dates, titles, number of comments and shares for each posts into a
document along with relevant quotes and comment interactions from each post. I kept this
document separate from other blog post-related data because I considered these posts—
hidden but still available and accessible via the WayBack Machine—separate and distinct from
blog posts available on the Mama Natural website.
3.10 External perceptions of Mama Natural
While there were no threads on GOMIBLOGS devoted to Mama Natural, I identified a
public thread on YTMD (YouTube Momma Drama) about her. It featured 154 posts from 2012
to 2015. I saved each page of the thread as a PDF and coded them in an iterative fashion.
3.11 Peer debriefing
Peer debriefing occurred at all phases of data collection. During the first phase of data
collection, my peer debriefing heavily centered on conversations with a certified nurse midwife
who resides and works in a large urban area. I did not record these phone conversations, but
took detailed notes recorded some comments verbatim. During these early conversations, my
questions varied in structure and focus. Some centered on meaning, “If a woman comes to you

48

and says she has watched this film, what is she telling you?” Others were more scientific in
nature, “Please tell me what the term ‘bloody show’ means.”
Another important person who served as a peer debriefer was a chiropractor who has
never been vaccinated and is vaccine-avoidant. I interviewed this person at the beginning of the
artifact analysis phase. I focused on his definition of key terms, clarification of how those
constructs and values might be operationalized into everyday life, and information seeking
behavior. I also asked about his familiarity with several key figures and artifacts in Mama
Natural’s life.
Throughout this period I engaged in casual questioning and debriefing with friends and
peers, particularly a physician and new parents. These interactions were usually characterized
by short interactions, less than 10 minutes and centered around specific subject matter they
would know from direct experience (for example, why wait until a newborn is 2 weeks old to
start cloth diapering?). I had originally intended to reach out to a mommy blogger within my
own network, but never did so. I did not do this because throughout data collection, memoing,
and note-taking, I never produced a list of questions for her. During most phases of data
collection, I had a running list of items to ask others about, but such questions never came
organically for Alice, so I did not pursue an interview. I think this is because Mama Natural was
somewhat transparent about how her blog would change and it was easy to see the changes in
the WayBack Machine, thus, many of the questions about blogging mechanics I might have had
for Alice were answered by the data.

49

CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS
Throughout the findings and discussion section, I will include quotations from numerous
evidence streams, including comments on blog posts, selections from forum threads, and
statements from Mama Natural’s videos. If they appear casual, colloquial, and incorrect, this
should not discredit the legitimacy of their content or be used to judge the speaker. Rather it is
a reflection of the norms of discourse in the environment from which the data was taken. For
example, in the anonymous online forum YTMommaDrama, usernames like PinkTuTu,
Otherthings, and Shortysahm were normative within that space.
In this chapter I will present my theoretical and empirical findings. First, I will introduce
a theoretical model to explain this context. I will then present each aspect of the theory
alongside the evidence that illustrates it.
4.1 Choosing an inside on the outside: Theoretical findings
I now introduce a model of the worldview my case, Mama Natural, inhabits (Figure 4.1).
This worldview, naturalism, is discussed in great detail in sections 4.5 and 4.6. I developed this
model to describe the relationships between the behaviors and ideology I observed throughout
data collection and to help me explain them to others. The worldview is represented by three
concentric circles, the outermost is green, the middle orange, and the innermost red. These
colors correspond to the meanings of a traffic light and reflect the level of movement available

50

to inhabitants. The outermost circle is a dotted barrier—there are many points of entry
throughout the circle and individuals can enter many ways. This circle is the boundary between
this worldview and another one. The next circle is the distance between being a fringe-member
and a more involved member, to enter this circle—the orange one—the line is dashed, there
are fewer points of entry because less variation is allowed. Individuals contained within this
circle will still be variable, but there will be greater homogeneity. The last circle, the red, is a
long-dashed line to represent increasing homogeneity and fewer paths to entry. In this circle,
there is a close alignment between ideology and actions—members of this circle are similar to
high-level politicians. Individuals in the orange circle are closer to lower-level politicians or
moderate political activity, like the winner of a state-wide seat. These individuals may
moderate the views and information from the red circle to make it more palatable to members
on the fringe. Alignment of behavior and values with the principles of the worldview
determines position. For example, in a hypothetical community that did not value consuming
animal products, a cattle farmer would not be welcome in the center of the circle.
Figure 4.1

51

Figure 4.2 depicts the inhabitants of the innermost circle, information leaders.
Information leaders are individuals like Sally Fallon, the author of Nourishing Traditions,
Andrew Wakefield or Jenny McCarthy. Their views may be extreme, they lead by example, and
they are probably known outside of the worldview. They have agency, privilege, and power
within the worldview. They are represented by small blue dots packed tightly together—
because this circle is more closed and has fewer paths to entry, those within it will have high
homogeneity—though it may not be visually apparent. The center is a place where views are
not moderated to be appealing to outsiders and where there is a close match of behavior to
ideology. Individuals within this circle will publically embrace and exhibit much of the core
tenets of the ideology.
Figure 4.2

Within the orange circle are managers who may repackage the information and
directives of information leaders. They will “soften the message” so that it will be more
appealing and palatable to those residing within or outside of the green circle. Message
softening was visible when Genevieve presented her reasons for consuming animal products,
but assured readers she wasn’t judging them, compared to Sally Fallon’s blunt declaration that
“Even the most ardent vegans cannot escape dependence on animal products” (1999, p.474).
This circle is less homogeneous than the innermost circle because there are more paths to

52

entry. Members of this circle may be very different from one another. An individual on the top
of the orange circle) may have entered this worldview for reasons entirely different than a
person who entered it from the left. Though these individuals are very different, enough of
their behaviors align with the orange circle that they cannot be termed mainstream outsiders.
Figure 4.3

Within the green circle are individuals who are loosely affiliated with this worldview.
There will not be a close alignment with their behavior and the ideology of the worldview,
however their affiliation with the worldview may still be of profound importance to their
identity. To transcend from this circle to a more inner circle, these individuals must adopt
behavioral changes that put them in closer alignment with the ideology of the worldview. There
is a great degree of heterogeneity within this circle and much more tolerance of choices that
deviate from the principles of the worldview. Because the barriers to access are lowest here,
this is the easiest circle to join. Loose affiliation might mean only using essential oils or apple
cider vinegar, relatively inexpensive everyday products, while agreeing or disagreeing with
more central tenets of the worldview.

53

Figure 4.4

Outside of the green circle exists the fringe. Individuals in this area are unaffiliated with
this worldview and may not even be aware of it. Within the worldview these individuals are
perceived as potential followers or agents of persecution. This binary approach is preferred to
force the issue, because allowing for gradation encourages more differences of opinion which
would require greater tolerance for dissent. These outsiders may be members of the
mainstream or of another worldview. Within this framework the mainstream is an aggregation
of worldviews opposed to or outside of this worldview. Worldviews that exist on the fringes of
this worldview, such as veganism or environmentalism, are treated differently than others to
which this worldview, naturalism, is likely to appeal. This is discussed in greater detail in section
4.4.1.
Figure 4.5

54

4.1.1 How do people move on this model?
Movement across these circles increases in difficulty as one moves closer to the center
of the circle. To move across the circles repeatedly requires not only agency and autonomy, but
privilege and power. Residing within this worldview is not a choice for everyone who is in it.
Choice is construed to mean individuals would choose to reside there if they had the means
and opportunity to reside elsewhere. This definition of choice is essential to understanding the
difference between the two actors I will introduce, because one truly does not have a choice,
and the other may characterize or consider themselves without a choice despite great privilege
and power. I will use travel as a metaphorical frame because of Genevieve’s own conception of
natural lifestyle as a journey one does not always “choose” to take
Most of us start on our natural living journey because we encounter a health issue. It
may be an issue with a digestion, or a loss of energy, or a food sensitivity with one of
our kids. Circumstances like these force us to look at what we’re putting into – and onto
– our bodies (“My ‘Before’ Pictures! ❂ IRL #48,” 2015)
Individuals who move into this worldview are reluctant newcomers or willful adventurers.
Reluctant newcomers are marginalized, stigmatized, and disenfranchised, pushed out of their
home worldview—they cannot find sanctuary within this place and are forced to find a new
“home” (even if it is in the same geographic place) whose perspective or ideology is not hostile
to them. They may have “chosen” this new worldview because of lack of accessible resources or
needs unmet by the mainstream worldview. This new home is similar but also different. Rules,
norms, customs may all be different—some drastically so. Think of how race may influence
perception of a routine traffic stop. Even if this new world is different it is in the same place
(physically), so individuals must constantly manage two (at a minimum) different, potentially
conflicting worldviews and the residual stigma that created their reluctant newcomer status.
55

Willful travelers may experience some stigma, but it is not equivalent or at the scale of
reluctant newcomers. Willful travelers have not been pushed out, they have chosen to leave
their home worldview. In some ways, they are explorers. Because they are explorers of new
worlds, they relish and enjoy learning new worldviews. It is imperative to remember willful
travelers have chosen their journey—they retain agency, but most importantly they retain the
privilege and power they enjoyed before they began their journey. They can navigate between
the worldviews they inhabit with relative ease. Willful travelers can move freely between the
various circles of the model—even outside of it if they so choose. Reluctant newcomers likely
cannot.
The difference between a reluctant newcomer or a willful traveler in the outermost
circle could begin with food. A reluctant newcomer might enter the worldview because of an
allergy to soy—an omnipresent ingredient in processed foods. Because of the allergy, by default
they must observe many of the nutritional directives of the natural lifestyle. Their primary
reason for seeking foods made with “clean” ingredients is not nutrition, but safety. To contrast,
a willful traveler might choose to give up soy because they are interested in making lifestyle
changes or they want to experiment with their diet. There is no dire imperative forcing their
hand.
Because willful travelers retain the privilege and power from their former worldview,
and especially because they likely maintain relationships (friendly and family) they have fairly
permanent ties to the worldview they no longer inhabit. This means even if they do not actively
participate in it, they remain up-to-date on its happenings and customs. Because of the
privilege and power they enjoy, they are able to navigate introducing and enjoying the learned

56

behaviors of one world into another without experiencing significant stigmatization. In a post
promoting a book, Genevieve wrote “We know how powerful media can be in influencing a
generation and this book will speak to our children in a powerful and important way” (“Buy a
Book & Change the World... | Mama Natural,” n.d.)Their ability to choose these things, much
like they choose to inhabit these external worlds, means that experiences such as learning a
new vernacular are enjoyable explorations, not a necessity as they would be for a reluctant
newcomer. Because these customs are elective for travelers, they are pleasant, sought-after
activities, they are choices. These willful travelers may inhabit the world, but because of their
socioeconomic privilege and power they do not fully inhabit the context of this world. Because
they do not fully inhabit the context, they do not recognize that what they are choosing for
many is not a choice.
4.1.2 Where does this case fit on this model?
In this model, Mama Natural is within the orange circle. In the red circle are images of
Jenny McCarthy and Andrew Wakefield. Because Mama Natural is in the orange circle—the
moderating circle—because she does not express extreme anti-vaccination views, instead she
shares her own views and links to more extreme information, giving it a tacit endorsement.
Jackie Mize’s book, Supernatural Childbirth, asserts “You don’t find ‘miscarriage or abortion in
the Bible. It was not and is not today the will of G-d for you to lose your baby” (1995, p. 112).
Sally Fallon’s baby-rearing book “features a thought-provoking chapter dedicated to childhood
vaccines” (“Top 10 Natural Parenting Books,” 2014). Dr. Sears
presents the information in a way that empowers and encourages the parent to make
his/her informed decision without pushing an agenda. Finally, he offers a helpful
alternative schedule for parents who still want to vaccinate, but in a gentler way (“Top
10 Natural Parenting Books,” 2014)
57

These items do not come with warning labels or descriptions that speak to their true content.
Figure 4.6

She also makes comments about preserving her children’s ability to reenter other
worldviews. On the topic of peanut butter, she says “I stay away from peanut butter and don’t
give it to Griffin often. He has had it a few times as I don’t want him to live in a bubble” (“Is
Peanut Butter Healthy?,” 2013).
Genevieve is also positioned within the orange circle because of how she positions
herself when she creates opportunities for her audience to categorize themselves on the
spectrum of natural living. In a quiz that lets readers see “where do [they] fall on the parenting
crunch-o-meter?” she says “Full disclosure – I got Crunchy Mama Lite ☺” (“QUIZ,” 2014). Other
options included Traditional/Conventional Mom, Middle of the Road Mama, Earth Mama, and
Attached to the Max Mama. She does not present herself as the most extreme. In a related quiz
to determine one’s crunchiness, she reassured readers who were upset they received “Newbie”
rather than more experienced and extreme labels like “Granola Girl” or “Queen of Crunch”
(“Just How Crunchy Are You?,” 2014) that the quiz had misclassified them. To contrast, Sally

58

Fallon only identifies one recipe in all of Nourishing Traditions (which is over 650 pages) where
“we compromise somewhat on our principles” (1999, p. 57).
Of course, individuals are complex and may “travel” through multiple worldviews. While
Genevieve is a message manager for those who live a natural lifestyle, she is also a devout
Christian, a digital entrepreneur, at times a stay-at-home-mom, an author, and a wife. Her
worldview may be more accurately represented by a model like the one below. The model I
have created instead considers how an entrepreneurial person of faith experiences the natural
lifestyle.
Figure 4.7

4.1.3 Propositions
The following propositions comprise this theory.
1. One cannot penetrate deeper layers of the worldview without modifying behavior to
operationalize the values of the worldview.
2. Only information aligning with the principles of the chosen worldview will be allowed to
circulate without limits

59

3. Information and behaviors from the discarded worldview will be limited, meaning its
legitimacy and relevance will be tightly confined to scenarios likely extreme and rare
4. Negative mainstream attention may be sought by information leaders and message
managers and will always be used by information leaders and message managers to
legitimize the perception inhabitants of this worldview are persecuted
5. The persecution perception will be used to attract individuals who identify as outsiders
of the mainstream, they will be given the opportunity to become insiders in this new
worldview, which will mark their persecutors’ worldview as outsiders
6. This worldview is in conflict because it is trying to maintain two identities—the
persecuted, helpless outsider and the shrewd, wiser-than-thou insider
4.2 The willful traveler: The many cases of Mama Natural
This next section describes Genevieve’s evolution over time and reviews how she has
refined her focus, monetized her persona, and concealed parts of her past. After introducing
her digital persona and its evolution, I will position it within the theory in section 4.3 which
describes her as a message manager and section 4.4 which portrays how she manages
messages. Next I will describe the worldview whose messages she manages and the beliefs and
values that govern her actions in sections 4.5 and 4.6. Sections 4.7 and 4.8 describe how these
values and beliefs are operationalized. Section 4.9 offers an overhead view of this worldview,
mapping behaviors to position. I then consider what prevents individuals from entering the
worldview in section 4.10, and finally how outsiders perceive this worldview in section 4.11.

60

4.2.1 Coming into focus
Before Genevieve reached the position of a message manager, she was a willful traveler.
Her digital journey to becoming Mama Natural began with her first pregnancy when she joined
YouTube and started creating videos “because I was craving community, I wanted to bond with
other moms, and I knew I wanted to go natural and I knew that was going to be hard so I knew I
needed support” (“BABY FEVER! 👶 👧 👶 (IRL s2 e7),” 2015). Her blog has grown to cover 7
years of Mama Natural’s life, during which she had two children, moved from Chicago, IL to
Destin-area, FL, created a birth course and wrote a book. During my first review of the posts I
noticed that the site’s focus seemed to shift every 12-18 months, Genevieve herself
acknowledged this in the sixtieth episode of her IRL show, “My husband Michael and I tend to
get restless with our projects after a year or so” (“The End Of The IRL Show?,” 2015). Genevieve
mentioned several phases, such as pregnancy, postpartum, the MN show and the IRL show.
My own observations were that the site began around her pregnancy with her first child
and originally had less of a focus. The earliest videos included cooking demos, a relationship
series, and pregnancy updates. There was also a “mama natural show” that was not on the blog
but was sometimes referenced in newer videos. The earliest iteration of the site featured “How
to be a natural mama” in ten steps (these steps disappeared by 2013) and was less polished and
professional in appearance.

61

Figure 4.8

Figure 4.9

Figure 4.10

Figure 4.11

62

Figure 4.12

In the beginning of her blog, her actions resembled Morrison’s rendering of “personal
mommy blogging” which “is marked by direct emotional reciprocity among its participants,
creating strong bonds of trust and support” (2011, p. 37). While Genevieve has created a
community, the size of her audience and her enthusiastic “participation in remunerative
blogging practices such as advertising, sponsorship, paid reviews” (Morrison, 2011, p. 38) mark
her as a more polished, professional blogger. The blog’s focus shifted repeatedly (Figure 4.13);
towards caring for a new baby, and then again toward pregnancy and having a natural
pregnancy while she was carrying her second child. During this time she posted weekly vlogs
and kept posting on that schedule until her daughter was 12 weeks old (the 4th trimester). After
this the blog shifted again to “The IRL show,” IRL short for In Real Life, which was more focused
on family, faith, food, fun, and talking-head style allowed her to spend more time developing
her Mama Natural personal. This phase lasted a long time—over a year, during which she and
her family moved. They briefly rebooted this phase, but it was at this time she also began to
develop the birth course and pregnancy- and birth-topics took the spotlight. Her desire to share
her everyday life once again surfaced with the “Soul Food” video series.

63

Figure 4.13

2010

Earth Mama TV

Pregnancy vlogs
and lifestyle
tutorials

2011

Relationship
series and
cooking tutorials

The Mama
Natural Show

2012

Attends YouTube
NEXT

Collab videos

2013

Pregnancy by
week series

Birth of her
daughter

2014

Post partum
series

In Real Life (IRL)
Show

2015

Development of
birth course

Move to Florida

2016

Week-to-week
pregnancy guide
by email

Soul Food series

2017

Published book

Birth of her son

Greater
coordination of
videos and blog
posts

During the early years of Genevieve’s blog, she featured guest posts with some
regularity. Looking at some posts in Wayback Machine, many of these guest posts remain on
the blog but over time, the information about the guest author has been removed. Some guest
posts do retain the guest authorship, but not all. Posts have coalesced around one author Mama Natural. While some guest posts remain with guest authorship still preserved, others
such as “Breech Birth: What are your options for delivery?” lost evidence they were authored
by someone other than Genevieve - the post was originally authored by Team Mama Natural.
64

Figures 4.14 and 4.15

There are many possible reasons for this, but it seems to support a larger shift within the blog
over time—merging around a core identity and persona. When the blog first began, there were
many tags, now there are just four.

65

Figures 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19 and 4.20

Removing categories and tags removes specificity and precision tools for readers,
transferring control to the domain owner, common user design. This shift requires users to look
through more posts or use search and make relevance judgments to find posts previously
accessible. The result, intended or not, keeps readers’ eyes on the blog and forces deeper
engagement—which is more profitable.
In the early years before the blog was her and her husband’s full-time jobs, Genevieve
featured far more giveaways of varying value (jars of coconut oil to a $2000 treadmill desk).
Some of these were likely sponsored, but others may have been an effort to grow her audience

66

and attract new members. Genevieve also started refining a “schpiel” of sorts where she would
instruct viewers about her posting schedule at the end of her videos. Genevieve’s transformation
into a more professional mommy blogger started with reoccurring features, like annual gift guides, April
Fool’s videos, and birthdayl updates of her children. Genevieve also edited or modified many posts

to keep up with the changes on her site and style. Some of the revisions are unsurprising and
based on comments, such as fixing links or adding citations. Others involved the previously
mention injection of Amazon Affiliate links. Some posts were also updated with transcriptions
of videos. Other posts were rearranged to appear in sequence with newer posts. Genevieve
also has plans for the future of MamaNatural.com, in a post entitled “My 2017 resolutions” she
discussed her intention to create bump clubs and a series devoted to the first year of a baby’s
life (“My 2017 Resolutions | Mama Natural,” n.d.).
4.2.2 Hidden Mama Natural
Some phases and facets of Mama Natural were later concealed or deemphasized over
time. The shift on immunizations was the first that I noticed. The URL link
mamanatural.com/vaccines has been captured 81 times in the Wayback Machine with the
earliest on Januray 11, 2014 and the last on August 21, 2017 (though that capture says “Page
not found”) (“What We Are Doing About Vaccines for Children Now,” 2016). I have not seen the
post publically since mid-April 2017 and have had to study it from a WM-capture since that
time. This is a dramatic shift in public persona. The first iteration of Mama Natural featured “be
intentional about vaccines” in the side navigation bar as number 9 of 10 steps to being a natural
mama (Figure 4.14). She had not vaccinated either of her children and talked about it, if

67

sparingly—there was even a video series of posts (now removed and not mentioned to on her
blog) in addition to the aforementioned blog post.
Figure 4.21

There are other parts of Genevieve’s Mama Natural persona that she has separated and
attempted to create new channels for. How she incorporates her faith appears to be an area
somewhat unfulfilled to her. She mentions spirituality quite often—in her IRL series “Faith” was
a segment dedicated to it. A cross appears in her bedroom, and she usually wears a cross that
can be observed by viewers. However, there is the sense she would like these to be a larger
part of her offering. She announced launching “MamaSuperNatural” while probing for this
audience. Some of her readers commented that they were disappointed she would be
separating her faith from the rest of her programming (“The End Of The IRL Show?,” 2015).
While the Instagram and YouTube profiles are still available and public, they were never
developed further. The handle Mama Supernatural is too close to be coincidentally linked to
the book Supernatural Childbirth by Jackie Mize, of which Genevieve is an avowed reader,
believer, and supporter.

68

After the first phase of data collection, I went to MamaNatural’s YouTube page and
reviewed videos that were still public but not available on her blog. Watching her earliest
videos, I found out the Mama Natural was not her first foray. Some of these videos referenced
an Earth Mama TV, some pointed to or acknowledged the name change, but others did not.
Despite looking on YouTube and online, I could not find Earth Mama TV. For whatever reason,
Genevieve has removed or hidden all of that former material except for the videos she
transferred to the Mama Natural persona.
There are certain parts of Genevieve’s life that receive opaque references but are never
revealed in focus. Some are not surprising - it is common for individuals to keep identifying
personal details such as their place of employment private online. Despite the amount of
research she conducts for her blog and videos, she rarely references her information seeking
behaviors or what sources she monitors. She never reveals where she works (other than vague
“Corporate America” (“DO YOUR CHORES! 👧🏻 ⚙ 😩,” 2016)), and only mentions working parttime and then quitting in passing, not discussing specifics or bringing it up at the time.
References to her job are only given when necessary, such as when she took her son with her to
a meeting she had in California and Mike accompanied her to help - the meeting’s purpose is
never revealed but she needed to acknowledge being out of town to explain the change of
scenery in the video.
Given how much Genevieve shares with her audience and how much of a regular role
she gives her faith, it stands out that she has never spoken about her religious practice in great
detail. It aligns with a larger pattern of not adding context which might limit her appeal. Even
when discussing her spirituality, she typically uses the word “G-d” rather than Jesus.

69

Withholding context and using more inclusive language is a way to make this message more
accessible.
There are also matters hinted at and only disclosed later. The post “My big secret
project REVEALED!” disclosed the real reason she and her husband went to New York - meeting
with book publishers (“My Big Secret Project REVEALED! | Mama Natural,” n.d.). Other life
experiences are disclosed only after the danger has passed or the chance to weigh in would be
meaningless, such as revealing only after it happened, that her daughter went on formula for a
week because Genevieve was on antibiotics for a tick bite (“My Big Secret Project REVEALED! |
Mama Natural,” n.d., “What is the Best Baby Formula?,” 2016). In a video titled “Week 17 Scary Midwife Visit” it took the midwife a little while to find the heartbeat of the [fetus? Baby?]
and she instructed her husband to turn off the camera, rather than film the entire interaction.
Other acts of concealment include her site highlighting mainstream media attention but
not linking to this coverage or give much information about it.
Figure 4.22

It is true that she been featured on the Dr. Oz show, but until you read her post or
watch the video (hers or Dr. Oz’s) you would not know it was for her pumpkin spice latte recipe
(“What’s Your MAMA WOUND?,” 2014). When Genevieve does not include the coverage, she
forces the reader to seek it out—extra labor, or see the logos and come to conclusions that she
is trustworthy based on this mainstream media attention.

70

The most glaring act of hiding is the absence of Genevieve’s ten vaccine-related blog
posts and the accompanying videos. The main post “What we are doing about vaccines now”
(“What We Are Doing About Vaccines for Children Now,” 2016) was live until March of 2017.
Genevieve’s book was published several months later. The nine posts about individual vaccines
were created in late 2011 and the remaining post was created in 2014. All posts were no longer
publically available by May of 2017. While these posts are only accessible via the Wayback
Machine, subtler hints of Genevieve’s stance on vaccines remain – such as emphasizing
immunity-boosting foods and endorsing the Dr. Sears book.
The aspects of herself she has tried to deemphasize or conceal over time are traits that
could alienate outsiders unfamiliar with her. This is an effort to make her worldview more
palatable to unaffiliated individuals. Concealing the posts about vaccination happened before a
pivotal moment in her movement—publishing her book. The book has the potential to
dramatically expand her audience and her profile. Section 5.3.4 discusses how Genevieve views
herself as starting a movement, which these acts of concealment support.
4.2.3 A Natural Capitalist
As of this writing, Genevieve and her husband, Michael (Mike), appear to make their
living primarily from Mama Natural-related ventures. This includes her blog, her YouTube
videos, her book, her birth course, selling essential oils, and other sponsorships or brand
partnerships. This has not always been the case. When the blog first began, both Genevieve
and her husband worked full-time jobs in addition to creating Mama Natural content. Some of
these revenue streams have brought them more success than others: via selling and recruiting

71

others to sell Young Living essential oils, Mike and Genevieve won an all-expenses paid
Mediterranean cruise (“SOLO PARENTING IS EXHAUSTING!,” 2015).
Over time, the website was optimized for monetization. By the time I began studying
the site, there were advertisements from YouTube and clickable banners from Google AdSense.
However, based on comments on older posts, the blog was originally free of advertisements
(“Week 1 on the Paleo Diet,” 2014). Incorporating advertisements came with pitfalls. In a
comment, kate May wrote
“I’ve been a fan of your videos and learn from the information you provide. However,
I’m disgusted by the pro abortion ads now on your page. You lost me and a few others.
We are no longer supporting you. (“Fertility Diet,” 2010)
Genevieve wrote a lengthy response
Hi Kate, can you let me know which ads you’re referring to?
The ads on my site are Google Adsense ads, which are standard for most web sites you’ll
encounter, including many major news outlets.
One unique feature of Adsense ads is that they can “target” visitors. So if you visit a
website, you may see ads for that site on subsequent websites you visit. I personally
notice ads following me around all the time.
For that reason, the ad experience for each visitor are vastly different.
I do have the ability to ban certain advertisers, so let me know which ad it was if you can
remember (“Fertility Diet,” 2010)
Video ads are acknowledged in IRL30 when she says “I’m sure many of you have noticed the
YouTube ads that run before our videos and this kind of helps us run and keeps us selfsustaining, but what we’re going to try to do s replace those with brand sponsorships” and goes
on to discuss the brands she hopes to collaborate with, rather than the arbitrariness of the
YouTube ads (“Triumph & Tragedy! - In Real Life #30,” 2014). Posts from the blog’s inception
now have Amazon Affiliate links, which were inserted over time. Below, Genevieve explains her
relationship with Amazon

72

“P.P.S. This article contains affiliate links, in which I may receive a small commission. This
helps to support the work of our blog! Please know that you will never pay extra for these
products, and I only recommend things believe in. THANK YOU!” (“The Ultimate, All-Natural
Hangover Remedy,” 2013)
In the images below, you can see how these posts have changed over time. The image on the
left features an affiliate link (in orange), to the right is the text from when the post was first
published.
Figures 4.23 and 4.24

Genevieve also started linking to search results rather than direct products, presumably
because a direct product link is more vulnerable to obsolescence than search results. Direct
product links may break; Amazon may be out of the product; readers may want a different
version. Linking to search results provides a greater likelihood of success.
Compared to her willingness to send readers to Amazon for just about anything,
Genevieve is extremely selective in brand sponsorships. Most of the brands Genevieve
partners/ed with are smaller, boutique outlets (or were at the time) and products she not only
used, but which aligned with her principles. These brands included MightyNest, an ecommerce
site for green alternatives; Vital Proteins, a brand of gelatin supplements; Simple Mills for
gluten and grain-free baking mixes; and Branch Basics, a line of natural cleaning products.

73

There is an unacknowledged tension in Genevieve’s economic stake in Amazon Affiliate
links—a partnership almost three quarters of her peers engaged in—Amazon is a monopolistic,
capitalist venture frequently blamed for destroying mom-and-pop-style small businesses and
brands one would associate with seeking a natural lifestyle. Amazon is the very essence of the
toxic technological modernity this worldview perceives as a plague. This is similar to a blog
Genevieve references, ScreenFreeParenting.com, which was covered in digital advertisements,
and unless one prints it, must be viewed on a screen.
4.2.4 Quantitative findings of blog behavior
Quantitative metadata about each blog post was gathered in a Qualtrics form for future
analysis. Descriptive statistics and cross tabulations of that data are below. This data is
presented to depict Genevieve’s general blogging.
4.2.4.1 Descriptive and summary statistics
Almost all of Genevieve’s posts fall into four categories: baby, for you, parenting, and
pregnancy. When Genevieve initially started the blog, there were significantly more categories,
or tags, for posts. Over time these tags fell away and were reduced to these four categories
which align with the blog’s focus—natural pregnancy, parenting and lifestyle. Graph 4.1
features a summary of how posts were categorized with “For You” accounting for over half.

74

GRAPH 4.1 BLOG TAG FREQUENCY
No tag

3

Pregnancy

127

Parenting

24

For You

306

Baby

85
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Genevieve’s commenting behavior was also of interest. Table 4.1 features Genevieve’s
comments per post by year. Based on these data, from 2012 to 2015, Genevieve was more
engaged in her blog (number of posts peaked in 2014) and more active in the comments
section on her blog and there was a serious drop in 2016. This could be due to her compiling
and working on her book that year. The small number of posts in 2017 has more to do with the
difficulty of dating more recent posts in the Wayback Machine and should not be seen as an
accurate count of how many posts Genevieve produced that year.

Year
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

TABLE 4.1 GENEVIEVE COMMENTS PER POST BY YEAR
Posts
Mean
Median
Minimum
19
5.6
3
0
46
5.2
4
0
31
9.9
9
1
84
7.6
4
0
147
7.0
5
0
91
7.0
5
0
91
3.0
2
0
20
1.1
0
0
75

Maximum
22
22
28
144
45
41
15
16

Graph 4.2 reflects general frequencies of blogging behavior. Genevieve recommended
products for purchase on slightly less than half of posts. She cited herself on nearly three
quarters of posts compared to citing outside sources on half of all posts (greater detail on this
behavior can be found in the next section) and included videos on over half of all posts.
GRAPH 4.2: GENERAL BLOGGING BEHAVIOR

No

Yes

0

50
Inclusion of video

100

150

200

Citation of outside sources

250

300

Citation of Self

350

400

450

Recommendation of products

4.2.4.2 Cross tabulations of blog behavior
Table 4.2 presents a cross tabulation of Genevieve’s citation of herself compared to
outside sources. There is a small subset of posts where she does not cite herself or outside
sources, the smallest proportion is her citation of others without citing herself. For the most
part, if she cites outside sources she will cite herself as well, by a ratio of nearly four to one.
When she cites herself or doesn’t cite anyone, the ratios are more even, closer to two to one. I
think this displays how important it is for her to present her own “anecdotal evidence” as

76

equivalent to outside sources and also possibly functions as a way to maintain readership
(external citation links are not monetized, to my knowledge). These numbers should be viewed
with the qualifier that in plenty of the posts where she does not cite others, it is absolutely
appropriate. In recipes, vlogs about her children, or other personal aspects of everyday life,
external citations may not be warranted.
TABLE 4.2: EXTERNAL CITATION AND SELF-CITATION
Cites others
Doesn’t cite others
Cites self
218
177
Doesn’t cite self
54
96
Table 4.3 displays a cross tabulation of her external citation behavior compared to
product recommendation, table 4.4 presents how this is different when she cites herself. When
she cites herself she is more likely to recommend products then when she cites external
sources. Self-citation is a strong metric for predicting whether a product will be recommended,
as compared to citation of others—if she cited her own posts she recommended a product at a
ratio of almost four to one compared to when she cited others, about one and a half to one.
This suggests her information has a stronger tilt toward monetization.
TABLE 4.3: EXTERNAL CITATION AND PRODUCT RECOMMENDATION
Cites others
159

Recommends
products
Does not recommend 113
products

Doesn’t cite others
105
168

TABLE 4.4: SELF-CITATION AND PRODUCT RECOMMENDATION
Cites self
Doesn’t cite self
Recommends
205
59
products
Does not recommend 105
91
products

77

4.3 The message manager: Artifact analysis
In the section “Where does this case fit on this model?” I identified Genevieve as a
message manager. Figure 4.25 recalls this with the inclusion of several artifacts in the
information leaders’ circle. In this section I will present how the artifacts came to be seen as
representative of the information leaders and Genevieve’s incorporation of their contents and
styles caused me to conceive of her as managing their messages rather than delivering her own
unique message.

Figure 4.25

I began with the books endorsed by Genevieve that were regularly cited and endorsed
by her. This is a key distinction, as Genevieve cited over 1200 unique sources in 554 blog posts.
These artifacts, however, were regularly cited, and were clearly foundational to her. The
cookbook, Nourishing Traditions, earned its own episode of her weekly video update, entitled
“this book changed my life.” The Dr. Sears’ vaccine book was cited as the primary influence on
Genevieve’s views on vaccines. Supernatural Childbirth was highlighted on Genevieve’s
recommended books page. Language from The Business of Being Born was incorporated into

78

her birth class. All of these artifacts appeared across multiple posts and videos on the website.
They are distinct in another way which became apparent while reading them.
These are all items Genevieve is extremely familiar with, to the point she has
incorporated them into her material. I evaluated the majority of them after reading all of
Genevieve’s blog posts at least once. As I studied them, I could see which parts of them had
been seeded into Genevieve’s site. For example, Genevieve’s preference for cooking with
pastured butter and consumption of cod liver oil are two key instructions from Nourishing
Traditions. She does not call back to the book every time she talks about these habits, or Dr.
Westin A. Price (whose findings the book draws from), but they have become a part of her
everyday life.
Genevieve’s gentle, no-judgment approach seems very similar to Dr. Sear’s equally
gentle, no-pressure, you-decide style when writing to parents about vaccines. She constructs
her blog posts much like a chapter in his book, as a neutral provider of information that steps
back and allows you to make your own choice. She repeatedly emphasizes that she is “not here
to judge.” Genevieve also borrows Sear’s tendency to offer parents another path and
presenting it as equivalent to that being avoided, discussed in greater detail in the section
“Offering another way.” When Sears discusses avoiding vaccines, he says “Breastfeed for at
least one year. Two is better” (2007, p. 231) and “Avoid nurseries for at least two years. This
includes group day care as well as church and health club nurseries. Avoid large playgroups with
multiple infants” (2007, p. 231). By creating an additional option, Dr. Sear’s offers another path
that also gives evidence and legitimacy to these “natural” parenting choices.

79

The book Supernatural Childbirth by Jackie Mize is another book that is essential to
Genevieve and referenced with regularity. This is the most overtly religious of Genevieve’s
favorite books and inversely, the one she directly references the least. However, its language
and narrative reoccur throughout her blog. Genevieve considers her second childbirth a
“supernatural childbirth” and calls it such.
I also read two of the works of Ina May Gaskin, considered the mother of the modern
American midwifery movement (the white one anyway). Genevieve actually does not reference
her a great deal—however Gaskin is central to the natural childbirth movement in America
(Shapiro, 2012). She is featured in The Business of Being Born, an additional artifact—a
documentary that is foundational to Genevieve’s beliefs on childbirth and hospitals. Ina May’s
work is implicitly referenced in much of Genevieve’s work, as it is the antecedent to many
elements of the modern movement for natural childbirth.
Though Genevieve manages the messages of all these artifacts, not all are truly
information leaders. Dr. Sears’ non-judgmental tone and emphasis on helping individuals
negotiate their preferences with their doctors is more typical of a message manager, as
conceived by this model. Jackie Mize instructs individuals how to manage their faith, “But when
a woman walks in the hospital like some kind of a religious weirdo, that’s exactly what they will
think she is. Then that gives a bad testimony of what a Christian is” (1997, p. 42). Her concern
about how her readers will be perceived by outsiders is more characteristic of a message
manager than an information leader. In contrast, Sally Fallon calls her book the “cookbook that
challenges politically correct nutrition and the diet dictocrats.” She does not appear concerned
about how others may receive her messages.

80

4.4 The message manager compared to the information leader
In the previous section, I have positioned Genevieve as managing the messages
delivered by leaders within her worldview. I propose these managers are more tolerant of
deviation because their role is to attract individuals who are more loosely affiliated with the
worldview. I make this assertion based on the observations and evidence discussed in the next
four sections: the difference between how Genevieve and one of her artifacts discussed
vegetarianism; a desire to appear non-judgmental; allowing difference; and not directly linking
vaccines with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
4.4.1 Vegetarians not preferred
As someone who has not eaten meat for over 8 years, and given the common conflation
of those who pursue a natural lifestyle with hippies and vegetarians, I was unprepared for how
avoiding animal product consumption was portrayed. In Nourishing Traditions, Morell asserts
Animal products are essential for optimum growth and healthy reproduction. If you feel
compelled to adopt the life of a saint or a sage and are attracted to vegetarianism, we
urge you to wait until your later years to do so, when the period of growth and
procreation is accomplished (Fallon, 1999, p. 30)
Fallon prefaces these comments by praising vegetarians as highly spiritual
The desire to abstain from animal products, found so often in those of a spiritual nature,
may reflect a longing to return to a former, more perfect state of consciousness that
was ours before our souls took embodiment in physical bodies on the material plane.
This longing attracts many to the belief that our bodies and souls can be purified, or that
we can achieve spiritual enlightenment, through a meatless diet. Saintly individuals are
often drawn to strict vegetarian habits (Fallon, 1999, p. 30)
Ultimately, Fallon suggests those who are drawn to avoid animal product consumption “shirk
the earthly duties for which the physical body was created” (1999, p. 30). This surprised me,

81

because I had assumed a pescetarian, vegetarian, or even vegan lifestyle would be preferred.
Genevieve did live a vegan lifestyle for a period, but concludes
Now, don’t get me wrong…I know some people do well on a vegetarian or vegan diet. I
think that’s great as I want everyone to feel well. But I just know for myself that I could
not be a mother…I could not breastfeed…I could not flourish without animal products”
(“Why I’m Not Vegetarian ✌ IRL #49 | Mama Natural,” n.d.).
In contrast, “in the final years, the Anasazi lacked animal products, particularly vitamins A and
D. They died out and so will we if we eliminate animal fats from the diet,” (1999, p. 415)
according to Fallon.
What is of particular interest is how this choice is praised but not encouraged,
compared to other lifestyle choices that are judged with less empathy and compassion.
However, it makes sense because those avoiding animal product consumption are more likely
to be receptive to Genevieve’s teachings and she would not want to alienate potential
adherents. Thus, vegetarians and vegans are treated as well-intentioned but misguided. This is
a careful choice, because doing so allows them to transition into Genevieve’s worldview
without experiencing stigma based on their former choices.
In addition to those who avoid animal products in some way, the natural lifestyle
movement recognizes potential followers in those seeking to live a green lifestyle. Genevieve
often touted the lower environmental impact associated with certain choices—such as cloth
diapering—as a supporting reason, but the “naturalness” was always the primary reason. If a
choice happened to be more environmentally friendly than a non-natural one, great, but it
never appeared to be the primary principle driving decisions. However, it was used as a
supporting principle to attract those for whom environmental impact is a primary principle. This
is also evidenced in her evolution from Earth Mama to Mama Natural.
82

This was further evident in a comment exchange between Genevieve and Mindy Larson,
where Mindy questioned replacing plastic Tupperware that was still usable with glass versions,
Genevieve responded “I see your point. This initial switch from plastic to glass benefits my
family more than the earth. But getting some durable glassware can prevent the purchase of
plastic containers in the future. I just updated the post to clarify. Thank you!” (“My Earth Day
Pledge. Want to Join Me?,” 2014). In a different comment exchange, a reader wrote about the
biblical grounds for consuming “ethical meat and eggs” but experiencing friction from family
and Genevieve responded “It amazes me when Christians aren’t tree huggers as this is G-d’s
beautiful creation” (“What To Do When People Think You’re Nuts | Mama Natural,” n.d.).
4.4.2 No judgment!
Genevieve offers reassurances she is “not judging you” for avoiding consumption of
animal products while recommending the practice in almost every food-related post. Similar
veins of “not judging” were visible in other practices, particularly her sense of humor.
Genevieve has a post where a woman encounters stigma for breastfeeding in public and she
“hulks out” on the accoster who responds, “I can’t help it, I was formula fed!” ((“Mama Hulks
Out on a Breastfeeding Hater!,” 2014). One reader commented
You can’t truly believe that my children will grow up to be bullies because I fed them
formula with love, can you? So why would you suggest such a thing, even under the
guise of humor (“Mama Hulks Out on a Breastfeeding Hater!,” 2014).
Genevieve responded
I can see your perspective for sure but please know that was NOT my intention with this
video…..this decision is none of my business, frankly. We all do what’s best for our
families. Just like co-sleeping (we don’t), vaccine decisions, and any other thing we
encounter while parenting

83

At the appearance of targeted criticism, Genevieve immediately tried to offer reassurance that
such difference or deviation was allowed and tolerated. In another video entitled “Mama hulks
out on a processed food company,” the recipient of her wrath responds “I can’t help it, my
mom fed me TV dinners” (“Mama Hulks Out on a Processed Food Company ☺,” 2013)
Genevieve encountered similar pushback in a Sh*T Crunchy Moms Say. When she joked
about circumcision saying “we would never mutilate our son” (“Sh*t Crunchy Mamas Say,”
2012). One reader wrote “the part about mutilating genitals is borderline offensive, especially
to us regretful moms out here who are now more educated. Yes, my son (and husband) were
unnecessarily altered, but they were not mutilated.” This became part of a longer thread
between readers, but Genevieve’s response to this comment was
Hi Susan, thanks for sharing; I can see your perspective; and oh, my intention wasn’t to
be harmful. In this particular video, I portray a very exaggerated persona with strong
and somewhat judgmental opinions that are counter cultural so that we can all laugh at
ourselves” (“Sh*t Crunchy Mamas Say,” 2012).
In a separate post about circumcision, Genevieve told readers
Mama Natural is not here to judge. Baby circumcision is a personal and sometimes
religious decision. Thing is, it’s an irreversible decision. So do your homework, get the
facts, and do what’s right for you and your baby boy” (“Baby Circumcision Myths &
Facts,” 2016)
Genevieve tried particularly hard to avoid appearing judgmental when discussing
childbirth choices. In a post entitled “The Truth about epidural side effects,” she wrote “And
they certainly aren’t a moral issue. I am not here to judge” (“The Truth About Epidural Side
Effects,” 2016). A post praising natural childbirth came with this qualifier, “Please know that my
intention in this article is not to condemn, criticize, or judge any mother who chooses to have
interventions” (“Why Natural Birth Is So Beneficial For Baby & Mama,” n.d.).

84

Not judging is actually part of this worldview. In a post entitled “What to do when
people think you’re nuts” Genevieve instructs readers “Set the boundary, but don’t judge”
(Mama Natural, n.d.). By avoiding judging a decision or asserting that they are not judging a
decision, members of this worldview avoid performing boundary work commonly associated
with those they deride.
4.4.3 Allowing difference
Even she struggles with the demands of conforming to this lifestyle. In IRL57, she
reassures viewers, “It is not about perfection…..we set such high standards for ourselves in
every area of our lives” (“It Ain’t About Perfection! ☆ IRL 57,” 2015). In another episode of IRL,
she admits, “When it comes to exercise I am so not disciplined and I hate even saying that
because I should be” (“BABY FEVER! 👶 👧 👶 (IRL s2 e7),” 2015). In another post, she suggests
activated charcoal to whiten teeth as “just because we’re natural mamas doesn’t mean we
don’t care about beauty” (“Activated Charcoal Teeth Whitening - How to Do It,” 2014). In the
post “What’s in Mama’s Makeup Bag?” she echoes this, “Just because we’re natural mamas, it
doesn’t mean we can’t enjoy a little glamour” (“What’s in Mama’s Makeup Bag?,” 2012). In
several comments, she admits to “toxic gel-based” manicure (“Baby Got a Black Eye! - In Real
Life #20,” 2014).
This extends to acknowledging how difficult aspects of natural living are, “Frankly, cloth
diapering is WAY more complicated than I thought” she admitted (“Why We Chose bumGenius
Cloth Diapers,” 2011). She also confesses that she “just didn’t feel comfortable” when she tried
baby-led weaning (a practice that starts weaning by giving children large pieces of food and
allows them to self-wean) (“Why I’m Waiting To Do Baby Led Weaning (BLW),” 2011).

85

Struggling to adhere to this lifestyle was most evident in the comments. A commenter asked
where Genevieve found sugar-free bacon, she admitted “it does contain sugar but it’s like the
4th ingredient and so minuscule that I don’t worry about it” (“Week 1 on the Paleo Diet,”
2014). On a comment in a different post, a reader asked why a recommended product included
certain ingredients, again Genevieve admitted, “I know. Not perfect. BUT, it is such a minuscule
amount that I’m okay with it. I know many other natural mamas that take it with wonderful
results” (“Pregnancy Supplements,” 2013). She even “enjoy[s] the occasional diet 7up”
(“What’s the Best Diet?,” 2016). I use the words admit and confess because these moments feel
like admissions of guilt. She is not transparent about these choices until readers ask for an
explanation of her actions.
4.4.4 What “causes” Autism Spectrum Disorder
Genevieve mostly avoids one of the most common and well known anti-vaccine
assertions, that vaccines cause Autism Spectrum Disorder. She does mention ASD as a risk in
several public posts when discussing EMF exposure (“How to reduce your EMF exposure (and
why you want to),” 2015), ultrasound (“Baby Ultrasound,” 2016), and cooking with copper
(“The Ultimate Guide to Safe, Nontoxic Cookware,” 2016). She does provide several clues (can I
call them dog whistles) to this belief; in the twenty-sixth episode of her YouTube-only series,
she says that a study supporting intestinal differences between ASD and non-ASD children
“validates what parents have been doing to address” the condition (“WEIRD PREGNANCY
CRAVINGS! (MNShow 26) - YouTube,” n.d.)
ASD is not the only condition Genevieve connects to relatively common technologies.
She does not hesitate to tell her readers “Excessive EMF exposure during pregnancy has been

86

linked with childhood autism, ADHD, and asthma” (“How to reduce your EMF exposure (and
why you want to),” 2015) or that “new studies from China point to ultrasounds carrying risks
including Autism, ADHD, genetic damage, jaundice, childhood cancers, and allergies” (“Baby
Ultrasound,” 2016).
Genevieve previously had ten blog posts directly related to vaccines—one for each of
the vaccines in the childhood immunization schedule and one to discuss her choices for her
own children. Genevieve absorbs the style and content of Dr. Sears’ book and repackages it for
her blog, which she acknowledges, “I structured my videos the same way, breaking down each
vaccine, the ingredients, and the diseases it treats. Think of them as Cliffs Notes to Dr. Sears’
book” (What we are doing about vaccines for children now). As discussed previously, these
posts are no longer available, and at least one was taken down shortly before the launch of her
new book even though she does not discuss the childhood vaccination series in her book. Thus,
if one went to MamaNatural.com and searched “vaccines,” there would be nothing to suggest
overtly that she advocated for vaccine avoidance or delay. In these hidden posts, she exhibits
many of the common behaviors of vaccine-avoidant parents. Genevieve describes Dr. Sears as
“he then challenges the reader to make their own decision” (What we are doing about vaccines
for our children now). This language reinforces that evaluating and self-determining about
vaccines is harder than following the AAP schedule, setting up a dichotomy between passive
acceptance and active challenging and questioning.
The VAERS reports appear to be a motivator - “the more vaccine injury stories I hear,
the less I want to vaccinate our kids at all” (What we are doing about vaccines for children
now). In a comment exchange on this post, Genevieve encourages a reader to “Dig around on

87

The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program Website. They’ve awarded over 2 billion
dollars to victims of catastrophic vaccine injuries” and includes weblinks. When asked directly
by a commenter, “I heard vaccine can cause autism? Is it right? What do you think?” Genevieve
responds “I would take a look at my MMR vaccine video re: autism” rather than directly
addressing the question (“Polio Vaccine (IPV) – Childhood Vaccine Series - Mama Natural,”
2015).
In the absence of these posts, Genevieve provides subtle cues to her audience that
indicate her views. She is an avowed devotee of the book Nourishing Traditions and the Weston
A. Price Foundation—both of which feature anti-vaccine language. She also still includes Dr.
Sears’ book on her list of recommended parenting books. One could assert that if she does not
directly say these claims, just links to people who do, she maintains plausible deniability for
their content. I would instead assert that the act of making her former posts hidden is an act of
deception to “soften” her message and then her endorsement of problematic materials
legitimizes and sanitizes them.
4.5 A worldview in focus: Natural as Epistemology to explain information use and worldview
The worldview explicated by the theoretical model is one where scientific evidence
plays an inconsistent role, along with the meaning of “natural.” Science is sometimes
demonized but is also used with regularity. It is similar to the disparagement of media as “fake
news” and justifying it with a news article to prove it. Because science (very broadly—scientists,
scientific findings, the scientific community, the scientific process) is not used or treated in a
consistent way (sometimes the subject of criticism and sometimes the agent of proof), I saw it
as a secondary character or actor in this world. It was not consistently trusted or mistrusted,

88

accepted or dismissed, shared or avoided, et cetera. This became especially apparent when I
read the artifacts central to Genevieve’s Mama Natural persona. For example, in Nourishing
Traditions, the author expressed skepticism “When research showed that astronomical
quantities of artificial safrole caused cancer in rats” (Fallon, 1999, p. 589) and suggested “the
FDA was more concerned about eliminating competition for the drug and soft drink industries
than in protecting the populace from a carcinogen” (Fallon, 1999, p. 589). Alternatively, the
findings of a study with a similar methodology which fed cereal to 18 rats in three groups are
accepted and shared (Fallon, 1999, p. 469). It spoke even louder when I evaluated Mama
Natural’s scholarly information use—she repeatedly cited from journals like JAMA, Pediatrics,
NEJM, and the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and most often linked to
PubMed—a government-funded information retrieval and discovery tool. This was stunning
considering one of her video is titled “Mama Natural hulks out on evil food scientist,” and her
belief that the CDC “wants to paint our children with an extremely broad brush when it comes
to vaccinations” (“What We Are Doing About Vaccines for Children Now,” 2016). Despite
distrust of these institutions, their policies, even the generic individuals who conduct this work,
she uses their tools and selectively presents their findings.
Over time I did begin to see patterns in when scientific findings were accepted and
shared versus when they were criticized and considered suspicious. A code that occurred across
artifacts, blog posts, and videos was aligning which became a construct for absorbing
information that confirmed or aligned with preexisting beliefs. For example, take the belief that
it is better to eat butter than margarine. A study finding evidence of this would be accepted and
used as proof in Nourishing Traditions, while a study disputing this belief would be criticized, its
89

funders examined, and its limitations used to raise significant doubt over its trustworthiness. In
Supernatural Childbirth, Jackie Mize allowed for this as well, “there are usually a few things in
every good source of information that you have to toss out because it doesn’t agree with what
you are believing for” (p. 31). Aligning also extended to modifying one’s behavior to “align” with
the principles of this lifestyle.
This pattern of behavior out of context is not particularly concerning, scientists also read
papers and consider the findings and limitations in line with their pre-existing knowledge. They
are also known to resist evidence, findings, and theories that contradict their own
epistemological identities and oppose those whose work threatens paradigmatic shift. For
example, take the Semmelweis effect which is discussed in The Business of Being Born and by
Ina May Gaskin. This was a distressing historical case of a physician realizing that physicians’
lack of hygiene caused women to die in childbirth—but the doctor was ignored and ostracized,
women continued to die, and it took decades for his life-saving changes to be enacted (Gaskin,
2003). While this behavior is similar, it is not the same. Semmelweis was alone and his findings
were ahead of the theory that explained them, his peers threatened or offended by his ideas.
The findings and theories this worldview rejects have more evidence and scientific consensus.
One could also consider it a simple case of confirmation bias, where individuals accept
information that reinforces what they already believe. I think both are at work here, but they
do not explain everything I observed—particularly the tolerance or openness to behaviors one
did not personally endorse or exhibit. When Genevieve had her placenta encapsulated but
ultimately did not feel she benefited from the experience, she still treated the concept
favorably and encouraged women to consider it (“My Experience Eating Placenta | Mama
90

Natural,” n.d.). Rather than crudely using information to confirm only her own experience,
there was an allowance for range and difference of opinion, interpretation, and experience.
In this worldview, natural functions much like an epistemology. In the way a researcher
may be a positivist or a constructivist, Genevieve is a “naturalist.” Surprisingly, Mama Natural
avoids directly defining what natural means to her. Avoiding definition is a canny strategy to
allow the label to be unlimited. Limiting was another code that emerged across all evidence
streams. Limiting meant confining the relevance and legitimacy of information. For example,
when Genevieve asserts that vaccines have saved countless lives, and then adds “other factors
have “saved” lives in regards to infectious disease like better sanitation, clean water, and good
nutrition” (“What We Are Doing About Vaccines for Children Now,” 2016) she is limiting the
information’s power.
When I debriefed with a chiropractor who avoids vaccines and pursues a natural
lifestyle, he defined natural as “a state of being of an organism that s well-adapted to its
environment, a way to describe a relationship between an organism and its environment, a
well-adapted relationship” also “something left alone and unaltered by man.” Within that
definition all information that supports and aligns with this view is inherently considered more
trustworthy, information disputing this view undergoes significant scrutiny and suspicion. It is
similar to a positivist epistemology except it is not the knowledge that is discovered, it is a
lifestyle and set of choices that are championed. Within this worldview, there is knowledge, but
it is “natural” and information is not so much constructed, discovered or found, but unearthed.
There is a “natural” way of doing things, a way that “nature” intended, and all information is

91

interpreted through this lens, nearly all choices made to align with it.
4.6 Beliefs, values, and thematic landscape of this worldview
I will now discuss the beliefs, values, and themes I constructed from my observations of
this worldview. The first belief, offering another way, is a strongly held conviction that there is
an alternative to most mainstream choices. This goes along with the second belief, that we can
be redeemed through our choices and return to or reach a destined or ordained way of being.
The value, exoticizing ancientness, is determinant in how desirable other ways are. The second
value discussed is preferring anecdotal evidence over traditional conceptions of authoritative
knowledge. The themes of limiting, magic and miracles, and oil-slicked icebergs illustrate the
principle of “another way,” valued as “preferably an older way” often evidenced by personal
testimony, in action.
4.6.1 Offering another way
A code that emerged across evidence streams was “offering another way” and “creating
an alternative path.” Much of the natural lifestyle movement rhetoric consists of revealing
another choice and characterizing it as equivalent if not superior to the existing and normative
choice. This other choice is the “natural” one, it may be one that was abandoned or fell out of
use due to a new technology, it may be more laborious or more expensive, it may be all of
these things. Sometimes practices, behaviors, and items are presented as equivalent
alternatives to the mainstream norms. This was most evident in breastfeeding.
Occasionally, Genevieve would “offer another way” when mainstream medicine would
not. In the United States, it is very difficult to deliver a breech (when a baby is not position
headfirst) birth vaginally. However, Genevieve informs her readers, “There are times when a
92

breech baby may be delivered vaginally” (“Breech Birth,” 2015). This is true, there are providers
who are comfortable allowing women whose babies are breech to attempt a vaginal birth,
often under a very strict protocol, but the practice is uncommon. Genevieve hints at this when
she writes, “What if my practitioner can’t or won’t allow a planned vaginal birth?” but goes on
to tell readers they “can either accept the situation. Grieve. And give birth via gentle cesarean.
Or, if you live in Tennessee, or are willing to travel, you may want to consider going to Ina May
Gaskin’s The Farm Midwifery Center” (“Breech Birth,” 2015).
On the topic of vaccines, Genevieve wrote, “If you’re like me, you’re weary about
exposing your newborn to the host of immunizations for various diseases; but take heart, if you
breastfeed your child, he/she will have a stronger immune system and be more resilient” (“10
Surprising Benefits of Breastfeeding,” 2017). Even if you do vaccinate “it may give you more
peace knowing that breastfeeding increases the positive benefits of immunization.” Instead of
vaccinating her son, Genevieve ‘offers another way’ by providing
natural and gentle ways to boost his immunity…..one of the best ways to do so is through
diet…..I also boost his immune system with probiotics and use elderberry syrup and
mushroom complexes to ward off colds, flus and other sicknesses (“What We Are Doing
About Vaccines for Children Now,” 2016)
and also she’s “started looking into homeopathy as an alternative or a complimentary course of
action in preventing childhood diseases” (What we are doing about vaccines for our children
now).
Offering another way is also a method of modifying mainstream practices so they better
align with the principles and priorities of the natural lifestyle. This is evident in the
recommended changes to make a ceasarean “gentle,” such as “doctors and nurses are asked to
refrain from ‘shop talk’” (“Gentle Cesarean,” 2017).
93

4.6.2 Redemption for the sinner
On Genevieve’s “About me” page, and in the “Before” story she references in many
posts, she portrays herself as 60 pounds overweight and even calls herself “obese” (this last
point is always with an exclamatory punctuation point), says she drank six Diet Coca-Colas a
day, and terms this “the typical American diet” (“About Mama Natural,” 2011, “My ‘Before’
Pictures! ❂ IRL #48,” 2015). But then, Genevieve found Nourishing Traditions. She even says
“by G-d’s amazing grace, and the help of many others, gave it up and life has never been
better” (“Sugar Addiction” 2012). To me, this story sounds very familiar to “I was a sinner and
then I was redeemed.” Instead, it is “I was a junk food eater, and now I am a healthy eater,” but
the underlying message is the same. This is especially evident when Genevieve emphasizes she
still views herself as a junk food “addict” or sinner, “With G-d’s amazing power and grace, plus
the help of friends, I haven’t binged on sugar and junk food ever since” however “To this day, I
am still a junk food junkie, and I still need to abstain from sugar. I know that if I try to have just
one cookie or piece of cake, it would probably lead to overeating…and the inevitable remorse
and shame” (Special Day Today + Floriday Vacation).
4.6.3 Exoticizing ancientness
Age is used as a proxy for evidence. For example, “Swaddling a baby is a technique
practiced throughout the world for thousands of years (so it must be good, right?)” (“Swaddle a
Baby the Right Way (with Pictures) | Mama Natural,” n.d.). Behaviors are promoted because of
nostalgia for their ancientness, such as when “a birth ball recreates ancestral movement” (“Can
a Birth Ball Really Help You Have a Better Labor & Delivery?,” 2016). This extends to food as

94

well, “I know butter’s been demonized, but it’s been nourishing humans for thousands of years,
and I ate plenty of it and it didn’t cause me any problems” (“Fertility Diet,” 2010).
She mentions Weston A. Price’s research with long-lived cultures, asserting “they knew
instinctively” that children should be spaced three years apart (“Why I Waited 3 Years Between
Pregnancies,” 2013)[emphasis added]. Colostrum “has been prized for its health benefits by
many cultures - primarily in India - for thousands of years” (“Colostrum,” 2016). If you are
suffering from a toothache, “Forget Novocain; ancient dentists used cloves” (Howland, 2017, p.
352).
Along with ancestral knowledge, an undercurrent of the natural lifestyle is respecting
the instincts and intuition of the individual. This includes respecting the autonomy of the
individual - even an infant’s autonomy. When weaning her first child, Genevieve wrote, “I knew
six months was around the time to start him on solid foods, but I wanted him to tell me when
he was ready” (“Starting Solids,” 2011). She also wanted her son to “nurse as long as he wanted
to” and insisted “the baby will lead the way” when describing motivations and process for
extended breastfeeding (“Extended Breastfeeding the Older Baby or Toddler,” 2012). Baby-led
weaning is endorsed because “it allows your baby to control his/her solid food intake by selffeeding from the very beginning of the weaning process” (“Why I’m Waiting To Do Baby Led
Weaning (BLW),” 2011). There is an implication that instinctive knowledge can be accessed if
one seeks or waits for it, almost an encouragement for humans to look for and prize primal
responses.
This also extends to endorsing products and foods. “Moroccans have been using Argan
oil for more than 3500 years” (“Which is the Best Carrier Oil?,” 2016) according to Genevieve. In

95

“Natural Morning sickness remedy” she tells her readers “Native Americans used almonds
before drinking to prevent hangovers” but does not specify which tribe(s). Essential oils are
recommended as “the oldest form of a natural health aid, dating back to the ancient Egyptians”
(“How to Use Essential Oils,” n.d.). Oil pulling is “an ancient Ayurvedic practice” (“10 Doable
Resolutions for a Healthier New Year | Mama Natural,” n.d.). Mama Natural tells readers “In
China, mothers have engaged in placenta consumption for thousands of years” (“Eating the
Placenta,” 2014) and “we’re some of the only animals that don’t consume our placentas after
birth” (“Week 1 on the Paleo Diet,” 2014). Saunas are “powerful means of detoxification, from
Native American sweat lodges to Finnish wood-fired saunas” (“SaunaSpace Sauna Review Near Infrared FTW!,” 2016). Moxibustion acupuncture “has been around for over 3500 years!”
(“How to Turn a Breech Baby,” n.d.). The neti pot is an “ancient nasal irrigator that’s been
around for 1000s of years” (“How to Use a Neti Pot (And Why You’d Want To),” 2010). None of
these cultural references are explored or contextualized.
This behavior was extremely visible in Nourishing Traditions, a book beloved to
Genevieve. Its author, Sally Fallon Morell tells readers “Primitive tribes in both Africa and the
New World consumed algae in the form of ‘pond scum,’ which they dried in the sun” (1999, p.
613). She instructs “The ancient Chinese valued the pear for treatment of the stomach and
lungs” (1999, p. 577). Fallon mentions a study about eggs that “proves the folk wisdom of the
Orient” (1999, p. 443). Additionally “Native Americans understood instinctively that pecans had
to be treated in some way before they were consumed” (Fallon, 1999, p. 514).

96

4.6.4 Story first, facts later: “Anecdotal evidence”
Ina May Gaskin begins both Spiritual Midwifery and her guide to childbirth with over
100 pages of women’s stories (Gaskin, 2002, 2003). These stories read like testimonials [insert
what that means]. Even those that feature pain—such as a miscarriage or stillbirth—result in a
beautiful, happy baby at the end. They all have happy-ever-afters. The vast majority feature
natural childbirths delivered at The Farm (the community/commune founded by Gaskin’s
husband, herself, and his followers). Only after these stories, nearly halfway into each book,
does Gaskin begin her instruction and teaching about childbirth.
Relaying information this way is not unique to Gaskin. Mama Natural also practices this.
Genevieve tells her readers, “Anecdotal evidence of amber’s efficacy as a teething necklace
abound in both directions, but the scientific research is sparse” (“The Natural Mama’s Guide to
Amber Teething Necklaces,” 2017). She assures them “We’ve waded through the scientific and
anecdotal evidence for you so you can make the best choice for your family” (Natural Mama’s
guide to amber teething necklaces). In this worldview, this is a valid tool to make decisions,
“Anecdotal evidence shows that stumps that had dried herbs used on them fell off around day
3 as opposed to the standard 1-2 weeks” (“Umbilical Cord in Newborns: How to Care for It
Naturally (without using alcohol),” n.d.). She also uses this tactic to limit the persuasive power
of her own experience, “My experiment with eating placenta was by no means scientific, and
there may have been other factors that drove my experience” (“My Experience Eating Placenta
| Mama Natural,” n.d.). But still, “anecdotal evidence” is the preferred form. In privileging
“anecdotal evidence,” inhabitants of this worldview are valuing the experiences of their peers,
as articulated by Genevieve’s thoughts on red raspberry leaf tea, “Frankly, I put more stock

97

into the experience of moms throughout the centuries (and in our community), as well as my
own positive experience with red raspberry leaf tea” (“The Truth About Red Raspberry Leaf Tea
During Pregnancy,” 2017).
This behavior may be learned from or reinforced by sources of authoritative knowledge
within the worldview. Sally Fallon Morell cautions against soy formula usage by asserting
“Anecdotal reports of other adverse effects include extreme emotional behavior, learning
difficulties, immune system problems, irritable bowel syndrome and depression” (p. 603).
4.6.5 Themes
Three major themes emerged—limiting, magical miracles, and tainted icebergs. These
were coded inductively and using gerunds (magicking, miracling, tainting, iceberging).
These words were typically applied to food and medical interventions, but extended to
products like mattress and electromagnetic frequencies (EMFs). Magicking or tainting meant
imbuing an item with extraordinary properties—if good, magic, if negative, tainted. Iceberging
was the tendency to then link a tainted food to a laundry list of very serious health conditions
(often conditions with unclear etiologies, such as Autism Spectrum Disorder). Miracling is
similar except the skew is switched
4.6.5.1 Limiting
4.6.5.1.1 Limiting medicine
Genevieve avoids saying “never” about medications or drugs considered not natural.
Rather, she limits them, such as in a post titled “How to increase breast milk supply naturally
(video)” she instructs, “As a last resort you can talk to your doctor about taking prescription
medication that can boost supply” (“How to Increase Milk Supply Naturally,” 2014). She

98

presents drugs as a last resort and will try natural remedies first, “I’m so grateful we didn’t use
any of the harsher medications and instead found natural remedies for baby reflux. If going
through it can help just one other mama not resort to harsh pharmaceuticals, then it was worth
it!” (“Natural Remedies for Baby Reflux,” 2013). Sometimes her recommendations directly
contradict those of the remedy - she endorses the Moringa probiotic while nursing, though the
supplier does not recommend it for pregnant and nursing women (“Week 9 Postpartum,”
2014). For labor she tells readers “Bring. On. The. Drugs. (Natural, of course)” (“10 Natural Birth
Essentials for Labor & Delivery,” 2012). For UTIs she says “There are plenty of potent natural
antibiotcs” (“Natural Remedies for UTI,” 2016). She also discourages the use of synthetic birth
control, such as IUDs and synthetic hormone replacement pills (is that the term?) (“Natural
Birth Control - Options & Suggestions,” 2016). Genevieve asserts copper IUDs can cause copper
toxicity, and that “although western medicine denies such a condition exists, I know too many
people who experienced this to agree.” (“Natural Birth Control - Options & Suggestions,” 2016).
4.6.5.1.2 Limiting HCP’s power:
Genevieve also imposes limits, like her peers and the artifacts she endorses, on the
expertise of healthcare providers. Genevieve encourages women to take birth courses outside
of hospitals because “while some hospital-run childbirth education courses can be helpful, they
usually teach women how to be good patients” (“Which Birthing Classes Are Best For You?,”
2016).
She instructs readers that their values may not align with the HCP system, “We have to
remember that our healthcare system is trying to take care of the general population” (“Natural
Baby,” 2016). In the third session of her online birth course, she and her co-instructor assert,

99

“Don’t rely on your pediatrician, pediatricians do not have training in breastfeeding.” Doctors
are often treated as a last resort, in the post “What is your green poop telling you?” she gives
numerous recommendations and concludes with “If your green poop persists, despite trying all
of the digestive support, it’s time to see the doctor.” A reader commented about a doctor
wanting to induce her on her due date because the doctor was going out of town, Team Mama
Natural responded, “Your doctor going out of town is a very poor reason to be induced, he or
she should know better. If I were you I would get a new doctor right away” (“The Truth About
Red Raspberry Leaf Tea During Pregnancy,” 2017). When a reader asks if it safe to use charcoal
while pregnant, Genevieve responds,
“I would but of course, check with your doctor or midwife. You don’t swallow so it’s
similar to toothpaste. If it’s OK to use fluoride toothpaste while pregnant, which is a
known neurotoxin and poison, then I wouldn’t see why this wouldn’t be okay”
(“Activated Charcoal Teeth Whitening - How to Do It,” 2014)
In his book about vaccines, Dr. Sears limits doctors’ vaccination recommendations by
suggesting they have been overly influenced by extreme cases
All it takes is one very bad case of a disease to convince a doctor that anyone who
opposes vaccines is crazy. Fortunately for me (and even more so for my patients!), I
almost never see kids suffer complications from vaccine-preventable infectious diseases.
Death and disability from a disease is a hard thing for any doctor to stomach, so it’s not
wonder that most are pro-vaccine (Sears, 2007, p. 245)
4.6.5.2 Everyday magic and miracles
The code “magicking” referred to imbuing an item with almost magical properties,
almost as if it were a panacea that could fix or improve anything. This code occurred across all
evidence streams. Blog posts like “101 Uses for Apple Cider Vinegar” or “Hemp Seeds Benefits
and How to Use ‘em” exemplified this code, taking an item easily obtainable and expanding its
applications while promoting its almost miraculous properties. Apple cider vinegar may truly
100

have 101 uses, probably even more, but so do other everyday items like eggs, butter, sugar, or
tinfoil.
Items and behaviors magicked were then imbued with miraculous properties. In the
post “How to do Oil Pulling (And Why you’d want to)” she asserts “According to long-time
devotees, oil pulling has the power to alleviate migraine headaches, asthma, diabetes,
bronchitis, diseased teeth, chronic blood disorders such as leukemia, arthritis, eczema, heart
and kidney disease,” among others (“How To Do Oil Pulling (And Why You’d Want To),” 2010).
Genevieve instructs her readers that “breastfeeding protects against developing chronic
diseases such as: celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, asthma, and childhood cancers”
(“10 Surprising Benefits of Breastfeeding,” 2017). Camu camu powder can “help with shingles,
asthma, atherosclerosis, chronic fatigue syndrome, depression, gum disease, headaches,
osteoarthritis, and herpes” (“Crazy Benefits of Camu Camu Powder,” 2016). In Nourishing
Traditions, Sally Fallon magicks algae as “Rich in chlorophyll, protein, beta carotene, omega-3
fatty acids, minerals, enzymes and nucleic acids” (1999, p. 613) and then connects it to
miracles, “dried microalgae have been used successfully to treat everything from leprosy to
AIDS” (1999, p. 613). Flax oil can treat “heart disease, cancer, diabetes, PMS, arthritis, and
inflammatory and fibroid conditions” (1999, p. 458) according to Fallon.
4.6.5.3 Oil-slicked icebergs
Tainting is a code that emerged across evidence streams. It was across the axis from
magicking. Tainting occurred when an item or process was linked or implied to cause a negative
(often horribly so) outcome. It also became a way to move the goalposts on what natural living
means. At first it was just organic foods, then the organic foods must be non-GMO. Later

101

Genevieve also introduce concerns about EMFs, at first buying special shields for her electronics
(“How to reduce your EMF exposure (and why you want to),” 2015) and evaluating everyday
objects like hair dryers and toothbrushes but even going so far as to rent EMF meters to check
the levels at the lot they were purchasing for a house and at her son’s school (“Are EMFs Real?
| Mama Natural,” n.d.).
Tainting items and behaviors often led to the need to detox or calls to detox like “Did
you know that we are exposed to more toxins in one day than our grandparents were exposed
to in a lifetime? That’s why it’s so important for us to practice simple detox measures”
(“SaunaSpace Sauna Review - Near Infrared FTW!,” 2016). This was evident in the post “What’s
the best diet? 5 immutable truths of nutrition” when she discussed the need to “undo the
damage of the industrial food diet.” Linking a specific diet to unspecified harm was a common
behavior. Genevieve’s posts and videos imply omnipresent food items are tainted, such as
when she writes “Many are allergic to our highly tampered wheat crop” (“Non GMO foods:
How to Avoid GMOs (for real),” n.d.). In the second class of her birth course she talks about the
need to “offset the modern world and what it does to our bodies.” She instructs her readers “If
our bodies never eliminated toxins without the help of a heavy handed cleanse, they’d become
overburdened pretty quickly” (“Kombucha During Pregnancy: What You Need to Know | Mama
Natural,” n.d.). She prefaces a post about supplements with “I don’t think we can get every
nutrient we need from our diets. Unfortunately, our depleted soils produce foods that aren’t as
nutritionally dense as they could be” (“Pregnancy Supplements,” 2013). She even suggests this
is the result of our parents’ choices, “So if you or your mom (or even your grandmother) have
ever taken antibiotics, eaten store bought bread or pasta everyday, or eaten fermented foods

102

fewer than once a day, your baby may need probiotics” (“Probiotics for Infants,” 2016). Based
on those criteria, virtually everyone needs to give their infant probiotics.
After an item or behavior was tainted, it would often become an “iceberg” with the
code iceberging. An example from the post “What everyone should know about toothpaste”
demonstrates this code in action, “What we often don’t hear is that fluoride can discolor teeth,
suppress the immune system, contribute to certain cancers, cause gastrointestinal issues like
vomiting and diarrhea, and lead to birth defects.” Copper “can cause many issues, like
Tourette’s, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism, and Aspergers” warns Genevieve (“The
Ultimate Guide to Safe, Nontoxic Cookware,” 2016). This behavior was also observed in
artifacts, particularly Nourishing Traditions. Sally Fallon linked fluoride with “bone loss, bone
deformities, cancer and a host of other illnesses” (1999, p. 53); avoidance of cholesterol and
saturated fats with “eating disorders, depression, fatigue, infertility” (p. 433); and soy formula
with “extreme emotional behavior, learning difficulties, immune system problems, irritable
bowel syndrome and depression” (p. 603), are several extreme examples.
Tainting leads to thorough inspection and providing alternatives for numerous everyday
items. These are offered with a hint of self-deprecation but still encouraged. In the post
“natural Easter Basket Ideas” Genevieve says “Imagine the look on your neighbor’s face when
you tell them you only use organic veggie sidewalk chalk. Ha! But it makes perfect sense,
especially when baby is using them” (“Natural Easter Basket Ideas,” 2016). Once items have
been thoroughly tainted, alternatives are needed. Tainting an item lays the foundation for
needing an alternative, the skill at which this worldview excels.

103

4.7 Offering another way in action
This worldview’s leaders believe they can offer another, better way. The next sections
examine how offering another way manifests. The first reviews challenging mainstream
descriptions, classifications, and ultimately, meanings. The second considers the differing
inclusion criteria for what constitutes a valid substitute. The third examines a popular alternate
way in this worldview, complementary and alternative medicine. The fourth section reviews
specific instances in Genevieve’s family life and how she operationalizes “another way” when
her children are sick.
4.7.1 Contesting categories, classification, and metadata
A driving principle of this worldview is that there are alternatives to mainstream norms
and that those alternatives are equivalent if not superior to their counterparts. Contesting
mainstream interpretations and descriptions often prefaced offering an alternative. This begins
with food and extends to nearly everything. For example, Monosodium Glutamate (MSG), a
controversial food flavoring additive is labeled a neurotoxin in Nourishing Traditions, labeling
echoed by Genevieve.
There is often a literal effort to change the meaning and connotation of a term. In a
recipe post [paleo pumpkin dessert bites], she asserts, “Halloween doesn’t have to mean high
fructose, GMO corn syrup candy.” If Halloween has other forms of candy, it is accessible to the
natural lifestyle. This occurs again when she asks “Did you know that jello can be a health food?
Well, if you make it the Mama Natural way it can be” (“How to Make Jello the Natural and
Healthy Way,” 2012). Alternatively, there is an effort to change the label, Genevieve asserted
“We’ve come to realize breastfeeding is not the best word for the process because it’s more

104

than feeding” (“How & Why to Work With a Lactation Consultant,” 2016). If breastfeeding is
more than feeding it can be afforded more status.
Some of the contested definitions are part of a larger debate. “Birth is a normal
biological function” (Home birth: Is it safe?), vs “The problem is that the people who believe
that home birth is reckless think about birth as a medical condition” (“Home Birth: is it safe? |
Mama Natural,” n.d.). Definitions do not freely circulate, however. In a comment exchange, on
reader asked about products claiming to be natural, another responded “The word ‘natural’
means nothing” to which Genevieve wrote “Hmmm, I think natural means something” (“What’s
in Mama’s Makeup Bag?,” 2012), but did not provide a definition.
Contesting labels and their meanings is most visible around childbirth. The term “natural
childbirth” is prominent but problematic. Even Genevieve laughs and asks, “What is an
unnatural childbirth?” in her childbirth course. In her class, she and Maura emphasize that
women must ask their providers what they mean when they say natural childbirth, because to
many providers it only means vaginal birth. Genevieve believes a “natural” childbirth is a
vaginal delivery without Western medicine interventions; when she accepted Pitocin as she
labored with her son it was a decision she grieved later, even feeling like it mean she had not
achieved a natural childbirth (“What’s Your MAMA WOUND?,” 2014). A more accurate but less
used descriptor is medicated or non-medicated childbirth.
Other terms contested by Genevieve and peers are more obviously problematic and
insensitive. Rather than the term “incompetent cervix,” Genevieve uses “dynamic cervix.” The
phrase “inadequate pelvis” should also probably be retired. Whatever natural childbirth means,
advocates are more considerate of how professional terms and labels may be internalized by

105

pregnant persons. Some of these efforts are met with more resistance than others. Caesarian
section is a procedure perceived to be too common in the United States. There is a growing call
for “gentle” c-sections. Genevieve has a post addressing this (“Gentle Cesarean,” 2017), guest
authored by a woman who is open about her own difficult experiences with c-sections. I
mentioned “gentle c-section” off-hand to a surgical resident who chortled and said “no such
thing!”
4.7.2 Inclusion criteria:
The natural lifestyle movement devotes a lot of time to labeling certain foods,
chemicals, and additives as unnatural and toxic. Many of the items receiving this categorization
are common, everyday items easily acquired. The reasons for excluding them are not always
obvious. Sometimes the criteria are clearer, however. In a post about natural deoderant,
Genevieve raves “You could eat every single one of the ingredients” (“The Pit Paste That Works
(For Everything),” 2014), implying if you cannot safely eat it, you should not use it. About her
toiletries she remarks, “today, I’m happy to say that most of the products in my bathroom are
safe and even edible!” (How to detoxify your medicine cabinet). One company is dismissed
because “I’m not a huge fan of Honest products, as I think they add too many ingredients”
(“The Best Natural Bubble Bath + DIY Recipes,” 2016). Whether an item is edible or has a
certain number of ingredients serves as a litmus test for whether it is safe enough to use for
other non-food purposes suggests a different risk evaluation criteria for inclusion. A comment
exchange between Genevieve and a reader also suggests a different risk threshold when
evaluating scientific research. Beth wrote
Studies like this always fascinate me because I wonder how they divide the participants
into groups without violating research ethics. Doesn’t it seem unethical to tell one group
106

that they need to stay sedentary when activity has been shown to improve recovery and
pregnancy outcome overall? It seems like a better design would be to survey women
throughout their pregnancy on activity rates and analyze the results later. You would
still be able to estimate the impact of exercise but you wouldn’t be instructing anyone
NOT to work out. With a large enough sample you will be people who exercise more or
less than average. Also, I’m curious about the measure they used - auditory memory of a
sleeping newborn. What does this signify exactly? Why did they choose this measure?
(“Exercise During Pregnancy,” 2014)
Genevieve responded “I thought the same thing about the sedentary mamas. I would not want
to be in that control group!” (“Exercise During Pregnancy,” 2014). This is similar to Dr. Sears
consideration that
The only foolproof way to study the long-term side effects of vaccines would be to take
50,000 infants, set aside 10,000 as an unvaccinated control group, and give the
remaining four groups of 10,000 babies each a series of only one vaccine. Then testers
would follow these kids for twenty years and compare the types of problems they have.
Of course, we can never follow this plan, as it would leave many children unvaccinated
and susceptible. We could look for 10,000 volunteer families and compare the health of
their unvaccinated kids to a group of 10,000 fully vaccinated kids over a twenty-year
period. That would be a bit easier. Any volunteers? (2007, p. 179)
In this worldview, participant autonomy is the most important component in research design.
They do not discuss how this could compromise findings.
4.7.3 Complementary and alternative medicine
Genevieve is a huge advocate of complementary and alternative approaches to
medicine. In 7 years of blog posts she utilized chiropractic care, a holistic dentist, acupuncture,
essential oils, reflexology, naturopathic and homeopathic remedies regularly. While there’s
something to be said for a “try everything” approach, hers is often “try everything else first”
and only then go to a practitioner of Western medicine.
Historically, some of anti-vaccination opposition came from practitioners, such as
chiropractors, who were disenfranchised by the practice (Kaufman, 1967). Vaccination is largely

107

confined to Western medical practitioners. While they do not profit from them (a commonlyheld belief by vaccine-avoidant parents), the monopolization around who can provide
immunizations and receive reimbursement for them contributes to the perception of
pharmaceutical companies, government, and health care providers in collusion. There are also
unflattering examples of certain providers continuing to lobby to retain monopolistic privilege
to dispense certain forms of care—the American Medical Association is famous for advocating
against permitting non-physician healthcare workers to expand their scope of practice to skills
performed exclusively by doctors (“Scope of Practice | AMA,” n.d.).
There are aspects to Genevieve’s promotion of complementary and alternative
medicines and practices that, while reflective of her own choices, also reveal the economic
benefit for her if her readers adopt them. I presume Genevieve makes a great deal of money
selling essential oils based on several factors; a) she has used buying essential oils as a way to
gain closer proximity to her with a private Facebook group, b) she has removed a video to
comply with the FDA, and c) she and her husband attend an annual conference held by the
company she purchases from —they even won an all-expenses paid Mediterranean cruise for
their work.
Genevieve is an avowed user of supplements, homeopathic and naturopathic remedies,
and probiotics. She is transparent about which she uses and acknowledges some are
controversial—particularly the company Hyland’s, whose teething tablets were recalled
because parents reported their babies were poisoned by them (“Hyland’s homeopathic
teething tablets recalled - CNN,” n.d.). Readers asked Genevieve to weigh in on these
controversies in the comments on posts. Her responses show a comparatively high risk

108

threshold for these products compared to Western medicine. When a reader asked her to
weigh in on disturbing test results for fermented cod liver oil, Genevieve responded “We don’t
have enough information yet to fully understand the situation. It definitely is disturbing but
know that we’ll get to the bottom of it” and went on to recommend brands she finds
trustworthy (“What Have We Done?,” 2015). She reassured a different reader about the same
controversy, “I would feel comfortable still taking it at this point. A practitioner who I trust has
had it tested and it showed no rancidity” (cod liver oil for kids).
One reader expressed in a comment “I don’t believe that belladonna is a ‘toxin’ for
children as the FDA claims, since it has been used for hundreds of years” and Genevieve
responded, “I agree. It’s about proper dosage and good sourcing” (“6 Natural Teething
Remedies for Baby,” 2017). Responding to a reader who was troubled by the use of belladonna,
Genevieve wrote, “Yes, there is definitely controversy with belladonna for children. In fact, that
is what spurred the FDA to put pressure on Hyland who recalled their teething tablets since
they contain belladonna. However, I don’t believe that belladonna is a ‘toxin’ for children as the
FDA claims, since it’s been used for hundreds of years, in a variety of different ways for infants.
I think it’s about proper dosages/usage and this can be in partnership with a homeopathic
practitioner or strong word of mouth/experience from other mamas. Ultimately, just like
everything else, parents need to make informed choices for their family” (“6 Natural Teething
Remedies for Baby,” 2017). In response to a different reader, Genevieve went a step further
and said, “I don’t really worry about their safety as I’m sure they are extra careful since the
recall” (“6 Natural Teething Remedies for Baby,” 2017).

109

4.7.4 What happens when a child is sick?
Upon learning someone has not vaccinated their child(ren), many respond “just wait
until they get sick.” There were two particular instances of this in the data that were revelatory
about how a vaccine-avoidant parent approaches illness.
4.7.4.1 A recurring health concern:
Genevieve’s elder child, Griffin, struggled with eczema several times, based on her
posts. The first time she mentioned his eczema was in a post entitled “Why I don’t use soap
(much)” and “noticed he started to get a patch or two of dry skin and the doctor thought it
might be eczema” (“Why I Don’t Use Soap 😮😮😮 (Much),” 2016). Later, when Griffin was
three years old, it reappeared and she told her listeners
“I was just disappointed because since this kid has been born I have given him such a
healthy diet, I mean it’s certainly not perfect but all things considered he eats super
well, he was breastfed for two years, I gave him lots of probiotics, I ate lots of probiotics
so I was just kind of baffled” (“The House is a Wreck! - In Real Life #26 | Mama Natural,”
n.d.)
In her view, based on these preventative choices, her son should not have developed this
condition. They decided to do a blood test for food allergies and eliminated anything for which
he had sensitivities and gave him certain supplements so that “by doing all of this together in a
month this guy’s eczema was gone” (“The House is a Wreck! - In Real Life #26 | Mama Natural,”
n.d.)
There was an element of Genevieve that took Griffin’s eczema as a personal affront to
her parenting. When she first told her audience about it, she asserted
I’m mama natural and I follow this awesome diet and I give him probiotics and I’ve been
giving him the stuff that’s ‘good’ and blah blah blah but it just goes to show that none of
us are exempt and I’m just frustrated by it (“Ain’t No Baby Up In Here - In Real Life #8,”
2014)
110

At that point, she was attributing Griffin’s eczema to gas leaks in her home (“Toxic Gas Leak! In Real Life #6,” 2014). Genevieve said, “It’s just a drag, I don’t want my kid to have this” (“Ain’t
No Baby Up In Here - In Real Life #8,” 2014). Of course, no parent wants their child to suffer
from eczema, but this instance reveals how health functions in this worldview. Ill health is
viewed as something that can be preempted based on preventative choices, when
environmental and lifestyle factors are examined for culpability. An innate tendency toward
eczema is never discussed.
4.7.4.2 Short-term illness:
When Genevieve’s second child, Paloma, was two months old, her son (about three)
came down with a serious fever. At the time, neither child had received any vaccines.
Genevieve was well aware of the risks stating
I was so worried about her I did not want her to get sick. I mean first of all a fever for 2
month old could be super serious and don’t even get me started about that cough I
mean it sounded horrible and of course I go to– its whooping cough– and that could be
deadly for 2 month old and it just freaked me out (“Week 10 Postpartum | Mama
Natural,” n.d.)
She and her husband divided their house and essentially quarantined one child from the other
with each parent tending to one child only until the danger had passed. She did realize the
privilege of her position, admitting, “I can’t even imagine if I had to be home with just the two
of them trying to block and tackle. It would have been a freaking disaster” (“Week 10
Postpartum | Mama Natural,” n.d.)

111

4.8 Anecdotal evidence: The information used
I have described a worldview where anecdotal evidence counts as more than or equal to
traditional authoritative knowledge. In the next three sections I will discuss how traditional
knowledge is treated based on Genevieve’s citation behavior and general information behavior
observed.
4.8.1 Full-text, full attention
When cleaning Genevieve’s citation data, I counted 304 scholarly articles, after
removing duplicates this was 270 unique scholarly citations. I considered any web link that
appeared on PubMed or a journal’s domain to be a scholarly article. Of these citations, 162
(60%) were from PubMed. Of the PubMed citations, 118 of the PubMed citations (72.84%)
were abstracts or citations. Out of all 270 citations, 61.85 percent were abstracts or citations.
By not providing free full-text access to scholarly work, we may be contributing to ideas
that the scientific community is gated and elitist and withholds information. Worse, we may be
privileging work that is full-text and open access, work that is not necessarily better. This is
dangerous because journals that publish problematic work may exploit this loophole if they are
interested in reaching the public via authoritative sources. For them, scholarly work is primarily
a way to gain legitimacy with non-scientific audiences—not contribute to scholarly dialogue.
There are potential conflicts of interest within these systems. One example was The Journal of
Perinatal Education, a Lamaze International Publication which appears full-text in PubMed
“courtesy of Lamaze International.”
Genevieve never addresses that the links she provides are sometimes full-text,
sometimes abstracts, and sometimes citations. This is concerning because of her willingness to

112

criticize studies and because of how often she summarizes studies. There is no way of knowing
if these judgments were formed from reading the whole thing or just the abstract [insert article
about abstracts not being representative of the article]. It is interesting because despite having
several videos about hulking out on evil scientists, she never mentions distress about not being
able to access this information. This supports other behavior that suggests Genevieve wants
you to get your information from her. The inclusion of references is not about enabling readers
to examine the information themselves, instead it is a marker of why readers can trust her. This
is most evident in the last page of her book, before the index, when in a red box titled
“REFERENCES” she wrote “Find links to all the research, studies, and historical data referred to
in this book at www.mamanatural.com/book/references/” (Howland, 2017, p. 486).
4.8.2 Bibliometric findings
Table 4.5 shows almost half of Genevieve’s scholarly citations came from journals she
cited from more than once. Over 95 percent of her citations came from journals I was able to
verify were peer-reviewed. The articles she cited were published between 1939 and 2017 with
a mean year of 2005.
TABLE 4.5: JOURNAL CHARACTERISTICS
Cited from more than once
Peer-reviewed

Altmetric
Web of Science
ISI
Scopus
Google Scholar

47.78%
95.19%

Citations
256
251

TABLE 4.6: METRICS
Mean
Minimum
67.48828
0
71.41434
0

Maximum
1449
902

246
267

86.06504
148.1273

1044
1901

113

0
0

Year

TABLE 4.7: SUMMARY OF YEAR
Observations
Mean
Minimum
270
2005.626
1939

Maximum
2017

4.8.3 Information Behavior
Across artifacts and platforms, Genevieve’s information and narrative were remarkably
consistent—especially down to specific details. For example, Genevieve struggled with weight
and diet prior to becoming “Mama Natural.” Over time, how she presents this struggle has
ossified into a set story with identical details— “I was 60 pounds overweight – obese!”, “I was
addicted to sugar”, “I drank up to 6 Diet Cokes a day!” (“About Mama Natural,” 2011, “My
‘Before’ Pictures! ❂ IRL #48,” 2015, “Sugar Addiction,” 2012). Amounts and adjectives did not
vary, they became a fable more than anecdote.
Genevieve extended this behavior to less personal information as well. Even more
mundane stories were repeated across platforms—her book, her blog, and her videos—almost
verbatim. I noticed, as I read her book, that much of the material felt like it had been pulled
directly from her blog. There was additional, new information I had not read previously, but
there were also stories and information from posts I could recall reading or hear her telling me
in a video. This also extended to the stories in her birth class videos.
This struck me as odd, and a measure of how controlled this narrative is. It also
underscores the limits of relying on “anecdotal evidence” —the information hardens because
the holder is not in situations that challenge the existing evidence—the well upon which to
draw is not deep. Genevieve’s book, blog, videos, and course are largely drawn from and about
her experiences during the pregnancies and births that produced her two children. Over time,

114

and if the barrier to access is higher, she adds layers of meaning and new interpretations—but
it is always the same experience being evaluated.
I observed this when watching Genevieve describe the birth of her first child, Griffin.
Genevieve’s labor with Griffin stalled after 24 hours and was prodromal, meaning his head was
pressed against her tailbone for hours—extremely painful. After various non-medical
interventions, her midwife suggested a minute amount of Pitocin, a synthetic version of the
hormone that causes contractions, Genevieve says “With regret, I agreed to two drops of
Pitocin” (“Griffin Natural Childbirth Videos - Part 2, Delivery [GRAPHIC],” 2010). Within minutes
of receiving Pitocin, her contractions began again and her son was born soon after. At the time,
Genevieve wrote and spoke about personal grief and disappointment over a perceived “failure”
to have a completely natural (unmedicated) birth, she says “It saddened me because I am
MamaNatural and I didn’t want to have to go that route” (“Griffin Natural Childbirth Videos Part 2, Delivery [GRAPHIC],” 2010). She shows evidence of bargaining, “it was just two drops of
Pitocin, some moms are at 20/30 for their entire birth!” (“Griffin Natural Childbirth Videos Part 2, Delivery [GRAPHIC],” 2010). Over the years she referenced this repeatedly and
expanded her explanation for how and why it happened. Initially, when she referenced it, she
focused on forgiving herself and her personal grief. This influenced later posts and directives to
readers to allow themselves to grieve and how to ask for the support for having a birth
experience other than the one they had hoped for. She also produced posts about prodromal
labor (back labor) and how painful it was; videos would segue to her naked and loudly grunting
in pain as her husband pressed on her back to relieve her aches.

115

In Genevieve’s childbirth class, the explanation shifts outward. For the first time (in my
memory) as Maura (the midwife, nurse, lactation consultant and doula) explains how labor
progresses and the urge to push et cetera, Genevieve hypothesizes that she pushed too soon,
tiring out her uterus and stalling her labor, she goes on to talk about how the midwife was not
with her the entire time but had multiple patients that night and thinks her ultimate need for
Pitocin might have been preventable. Her grief and perceived “failure” to “achieve” a
completely non-medicated childbirth shifted over time from something personal to an
unnecessary outcome of the unsupportive hospital system. This hypothesis, that the Pitocin
intervention was preventable and would not have been necessary if the midwife had been in
the room the entire time only appears in Genevieve’s birth course—a course that costs $200 to
take. The video is only accessible via a password and email address. As the barriers to access
become higher (i.e. financial) the information shared is less filtered to be appealing to the
masses.
The sameness of the information is interesting for many reasons. It has largely been
unchanged for different media—video, book, blog post—the message and words used to
deliver it are not altered. The same message is disseminated to different platforms (and maybe
different audiences) but it is not adapted with those different audiences in mind. This is not
about tweaking a message to reach different people, this is about reaching people on all sides
of the bubble with the same travel brochure to a new land. It is not until one pays to enter (via
the birth course or joining Genevieve’s team to sell essential oils) that one is exposed to the
additional layers of interpretation and meaning.

116

4.9 The spaces between: Family Resemblances
The theoretical model implies leveling and a progression of choices and behaviors that
set each level apart. In the next section I will present the family resemblances detected and
how they demonstrate this leveling based on Mama Natural and 84 of her peers. Family
resemblances refer to the “complicated network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing:
sometimes overall similarities, sometimes similarities of detail” (Wittgenstein, 1967, p. 32) that
determine membership or association to a “family.” Individuals were considered peers if they
had a current digital presence where they discussed parenthood, pregnancy, diet and nutrition,
or natural lifestyle, and if they had a tangible link to Genevieve. I discuss this selection process
in greater depth in section 3.7.
In Figure 4.26, there is a model of the different levels with the family resemblances at
each level. Items are clustered around their higher categories to represent the various paths to
entry in this worldview. Not all characteristics are represented in this graphic, but there is a
clear progression and “path” to the center. As one adopts more practices and incorporates
more knowledge, these choices become more laborious and require more determination. This
figure illustrates how there are numerous points of entry to this worldview, but the path to the
center does not have as many openings.

117

Figure 4.26

Figure 4.27 presents an alternative of this model, which is likely more realistic to the
paths people take. In this figure, the journey is not a straight line, and it does not always end at
the center. It allows for movement in multiple directions and the accumulation of practices
from various parts of this landscape. It is still limited because it does not illustrate when
someone truly transitions through the circles. If someone does all of the things contained by
the green circle, compared to someone who only does several, are they really in the same
place?

118

Figure 4.27

The next sections discuss each category of family resemblances in greater detail, the
leveling observed, and the limitations to the data.
4.9.1 Rationale for Inclusion
During my first round of data collection—watching and reading Mama Natural’s posts
and videos, I recorded my impressions, thoughts and comments in brief memos and collected
metadata from the posts and videos. I quickly noticed that just because Genevieve had a post
about a topic did not mean she adhered to it—usually she had tried it at least once, or
researched it herself, but it was clear she felt she needed to address it. The topic baby-led
weaning exemplified this. In a post and video, Genevieve discusses the various schools of
thought, her own experience, and ultimately why she was not comfortable with it (“Why I’m
Waiting To Do Baby Led Weaning (BLW),” 2011). Even in this worldview and on her website,

119

Genevieve did not perform every associated behavior, and of those she did perform, it was not
always a positive experience. The inclusion of those experiences anyway speaks to how integral
these practices are to this worldview.
Potential family resemblances were identified over time and sorted into 6 categories
with a total of 51 characteristics. Categories were not always discrete and some characteristics
would have been appropriate in multiple categories, especially for items that had multiple
uses—such as coconut oil, a food item (in the Food category) which many members of Mama
Natural use for cooking, but also as a carrier oil for essential oils, for oil pulling, and during
pregnancy. The categories are listed in the table below.
TABLE 4.8
Category
General

Food
Child-rearing

Information
Sources
Personal Habits
Pregnancy &
Childbirth

Characteristics
Voice(s), Gender, Race, Orientation, Religion, Marital Status, Children,
Amazon affiliate, non-book product, book published, disclaimer, personal
redemption arc
Coconut oil, special diet, apple cider vinegar, grass-fed/pastured beef, raw
milk, organic products, anti-seed/vegetable oil, anti-GMO
Baby-led weaning, breastfeeding, babywearing, attachment parenting,
circumcision, vaccine avoidance, homeschooling, amber teething necklace,
elimination communication, cloth diapers
Dr. Robert Sears, Weston A. Price, Ina May Gaskin, Sally Fallon Morell, Gail
Tully
Reflexology, Homeopathy, Naturopathy, Oil pulling, chiropractor,
supplements, oppose fluoride, essential oils, acupuncture
Homebirth, Natural childbirth, Midwifery care, Skin to skin, delayed cord
clamping, placentophagy, NFP/synthetic birth control opposition

Of the 85 cases, strong homogeneity was found in certain characteristics. In some
categories, leveling was observed, where between certain resemblances there would be a steep
difference, suggesting distinct levels of adherence. Sometimes this made sense, calling back to
“Just two steps to natural living,” as resemblances like coconut oil or essential oils have a
120

relatively low cost compared to characteristics that are perceived as more extreme or
expensive, such as fluoride opposition (obtaining fluoride free toothpaste is not difficult, but
fluoride-free water is very expensive and time-consuming).
In the sections below, I present the findings for each category. All percentage points are
rounded to the nearest hundredth.
4.9.2 General Family Resemblances
Almost all cases were women, most of these women were married, white, had children
and were the sole voices and creators of their digital space. Of those who mentioned a spouse,
not a single one was in a non-heterosexual partnership. It is possible that they would not
disclose this for fear of stigma and negative backlash. Of the minority who did not acknowledge
a romantic partner, it is also foreseeable they may have avoided doing so at their partner’s
request, because they do not have a partner (for example, a blogger who was attending college
and relatively young was unsurprisingly unmarried), or other reasons. The same can be said for
the percentage of cases with children. The majority did not express or acknowledge a religious
background, of those who did, most followed a Christian denomination. It is likely the
proportion of Christian cases is much higher. To be categorized as a Christian, a case had to selfidentify that way in their biographical sketch, directly acknowledge Jesus in a flattering way, or
personally discuss their faith. Casual observance of Christmas, inclusion of holiday recipes or
activities was not taken as evidence of faith, because such behavior could be seen as cultural,
like a Thanksgiving meal, rather than religious.

121

Race
Gender
Marital Status
Voice
Children
Religion
Amazon Affiliate Participation
Disclaimer
Published book
Non-book product
Personal redemption story

TABLE 4.9
92.9% White
92.9% Female
90.6% Married
83.5% Solo Internet presence
83.5% have children
71.8% did not express religious background
71.8%
65.9%
55.3
44.7
44.7

In the general set of resemblances, there were five characteristics pertaining to the
perceived professionalism of the blog. This began with participation in the Amazon Affiliates
program, a program that allows Internet users and content creators to include Amazon links
and receive a small commission when visitors purchase from those links. If cases were
attempting to capitalize off of their content via affiliation, they likely also had a disclaimer
limiting their liability and emphasizing they were educational and informational resources. After
this “level” there was then another drop to participants who had published a book—this
characteristic did not distinguish between physical and electronic books, self-publishing or
publishing via a traditional publisher, or charging for the book. More than half (55%) of
participants had produced a book in some fashion. About 45 percent of participants offered a
non-book product of some kind. This varied from electronic courses, videos, and other digital
products to physical goods. The same proportion (45 percent) of cases featured a personal
redemption story. This characteristic was based on Mama Natural’s frequently repeated fable
about her “Before” life, when she drank Diet Coke, smoked cigarettes, and was overweight, but
through diet had “healed.” Many of the cases exhibiting this characteristic featured similar

122

stories of struggles with weight, often with health, and through persistence and food choices:
healing and glowing physical health.
4.9.3 Food Family Resemblances
Food behaviors were highly significant as family resemblances. These categories were
derived from Genevieve’s most commonly expressed food preferences and the directions found
in the artifact, Nourishing Traditions. Because of the frequency with which we eat, purchase
and prepare food, our diets are perhaps the easiest entry point into this worldview. The blog
post “Just two steps to natural living” focused on diet choices. Food can also be less expensive
than accessing other characteristics.
More than six of every seven cases endorsed or exhibited coconut oil usage. Genevieve
personally uses coconut oil for cooking (even bringing it to restaurants and asking them to cook
her food in it and almost innumerable other things, such as a balm for cracked nipples. Almost
as popular was a preference for organic ingredients.
TABLE 4.10

Coconut Oil
Organic Products
Apple Cider Vinegar
Anti-GMO
Grass-fed Protein
Raw Milk
Anti-seed oils
Special Diet

87.10%
85.90%
77.60%
73%
69.40%
53%
50.60%
29.40%

Nearly four of every five cases endorsed or used apple cider vinegar in some way.
Genevieve had a blog post entitled “101 uses for apple cider vinegar” (“101 Uses for Apple
Cider Vinegar,” 2016). Like coconut oil, apple cider vinegar is relatively inexpensive and a

123

common grocery ingredient. The embrace and usage of these two ingredients was ubiquitous
throughout Genevieve’s network.
The next “level” of behaviors was a hostility toward GMO (genetically modified
organism) products and a preference for grass-fed or pastured animal protein. There was a
large drop between these two behaviors and the next two behaviors contained in the level—
hostility toward certain oils (seed oils, like canola) and preference for raw dairy. It is important
to acknowledge that both of these characteristics were more difficult to assess. Detecting
preference for grass-fed or pastured animal protein usually involved one to two searches—
“pasture” and “grass-fed.” Assessing raw milk was much more complicated, as raw is also a
popular way of eating in this communities and resulted in many false positives (recipes like
“raw carrot salad”). There are also many forms of dairy, such as milk, cheese, and yogurt.
Unpasteurized or non-pasteurized are not the commonly used terms. Thus, preference for raw
dairy is likely understated. The same can be said for hostility toward seed oils; it was necessary
to do multiple searches. In addition, bloggers did not need to warn against using certain oils,
they could display bias against those oils without ever saying so if they created recipes that
never used them—however this would not have “counted” as hostility, thus that number is also
likely understated.
About a third of cases were characterized as “special diet,” meaning they were vegan,
vegetarian, dairy-free, gluten-free, Paleo, or some combination in their biographical sketch. This
was included because, again, diet was seen as a gateway into this worldview and an aspect of
life where it is relatively easy for individuals to experiment. However, the distinction between
being on a special diet and not is very blurry. For example, while Mama Natural is on a very

124

specific diet of organic, non-GMO products that are largely unprocessed, I would not have
counted her as on a special diet because there is no specific food group she avoids (elimination
of highly processed, inorganic, GMO foods has yet to gain a label).
4.9.4 Child-Rearing Family Resemblances
Within the category of child-rearing, breastfeeding was the obvious gateway behavior to
this worldview, with more than three quarters of cases acknowledging or exhibiting the
behavior. Cloth diapering, homeschooling, and vaccine avoidance and delay were the next level
of behaviors. Each involves significantly more parental labor to adopt. These numbers refer to
awareness and inclusion of these perspectives, not necessarily adoption and exhibition of them.
Homeschooling may be overstated because if a case referenced homeschooling in any way, it
was counted—the case did not have to personally homeschool. Thus, bloggers creating
activities and suggesting modifications for homeschool parents were counted in this category.
The reason for this was primarily because it was very difficult to tell if a parent was actually
homeschooling and many cases expressed ambivalence about homeschooling, suggesting they
might do so in the future. The same could be said of cloth diapering (many cases admitted
attempting it or performing it only under certain restrictions). Vaccine avoidance and delay, as
discussed in the literature review, is a notoriously messy label that can mean many things.
However, almost half of cases mentioned and included these topics.

125

TABLE 4.11

Breastfeeding
Cloth Diaper
Vaccine Avoidance/Delay

76.50%
47.10%
47.10%

Homeschooling
Babywearing
Attachment parenting
Baby-led Weaning
Circumcision Opposition

44.70%
31.80%
25.90%
25.90%
15.30%

Elimination Communication

12.90%

Amber Teething

12.90%

Babywearing (attaching a child to one’s body and “wearing” them), attachment
parenting, and baby-led weaning were the next set of characteristics. These are intertwined,
with babywearing a common attachment parenting practice. Attachment parenting is a
philosophy of parenting developed by Dr. FIRST NAME Sears, the father of the Dr. Robert Sears,
who wrote The Vaccine Book. These behaviors also require additional parental labor to
perform. They may also be understated. Attachment parenting was difficult to assess because
of high false positive returns in many cases, and baby-led weaning and babywearing are acts
likely performed by many people who do not recognize them as such. The last level and most
“fringe” were circumcision opposition and use of amber necklaces for teething pain.
4.9.5 Information Sources Family Resemblances
The information sources category was derived from the resources considered central to
Mama Natural’s formation. Dr. Sears and Ina May Gaskin have relatively high mainstream
recognition compared to the others, but this did not correlate to presence in the network. The
closeness between Weston A. Price and Nourishing Traditions is unsurprising, given the latter
derives its teachings from the former. Gail Tully is the creator of SpinningBabies, techniques to
shift a fetus’ position and decrease the likelihood of a Caesarian. Gaskin and Tully’s information
126

is only applicable to pregnancy and childbirth. Dr. Sears’ books are only relevant if one has
children. Because of their smaller domains, it is unsurprising they were less prevalent than the
works of Price and Fallon. Price and Fallon’s information pertains to diet, a topic with wider
appeal.
TABLE 4.12

Dr. Westin A. Price
Nourishing Traditions by Sally Fallon
Ina May Gaskin
Gail Tully
Dr. Robert Sears

48.20%
47.10%
17.60%
9.40%
9.40%

4.9.6 Personal Habits Family Resemblances
Utilization of essential oils or supplements were the most commonly shared personal
habits within the network. It is not surprising that these two characteristics might serve as
“gateway habits,” as essential oils are relatively inexpensive and supplements is a larger and
inclusive term that could encompass some of the other behaviors, but can also be a relatively
inexpensive item. Acupuncture, homeopathy, naturopathy, fluoride opposition, and
chiropractic care were the next level of behaviors. Four of the five are associated with
practitioners of complementary and alternative medicine, and the remaining may be an
attitude widely held by these practitioners. The last two behaviors, reflexology and oil-pulling
were less common. They may be under-represented based on difficulty detecting them—
searching sites for “oil-pulling” often returned false positives related to oil or pulling but not the
actual practice. Reflexology as a term rarely returned results, but given the popularity of other
practices, it is possible cases referred to it a different way.

127

TABLE 4.13

Essential Oils
Supplements
Homeopathy
Oppose Fluoride
Chiropractor
Naturopathy
Acupuncture
Oil pulling
Reflexology

80%
78.80%
54.10%
51.80%
50.60%
50.60%
49.40%
35.30%
17.60%

4.9.7 Pregnancy and Childbirth Family Resemblances
Not surprisingly, natural childbirth (admittedly an ambiguous term with various
meanings) was the characteristic most likely to be exhibited by this set of cases, with almost
two-thirds referencing this behavior. Midwifery care was referenced almost as frequently. The
next “level” was comprised of homebirth, skin-to-skin, delayed cord clamping, placentophagy,
and natural family planning or hostility to synthetic birth control methods. As in other
categories, not every case that was “counted” for these characteristics personally exhibited
them, but they did include or make note of them to be counted. Placenta consumption, in
particular, was a behavior in which many of the cases who mentioned it had not actually
performed it. Each of the behaviors in the second “level” of characteristics requires more
persistence, time, or money to perform.
TABLE 4.14

Natural Childbirth
Midwifery Care
Homebirth
NFP / anti-synthetic birth control
Skin-to-skin
Placentophagy
Delayed cord clamping

61.20%
58.80%
37.60%
36.50%
32.90%
29.40%
27.10%

128

4.10 Barriers to access: What keeps people from moving freely?
In the model, inhabitants act with the understanding that movement is restricted based
on strength of adherence to beliefs and relative adoption of behaviors. There are additional
factors at play, namely financial freedom and privilege based on external characteristics, which
are discussed in the next two sections.
4.10.1 Pay to play
The financial cost of admission to this lifestyle is high. It begins with the prices of
organic, non-GMO, fresh food and extends into a number of areas of the home. In “The
Ultimate Guide to the best cookware (what’s safe, what’s not),” of course the cookware
deemed safest by Mama Natural was also the most expensive (“The Ultimate Guide to Safe,
Nontoxic Cookware,” 2016). In a blog post and video about pregnancy supplements, there are
ten different bottles recommended totaling hundreds of dollars (“Pregnancy Supplements,”
2013). There were areas that the rigorous inspection of ingredients and processing did not
always reach. For example, clothing - Genevieve mentioned purchasing inexpensive clothing for
her daughter from Old Navy (“I Can’t Stop Buying Girl Clothes! - In Real Life #35,” 2014) or
wearing a Forever21 sweater (“STRANDED! - In Real Life #33,” 2014).
There are occasional nods to the cost of pursuing this lifestyle. Cloth diapers are
presented as a long term investment that will save money over time (“Why We Chose
bumGenius Cloth Diapers,” 2011). Natural (non-medicated vaginal) childbirth is accurately
presented as less expensive than medicated childbirth or non-vaginal birth (“Is a Birth Center
Right for You?,” 2015). Genevieve also tells her viewers that her family views their expensive
food bill as “preventative medicine” which is why they allocate so much money to it.

129

I was surprised at the vitriol directed at items like canola oil and the high percentage of
individuals in the family resemblances analysis who shared this dislike (50.6%). Upon reflection,
canola oil is an omnipresent ingredient in highly processed foods, it is inexpensive and it is
derived from GMO ingredients. Almost three quarters (73%) of the cases in Genevieve’s peer
network derided or opposed GMO foods. GMO foods are also less expensive and more likely to
be found in processed foods. There may also be an effect of their perceived inferiority
contributing to their inexpensiveness.
Demonizing GMO-foods and seed oils like canola severely contracts the foods available
to most individuals. With just those “two steps” to natural living, individuals would be deeply
within the natural lifestyle because, by default, not a lot remains. Genevieve and her peers do
not acknowledge what “cheapness” means and what they are doing when they use it as an
insult. Removing ingredients (foods, chemicals, additives, et cetera) because they are “cheap”
or criticizing them for being “cheap” does not acknowledge that cheapness often is a means for
something to be accessible. For example, using canola oil in processed foods is cheaper than
using grass-fed butter, switching to the latter would escalate the cost and possibly make the
item inaccessible to the audience who buys it, removing their ability to access it. Opposing
“cheapness” without acknowledging the systemic and structural barriers that make the cheap
choice the only choice is problematic. This is best described in a comment exchange between
Genevieve and a reader, who commented about his use of inexpensive canola oil rather than
more expensive cooking fats. Genevieve responded “If money is tight” (emphasis added)
(“Olive Oil Scam REVEALED (And How To Spot The Real Stuff),” 2017). If. If money is tight. Not

130

“When.” It is easy to lambaste “cheap” food when one has always been in the position to avoid
it.
4.10.2 What cannot be purchased
There are barriers to access of this lifestyle that cannot be overcome with money. Some
of Genevieve’s recommendations for natural lifestyle reflect the power afforded by her
privilege. For example, in the video attached to IRL14, she recommends bringing your own
cooking oil to restaurants when eating out. In comments on this post, one reader expressed
skepticism restaurants would honor the request but Genevieve reassured her “You’d be
surprised about the oil thing. I thought waiters would not go for it but we haven’t had an issue
ONCE” (“Two Words to Describe Your Child - In Real Life #14 | Mama Natural,” n.d.). Another
reader asked Genevieve to “walk [her] through a sample of this conversation” and Genevieve’s
response included “If they give me any pushback, I say that we are trying to avoid other
vegetable oils due to allergies (I am allergic psychologically to bad oils.)” This is not the only
occasion where Genevieve treats food allergies and sensitivities with a levity they do not merit.
When a reader asks about preventing her child from eating the unhealthy snacks at preschool,
Genevieve responds “I advocate hard for bringing your own snack. You can always play the
‘food sensitivity’ card” (“What To Do When People Think You’re Nuts | Mama Natural,” n.d.). In
Genevieve’s worldview, food allergy or sensitivity is a “card” to be played to achieve a goal, not
a condition that can threaten one’s life.
Genevieve also appropriates the language of serious issues on occasion for the purpose
of humor. For example, she says “I was addicted to the white stuff...I couldn’t get
enough...towards the end, just one hit and I was down for the count...I knew I had to quit but I

131

didn’t know how” when talking about her relationship with refined white sugar (“Sugar
Addiction,” 2012). Disordered eating is not the same thing as addiction to or abuse of illegal
substances. In her video “Sh*t crunch mamas say: Part 2,” she has a skit about buying raw milk
in secret which depicts the act like someone buying illegal drugs—she even mentions “the feds”
(though she’s referring to the FDA) (“Sh*t Crunchy Mamas Say - Part 2,” 2012). The skit is lighthearted and comical, but also highlights the inherent privilege of the situation - clearly she is
not afraid of the consequences of buying raw milk and publicizing her illegal actions. She even
jokes “aaaah, that’s the stuff.” She literally broadcasts this illegal activity on YouTube. It is
difficult to image a person of color and without her socioeconomic status creating the same
video.
It’s rare that Genevieve directly addresses situations outside of her own. When she
acknowledges “for some women, prenatal care is their first or only chance to see a doctor and
undiagnosed STDs can be dangerous for the baby” (“First Prenatal Care Visit,” 2016), it is a rare
concession to women who are not able to access health care regularly, and the need to accept
a treatment plan designed to anticipate women at that level. If you are unable to exclusively
breastfeed and instead pump and use bottles, Genevieve characterizes these as “commitments
that will keep you from feeding baby exclusively” (“Best bottles for breastfed babies,” 2016),
commitments rather than work, obligations, et cetera. In a different post encouraging
breastfeeding, she muses
What this tells us is that many women want to breastfeed and are trying to do so, but
they face barriers. Maybe they’re not getting the support they need. Maybe they’re not
hearing a ton of great examples. Maybe they don’t know other breastfeeding mamas
(“Breastfeeding Gets Easier,” 2010)

132

In discussing blood or hair mineral analysis, she admits “not everyone can afford or access this
kind of personalized testing but hopefully this will be the medical norm one day” (“What are
the Best Prenatal Vitamins for You?,” n.d.). In food, “Enriched flour is one of my pet peeves. It
really isn’t necessary to give our kids synthetic forms of vitamins unless they are malnourished
or in very poor health (and even then, it’s questionable how beneficial they are)” (“Healthy
Goldfish Crackers Recipe,” 2016). In the 55th episode of the MN Show, she discusses how
married sex can be better, because (in her worldview) you don’t have to worry about
contracting diseases or worry as much about birth control failure (“IS MARRIED SEX BETTER?
(MNShow 55) - YouTube,” n.d.)
Genevieve admits she and her husband are “both blessed to work from home, so we
can go anywhere there’s a decent internet connection” (“We are leaving Chicago ➜➜ IRL 59 |
Mama Natural,” n.d.). In discussing their occupational choices, she says
I have found what works best is for me to work part time and Michael to work full time.
Michael loves to work and so he needs that for his just his well being and for me I love
part time because I really love accomplishing things and sharing messages with you and
doing blog posts, but I also love being with my kids” (“What’s Wrong With My Neck?,”
2016)
In a post about flying with an infant, she says “I would seriously consider not travelling if you
have to go alone” (“10 Tips for Airline Travel with Baby,” 2011). Single parenting was addressed
about four years into the blog, when her husband returned to work after the birth of their
second child
It’s very humbling because I know tons of moms that do this every single day. I know
other ones that have twins and more kids than just two and they manage it and they
show up and they get it done but it was hard (“Week 4 Postpartum,” 2013)

133

Still, single parenting was considered through the lens of staying home while a partner works
outside the home. Genevieve structures her posts and videos around her own experiences. She
does not consider how her instruction would need to be adapted for someone who lacks the
privileges afforded to her because of her race, her marriage, or her work choices.
Genevieve’s blog does not address and appears not to consider conditions outside of
her own. Her circumstances are “blessings” rather than privileges. Blessings are favors from a
higher power, privileges are special advantages or rights offered for a variety of reasons—such
as the color of one’s skin, one’s sex, or one’s marital status. Genevieve may be blessed, but she
is also a well-off, white, Christian, woman in a loving heterosexual marriage. Those
characteristics grant her an immunity she does not acknowledge—she can brag about buying
raw milk, she can suggest she has a food allergy so restaurants will accommodate her—which is
unavailable and inaccessible to individuals who do not resemble her.
4.11 Outsiders: External perceptions of Mama Natural
The theoretical framework I have outlined identifies outsiders as possible followers or
agents of persecution. Genevieve rarely addresses or speaks about individuals who do not
ascribe to her worldview. I wanted to understand how outsiders might perceive her, but they
had to be individuals who were aware of her. Looking at online forums devoted to criticism and
“snark” about mommy bloggers and other digital personas was the best option to consider how
relative “outsiders” viewed Genevieve while remaining within the scope of the case.
On GOMIBLOG (Get off my Internets), the most well-known forum for these discussions,
there was not a thread devoted to Mama Natural. However, searching “Mama Natural forum”
immediately returned a long thread on the website YTMommaDrama. Other than the

134

comments on Mama Natural blog posts (which she has the power to delete), this was my first
opportunity to observe external perceptions about and reactions to her. Forum threads are also
distinct from comments on a Mama Natural channel, because comments are directed to her
and there is an awareness she can see them. Forum threads on websites like YTMommaDrama
are devoted to individuals talking about a person, not to them. This disassociation, especially
with anonymous usernames, may allow individuals to voice comments and criticisms they
otherwise would not.
I was not surprised at all to see negative reactions to Genevieve in this forum. One
poster, PinkTuTu, asserted “This woman is nuts. She would probably eat kitty litter if someone
told her it was organic trail mix,” and another, Autumnlane, suggested she suffers from
orthoexia (“YTMD • View topic - Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.). I observed many of the themes
described by Hunter (2016) in her content analysis of threads on GOMIBLOG. Elisabeth A wrote
“damn she is so pious I can’t stand her. A little humility would do her good” (“YTMD • View
topic - Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.). I perceived this comment about Mama Natural’s piety as a
two-fold criticism of her frequent references to her faith, but also implying she is not “real,” as
calls for authenticity were a common refrain in [gomiblog author]’s work. Interestingly,
numerous contributors wrote about and expressed outrage over Genevieve’s reaction to a
nurse attempting to take her newborn daughter and clean the infant. They attacked her for this
moment, for sharing it and for her perception of it. It is surprising because one could argue it
was a show of authenticity—what users of these forums most commonly find lacking in
mommy blog content. An authentic, if unflattering, moment became the most robust evidence
to disparage this woman.

135

I did not anticipate forum contributors defending (or declining to judge) Mama Natural.
Springsahm commented, “I like Mama Natural's videos because they are short and actually
planned out, so you get some production quality. it's also refreshing to see a YT mom who
definitely seems old enough/financially stable enough to have kids” (“YTMD • View topic Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.). SincerelyMe wrote
In the end I believe f you make an informed decision than it’s the right decision for your
family. And ultimately that’s what she does. Research, learn and then puts it into her
own life. I really enjoy her videos, now do I follow every bit of advice or suggestion of
course not, but I love that shes willing to share her information along the way (“YTMD •
View topic - Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.)
Her stance on vaccines was also discussed and it was divisive. Otherthings wrote
she’s okay in moderation. SOme of her videos are really informative (I loved the ones
she did on vaccines) but some of them are a little too ‘out there’ for me and I parent in a
very natural way. SPACE I could do wthout all the mention of god in her videos but
whatever. I’m sure a lot of her subs relate to that but I just.. Don’t (“YTMD • View topic
- Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.)
Yummymummy, however, criticized Genevieve’s choice to avoid vaccinating her son, “So she
thought Griffin had whooping cough.. You would think she would have gotten him vaccinated
BEFORE Paloma arrived?! Damn, maybe there are vaccines FOR A REASON!” (“YTMD • View
topic - Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.).
There were contributions that were more “detective” style, such as FibroMommy’s
query
If she's under 35 how did she get that special blood test that she used to debunk the
Intelligender tests? I've noticed people ask her how she got it cause they want it to and
she's playing the crickets game. Pisses me off. (“YTMD • View topic - Mama Natural
Blog,” n.d.)
Shortyh asserted

136

She sure doesn't have a degree in science. Her way of using the words toxin, chemicals
and detox is the reason I stopped watching her. There is no such thing as a toxin. All
chemicals are toxic in certain amounts. Everything is made up of chemicals, so her
whining about 'conventional products' being 'loaded with chemicals' is just complete
bullshit. And don't even get me started on what a scam 'detoxing' is *end rant* (“YTMD
• View topic - Mama Natural Blog,” n.d.)

137

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS
In this chapter I will discuss my theoretical findings and ruminate on the values and
capitalistic concerns of this worldview. I will also discuss the implicit bias lurking within this
worldview and how this threatens accessibility and inclusivity. I then reflect on my role as the
researcher. I conclude with future work and final considerations.
5.1 Discussion of theoretical findings
Elfreda Chatman’s theory of information poverty provided sensitizing concepts for this
study. This research built off of previous works which considered how information poverty
applies when individuals seek stigmatized information (Lingel & boyd, 2013) or when residing in
an “impoverished” place is a choice (Pollak, 2016). In situations like these, individuals may be
privileged and connected to mainstream society in other ways that make it difficult to consider
them truly disenfranchised. Information poverty has largely been confined to groups and
persons experiencing Goffman’s concept of “discredited” stigma rather than “discreditable”
stigma (Goffman, 1974, p. 41-43). The “discredited person” must “manag[e] tension generated
during social contacts” while the discreditable person “manag[es] information about his failing”
(Goffman, 1974, p. 42).
The theoretical findings of this research expand our understanding of how persons who
experience manageable stigma traverse the world. The natural living worldview is one that
involves many people who are or who come from a place of economic, educational, racial, and
religious privilege—to name a few affordances they enjoy. However, some are also individuals
138

who enter it because of an unmet need that has resulted in stigmatizing experiences which
have made them feel inferior.
The natural lifestyle worldview is not one Chatman would consider impoverished
because, in my observations, my case and her peers were not “unwilling or unable to solve a
critical worry or concern” (Chatman, 1996, p. 197). On the contrary, the belief they could “offer
another way” often led to promises of all-natural remedies that would resolve chronic
conditions they believed were related to diet. However, Genevieve’s worldview is one in which
“outsiders are usually not sought for information and advice” (Chatman, 1996, p. 205).
Inhabitants of this worldview were able and willing to solve critical worries and concerns
without seeking outside assistance not just because of their privilege, but also because this is a
worldview that values anecdotal evidence, rather than outside knowledge. They have
constructed a worldview that makes outsider information and advice less desirable and less
valid than the information and advice circulating on the inside.
In information poverty, “insiders shield themselves from needed resources” (p. 194) and
practice secrecy and deception because of a “sense that outsiders cannot comprehend a
worldview different from their own” (p. 194). My findings did not align with this conception of
insiders. In Genevieve’s worldview, insiders believed outsiders could comprehend their
worldview and she actively tried to recruit them, hence her role as a “message manager.” I also
did not observe insiders “shielding” themselves, rather according to the values and beliefs of
their worldview—those resources were not needed. Jaeger and Thompson (2005) suggest the
insider/outsider divide “may lead to people ignoring what they see as outsider information,
actively choosing a state of information poverty” (p. 100). This mostly aligned with what I

139

observed, except they were not choosing poverty—in their opinion they were choosing wealth
and health.
I did identify outsiders in my findings—individuals who were potential followers or
agents of persecution. They did not inhabit the worldview and were labeled as such by insiders.
It is possible Chatman would label them—based on their proximity to the worldview—as
experiencing information poverty. I think inhabitants of this worldview may characterize
outsiders in ways that align with information poverty, though those outsiders might disagree
with the assessment. This recalls a tension of applying the label information poverty to
marginalized groups, as reported by Hersberger (2003) in her study of homeless families,
“When asked if they felt information poor, none of the residents answered in the affirmative”
(p. 55). I think my findings demonstrate the importance of reexamining populations and
communities we have traditionally labeled as information impoverished through a different
lens. My findings describe a worldview populated by autonomous insiders and also a worldview
where individuals can develop these traits, despite remaining on the “outside” of the
mainstream.
Genevieve’s worldview did not exhibit secrecy or deception often or in ways I could
consistently detect. This could have been because most of the data collected were public and
designed with insiders and outsiders in mind. The final construct of information poverty, risktaking, was somewhat evident but, in my estimation, it appeared as a result of other values and
beliefs rather than a driving behavior. Of Information Poverty’s six propositions, only the last,
“New knowledge will be selectively introduced into the information world of poor people. A

140

condition that influences this process is the relevance of that information in response to
everyday problems and concerns” (Chatman, 1996, p. 198) held value in this context.
My theoretical findings did align far more closely with Ludwik Fleck’s theory of thought
collectives. Fleck’s collectives are “an esoteric centre made up of (scientific) specialists, and an
exoteric circumference composed of both educated and uneducated lay person” (as cited by
Arksey, 1994). My theoretical framework suggests a circle between these two which mediates
between specialists and individuals who are new to the circle. Fleck, according to Sady,
sometimes included three groups in the collective: a vanguard, the main body, and stragglers
(2017). I did observe Arksey’s assertion that in thought collectives “audiences participate in
verifying the specialised knowledge” (1994, p. 449). The collectives have a “shared thoughtstyle which links the individual participants of a collective together, whilst simultaneously
constraining and determining the way of thinking adopted” (Arksey, 1994, p. 450). Key to
understanding the natural lifestyle worldview was grasping the idea of natural as an
epistemology with experts or information leaders limiting the influence of outside knowledge.
Fleck also asserted “that thought-styles are passed on from teacher to pupil” (according to
Arksey, 1994, p. 451) which explains Genevieve’s adoption of information leaders’ narrative
styles. I reported “offering another way” to be the key belief of this worldview—that another
“natural” way existed for virtually every circumstance. This aligns with Harwood’s (1986)
statement that “conceptual networks in Fleck’s scheme possess infinite resilience, bouncing
back vigorously, though altered, after each challenge” (p. 180). My findings also demonstrate
“Fleck’s suggestion that presuppositions of a thought-style may arise from non-rational
commitment to primitive images or metaphors” (Harwood, 1986, p. 182).

141

My findings are limited however, because other members of the thought collective from
different circles were seen through the lens of someone who regards the experts as expert and
does not have personal access to the center of the worldview. I can only describe the center of
the worldview as someone who is not in it perceives it to be—a place where opinions are on full
display without concern for or fear of backlash. At the center, negative reactions are perceived
as confirmation of someone’s outsider status, not as a reflection on the insider’s choices. The
center is the source before it is distilled for less expert audiences. Based on my findings, it
sounded like an orthodox Eden where one can fully embrace and exhibit the worldview with
the confidence of someone who inhabits the mainstream, which is how someone seeking it
would probably perceive it, but because I did not study an “expert” I cannot state with
authority that its inhabitants also share this perception.
My theoretical findings demonstrate the experience of managing non-discernible
stigma—specifically the choice not to vaccinate a child based on natural lifestyle principles—is
not well explicated by Chatman’s Theory of Information Poverty. Instead, Fleck’s thought
collectives describe how this worldview functions. My findings do contribute to our
understanding of thought collectives by providing rich evidence to suggest there is a middle
group distinct from the experts and non-experts.
5.2 Discussion of values, beliefs, and thematic findings
In the next sections I discuss my findings and share aspects of this worldview I found
problematic and why. I do not believe these values or their flaws are unique to the naturalism
worldview. However, they intertwine together in this worldview in a way distinct from their
appearances outside of it. I first review the issue of relying on anecdotal evidence through the

142

lens of what material I found missing in the artifacts. I then discuss why age should not be a
proxy for value, this worldview’s comfort with cultural appropriation, and the disparity between
the “natural lifestyle” and living in nature. After reviewing the values of this worldview and
what they can mean for outsiders, I examine how this worldview uses an attitude of “nonjudgment” to perform boundary work and prime inhabitants to experience opposition from
outsiders.
5.2.1 The plural of anecdote is not evidence
Reading Ina May Gaskin’s guide to childbirth (2003) from the beginning, I saluted her for
privileging women’s voices over her own when writing her book. However, the sheer amount of
birth stories (half of the book), and their sameness began to feel propagandistic to me. It
bothered me as I felt I only heard one point of view, one story and that its repetitive nature was
a priming effort so that I would receive the actual instruction a certain way. To counter this, I
read her first book, Spiritual Midwifery, concurrently and backwards—starting with the last
chapter of midwifery instruction and working up to the childbirth stories that compose the first
half of the book. I will qualify Gaskin’s work, by acknowledging when Spiritual Midwifery was
first published in 1973, midwifery was illegal in many states and non-medicated, non-hospital
births were unattainable to most women (Granju, 1999). Reading the stories of these natural
childbirth may have been many readers’ first exposure to the possibility of having a say in their
childbirth experience.
The emphasis on individual stories to illustrate rationale for choices nagged at me
throughout this research. I forced myself to ask, “What is inherently wrong or problematic
about putting stories and anecdotes first?” These works, of Mama Natural and Ina May Gaskin,

143

are meant to educate people, particularly women. They present themselves as equivalent to or
better than existing resources. Many existing resources do not lead with stories. Scientific
papers do not usually lead with personal stories; they present facts and evidence to make a
case for hearing the story of their study. Their findings are important within the context of the
evidence and facts presented. When it is reversed, the evidence becomes important within the
frame of the story presented. Personal anecdotes are just that—personal, contextual, and
specific. Introducing information after them reinforces the frame of that story and also only
holds relevance for that story.
Time after time, Genevieve tells her story as an opening to introduce a topic or concept,
and then cuts away to “that didn’t happen to me/with me.” The plural of anecdote is not
evidence. I do not take issue with individuals pointing out that aspects of their lived experiences
do not correspond to the immense range of what can happen to someone during pregnancy
and childbirth. What I find problematic and troubling is when someone’s own personal
experience is used as a rationale to dismiss or diminish accepted protocol and evidence.
There are serious limits to our own experiences. Combined over time and across
individuals like us, these coalesce into implicit and explicit bias. Again – this is not inherently
“wrong” per se – or at least not more wrong than any other group. But it is sinister when one
group believes their experiences are not limited, and thus biased, and that they can and should
make comprehensive recommendations for everyone.
During my first reading of Mama Natural’s blog, I was worried by “what’s missing here”
and had a running mental list that included miscarriage, stillbirth, abortion, infertility, postpartum depression, what to do in the event of prenatal testing coming back with a result one

144

was unprepared for, et cetera. Adoption was addressed in a guest post, but largely from a
Christian perspective (“The ABC’s of Adoption, Guest Post by Susanna Brown | Mama Natural,”
n.d.). The more I observed and analyzed from her site, the more convinced I was that there
were strong, serious “limits” to her experience and that these limits biased her site to a certain
segment.
Of course, there is the “so what” refrain. Everyone has a desired audience and tries to
reach it to make money. But Genevieve has articulated that she wants more. She wants to start
a movement and build a community of natural childbirth mamas. She has created an entire
brand for telling those women what their biggest risks and concerns are or should be. She
claims her book “was written with all mamas in mind” (Howland, 2017, p. xxi). She teaches
them how to advocates for themselves with health care providers, friends, family, and
hospitals. In so doing, the limits of her experience—and using her own experience as
evidence—become visibly harmful.
Genevieve never directly addressed miscarriage in a standalone blog post until she had
one. Over the course of seven years, while creating and crafting “the #1 pregnancy and
childbirth YouTube channel” and her blog and a childbirth course—she never addresses this
topic on its own. She had a post about rainbow babies (“What Is a Rainbow Baby? (Pregnancy
After Loss) | Mama Natural,” n.d.), a movement to talk about babies that come after
miscarriage, but never just miscarriage. Miscarriage happens to between 10 and 25 percent of
women. The book Supernatural Childbirth, a favorite of Genevieve’s tells readers “You don’t
find ‘miscarriage’ or ‘abortion’ in the Bible. It was not and is not today the will of G-d for you to
lose your baby” (Mize, p. 112). Miscarriage doesn’t happen on MamaNatural.com until it

145

happens to Genevieve. Miscarriage and Stillbirth do feature in Genevieve’s book, which was
written and compiled before her own miscarriages.
Still, something is missing from this chapter and it is completely absent from Ina May
Gaskin’s books, except for when it occurs in women’s childbirth stories—meaning women who
had or considered abortions but ultimately bore children. Abortion. Planned pregnancies that
do not end in the birth of a child, sometimes end with an abortion. This can be for many
reasons at many different points of pregnancy. The decision to abort a wanted and planned
pregnancy is exceedingly difficult and painful and the reasons one may do so are numerous.
Yet, Gaskin and Genevieve do not name these women or include their difficult journeys. If a
topic, group, or experience is not explicitly included, it is implicitly excluded.
There are similar, startling omissions in Ina May’s books. In Spiritual Midwifery she
discusses her own stillbirth story, but the segment “What to do if your child dies” (2002, pg.
267) is only one page long—half text, half photograph. In Ina May’s Guide to Childbirth, she
does address the racial disparities at work in maternal death but only devotes a half-page to it.
Alternatively, amniotic fluid embolism—a condition she experienced—is discussed for two full
pages. I include this because, at the time she wrote it, “For African American women in New
York City in 2008, the rate was an incredible 79 per 100,000 births” (2003, p. 275) and amniotic
fluid embolism occurred in one in every 6,500 births (2003, p. 282). In NYC, in 2008, 5 of every
6,500 (or 1 out of 1300) African American women who gave birth died. However, the rarer
condition that affected Ina May Gaskin is the one which she devoted more attention and more
space.

146

Gaskin also avoids a deep discussion of post partum depression (PPD) and admits she
rarely encounters it (2003, p. 262). She asserts “Most--but not all--cases of PPD and postpartum
psychosis can be prevented by providing plenty of help to new mothers during the weeks
following birth, but much of this disease is caused by isolation and exhaustion” (Gaskin, 2003, p.
262). This underlines the danger of relying on anecdotal evidence—even when drawing from a
community of anecdotes.
Omitting or glossing over or downplaying the frequency of events does significant harm.
Aside from the obvious implication of misinforming and ill-preparing their readers, this
contributes to long-standing stigma surrounding some of these topics—particularly miscarriage
and post-partum depression. Individuals experiencing these conditions would be forced to seek
out other resources, potentially alienating and isolating them.
5.2.2 Age isn’t everything
I struggled with ancientness being used as a proxy for legitimacy. I do not think "this has
been done for thousands of years" in itself is proof of efficacy, or morality or that it should
never be used as such. It is fine and appropriate to use this as significant, but it is the reason to
keep looking at something - not stop looking at it. There are numerous practices with millennialong traditions—slavery, rape, abuse, racism, to name a few. Only through serious activism
challenging normative, mainstream mentality have we begun to dismantle how these acts of
violence are embedded in our culture as acceptable. This hyper nostalgic rendering and longing
for the past removes a lot of damaging context that punctures the beautiful narrative. Making
all food items from scratch is quite laborious, but if female children are not at school they

147

probably have the time. Just because "It's always been done that way" or "it used to be that
way" does not inherently make it better.
5.2.3 Cultural appropriation
When elevating ancient or “exotic” information and practices, Genevieve has no qualms
about making superficial references to a cultural tradition and then considering how to
integrate it into her own life. In a post titled “Don’t mess with my family (on Sundays), Soul
Food” she discusses going to a conference where they were challenged to practice Sabbath and
says “In the Jewish culture there are some communities that still really practice Sabbath”
(“DON’T MESS WITH MY FAMILY (On Sundays) - Soul Food,” 2016). She does not mention
practice is typically called Shabbat and not observed on Sundays, but from Friday night to
Saturday night or discuss at all what it means to “really practice” Shabbat.
Removing context around these practices makes them ripe for commoditization and
incorporation by privileged groups. Judaic practices are becoming “brands” and a vein of the
wellness industry (Kahn, n.d.). Sometimes this results in white-washing transformation, visible
in the growth of Christian yoga studios (Solomon, 2017) or offering a $1100 course to become
an indigenous healer (Nov 10, November 10, & 2017, 2017). Genevieve has not personally
participated in these things (to my knowledge) but they are part of a worldview she inhabits
where “We live in a small town, so we allocate a good chunk of our annual budget to travel so
the kids can see DIVERSITY in thought, race, culture, economics, and lifestyle” (“My 2017
Resolutions | Mama Natural,” n.d.). For her, diversity is something to be purchased.

148

5.2.4 Nature is gentle?
I admit to chuckling when the word natural was considered synonymous with gentle.
Along with the nostalgic rendering of the past as a golden age, natural remedies are presented
as more “gentle” than their modern counterparts, which are labeled toxic and harsh. This
extends to the narrative of natural childbirth—skin-to-skin is “natural” and “how it was
intended to be” or “how it would be in nature/the wild.” Placentaphagy comes with a similar
refrain—stories about how animals do this in the wild, so it’s “natural.” This is another place
where this community elides context. It is true that some animals consume their placenta in the
wild (though it’s not always their own placenta), but animals also routinely eat their own young
or reject and abandon them. Nature is as brutal, harsh, and unforgiving—in some ways more
so—than the technological, human-constructed counterpart Mama Natural paints as a tainted,
despoiled place.
Nature is also portrayed with gentleness found in Disney, rather than the harshness
characteristic of Planet Earth. In the two affirmation cards which feature animals rather than
people, a mother is portrayed snuggling with a single baby. On one card it is a mother fox and
single fox cub. On the other card, an owl mother and owlet stand on a tree branch together, a
different branch has a mother squirrel and a single squirrel baby, rabbit, fox and hedgehog
mother and baby pairs are also in the deck. In nature, most of these animals give birth to
multiple young in a pregnancy and some of them prey upon one another.

149

Figure 5.1

5.2.5 Us v. Them
Genevieve and the artifacts that shape her and that she creates prime individuals to
anticipate opposition to their choices. Nourishing Traditions taints our image of the food supply
by constantly revealing the modern technological ills lurking within the most basic foodstuffs
while instructing readers how to avoid these dangers. Dr. Sears separates himself from other
doctors his readers will encounter and instructs them in vaccine avoidance and delay by giving
alternatives and questions to ask. While his tone is gentle and non-judgmental, especially
compared to Fallon’s, it is just as concerning. Dr. Sears is a physician, so he should well know
that many of the “reasonable” requests he suggests parents make regarding vaccines (such as
single-dose shots or doses that do not contain certain additives) are not actually that
reasonable. In many cases they would necessitate a special order, which is not a small task. This
is not as simple as ordering a pizza without a cheese, rather it often means asking the
restaurant franchise to purchase its cheese from an entirely different supplier the physician’s
office may not have a relationship with, at great expense—which may not be fully reimbursed
150

by the insurer. Further, there is evidence that single dose shots are not as efficacious as
combined vaccines (Offit et al., 2002). Still, these battles are manifestations of a huge power
struggle between parents, particularly mothers, and the systems they interact with in their role
as parents—particularly the healthcare system.
Many of Genevieve’s pregnancy-related blog posts and a huge component of her course
and book are about priming women for the opposition they will face if they pursue a natural
childbirth. Genevieve has posts about why to have one, but also how. She portrays it as a choice
that friends and family may not understand and may try to persuade a woman away from, as a
choice that will be met with skepticism or hostility from healthcare providers. The first session
of the online birth course features testimonial clips from various couples talking about how and
why they pursued a natural childbirth. However, similar to the Dr. Sears book, in priming
potential parents for power struggles—it is possible they are precipitated. Genevieve’s
suggested questions list for a midwife has over 40 items.
On her blog and particularly in her class, when discussing homebirths, she never
laundry-lists the states where the practice is illegal (or mentions the workarounds people take)
and how a woman and her home are evaluated as candidates for homebirth. This is a startling
omission for the #1 natural pregnancy and childbirth YouTube channel. Women who read her
site may be familiar with the statistics about homebirths and their safety and efficacy—but
Genevieve (and Maura in the class) have omitted crucial context —who is allowed to attempt
birth at home (ex, not high-risk, not people who don’t have bathtubs).

151

5.2.5.1 Priming for opposition:
Much of the instruction around pursuing a natural childbirth primes women to expect to
experience opposition and resistance. Genevieve states, “medicalized childbirth, the way it’s set
up, that’s just the way it goes if you don’t fight the system a little bit” (“BABY FEVER! 👶 👧 👶
(IRL s2 e7),” 2015). In the post “Which Birthing Classes are best for you?” she tells readers
“Without a firm conviction to pursue a natural birth, and the knowledge to support your
decision, you are not likely to have one.” In the post “how to have a natural hospital birth” she
tells readers “accept that the system is (probably) against you.” She reinforces this in other
posts, “most women don’t just stumble into a natural birth. It takes determination and
commitment” (“How To Have A Natural Birth | Mama Natural,” n.d.).
In the third video documenting her daughter’s birth, she reminds viewers “you always
have to be pushing and protecting your right for a natural childbirth” (“Paloma Natural
Childbirth Videos - Part 3, Afterbirth | Mama Natural,” n.d.) while interpreting a nurse’s efforts
to dry her newborn daughter off as meddlesome and interfering. She provides a template for
birth plans in a post titled “Free visual birth plan template (That nurses won’t scoff at)” implying
that nurses will be skeptical of birth plans (“Free Visual Birth Plan Template (That Nurses Won’t
Scoff At),” n.d.). The expectation of opposition is not confined to the healthcare system and
providers.
Rooted within the push for natural childbirth and healthcare is an undercurrent of
reclaiming power. In the 5th class of her birth course, titled Transition and Pushing, when
discussing the benefits of laboring in a tub, Genevieve and Maura point out “If you’re pushing in
the tub your provider has to be hands off.” While they highlight other benefits of laboring in

152

water, they also view it as a way to insert a protective boundary between mother and provider,
implying that the provider’s hands may be harmful and interfering. In a blog post titled
“Midwife Interview Questions: Find the Right Support for YOU” she instructs “Remember, your
midwife works for you.” (“Midwife Interview Questions,” 2017). This is not exactly a
partnership but a power dynamic flip.
5.3 Message or money managers?
The next sections examine the capitalistic interests at work in this worldview and the
ignorance of the socioeconomic reality of others.
5.3.1 Discounting authority without assumption of equivalent responsibility
There is an unacknowledged awkwardness to much of the health and lifestyle advice
prevalent on the Internet and the disclaimer utilized by many of the gurus, experts, doctors,
bloggers, influencers, et cetera who create this information.
Despite sowing seeds of distrust and skepticism for the medical establishment,
hospitals, and Western Medical providers (doctors, nurses, pharmacists, to name a few), none
of these bloggers or online experts take on any liability for the choices their readers may make.
They instead disclaim all responsibility or liability and remind you to consult your healthcare
provider before making any changes or decisions about your lifestyle. On the first page of her
book Sally Fallon includes a note to her readers that “The ideas and suggestions contained in
this book are not intended as a substitute for appropriate care of a licensed health care
practitioner” (1999, p. i). Genevieve tells readers her book “is sold with the understanding that
the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering medical, health, or any other kind of
personal professional services in the book” (Howland, 2017, p. v). They have built in plausible

153

deniability in case you make a decision based on their recommendations and this decision has
an unwanted result—after all they told you to talk to your healthcare provider. This is a darker
side to the emphasis on parental choice—expertise in one context does not necessarily travel.
This trend of discounting traditional sources of authoritative knowledge without
assuming any of the responsibility incumbent upon those figures, allows the critic a great deal
of freedom—particularly when the critic is not subject to the checks and balances of the figures
and systems they undermine. Mama Natural can criticize doctors and hospitals and their
protocols; she can encourage you to disagree with them, discount their advice, or seek
alternatives; she can do all of this while reminding you she is not “a substitute for professional
medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment” (“Disclosure/Disclaimer,” n.d.) and you should discuss
all of this with your healthcare provider. However, she cannot be sued for malpractice, her
practice cannot be impugned via word-of-mouth, and she cannot explain to you the
exceedingly complex and complicated set of compromises that drive the choices and policies in
play.
This is a dangerous trend visible in many other spheres—the David and Goliath
comparison that is false and flawed. Because when this dynamic is in play, David does not want
to defeat Goliath —David actually thrives under Goliath’s presence. If Goliath is gone, David
must lead—and leaders must answer to everyone, not just the individuals who read their blogs.
A lighter example of this is visible in season seven, episode four, of the American
television show, The Office. In it, Michael—the racist, sexist, bumbling and incompetent boss
who commits a microaggression every minute—departs for the day and leaves Jim in charge.
Jim is the handsome leading man who is good at his job, surprisingly good since he spends most

154

of his time not performing it and playing pranks on a coworker or flirting with the receptionist.
At this point in the show, Jim has devoted many talking heads to describing and assessing
Michael’s limitations. There is the sense that he could do Michael’s job infinitely better than
Michael. So one would think that when given this opportunity—to do Michael’s job for a day—
Jim will excel. Instead, he underestimates the importance of allowing each employee their own
birthday party and tries to combine all of them into one celebration upsetting all of them and
chilling what had been friendly or cordial relationships. When Michael returns and Jim tells him
what he did, Michael laughs and admits to committing the same error years earlier when he
first started.
5.3.2 Financial Incentives
When Genevieve’s blog first began, both she and her husband worked full-time jobs. As
of this writing, their full-time jobs are MamaNatural.com and its related products and channels.
This includes social media presences such as YouTube and Instagram, the online childbirth
course, a book, affirmation cards, a bracelet, a mobile device application, an ebook, and
recordings of affirmations. She also participates in YouTube advertisements, which the site
Social Blade estimates generate up to forty six thousand dollars a year (“Mama Natural
YouTube Stats, Channel Statistics - Socialblade.com,” n.d.). Her blog also has advertisements
(like AdSense). In addition, her blog and videos are inundated with links to Amazon products, as
she participates in Amazon Affiliates (a program that rewards referrals with a small portion of
one’s purchase), and brand sponsorships or partnerships. This is a common practice with
bloggers and individuals whose primary job is their social media participation. A recent study
found reported affiliate links were disclosed in less than eleven percent of YouTube videos

155

which had affiliate links (Mathur, Narayanan, & Chetty, 2018). While Genevieve does disclose
her affiliate status on her blog, I was dismayed to find her YouTube behavior aligned with these
findings.
This is another unacknowledged awkwardness—that much of their wariness or
resentment towards hospitals and providers of Western medicine could result in increasing
their own bottom line. As much as they feature the disclaimer that all decisions should be made
by a reader or viewer with their healthcare provider, if the reader or viewer chooses to
purchase any of Mama Natural’s alternatives—Mama Natural profits. It is in Mama Natural’s
financial interest to undermine the authority and knowledge of those we typically think of
when we think of healthcare.
When cleaning the data gathered surrounding Mama Natural’s information use, I
noticed a trend of Dr “first name, last name” followed by dot com. Several of these websites
were cited multiple times. Not all were doctors, and not all were doctors in the “M.D.” norm we
usually resort to, but they were almost exclusively white men who promise to help you take
control of your health—Chris Kresser, Dr. Sears, Dr. Ray Peat, Dr. Mercola, Dr. Oz, Dr. Andrew
Weil. Their websites almost always offer products and the articles frequently refer readers to
the websites’ storefronts. Particularly for those whose names end in M.D. or D.O. (doctor of
osteopathy), they are capitalizing on their mainstream credentials and authority to legitimize
fringe ideas— some of which are dangerous, others which are up for debate.
I labeled Mama Natural a message manager because she is careful to avoid saying
anything “too” out there. Because she treads so carefully and avoids explicitly saying things like
“Vaccines cause Autism,” her passive behavior is of great significance. Dr. Mercola, an

156

osteopathic physician whom Genevieve cites a number of times, sells ebooks about avoiding
immunizations, the dangers of mercury and fluoridated water, among a whole range of other
popular wellness topics. On his “about me” page, he states that he donates a portion of the
proceeds of his books to numerous organizations, including The National Vaccine Information
Center (“Dr. Joseph Mercola’s Qualifications,” n.d.), one of the most well-known anti-vaccine
advocacy groups in the United States. Chris Kresser, not a “doctor” but a functional medicine
provider, follows Genevieve’s route—limited explicit comments about vaccines, but a gateway
to materials like the book Vaccine Epidemic: How Corporate Greed, Biased Science, and Coercive
Government Threaten Our Human Rights, Our Health, and Our Children (“Recommended
Resources,” 2013). Not all of the doctors listed are anti-vaccine, Dr. Weil supports and
recommends vaccines. Comparing Dr. Mercola with Chris Kresser and MamaNatural, Dr.
Mercola is far more direct about asserting ideas that are considered fringe and without
credibility, while Kresser and Genevieve modulate their assertions by just providing the
information and allowing the reader to make their own decision. Dr. Mercola, and those like
him—healthcare providers trained in the tradition of Western medicine and accredited as
such—trade on the privilege and power accorded to their authority to impugn the very systems
which afforded them their position. Because Dr. Mercola is a doctor, because Dr. Sears is a
doctor—they can directly attack the efficacy and safety of vaccines.
5.3.2.1 Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Genevieve uses, recommends, and profits from complementary and alternative
modalities; particularly supplements, homeopathic and naturopathic products and essential
oils. She promotes these products as better than treatments offered by Western medicine

157

practitioners, encouraging people to try all of them and only as a last resort visit these
providers. These are expensive products that lack an evidence base.
Supplements are a poorly regulated product in the United States and there are efforts
to keep it that way. During the hearing of since-resigned Secretary of Health and Human
Services Tom Price, Senator Orrin Hatch asked him about the regulation of supplements—a
profitable industry in Hatch’s state of Utah—and Price assured the senator he supported the
existing regulation (Offit, 2017). This is not the opinion of most physicians. In an editorial for the
journal Annals of Internal Medicine, the authors assert “The message is simple: Most
supplements do not prevent chronic disease or death, their use is not justified, and they should
be avoided” (Guallar, Stranges, Mulrow, Appel, & Miller, 2013, p. 850). A conference held a
meeting of six former FDA commissioners who lamented the agency’s inability to regulate
supplements, which can be sold “without any safety, purity, or quality testing by the FDA”
(Hamblin, 2016).
There is extensive evidence about the lack of efficacy of homeopathic treatments (Ernst,
2002). As for essential oils, Genevieve sells Young Living Essential Oils, a multilevel marketing
company “structured in such a way that a large base of distributors generally spend more than
they make, while a small number on top reap most of the benefits” (Monroe, 2017). According
to Monroe (2017), in 2016, 94 percent of members who were registered to earn commission
received less than a dollar. Genevieve and her husband have received an all-expenses paid
Mediterranean cruise for their work with Young Living (“SOLO PARENTING IS EXHAUSTING!,”
2015). Though many do not profit, Monroe (2017) suggests they stay because “Young Living’s
affection for abstract nouns—purity, abundance, wellness, vitality—helps to define a shared

158

culture that prizes freedom, family, and self-sufficiency, and is suspicious of regulation and Big
Pharma.”
These products are trying to have their cake and eat it too; they are trying to be classed
as equivalent to evidence-based, regulated treatments while remaining as accessible as natural
remedies. Genevieve recommends homeopathics, naturopathics, probiotics, essential oils, and
the use of various household products (such as coconut oil or apple cider vinegar) for virtually
any ailment. Are these products magic? As mentioned, many lack a strong evidence base and
regulation to guarantee they are what they say they are. But Genevieve cannot provide an
Amazon Affiliate link to antibiotics. She could to certain over-the-counter medications, but they
are not as expensive, she has used the words “cheap” and “harsh” to describe standard
medicines like Tylenol, as the “gentle, natural” remedies she recommends. It does not seem
coincidental that Genevieve cannot profit off of the treatments she disparages.
5.3.3 Privilege and power
In the last year, ProPublica has covered the disparate maternal death outcomes in the
United States. Up to 900 women die every year, and 65,000 almost die – women of color and
women in rural areas at disproportionate numbers (Martin, 2017). Black women are 243
percent more likely to die from pregnancy or childbirth than their white counterparts (Martin,
2017b). These numbers are subject to criticism because of poor reporting and data collection
which is “a reflection of the scant importance American society places on expectant and new
mothers and the urgency of acting to save them” (Fields, 2017). But even Serena Williams—a
wealthy, accomplished, well-known professional tennis player—nearly died from pregnancy
complications and saved her own life by self-diagnosing her blood clots and advocating for her

159

own care (Haskell, 2018). Addressing these disparities in a blog post for Science and Sensibility;
doula and childbirth educator Sharon Muza asserts “Racism is to blame and until that is
accepted as fact, it is unlikely to change” (2018). A report from the Center for American
Progress expands on this sentiment, suggesting these outcomes are related to the accumulated
stress of lifelong experiences with racism and sexism (Novoa & Taylor, 2018).
Throughout Genevieve’s entire blog and all of her videos and her birth course, I
recorded one reference to race
For reasons that are still unknown, black women across all socioeconomic class and age
categories are almost twice as likely to experience a stillbirth than white women.
Researchers are looking deeper into this statistic, but many questions still remain. In
light of this fact, it’s especially important that black women have good prenatal care and
work with providers whom they trust and with whom they feel comfortable
communicating (“What Is a Rainbow Baby? (Pregnancy After Loss) | Mama Natural,”
n.d.)
Genevieve does not question the systemic proportion of this issue. Her comments suggest
women of color just need to be extra careful and this problem is within their control. This does
a serious disservice to these women. Access to good prenatal care is not available to all women,
and in rural areas, there often is not a choice of provider.
Mama Natural, members of her network, and the information artifacts that shaped her
views promote a beautiful narrative of natural childbirth that almost every woman can reach
and should be given the opportunity to attempt—they only name certain barriers in her way hospitals, the "techno-medical" system, doctors, unsupportive or non-supportive family and
friends. They do not name insufficient healthcare coverage. They do not name maternity care
deserts (McKay & Overberg, 2017). They do not name the food deserts that put wholesome
nutritious food geographically out of reach - the same food these opinion leaders maintain is

160

the preventative to most health concerns and the antecedent to a healthy, well-nourished
baby. They sometimes name the unmarried mother, but do not acknowledge that she is 40
percent of mothers (Covert, n.d.) and the disproportionate burdens she faces. They do not
name paths to parenthood outside of heterosexual partnership. Even adoption, when
acknowledged, is given a white, Christian, married voice. They do not name the power and
privilege differentials between a married, well-educated, wealthy white woman and women
who differ from her. They do not name the significantly higher barriers to accessing care and
being treated with respect and dignity that those women face. They do not name her struggle.
They instead dive deeper into the crevasse of nurturing and nourishing a pregnancy and
working toward a non-medicated vaginal delivery surrounded by supportive caregivers. They
continue to speak about nutrition and managing stress. They do not name the mother who
works two minimum-wage jobs. They do not name her town that has one hospital. They do not
name the implicit bias or overt racism of the healthcare providers and system.
Genevieve does warn women about the increased risk of hospital childbirth and
interventions and encourages them to choose midwives, avoid certain interventions, and
pursue more laborious child-rearing choices, some of which lack robust evidence. There is a
potential misrepresentation in her work – why hospitals are unsafe for women, and for whom
they are most unsafe. Presenting the aggregate data without the deeper and significant context
is irresponsible and problematic. It obscures the bigger issues preventing women from
delivering safely.

161

5.3.4 Problematic proclamations from privileged and powerful people
As elucidated in the theoretical framework—privileged insiders will adopt practices from
other worldviews and may prefer them to the customs of their home world. Sometimes this is
the appropriation of culture in rituals, customs, and objects. An all too common practice is to
adopt a practice from another place and laud it as significantly better than the normative way
in the mainstream Western world and work to undermine the normative method’s status.
When this happens, the insider removes or omits the context that makes the other worldview’s
choice its norm, while emphasizing the costs and cons associated with the mainstream Western
world’s norm.
A common example is the refrain “women have been laboring naturally for thousands of
years.” The statement is true—women have been laboring naturally for thousands of years.
Women have, and they continue to—however when this statement is given as the rationale for
avoiding interventions or interventions not being necessary, it is problematic to omit that
women have also died during childbirth for thousands of years. In many of the places—
including the United States—where access to care and resources is limited—women are still
dying.
Omitting or ignoring this context matters because Genevieve does not see herself as
filling a niche, rather she is “trying to speak to lots of women who are in this spectrum” and
described her book as “going to speak to lots of women” (“My Big Secret Project REVEALED! |
Mama Natural,” n.d.). In the video attached to the post “A Very BIG Announcement” she
includes the message “CREATE A BETTER OUTCOME FOR YOUR BABY FOR YOUR COMMUNITY
FOR YOUR WORLD” when announcing and encouraging people to sign up for her birth course.

162

Her work comes from a very personal place as she created much of her material because she
“always felt left out because it wasn’t geared toward a natural mama.” When asked if her book
would be available internationally, she responded “I sure hope so! ….. My goal is for it to be
translated and localized to reach many international markets” (“My Big Secret Project
REVEALED! | Mama Natural,” n.d.). Genevieve does not confine her efforts to pregnancy. When
she approached her son’s teacher about sugar in the classroom and had a positive reception
she said it was a “great reminder that I and you can make positive changes in our local
community if we just take that initiative” (“STRANDED! - In Real Life #33,” 2014).
There are aspects of Genevieve’s content and language that are inclusive and speak to
common negative experiences and feelings during pregnancy, childbirth, and parenting. In
discussing weight gain during pregnancy she is blunt, “Most women need some extra weight to
be healthy during pregnancy” (“The Truth About Pregnancy Weight Gain,” 2016) and discusses
why dieting during pregnancy can be dangerous. This is a meaningful effort to reframe a
challenging part of pregnancy for many women. In her own eyes, Genevieve is leading a
movement and is performing heroic feats. This is evident in her humorous videos, where she
cosplays as the Incredible Hulk and attacks “a breastfeeding hater” or processed food company
scientist (“Mama Hulks Out on a Breastfeeding Hater!,” 2014, “Mama Hulks Out on a Processed
Food Company ☺,” 2013) or when she refers to herself as Mighty Mama Natural who fights
fraudulent olive oil (“Olive Oil Scam REVEALED (And How To Spot The Real Stuff),” 2017). The
co-instructor of her birth course tells her “I feel like you are filling such a void in really
empowering women” (“Meet The Queen of Crunch! ♔ IRL 55,” 2015). As much as videos of her

163

“hulking out” are humorous (she wears giant hulk hands and green make-up), the undertone of
“this makes me so angry I would commit physical violence” is less so.
When Mama Natural and other leaders in the natural lifestyle movement emphasize
good nutrition but do not discuss how expensive and time-consuming that nutrition is—their
message is theoretically accessible to all. When they remove the context of what good nutrition
means and costs they sow dangerous seeds. It is easy to ask “so what?” and “why does this
matter?” It matters because there are very privileged people who will hear their message of
“good nutrition,” who can easily afford the organic, non-GMO, gluten-free food imbued with
other magical descriptors. They can spend their time planning and preparing these nutritious
meals. They can and will do these things, and they will have healthy pregnancies and healthy
babies. But when they see a poor woman who did not do these things, will they talk about her
“bad nutrition”? Will they consider the context of her life because they have only been told
about the importance of good nutrition. Omitting the very important context that makes good
nutrition out of reach for so many—income, proximity to grocery stores and farmers’ markets,
and TIME—obscures the nature of a problem. To participate in Mama Natural’s movement, all
one needs to do is go to the grocery store and purchase it.
This is not a movement, it is a commodity. Commodities are not accessible to all, which
means they are not inclusive. If a movement is not accessible and inclusive, it is not a
movement. It is an expression of privilege and participation is an expression of power.
5.4 Implicit bias toward outsiders
The next sections consider how this worldview, which is very interesting in attracting
new members, is implicitly biased toward certain groups of outsiders.

164

5.4.1 An image issue
On her website, Mama Natural sells a deck of affirmation cards described as “This 50
card deck will fill your spirit with positive thoughts and inspirations. Each card features a
gorgeous illustration and affirmation, along with an encouraging note from Genevieve”
(“Natural Pregnancy Affirmation Cards,” n.d.). The cards, including shipping, sell for $17 but are
included as a gift with the purchase of the birth course—they are also available on Amazon.
When I received them I was not surprised that the majority (all but two) feature an image of a
woman underneath text. I was shocked at how many of them obviously featured a woman of
color. About a third appear to feature a woman of color—this is in stark contrast to Genevieve’s
website which rarely references race, rarely if at all features women of color, and does not
address the unique challenges women of color face. The deck even includes one card that
features a heavily pregnant woman wearing an African head wrap, she is on a beach with a
dolphin jumping from the ocean and a mountain visible on the beach behind her. Her face is as
symmetrical and delicate as a Disney princess, including pink nail polish and lipstick.

165

Figure 5.2

Despite the variation in colors used for the skin of the women in this deck—they all have
remarkably similar and generically beautiful faces – wide-set eyes with pointed chins and pink
lips. It is almost as if the same woman has changed her skin color with her clothes, perhaps
shortened her hair or changed the color. The “diversity” is barely skin deep. It does not extend
to variation in body shape, point of pregnancy, attractiveness. A woman’s color is reduced to
another form of decoration. This inclusion does not honor or speak to how this shapes identity
and makes her pregnancy distinct from white women.
Figures 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, & 5.6

166

As mentioned, two cards feature no women at all – instead animals nestling with a
baby. Two cards feature a woman’s outline only – notably the cards that affirm “My body was
designed to do this” and “I know I can birth this baby naturally.” For these two affirmations –
which affirm and emphasize a natural childbirth is within any woman’s grasp—any facets (other
than gender) such as skin color or dress have been stripped away—so that any woman could
look at the card and see herself. Only two of the cards feature women with romantic partners –
in both instances the partners are male and white. One card portrays a woman giving birth in a
tub while an attendant—a woman of color —supports her. Faith references trickle in and out
throughout the deck, with comments about a “Creator,” “the Divine,” and “G-d.”
5.4.2 Representation and selective speaking out
These issues of representation within this case—insensitive portrayals of women of
color, only featuring heterosexual partnership—may be dismissed or discounted for reasons of
intent or ignorance on the part of the creator. However, a common complaint within the
natural birth community members and leaders contained within this case—a criticism
articulated by Ina May Gaskin, echoed by The Business of Being Born, Jackie Mize and
Genevieve on Mama Natural—is the representation of birth in mainstream media. Genevieve
knows “how powerful media can be in influencing a generation” (Buy a book & change the
world). Genevieve points out “Few labors actually begin with spontaneous water breaking
(although you’d never know it from watching TV)” (“Understanding the Stages of Labor,” 2017).
In a different post, she says “Unfortunately, for most women, the majority of what they know
about childbirth comes from Hollywood depictions of a screaming, hysterical woman in stirrups
on a metal table” (Which Birthing classes are best for you). Jackie Mize attributes fears of

167

childbirth to “what mamma, grandma, television, movies, and books have portrayed. In most
movies when we see the woman having a baby, she either dies or is in such tormenting pain
that she wishes she could die” (1995, p. 49).
This community is sensitive to the “misrepresentation” of the childbirth experience and
how it can cause women to internalize the inaccurate portrayal and feel real fears from this
misinformation. The text on the back of the card depicting a white woman giving birth in a tub
with a woman of color attending her reads “While Hollywood would try to convince us
otherwise, there is incredible beauty and joy in the birth process.”
In the sole appearance of a woman giving birth in this deck of cards—it is a white
woman, connecting with “the most intense, sacred, and primal experience of [her] life” while a
woman of color attends to her in the water (usually considered more natural). This is an image
containing a thousand words about this community—birth is not a medical experience but it is
also not exactly an everyday experience, it is magic and spiritual and otherworldly.
Figure 5.7

168

5.4.3 Beneath the surface—a danger of responsibility
The criticism I have lobbied at the phrase “good nutrition” calls to mind the missing
context surrounding how many politicians talk about the poor, “if they would just work hard,”
without mentioning that many of them do work—very hard for very long—at very low-paying
jobs that do not treat them with dignity or grant them the basic “benefits” such as affordable
health insurance. Good nutrition is not easily accessible, due to systemic and structural
oppression.
However, even if a woman is able to practice “good nutrition” during her pregnancy,
what is that supposed to mean? In Nourishing Traditions, the author speaks about “our Godgiven genetic inheritance of physical perfection and vibrant health” (Fallon, 1999, p. xii) and
instructs readers about how their diets support or compromise this “inheritance.” The linking of
food consumption into conditions recalls the saying “you are what you eat,” but extends it to
one’s offspring. If you eat crap, your children will be lackluster and suffer maladies. Your diet
must be carefully calibrated to ensure you are at peak health when you try to conceive and as
you carry your child.
This is borne out in numerous posts from Genevieve and she provides anecdotal
evidence of its efficacy with photos of her two smiling children. Sally Fallon, the author of
Nourish Traditions, also makes a point of telling the readers of she is the “mother of four
healthy children” (1999).
This is a dangerous rhetoric that infers we can shape our children’s health entirely
through control of our consumption and our environments. Humans, though capable of many
incredible things – are not capable of this. Additionally, if we suggest that our children’s health

169

boils down to “good nutrition” or other related factors, and entirely within our control – we
remove empathy for those who suffer misfortune—after all it was within their control. They
just needed to have good nutrition. In this worldview, the suffering of a child is a result of the
failings of the parent.
This is evident in how Genevieve approaches misfortunes. When her son developed
eczema, she took it as a personal affront to her parenting and painstakingly reviewed
environmental and nutritional factors within her control. This incident is revelatory in
understanding why Genevieve has chosen not to vaccinate her children and why she would
probably identify as “vaccine-avoidant” rather than anti-vaccine. In Genevieve’s worldview,
vaccines are not necessary as long as one practices “good nutrition.” In this worldview, vaccines
are just another technological modern convenience, marketed as superior but actually an
inferior good.
Placing this kind of pressure on parents, but particularly on women is exceedingly
dangerous. On the level of the individual, there is the potential for acute emotional suffering—
no matter what there is always “more” she could have done for her child. At an aggregate level,
placing such a high onus on women—and it must be said that this is largely placed on women—
threatens a woman’s ability to have an identity outside of mothering. The author of Nourishing
Traditions does not view this as a negative:
When a woman stays at home and cooks with good judgment and understanding, she
watches with satisfaction as her children grow up capable and strong and her husband
maintains the good health and disposition that allow him to succeed in his work. She
also maintains her own good health into middle age, the period of her life when, her
family duties accomplished, she can plunge vigorously into meaningful work and
community service in order to bring peace and happiness to the world, while her
husband, retired with satisfaction from a successful career, supports her endeavors and
cooks with good judgment for her (Fallon, 1999, p. 433)
170

This paradigm helped Fallon achieve her desires and Genevieve is following a similar pursuit.
However, what neither discusses is that they chose it and what it would mean if this had not
been their choice.
5.4.4 Ableism
The anti-vaccine or vaccine safety movement’s focus and desire to establish a
relationship between ASD and vaccines is a fascinating and bedeviling goal. As of this writing,
ASD has no known etiology. As scientists across the globe search for a cause, they have also
spent much time and resources evaluating this claim – and have not found any evidence to
suggest it is true ((Chen, Landau, Sham, & Fombonne, 2004; Clayton, Rusch, Ford, & Stratton,
2012; Farrington, Miller, & Taylor, 2001)(Chen, Landau, Sham, & Fombonne, 2004; Clayton,
Rusch, Ford, & Stratton, 2012; Farrington, Miller, & Taylor, 2001). It must be acknowledged that
there is a savviness to claiming vaccines, EMFs, and other trappings of modern life cause
conditions like ASD because when met with the response, “there’s no proof,” they can always
respond “not yet.” Instead of another discussion of the lack of evidence for this damaging and
destructive claim, it is time to address the deeper harm underpinning it—that Autism Spectrum
Disorder is an injury and leads to a lesser quality of life than life without ASD.
The excessive focus on child-bearing and child-rearing choices and future health
outcomes is troubling. This emphasis portends poor life outcomes for those with those
conditions and often sets up false equivalencies between associations and risks of performing
or not performing a behavior. A diagnosis of asthma does not mean a child cannot live a full,
robust, fulfilling life. The same goes for any number of the conditions cited as reasons to avoid

171

or eliminate or consume a laundry-list of items. This sets physical health as the standard or
norm by which happiness and success are measured.
Physical health should not be a proxy metric of one’s life choices (or the choices of one’s
parents). In Nourishing Traditions, Sally Fallon describes the 14 groups studied by Weston A.
Price as “free of chronic disease, dental decay and mental illness; they were strong, sturdy, and
attractive; and they produced healthy children with ease, generation after generation” (p. xi).
According to Fallon
Children born to traditional peoples who had adopted the industrialized diet had
crowded and crooked teeth, narrowed faces, deformities of bone structure and
susceptibility to every sort of medical problem. Studies too numerous to count have
confirmed Dr. Price’s observations that the so-called civilized diet, particularly the
Western diet of refined carbohydrates and devitalized fats and oils, spoils our God-given
genetic inheritance of physical perfection and vibrant health.” (Fallon, 1999, p. xii)
This belief – that chronic disease and mental illness are symptomatic of life choices, particularly
modern technology and innovation—ripples throughout the natural lifestyle and parenting
community. According to Fallon, Price found evidence certain foods “promoted the beautiful
bone structure, wide palate, flawless uncrowded teeth and handsome, well-proportioned faces
that characterized members of isolated traditional groups” (1999, p. 16). Jarvis (1981) described
Price’s findings as “A classic example of an apparently well-intentioned but misguided
application of the myth of the healthy savage” (p. 21). Jarvis posits Price’s “data is of
questionable value because of the obvious view he entertained about the healthy savage”
(Jarvis, 1981, p. 21). The lack of dental decay—cavities—that Price observed? Jarvis (1981)
reviews several studies that found much lower rates in individuals suffering from malnutrition.
There are several disturbing ideas within this belief, besides the flawed evidence from
which it was constructed. First, if health status is determined by one’s choices, our health is in
172

our own control and we are “choosing” choices that make us sick, and we could “choose”
choices that would make us well. By endowing us with control over our own health, we are also
“responsible” for our own ill-health. Second, there is an assumption that life with a chronic
condition of any kind profoundly limits one’s ability to live a meaningful, fulfilling, happy life. A
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder is not a death sentence. Life with anxiety or
schizophrenia is not a death sentence. Life with an autoimmune disorder is not a death
sentence. Asthma, food allergies, eczema—these do not need to define a person’s life.
Constantly presenting these conditions as the result of behavior implies that we can control our
health and that life with them is less desirable. This is ableism. If your health is within your
grasp—within this worldview—you are denied validity and agency in accessing care, because if
you made different choices you would not be suffering. You are also denied power because
your health status is seen as less-than someone without your condition. Sarah Kurchak, an
autistic woman writing for Archipelago calls out the antivaccination movement and its
members for “dehumanize[ing] me as an autistic person” (Kurchak, 2015). But the pro-vaccine
movement is also guilty of this. Kaylene, the author of the blog Autistic Mama, writes
On the flip side, I’ve seen those who are pro-vaccine say things like, “There’s no reason
not to vaccinate your kids, vaccines don’t cause autism”. Here’s what’s wrong with that
statement. It implies that if vaccines did cause autism, you would be perfectly fine with
the population at large refusing vaccinations to avoid autism. Either way you look at the
way this myth is portrayed in the vaccine wars, it’s ableist, gross, and wrong. So please,
just stop. You’re not helping the autistic community at all (2016).
5.5 Researcher reflections
Any study involving qualitative interpretation deserves an examination of how the
researcher’s experiences, biases, and assumptions have shaped the research. I have organized

173

my reflections into a section on the role of faith in this worldview, and conducting research in
the area of parenting and pregnancy without being a parent or having experienced pregnancy.
5.5.1 Faith, Spirit, Christianity
From my early examination of Mama Natural, I was aware of her faith. She mentions
prayer, her relationship with a higher power, and church attendance with regularity. I knew she
was a Christian of some denomination – though she had never made it clear what kind—and
noticed the crucifix on the wall in some of her videos. She also often wears a cross necklace. I
initially treated the role of Genevieve’s faith very gingerly. Based on her blog, it was not clear to
me if faith played a starring role in cases other than Genevieve’s. I found it rather odd that she
never clarified what denomination of Christianity she identifies with (across 7 years of videos
and blog posts, I do not recall encountering this), though I sometimes wondered if she was a
Catholic (she has mentioned an Aunt who is a nun and the house has a crucifix).
I considered that perhaps one’s denomination is perhaps not so important outside of
the Bible Belt and that I was allowing my own experiences too much influence. As someone
who is not a Christian, I do not have knowledge of this—how Christians communicate what kind
of Christians they are. It occurred to me that this information is perhaps more important for
Jews —the adjectives Jews use to describe their Judaism, such as Orthodox or Sephardic, have
significant implications for their ritual and spiritual practice. I also considered that most Jews
only communicate this to one another, as it does not really hold relevance for non-Jews.
Since I am not a Christian, I did not always trust myself to interpret the role of faith in
this case. I do not have extensive, or even minor, knowledge of the Christian faith. Growing up
as one of very few Jews in a small town in the Bible Belt, most of my experiences with Christians

174

involved proselytizing and learning when new “friends” were actually befriending me with the
intention of converting me (this happened well into my teens). My bias has become detecting
Christian undertones, and at times I wondered if they were there and how much their presence
mattered. I also cannot say those undertones are uniquely Christian. Redemption and healing
through belief and adherence to a lifestyle are common among numerous faiths.
I did not include some of my interpretations about this facet of Genevieve’s life because
of these biases and concerns. I think the crossover of faith and the natural lifestyle warrants a
broader investigation. While it was an element in this case and appeared in multiple evidence
streams, I did not find enough evidence to feel confident to understand and describe its role in
this worldview.
5.5.2 No kids, no problem
I do not have children and I have never experienced pregnancy or parenthood. Others,
upon hearing my research topic, have commented about this. I had some hesitations,
wondering if I could truly understand some of the realities of this world without having these
life experiences. Instead, I felt quite the opposite during most of the data collection and
analysis, “thank goodness I don’t have my own experiences to draw upon!” Many of
Genevieve’s parenting and pregnancy recommendations were clouded in language that implied
judgment and danger if one did not follow them. Because I have never been pregnant, given
birth, or parented, I never felt like I had to defend my own decisions or question my choices. To
borrow Genevieve’s language, this research did not reopen any “mama wounds” for me. Not
having my own experiences also meant that I could not internally discount what Genevieve said

175

with “that’s not what happened to me.” It was much easier to think of myself as many of her
readers probably are—women experiencing pregnancy for the first time.
I have questioned if my lack of personal experiences with child-rearing made it difficult
or impossible to empathize with or understand some of Genevieve’s choices. There were times
I struggled greatly with anger toward some of the I data collection, particularly
recommendations about selecting doctors and hospitals for childbirth. During conversations
with the midwife I interviewed, I came to realize how my lack of direct experience had resulted
in undue harshness. This resulted in reexamination of data and some revisions.
5.6 Future work and final considerations
5.6.1 Theoretical implications
My theoretical findings have expanded our understanding of the mediator in Fleck’s
thought collectives and how non-visible stigma is managed in everyday life. Future work in this
area could examine the relationship between the different actors more closely—particularly
individuals at the center of the thought collective. Additional research is also needed to discern
if thought collectives can explain other forms of non-visible, ideology-based stigma.
5.6.1.1 Future work with Information Poverty
My theoretical findings suggest researchers should be cautious when applying
Chatman’s Theory of Information Poverty to groups experiencing manageable stigma,
particularly groups whose stigma comes from performing behaviors rather than embodying
stigmatized characteristics. Future research could try to assess if this is a true limitation to
Information Poverty or unique to this context.

176

This research also underlines the problematic name and nature of Chatman’s theory. To
label someone “information poor” assigns them an inferior status and the label is typically
applied by someone occupying the superior one, exacerbating the distance between them
rather than improving the circumstances. The very name, information poverty, is only accurate
in the eyes of those who do not meet its criteria and reflects their privilege, the assignation of
that name can be viewed as an expression of their power. While the theory still holds useful
constructs and propositions for the study of information behavior, it may be time to consider a
name that does not aid the stigmatization and marginalization of the communities it seeks to
understand.
5.6.1.2 Everyday Life Information Seeking
Fleck’s theory of thought collectives has vast potential applications in the realm of
Everyday Life Information Seeking (ELIS), particularly when explicating discovery. My case,
Mama Natural, pursued an interest in a healthy lifestyle which then extended to non-medicated
childbirth and natural parenting. Her interests led her deeper into the natural lifestyle and
exposed her to numerous related behaviors, not all of which she adopted. Her participation in
and pursuit of this lifestyle facilitated an exploration of everyday life information. Thought
collectives described this journey and should be considered in future work about serious
leisure. For example, the world of crafting includes numerous modalities that are interrelated
by shared tools, supplies, and techniques—in pursuing cross-stich needlepoint, one becomes
tangentially familiar with embroidery, which may lead to sewing, quilting, knitting, crochet,
among others.

177

5.6.2 Information implications
This research has serious implications for information providers, libraries, and the
individuals who create and maintain their services. We can no longer create collections and
information retrieval tools that trust seekers to make their own judgment about problematic
materials. I do not imply a lack of trust for the seekers’ judgments. Rather, by including
materials such as Dr. Sear’s The Vaccine Book without any context for why they are included,
their inclusion in a collection means we are allowing problematic materials to capitalize on the
authority and trust individuals place in libraries and legitimizing these materials. We need to
consider more accessible ways of cueing that material is grounded in scientific evidence or
included in a collection for other reasons, such as popular demand. We also need to reckon
with the flaws of our “authoritative” tools, such as PubMed—where it is all too easy to find
anti-vaccination “science.”
In addition to information service providers, health care providers must begin to
reconcile with the variation of opinions available within their own communities—particularly
for “experts” who profit from disagreeing with accepted policy and protocols. However, this is
not just a fringe problem on the Internet. Throughout this research, there were numerous
points across all evidence streams instructing parents how to choose practitioners and
hospitals. The underlying message is clear—the provider determines the experience and what is
“allowed.” For example, some pediatricians will not treat anyone who deviates from the
immunization schedule for non-medical reasons, others will treat regardless of immunization
choices. Within specialties there are contradicting behaviors—this worsens once parents begin
comparing experiences between providers from different specialties and perspectives.

178

This call to action extends to purveyors of information online. The CEO of YouTube,
Susan Wojcicki, called the platform “more like a library in many ways, because of the sheer
amount of video that we have, and the ability for people to learn and to look up any kind of
information” and said the service would try adding a “companion unit” to common conspiracy
theories (Thompson, 2018). While those are a dangerous and extreme vein of YouTube content,
the lack of interest on Wojcicki’s part in evaluating educational content should raise more
eyebrows. When asked if there is a system for evaluating the quality of advice available,
Wojcicki replied “there’s not a lot of incentive to not do the educational part correctly”
(Thompson, 2018). I cannot disagree more—there are immense incentives to provide incorrect,
flawed, problematic “educational” content. YouTube is a platform that pays providers based on
views, not on the accuracy or quality of their content. Providers are rewarded for holding
attention—not for educating individuals. This creates a system ripe for exploitation of
individuals willing to create “educational” content. As long as it garners views, they are doing it
“correctly.”
5.6.3 The limitations of fact-checking and information literacy
In the current zeitgeist where problematic information can spread rapidly by exploiting
cognitive biases and algorithmic flaws, many solutions have centered on fact-checking and
improving information literacy. Both are important concepts to combat this issue, but they are
limited. Fact-checking is the foundation of quality journalism, but it relies on a shared
worldview. Some facts or truths do not travel as well as others. The facts that undergird the
assertion that vaccines are the most safe and effective intervention to prevent certain diseases
will not “check out” for everyone. Fact-checking has value, but to suggest we can correct or

179

modify deeply held personal beliefs by sharing a few choice facts overestimates the power of
information and underestimates the human condition.
The concept of information literacy faces significant challenges, perhaps more so at this
time than any other. The American Library Association’s standard makes no mention of
misinformation or problematic information and focuses on cultivating autonomy within
students (“ALA | Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education,” n.d.). In
many ways, Mama Natural is extremely information literate, based on the standards,
Determine the extent of information needed
Access the needed information effectively and efficiently
Evaluate information and its sources critically
Incorporate selected information into one’s knowledge base
Use information effectively to accomplish a specific purpose
Understand the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information,
and access and use information ethically and legally (“ALA | Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education,” n.d.)
but her conclusions or what she used the information for result in her being labeled
misinformed. These standards are not enough. They rely on an understanding of relevant and
irrelevant information, good and bad information. Like fact-checking, they only work well within
a shared worldview. They cannot absorb someone using these very skills to choose information
labeled “bad” on purpose. Like fact-checking, information literacy needs to grow into a tool that
can accommodate diverse worldviews while maintaining integrity to the pursuit of knowledge.
5.6.4 Reflections on authority and privilege
Distrust of authority and assumption of privilege are recurring themes in discussions of
vaccination behavior. Research generally focuses on distrust of traditional sources of authority
without examining what is instead considered authoritative by these parents. Future research
in this area must connect authority and privilege. Lots of communities and individuals distrust
180

various authorities for numerous reasons on many issues. In vaccination behavior, however,
there is a distinct subset of parents who question or distrust traditional sources of authority,
such as Western physicians and governing institutions, and have the privilege to act in defiance
of these authorities’ recommendations—without severe repercussions. Future discussions
must consider how privilege shapes interaction with and perception of authority. This research
also suggests that we must consider privilege when creating recommendations and instruction
for interacting with authority. Just as Genevieve’s privilege protects her when she deviates from
doctors’ recommendations, a woman without her privilege might have a drastically different
experience. If we do not acknowledge that privilege has this power, we are complicit in the
continued negative interactions suffered by those with less standing.
5.6.5 Vaccination—the pregnancy and childbirth connection
Based on this research, parents’ attitudes, ideas, and beliefs surrounding vaccination
begin to form during pregnancy and childbirth. Interventions targeted at increasing vaccination
rates need to take this into account—particularly how negative and unanticipated experiences
during this period influence future encounters with the healthcare system. This begins by
acknowledging certain anti-vaccination beliefs we dismiss as conspiracy theories are relevant
and truthful components of some women’s childbirth experience. While vaccines are not a
money-making venture for physicians, every intervention during the childbirth experience adds
to the cost of the event. While vaccines are evidence-based, there is a long, unsettling history
of pregnancy and childbirth protocols that are not—even worse, those protocols often resulted
(and may still) in a traumatic loss of autonomy for women.

181

Vaccine avoidance and delay has sometimes been attributed to the belief that vaccines
are mandated for financial gain, not preventative care and that the schedule is not
individualized for each child (Gottlieb, 2015). This belief may build from certain experiences
during pregnancy and childbirth. In a post titled “Home Birth: Is it Safe?” Genevieve writes
“Hospitals are businesses that need to function profitably. Birth is sometimes slow and always
unpredictable” (“Home Birth: is it safe? | Mama Natural,” n.d.) In this selection, birth is a
process that needs to be adapted to suit the needs of the hospital’s bottom line. Genevieve also
warns readers “physicians and other healthcare providers are paid for the services they render,
which means that they don’t get compensated for keeping people well” (“What Does Birth Cost
in the U.S.?,” 2015).
In a post “What does birth cost in the U.S.?” Genevieve emphasizes the financial
difference between midwifery and hospital births, pointing out that with a midwife “you usually
have to pay for extra interventions out of pocket but this also means you aren’t forced to pay
for things you don’t want or need” compared to hospitals where
you (or your insurance company) are forced to pay for things like: hospital grade
personal care products, hospital logo merchandise, parenting DVDs and pamphlets,
disposable diapers, formula, etc. That’s why the nurses load you up with ‘free’ stuff
when you leave, because you’ve already paid for it (“What Does Birth Cost in the U.S.?,”
2015)
Physicians and hospitals must consider how their treatment of women in these vulnerable
moments—particularly the denial of agency and individualization—threatens overall trust in
healthcare providers.

182

5.6.6 What else are they avoiding?
I think the greatest contribution of this research is expanding the conversation around
vaccine avoidance. Vaccine avoidance is part of a lifestyle and embedded between other
behaviors. Because this is part of a lifestyle we must consider how this behavior may be passed
through the generations and what this means for vaccine avoidance.
5.6.7 Moving forward—together?
Genevieve as Mama Natural is absolutely part of larger movements and other
communities as she tries to build her own. While she is at times a problematic figure, not
everything she lobbies for should be dismissed. She rarely acknowledges how her privilege and
accompanying power are not enjoyed by all parents and parents-to-be—explorative
introspection need not be public—but its lack is felt when issues and experiences outside of her
own are consistently ignored or downplayed. This means that her advocacy, her community,
and her movement are somewhat constrained. These components were designed from the
experiences of a partnered, privileged, economically comfortable, straight, cis, Christian woman
whose two pregnancies were planned. Not incorporating other experiences—particularly those
that are from less privileged and powerful vantage points—weakens the message and threatens
those who are missing. It is important to decrease fear of non-medicated childbirth, stigma
around breastfeeding and miscarriages, among many other preferred issues Mama Natural
(and the digital natural lifestyle community favor). However, if Mama Natural wants to start a
movement, wants to effect meaningful change in pregnancy and childbirth health care
practices, she must address the unpleasant and much more pressing realities—which women
are dying in childbirth and why?, what if you live in a place where there are no providers to

183

choose from?, what if you are unable to access good nutrition?, among many others. It is not
enough to provide women with (limited) information. Without addressing the structural and
systemic factors that lead to these outcomes and everyone who is touched by them, her work
will be incomplete.

184

APPENDIX A—ARTIFACTS
CREATED
1. Genevieve’s book
2. Genevieve’s email handouts
3. Genevieve’s affirmation cards
4. Bracelet
5. Genevieve’s birth course
ENDORSED
1. Nourishing Traditions by Sally Fallon Morell – a cookbook and polemic of sorts that
Genevieve references quite often. She also featured the book in IRL38 (check) this book
changed my life.
2. Supernatural Childbirth by Jackie Mize – another book Genevieve mentions repeatedly
and whose language she has absorbed, often encouraging women to have a
supernatural childbirth.
3. The Sears Book on Vaccines by Dr. Robert Sears – in a now unavailable post Genevieve
mentions this book as guiding her decision not to vaccinate her children. She also
includes it in her list of top parenting books.
4. Spiritual Midwifery and Ina May Gaskin’s Guide to Natural Childbirth by Ina May Gaskin
– Genevieve referred to Ina May Gaskin occasionally and referenced the latter book.
Gaskin is a popular figure within the natural childbirth movement and is featured in the
documentary The Business of Being Born. I read the first book because it is a “classic”
and I felt I needed to read it to understand the second book.
5. The Business of Being Born – Genevieve mentions this documentary as influencing her
decision to pursue a natural childbirth

185

APPENDIX B—BLOG POST DATABASE ENTRY FORM
MNB Calla
Start of Block: Default Question Block
Q1 Blog Post Data Collection Form

Q2 Blog Post Title
________________________________________________________________

Q3 Blog Post Link
________________________________________________________________

Q4 File name of post (Type File Name, format BriefName.Date)
________________________________________________________________

Q5 How did MN tag the post?

▢
▢
▢
▢
▢

Baby (1)
For You (2)
Parenting (3)
Pregnancy (4)
No tags / unclear (5)

186

Q6 Abstract of post
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q7 Does this post have a video?

o Yes (1)
o No (2)
Q8 Does she reference other MN posts?

o Yes (1)
o No (2)
Q9 Numbers

187

o Comments (1) ________________________________________________
o Shares (2) ________________________________________________
o Sources cited (3) ________________________________________________
o Genevieve Comments (4) ________________________________________________
o Team MamaNatural Comments (5)
________________________________________________

o MamaNatural Comments (6) ________________________________________________
Q10 Estimated date first published

o Year (1) ________________________________________________
o Month (2) ________________________________________________
o Day (3) ________________________________________________
Q11 Does this post link to products for purchase?

o Yes (1)
o No (2)
Q12 What products are recommended?
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

188

________________________________________________________________

Q13 Does this post cite outside information?

o Yes (1)
o No (2)
o Unclear (3)
Q14 Information Used/Cited by MN (C&P as neat a list as possible)
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q15 Qualitative Memo Space
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q21 Methodological notes
________________________________________________________________

189

________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q16 Revisit this post for deeper analysis?

o Yes (1)
o No (2)
o Maybe (3)
Q17 Rationale:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Default Question Block

190

APPENDIX C—GENERAL MEMO COLLECTION FORM
General Memos
Start of Block: Default Question Block
Q1 General Memos

Q2 Date (MM/DD/YY)
________________________________________________________________

Q4 Memo tags:
________________________________________________________________

Q3 Memo Space
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Default Question Block

191

APPENDIX D—COMMENT COLLECTION TOOL
Comment Collection Aster
Start of Block: Default Question Block
Q1 Post Title
________________________________________________________________

Q2 Post Link
________________________________________________________________

Q3 Comment MN is responding to
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

Q4 MN's response
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

192

Q5 Highlight this comment for further analysis?

o Yes (1)
o Maybe (2)
o No (3)
Q6 Qualitative memo space
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Default Question Block

193

APPENDIX E—ORIGINAL MAMA NATURAL PAPER
Samantha Kaplan | INLS690 | Term Paper
Manifesting Trustworthiness and Credibility While Endorsing Stigmatized Viewpoints: A Case
Study of Mama Natural
Introduction:
In recent years, the United States has seen a resurgence in disease outbreaks for
illnesses previously thought eradicated or contained in part by adherence to the recommended
immunization schedule for children. Fingers have been pointed at the growing number of
parents who are declining to vaccinate their children by exercising their right not to (this right
varies from state to state). While many attribute this decision to the falsified article by Andrew
Wakefield that claimed a causal relationship between childhood vaccinations and Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD), the literature reveals a more complicated relationship between
parents and vaccines.
Initially, my interest was grounded in understanding why parents choose not to
vaccinate. However some of the vicious comments I heard directed at parents who chose not to
vaccinate their children sparked sympathy within me for this community and altered my
research interest. Considering these parents have made a choice widely stigmatized and not
endorsed by the scientific and medical communities, the government, and much of mainstream
society, I began to wonder if their information seeking behavior was somehow different from
the individuals who support vaccination. Specifically, if they do not trust the opinions of the
communities mentioned above, what information sources do they trust? How does a source
appear credible and trustworthy to them? To begin to understand this, I decided to evaluate an
information source that did not support vaccination in the form of a personal blog. I found
Mama Natural via serendipity when she appeared in a video with a blogger I follow for personal
194

enrichment. She sparked my interest enough that I went to her blog. I searched for “vaccines”
on it and found a post where she discussed in great detail her decision not to vaccinate either
of her children. Because of her articulateness and transparency about information sources
consulted, I considered her ideal for this research question.
Literature Review:
Studies of this population have found these parents are seeking balanced information
(Bond, Nolan, Pattison, & Carlin, 1998; Fitzgerald & Glotzer, 1995; Flaherty, 2013; Guillaume &
Bath 2004; Gullion, Henry, & Gullion, 2008). Part of the information need for balance arises
from a perceived bias or conflict of interest in doctors’ endorsement of vaccines (Bossaller,
2014; Guillaume & Bath, 2004). Bossaller found “doctors and scientists recommendations were
tainted by their affiliations with insurance and pharmaceutical companies” in online comment
sections, but also that the commenters considered doctors “under the control of the
government” (2014). Shurtleff reported that trust in vaccinations themselves, not just
providers, does appear to be decreasing (2009). If parents have less trust in health providers, it
is important to ask who they trust instead or trust more, particularly since Freed, Clark,
Butchart, Singer, and Davis found that almost one in eight parents has refused at least one
vaccine (2010).
This pervasive mistrust appears to send parents in a multitude of directions for
information. In a group of 196 parents, Rochman reported 95 percent consulted a social
network about their vaccination decision and 72 percent had a friend or family member tell
them to ignore the Center for Disease Control’s recommendations (2013). Parents in this
population place a high value on personal experiences and consider anecdotal information
authoritative (Bossaller, 2014; Freed, Clark, Butchart, Singer, & David, 2010; Rochman, 2013).
195

Considering the Internet’s ability to deliver a virtually limitless amount of anecdotal
information, these information channel choices should be taken very seriously.
Further, information literacy issues abound. Many parents struggle to understand some
of the scientific concepts that govern vaccine administration (Bossaller, 2014), such as the
immunization schedule (Luthy, Beckstrand, & Callister, 2010). Parents also do not understand
susceptibility to the diseases for which their children are being vaccinated (Kennedy, Brown, &
Gust, 2013; Smith, Chu, & Barker, 2004).
Parents in this population also have very strong feelings about when they should receive
information about vaccines from their doctor. In a sample of 225 parents from three healthcare
provision settings, 46 percent of parents thought the information should be provided during
the visit before the immunizations, and 22 percent of parents thought the information should
be provided at the child’s first visit with the provider (Fitzgerald & Glotzer, 1995). Overall, 68
percent of those parents did not think the appointment to receive the immunizations was the
best time to receive information about the immunizations (Fitzgerald & Glotzer, 1995). Taken
with other findings about information seeking behaviors in this population, it appears that
members of this population want to verify or triangulate the information they receive from
their doctor with other sources, both digital and face-to-face, and want the time to do so.
Shurtleff found that objectors were more likely to be upper middle class, married,
educated and white (2009). Additionally, Kirkland examined the leaders of prominent vaccinecritical groups and found them to be middle to upper middle class, white, and hold college
degrees (2012). However, these findings should not automatically be considered representative
and authoritative about this population, as Freed, Clark, Butchart, Singer, and Davis found black

196

parents were more likely to have refused a vaccine (2010), and Kennedy, Brown, and Gust
reported that parents with lower incomes were less likely to vaccinate (2013).
Davies, Chapman, and Leask found that most anti-vaccination websites are not scientific
but are packaged to appear credible (2002). Understanding this credibility will be the focus of
this work.
Research Questions:
Given the research findings that an increasing amount of parents do not trust traditional
sources of authoritative knowledge – such as doctors and scientists, place confidence in
personal connections, and seek information about vaccination online, there is a need to
understand trust and credibility in online information environments. Considering that
information websites that do not support vaccination are espousing a viewpoint not endorsed
by the scientific or medical communities, and directly flouts government regulations – but are
increasingly accepted as authoritative sources – understanding how these sources manifest
trustworthiness, credibility, and authenticity necessitates study. This paper will attempt to
answer this research question; how do websites that endorse stigmatized viewpoints, such as
the decision not to vaccinate appear credible, trustworthy, and authentic.
Methodology:
To understand this phenomenon I proposed to do a case study of a blog, “a specialised
website that allows an individual or a group of individuals to express their thoughts, voice their
opinions, and share their experiences and ideas” as defined by Tan, Na and Theng (2011) that
does not endorse vaccination. I used quantitative and qualitative content analysis methods to
analyze the media.
Why Mama Natural?

197

Mama Natural ranks within the top 30,000 websites in the United States, according to
Alexa.com (2015). On her website, Mama Natural, also known as Genevieve, states having over
25,000 readers signed up for her weekly email (MamaNatural.com, 2015). Mama Natural has
also exercised her religious right not to vaccinate her two children within the state of Illinois
(Mama Natural, 2014)
Data Collection
I read over 220 blog posts and watched over 130 videos that were embedded within
blog posts as part of the content analysis. I read the posts from most recent to least recent. All
of the posts were made between October 31,2013 and April 16, 2015.
Content Analysis
For the quantitative component of the content analysis, all of the blog posts were read
for:
•

If they explicitly quoted other sources, and which source types (scholarly, mainstream
news, niche news, organizations, reference sites, an individual’s site, or Mama Natural’s
Facebook Group)

•

The tag Mama Natural applied to catalog them (Pregnancy & Childbirth, Quizzes,
Giveaways, Mama’s Family, Relationships, Products & Reviews, Health & Fitness, Babies
& Kids, and Food & Nutrition). Mama Natural rarely applied dual tags.

•

Whether the posts contained a video

•

Whether the posts contained a demonstration component (video or photo)

•

The real-life application of the post (Consumption, Topical, Sensory, Activity, Other,
Personal Experience)

198

Prior to beginning the coding, I read 5-10 of Mama Natural’s posts as well as her introductory
pages, such as her About pages, to generate preliminary codes. Additional codes emerged
during the data collection based on common themes identified in the qualitative memoing of
the first 5-10 posts read. As the study was grounded in understanding how Mama Natural
appeared credible and trustworthy, I was most interested in whether she cited outside sources
in a post. I only marked posts “Yes” for citing outside sources if she provided links within the
post’s text. I categorized the sources based on traditional source types (Scholarly captured
sources like PubMed and the journal Pediatrics; Mainstream News referred to The Guardian or
USA Today; Niche news captured sites that had a focused frame, such as Natural News;
Organizations was used broadly for items from government to trade associations; an
individual’s site was tagged any time Mama Natural cited another individual’s blog or book; any
time she included quotes from her Facebook group I tagged as from Mama Natural’s Facebook
Group. I realized many of her posts featured videos and decided to create a coding category for
that aspect, as well as whether the posts featured a demonstration (video or photographic)
component to understand how often she visibly showed her readers how to do something. Her
posts were sometimes anecdotal (about her life and family), but were sometimes topical as
well, perhaps endorsing a particular habit, like using essential oils. This necessitated the
creation of a category composed of what the blog post’s real life application appeared to be
(many Consumption posts were about foods Mama Natural endorsed or did not endorse;
Topical posts covered items Mama Natural suggested applying to the skin; Sensory referred to
posts whose application was targeted at how reader saw or smelled (such as Mama Natural’s
series on Essential Oils); Activity posts captured concepts like breastfeeding and cosleeping;

199

Other was primarily used for items like Mama Natural’s quizzes, and Personal Experience was
used for Mama Natural’s vlogs about her everyday life.
In addition to this notation, a brief memo (from two to three hundred words) was
composed about each blog post evaluated. Some blog posts’ content was not quantitatively
analyzed but was subjected to qualitative memoing. Memoing was intended to help the
researcher “dig into implicit, unstated, and condensed meanings” (Charmaz, 2014, p. 180).
Findings:
I analyzed 222 posts for the quantitative content analysis and wrote 235 brief memos
about Mama Natural’s blog. From the quantitative content analysis component I learned the
following:

200

TABLE A
Outside Sources Referenced
Yes
No
58 (26.1%)
164 (73.4%)
Outside Sources Referenced by Type (of 58/26.1% of posts citing outside sources)
Scholarly
Source

Mainstream
News

Niche News

Organization

Reference

Individual’s
Site

MN’s
Facebook
Group

20 (34.5%)

9 (15.5%)

20 (34.5%)

22 (37.9%)

15
(25.9%)

27 (46.6%)

9 (15.5%)

Tags Applied By Mama Natural
Pregnancy &
Childbirth

Quizzes

Giveaways

Mama’s
Family

37 (16.%)

5
(2.2%)

2
(.9%)

88
(39.6%)

Relationshi
ps

Products
& Reviews

Health &
Fitness

Babies
& Kids

Food &
Nutrition

1 (.5%)

10
(4.5%)

11
(5%)

35
(15.8
%)

37
(16.7%)

Video
Yes
138 (62%)
Demonstration Component
Yes
31 (14%)
Application

No
84 (38%)
No
191 (86%)

Consumption

Topical

Sensory

Activity

Other

Personal
Experience

45 (20%)

14 (6%)

4 (1.8%)

31 (14%)

30
(13.5%)

98 (44%)

Discussion:
Over a quarter of Mama Natural’s posts from the period of analysis cite outside sources
(sometimes Mama Natural cited a source but did not provide a direct link, which was not
counted). This suggests parents who do not vaccinate their children are not doing so because
they are ignorant of the reasons to do so. Further, of those posts citing outside sources, over a
third (34.5%) cited scholarly sources such as PubMed or the journal Pediatrics. Not only is
Mama Natural reading the scholarly literature (when available) about the topics she discusses
on her blog, but she is disseminating it to her audience. It is perhaps surprising that Mama
Natural cites scholarly literature in one third of her posts that cite outside sources. It would be

201

easy to assume that because Mama Natural does not accept the scholarly literature about the
benefits of vaccination, she does not accept any scholarly literature. Instead, her inclusion of
scholarly sources suggests she is a highly discriminant reader and does include the scholarly
literature in her evaluation process. Mama Natural did sometimes cite articles that mentioned
studies, rather than the studies themselves. This could be for a number of reasons, but it is
interesting to note that she trusted other information sources’ knowledge of the studies
enough to cite them, rather than the studies.
While nearly 75 percent of posts did not cite outside sources, this should not be
interpreted as a reason to discount those posts. Many did not cite outside sources because they
were not relevant to the topic, such as a recipe or a video of her child’s developmental
milestone. Additionally, these posts served to build relationships with the readers over time.
Over half (62%) of Mama Natural’s posts include a video of her discussing the topic of
the blog post. Sometimes, such as in her IRL (In real life) series, the video was the seminal focus
of the post. In other posts, the video is a support, such as in her post titled “Why Eat Your Own
Placenta?” which also includes an array of sources and content. Regardless of its focus, the
videos help cultivate a personal connection to Mama Natural with their catchy titles (for
example, IRL I’m Gonna Smash My Phone!, Mama Natural, 2014) and personal tone. Mama
Natural regularly begins her videos with “Hey, Mama” and usually concludes them by asking the
viewer a question related to whatever the video was about, which contributes to generating a
relationship with her audience.
Personal experience was tagged for 44 percent of posts. Many of these posts featured
Genevieve confronting or discussing aspects of her life, frequently via video. Having watched

202

138 of these videos, they regularly covered the full spectrum of life as a mother – the ups,
downs, and unexpected. These posts also captured the competing norms of being a woman,
such as Mama Natural’s post about “Sex During Pregnancy: Everything You Need To Know”
where she candidly discusses the desire to be sexual and sexually appealing, as well as perhaps
being less interested in sexual intercourse due to pregnancy and concerned about sexual
intercourse potentially endangering the fetus (Mama Natural, 2015). This issue of competing
norms occurred repeatedly in multiple areas of Mama Natural’s life, from her desire to be
healthy as an individual to feeling responsible for her children’s health, as well as discussing
everyday life issues that were real but perhaps unpleasant, such as not enjoying a child’s
attitude one week. After viewing just a dozen or so of her videos, I felt a bond with her.
Acknowledging these moments of not loving a child’s action or struggling as a mother were
profoundly authentic. I hypothesize that they resonate with other parents because of the
realism inherent within them. I think it is specifically because they focus on the everyday rather
than the extraordinary that Mama Natural is able to cultivate a community.
Another layer to the personal experiences Mama Natural shares is that she shares her
entire life. Her children, her childbirth, her marriage, her diet, her home, et cetera, are all
featured in her blog. Rather than a relationship limited to one purpose, readers can empathize
with her via multiple channels. This cultivates authenticity both in immediacy and the longterm. Further, her candidness and rawness add to this authenticity. When she pauses to find a
word during her In Real Life (IRL) series, or admits to disliking the Paleo diet (Mama Natural,
2014), she doesn’t read off of a script (at least to this researcher’s eye) which creates a much

203

more intimate tone. It is this intimate authenticity that perhaps engenders trust among
readers.
Another component of this authenticity was the visibility and frequency of her
endorsement of certain lifestyle choices. If Mama Natural likes something or considers it
worthwhile, she will mention it multiples times over time. This long-term support and presence
builds credibility with readers. For example, her support of gelatin consumption is mentioned in
so many videos and posts it became ubiquitous.
An unanticipated finding from the research were multiple posts about topics Mama
Natural considers “natural” that are uncommon in the United States but prevalent in other
countries, cultures, or even species. These topics included oil pulling, cosleeping, elimination
communication, placenta consumption, reflexology among others. Mama Natural practices
nearly all of these in addition to more typical behaviors. These behaviors are presented with
outside sources to support them as well as anecdotal experience when available. It is
foreseeable that individuals might be drawn to Mama Natural’s blog for her open discussion
and positive remarks on any one of these topics and then see her decision about vaccination
and, perhaps, if they have already accepted her post about one of those topics, accept her
thoughts on vaccination. This finding also illuminates additional reasons why parents who do
not vaccinate might not trust traditional authoritative health information sources. Exposure to
or interest in stigmatized or uncommon behaviors like these, which are practiced and endorsed
elsewhere, could lead to a general questioning of the authority of medical providers. While
equating the medical community’s stance on cosleeping with their stance on vaccination is false

204

for many reasons, it becomes understandable when both behaviors are added to a long list of
topics not endorsed in the United States but accepted elsewhere.
Future Research
An expansion of this study could cover additional blog posts over a longer period.
Additionally, cross tabulation analysis could provide further insight about how Mama Natural
constructs her posts. An analysis focused around sources cited by Mama Natural could also
prove valuable in improving our understanding of what individuals like her deem credible.
Interviews with parents who do or do not currently follow Mama Natural’s blog could also
provide much needed insight to understand why she might be perceived as credible and
trustworthy.
In Conclusion
After reading over 220 posts by Mama Natural, I feel that I understand why other
individuals would perceive her to be trustworthy and credible. She shares almost every aspect
of her life (from her childbirth to her diet) with her readers. She also cites outside sources from
a wide range of source types when discussing topics many might consider controversial,
cultivating an appearance of high and varied literacy. Her reliance on sources such as PubMed
or Pediatrics suggests she is highly literate (although she does not fully highlight the difference
between findings and facts). Her inclusion of other source types implies a respect for good
information (not whether it is good information) regardless of where it comes from. These
components, combined with videos that directly address the viewer create an authentic, factual
information source.
Perhaps of greatest interest is the authenticity component of Mama Natural. It is
understandable why readers would trust her – she shares and gives so much of her life. Having

205

watched the four-part video blog series on the birth of her second child, one might wonder, “If
she shares this, what is private to her?” However this full focus sharing generates trust and
credibility as readers can come to know her over time but also in great depth. The authenticity
component seems to be of greatest import when endorsing a stigmatized viewpoint, such as
the decision not to vaccinate, as readers are able to see Mama Natural’s decisions but also read
about her decision-making process. This transparency likely lends credibility and
trustworthiness to her blog posts. Perhaps to gain the trust of parents deciding whether to
vaccinate, this kind of transparency and openness about the realities of parenting and what is
evaluated when making decisions is necessary.