URBAN PRINCIPALS' PERCEPTIONS OF SCHOOL
LIBRARIANS’ TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP ROLES

By
JANICE MOORE NEWSUM

ABSTRACT
Established standards and guidelines promote school librarian leadership in technology
integration. Despite the imperatives implicit in professional guidelines and standards, school
librarians' active engagement as leaders is not pervasive practice. Technology rich 21st century
school libraries present a challenge to school librarians to lead students and classroom teachers in
the use of current and emerging technologies. The urban public school is one setting in which
strong technology leadership of school librarians would benefit students. The utilization of
technology both as a practice within the school library and as an instructional strategy in
collaboration with teachers necessitates the use of transformative leadership. School librarians,
through unique training and experiences, are prepared to interact with students and adults to
achieve the promises and opportunities of classroom technological innovations.
The purpose of this research was to investigate urban school principals' and school
librarians' perceptions of school librarian technology leadership. The study was guided by three
research questions that examined the extent to which urban principals perceived school librarians
to be technology leaders, the ways in which principals enabled school librarian technology
leadership engagement, and the school librarians' self-reports of leadership activities that
reflected entry, adaptive, or transformative technology leadership.
The study used a mixed methods sequential explanatory research design. Both
quantitative and qualitative data were collected using an email survey and semi-structured
interviews. The study participants were employees of the Houston Independent School District
(HISD). In my analysis, I found that principals perceived school librarians to be adaptive level
technology leaders. School librarians also self-reported adaptive levels of technology leadership.
The study had a small study population, thus, additional research is necessary in order to
xii

determine if a larger study population would produce similar results. Although the results of this
study are not generalizable, the study was an exploration of the perceptions held by school
librarians and principals in an urban public school setting.

xiii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 School Libraries and School Librarians in the Information Age
The Information Age, also known as the Digital Age, began manifesting in the mid-20th
century and has been characterized by a shift from traditional industry to an economy and
workplace based on information access through computerized means (Cheng & Chen, 2008;
Pillania, 2009; Sasse, Schwering, & Dochterman, 2008). The technological innovations wrought
by this period have changed and continue to change the manner in which school librarians
approach information access, retrieval, use, and instruction in all libraries, including school
libraries. Between the 1958 National Defense Education Act and the 1965 Elementary and
Secondary Education Act, governmental monies were allocated for technology in schools and
"computing technologies have transformed libraries" (Peay & Schoening, 2008, p. 262).
Beginning with computerized catalog systems and electronic databases in the early days of
school technology development, school librarians have led students and teachers in access to and
use of emerging technologies.
A first instance in which school librarians led their patrons into the information age was
through promoting the use of the automatic library catalog. Library automation systems first
appeared in the 1930s as punch card technology in public and academic libraries (Black, 2007).
By the 1950s, with the appearance of the first commercially available computers, the application
of computer technology in libraries "had come to dominate library functions, from circulation to
information retrieval" (Black, 2007, p. 297). According to Cool (2004), computer information
systems expanded exponentially between 1980 and 1990 and the new electronic resources of this
era afforded more dynamic information retrieval; provided more current references than
1

previously possible; and granted access beyond the library setting. Cool wrote, "It is not an
exaggeration to say that electronic information systems of all varieties have changed the way we
live and think" (p. 1). The technologies prevalent in the 21st century present both challenges and
opportunities for school librarians to take the reins of leadership in technology integration
(Everhart, Mardis, & Johnston, 2011).
1.2 Technology and the School Librarian
One of the primary centers of information in schools is the library and technology has
affected the library in many ways. The resultant multifaceted technological environment of the
21st century imposes "new skills, knowledge, and ways of learning" (Kuhlthau, 2010, p. 17). The
research of Kulhthau showed that "school librarians are primary agents in school for 21st century
learners" leading to new ways of acquiring knowledge. The growth of technology in classrooms
and school libraries has resulted in the implementation of new professional and curriculum
standards, teacher training, and technology staffing. The traditional school librarian roles of
locating, collecting, organizing, and disseminating information are strengthened when these
skills are applied to new technologies as is the visibility and relevance of the library to the
school. These developing aspects of traditional school librarianship demand more than
proficiency; technology integration leadership is crucial to expose children to the learning modes
and resources they need to become 21st century learners (Kuhlthau, 2010). Johnston emphasized
the growing nature of the role of the school librarian "in the highly technological environment of
the 21st century school" (Johnston, 2012b, p. 18). New knowledge and skills represent a change
from the traditional models of teaching (Okojie, Olinzock, & Okojie-Boulder, 2006) and require
the extension of abilities, pedagogy, and content knowledge previously reserved for business or
college settings.
2

School librarians engage in a vital role "in schools that enable students to learn through
vast resources and multiple communication channels" (Kuhlthau, 2010, p. 17). The existing
complex culture of the modern school library suggests shared resources are a key element in
information age schools. The evolving needs of today's learners has fundamentally altered the
"outdated traditional warehousing managerial tasks" (Dow, 2013, p.5) of school librarians and
cast school librarians into an expanding role as knowledgeable leaders, especially in the area of
technology utilization and integration.
As information formats have evolved, access to information, digital resources, and print
materials remain an important component of the library function. Digital resources are less
visible, more difficult to showcase, and problematic to organize. The services provided by
libraries relative to online resources and references are less often considered by library users than
the presence and availability of books (Connaway, 2015). In studies of the use of virtual
reference services in public, school, and academic libraries, 82% of survey respondents ages 1228 reported no awareness of the existence of online reference sources (Radford & Connaway,
2010). The expertise of the school librarian contributes to making these resources easily
accessed by library patrons. As the educator who has traditionally been on the forefront of
blending technology with information access, the school librarian bears the responsibility of
leading the school community in the integration of digital resources into the day-to-day teaching
and learning. Kuhlthau (2010) referred to the school librarian as the "resources specialist" (p. 19)
capable of supporting teachers and students in schools and competent in the areas of curriculum
planning, teaching strategies, and collaborative instructional practices (Church, 2010). The
school librarian does not act in isolation; he/she has the knowledge, expertise, and training to
lead the way in creating a vision and mission for acquiring and using digital resources as well as
3

technology devices. Assuming the role of leader enables school librarians to participate in
"building 21st century skills throughout the school environment" (AASL, 2009, p. 17).
1.3 School Librarians as Leaders
Numerous state and national organizations have established standards and guidelines that
support the leadership role of school librarians (AASL, 1998, 2007, 2009, 2010). Professional
organizations such as the American Association of School Librarians (AASL), the National
Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS, 2010), and the International Society for
Technology in Education (ISTE, 2010) have established guidelines for the leadership roles of
school librarians. In recognition of the evolution of school librarianship, the revised NBPTS
Library Media Standards (2012) encourage school librarians to exhibit leadership professionally,
administratively, and instructionally. Leadership, by NBPTS standards, includes the integration
of technology for evidenced based decision-making, data analysis, as well as a component of
effective instruction (NBPTS, 2012).
Along with the four roles first delineated in the 1998 Information Power guidelines, the
2009 Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs includes a fifth
role, that of leader. As technology permeates the school environment, meaningful integration
suggests "a new role for school librarians to play in teaching essential online learning skills to
both students and their teachers" (Dow, 2013, p. 67). The complexity of technology in schools
has led to the need for "librarians who can help people to navigate the ever-expanding universe
of information as both consumers and producers of ideas" (Dow, 2013, pp. 67-68). This role is
specifically pertinent to the school librarians' knowledge of technology and technological
innovations. The school librarian can assume leadership in connecting the work of the classroom
to the available digital resources of the library. School librarians are “continually directed to
4

assume leadership roles in their schools to teach students to read, view, and/or listen to
information presented in many contexts" (Dow, 2013, p. 40). Despite the imperatives implicit in
professional guidelines and standards, school librarians' active engagement as leaders is not
pervasive practice (Everhart, Mardis, & Johnston, 2011). Working from a strong collaborative
position as an "informed change agent, leader and resource guide" (Callison & Preddy, 2006, p.
203), school librarians have the opportunity to be proactive in assuming leadership in the
implementation and management of technology initiatives.
The variety of ways in which school librarians demonstrate leadership may include using
technology in instruction, teaching colleagues to use new technology resources, promoting the
ethical use of information, and facilitating standards based instruction. School librarian
leadership is not limited to these areas and may extend to community engagement, district level
service, as well as local, state, and national volunteerism. National standards (AASL, 2009;
NBPTS, 2010) and professional best practices encourage school librarians to be "visible leaders
who model various leadership behaviors" (Smith, 2014, p. 56).
1.4 School Librarians Self Perceptions of Technology Leadership
When school librarians' activities align with the current standards and guidelines and
school librarians lead principals to be informed of the significance of digital technologies to
enable students to stay current with engaging and relevant instructional experiences, students
benefit (Moreillon, 2013). School librarians who exhibit a strong commitment to their role as
technology leaders can build influence with their principals and boost the expectations through
these positive relationships. Recognition of the leadership role and enactment of that role will
help the school librarian to improve teaching and learning for the entire school community
(Howard & Eckhardt, 2006).
5

1.4.1 Principal Perceptions of School Librarians as Technology Leaders
The guiding perceptions that structure the relationships between the principal and the
school librarian often originate during the principal's formative years as a student (Church,
2010). These perceptions may persist through the principal's tenure as a classroom teacher,
during pre-service principal training, and into their careers as principals (Church, 2010; Hartzell,
2002). Personal experiences from having worked with or supervised a school librarian are
another source of principal perception (Church, 2010; Shannon, 2012). The principal's minimal
exposure to school library research, professional school library publications, or school
librarianship-related professional development also contributes to limited knowledge of the
school librarian as an educator (Church, 2010; Kaplan, 2006). If the principal misunderstands the
worth of the school library and the value of the school librarian’s expertise, the principal is likely
to restrict the school library media specialist's ability to make a difference in the activities of
teaching and learning (Church, 2010).
The principal's lack of knowledge about school library practice may affect the support
afforded to the library program in such areas as hiring, budgeting, scheduling, promotion of the
library program, provision of resources, including technology, and recognition of the school
librarian's professional expertise. The success of the school library program is strongly correlated
to administrative support (Johnston, 2012b; Shannon, 2009) with principals providing library
budgets, scheduling options, and performance expectations (Church, 2010). Unfortunately,
during periods of financial difficulty, the principal's investment in the school library program
may be reduced or eliminated (Ewbank, 2011; Toor & Weisburg, 2011). As states and districts
struggle with school finance, eliminating library programs and school librarian positions become
cost cutting measures (Perez, 2010). Church (2010) asserted that in their position as instructional
6

leaders principals "play a key role in the effectiveness of the library program" (p. 1) through
budgetary and hiring decisions. The extent to which students have access to fully staffed libraries
and quality resources is determined by the principal's decision to hire or retain a state certified
school librarian. The principal's support of the school library is a determining factor in the
success of the school library and the school librarian (Everhart, 2006).
Oberg (2006) found that at the most basic level of understanding principals believe that
"teacher-librarians are not leaders or proactive educators, but service providers who merely
respond to teacher or student requests" (p. 13). Principals may express a belief in the value of the
library program. Despite consistent evidence of a connection between an effective library
program, student achievement and improved student test scores (Kachel, 2011; Kachel, 2013;
Scholastic, 2008; Scholastic, 2016), the non-instructional components of the library program
(check-in/out, materials organization and provision), are more highly valued by principals than
the instructional components (curriculum development, collaborative planning) (Everhart, 2006;
Shannon, 2009). Principals may have limited knowledge of the "instructional potential" (Church,
2010, p. 2) of the school librarian and the potential leadership role of the school librarian as an
active partner in technology integration.
The customer service orientation of library services results in the demonstration of
qualities in library leaders that other leaders may not exhibit (Phillips, 2014). These qualities,
commitment, creativity, caring, communication, compassion along with innovation, change,
vision, and empathy were reported as indicators of quality library leaders (Jange, 2012). The
emphasis upon quality leadership resulted in the inclusion of leadership development coursework
in a number of school librarian training programs, but the level of school librarian leadership
skills frequently remains unrecognized (Mardis, 2013).
7

Graduates of school library preparation programs attest that their "preservice education
experiences prepared them to embrace school library and technology integration" (Mardis, 2013,
p. 37). The research studies of Mardis and Everhart (2011), Johnston (2012b), Lupton (2016) and
Shannon (2008) indicated that the perception of the school librarians’ competence to perform the
leadership roles for which they have been prepared is critical to the manner in which support for
the school librarian is demonstrated. School librarians’ capabilities as leaders is a customary
expectation of the preparation programs for the professional licensure of school librarians.
1.5 Leadership Competence
School librarians are highly credential professionals required to meet state mandated
certification standards and possessing specific "knowledge of pedagogical principles and
curriculum, paired with technology and information expertise" (Johnston, 2012b, p. 18) enabling
them to assume technology leadership roles.
By virtue of education, experiences, and mandated state requirements, school librarians
hold advanced degrees and are competent in the areas of pedagogy, curricular content, learning
modalities, information literacy, and technology integration (Church, 2010). Through their
professional training, school librarians are uniquely poised to make positive contributions to
student achievement and school improvement as they exemplify technology integration
leadership in the educational setting (DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011; Dotson & Jones, 2011;
Keengwe, 2007; Moreillon, 2013).
1.6 Technology Leadership in the Context of the Urban School District
Principals and school librarians function in a number of different contexts, but the urban
district context has its own unique challenges and leadership needs. There are multiple
definitions of urban, including demographic and social aspects. The digital Urban Dictionary
8

(www.urbandictionary.com) provides 38 definitions of the term urban (Agosto & HughesHassell, 2010). Using data from the United States Census Bureau, Agosto and Hughes-Hassell,
characterized urban by population density per square mile, with "at least 1,000 people per square
mile at its heart and a number of surrounding blocks with a population density of at least 500
people per square mile" (Agosto & Hughes-Hassell, 2010, p. 3). The U. S. Census Bureau (2010)
defines urbanized areas as having 50,000 or more people, but simply put, urban refers to large
inner city centers. The Census Bureau (2010) further clarified urban areas as populated centers
that are potentially located "inside and outside metropolitan areas." Agosto and Hughes-Hassell
(2010) also emphasized the popular culture, marketing, and demographic characteristics of
urban. Agosto and Hughes-Hassell posited urban is used "in connection with corporate
advertising directed toward minority groups" (2010, p. 6), making it a marketing expression.
Students enrolled in urban schools are "best defined in the context of socially related
problems including poverty, structural racism, and class and gender bias" (Kidd & Keengwe,
2010, p. 51). The connotation of the term “urban” has come to evoke racial minorities, limited
English speakers, low academic achievement, high mobility, poverty, crime and high
unemployment rates (Balfanz & Mac Iver, 2011; Jacob, 2007; Salisbury & McGregor, 2005).
These characteristics are typically associated with urban districts, but are not "unique to urban
areas and can be found, in particular, in many schools in the nation's rural areas" (Jacob, 2007, p.
120). Although rural and urban areas share similar characteristics, urban districts educate twice
the number of limited English speakers, have jobless rates that are 3% higher, and a violent
crime rate per 100,000 inhabitants of 506 in contrast to a rate of 202 per 100,000 inhabitants in
non-metropolitan areas (Jacob, 2007). The multiplicity of the tangible disadvantages of urban
areas is indicative of the challenges urban districts face in hiring effective leaders.
9

Teacher shortages are common in specific content areas (mathematics, science, special
education) and in some geographic regions, but urban districts experience increased vacancies
because of poor working conditions, low retention rates, and restrictive hiring practices. Urban
district hiring practices curb hiring until late in the hiring season, encourage filling vacancies
with substitute teachers, and the use of more alternatively certified persons (Eckert, 2013). Jacob
(2007) reported studies that "found teachers in schools serving poor and minority children in
large cities are more likely to be inexperienced, less likely to be certified, and less likely to have
graduated from competitive colleges than are suburban teachers" (p. 135) and some persons
responsible for urban classrooms are not certified at all (Jacob, 2007).
A consistent, although diminishing, gap in technology access, use frequency, and quality
of technology instruction remains evident in urban schools. While urban youths' computer usage
is comparable to other groups, the quality of technology is lower. Urban youth are less likely to
have a computer at home, experience teachers who are poorly trained in computer use, and own
devices that "tend to be older and less portable" (Daugherty, Dossani, Johnson, & Oguz, 2014;
Rainie & Fox, 2012). These myriad challenges create an environment that would benefit from
strong leadership, but less clear is how principals can best share leadership responsibilities and/or
how school librarians contribute to the leadership capital in urban schools.
1.7 Problem Statement
There is a significant body of research investigating the influence of leadership on school
improvement and increased student achievement especially within the context of urban schools.
Significantly less research exists on principals’ perceptions of the school librarian’s technology
leadership role in urban schools and the influence of effective school leadership on student

10

academic success (Gavigan & Curry, 2015). Also missing is official documentation and
published research about how urban school librarians view themselves as technology leaders.
All types of libraries, especially school libraries, are on the forefront of ubiquitous
technological innovations. The swiftly changing technological and information environment in
school libraries suggest a re-conceptualization of school libraries and presumes new
opportunities for school librarians as technology integration leaders (Kuhlthau, 2010; Todd,
2008). Since 2001 and the passage of No Child Left Behind (2001), federal, state, and local
mandates promoted by policymakers are critical components of a complex process of urban
school reform (Jacob, 2007). Digital innovations and the growth of virtual resources heightened
expectations for enhanced student achievement. Initiatives in urban school improvement fueled
by technological innovation and designed to increase students' transliteracies and computational
skills, to bolster teachers' instructional competence, to increase professional accountability, and
to garner measurable gains on state assessments, are at the core of major educational change. The
pace of technology-based change requires school librarians to seek opportunities to exercise
leadership in teaching and instructional partnership as core activities of technology integration
(Johnston, 2013). These new responsibilities have opened pioneering opportunities to explore the
leadership role of school librarians, as they perceive themselves to be technology leaders and as
others perceive them as technology leaders.
1.8 Importance/Significance of the Research
School librarians lead teachers and students in the successful use of the vast array of
resources and model the appropriate navigation through the information available to them. The
work of the school librarian involves "numerous roles on a daily basis, but leadership in
technology integration has emerged as one of their most vital roles" (Johnston, 2013, p. 33). The
11

work of the school librarian crosses grade levels and content areas, thereby enabling school
librarians to influence technology use by students, teachers, administrators, and parents.
The convergence of diverse digital platforms has caused "administrators, educators, and
major stakeholders to rethink curriculum and instructional reform for student achievement"
(Kidd & Keengwe, 2010, p. 61) in K-12 educational settings. The expansive digital information
age, along with the rapid and continuous change in school technology, has introduced novel
instructional and curricular design and delivery modes. Ensuring continuous improvement in
teaching, learning, and student achievement requires highly organized, effective information and
technology leadership. The economic and political climate in public K-12 settings calls for the
restructuring of instructional practices to incorporate technology "to enhance quality education
and student learning" (Kidd & Keengwe, 2010, p. 51). In an effort to foster the use of
technology in instruction new positions such as teacher technologist, technology integration
specialist, and campus network specialist have emerged.
Schools have employed persons knowledgeable of computers, Web 2.0 applications,
digitals tools (e.g., video, animations, presentation tools) to ensure the "effective use and
integration of technology in the classroom" (Kidd & Keengwe, 2010, p. 59). However, school
administrators often overlook that a variety of professional organizations have endorsed highly
skilled school librarians as personnel who can fulfill these roles and provide technology
integration leadership (AASL, 1998, 2007, 2009, 2010; ISTE, 2010; NBPTS, 2010). The
examination into the perceptions of urban principals and school librarians that contribute to the
favorable assumption of technology leadership by school librarians is limited. The study added to
the literature and the investigative research of those perceptions. Additional evidence of the
school librarians' contribution to student achievement and the correction of poorly held
12

perceptions have the potential to open avenues of leadership to school librarians and influence
the hiring and retention practices of principals (Hartzell, 2007). Principals who are not informed
about the expertise school librarians possess (Church, 2010) may make hiring decisions that
exclude the services of a certified school librarian. The principal's perception of the school
librarian as a technology leader may influence hiring practices, maximize, or hinder the ability of
the school librarian to engage in leadership roles both in the school library and beyond the
borders of the library. Given the conclusions of multiple library impact studies that students
buoyed by professionally staffed, well-funded, and resources rich libraries read and test better
(Gretes, 2013), the study contributed to a re-evaluation of the staffing patterns in the Houston
Independent School District (HISD). The study added to the evidence that the district’s efforts to
improve early and middle grades literacy can be bolstered by better library staffing (Shannon,
2012). The study possibly educated principals to the potential of school libraries to
counterbalance “the effects of poverty on reading achievement” (Gretes, 2013, p. 5). Finally, the
study perhaps informed the practices of supportive school principals relative to the provision of
library funding, hiring and retaining school librarians, and endorsing flexible scheduling as a
means to facilitate classroom teacher/ school librarian collaboration.
1.9 Definition of Terms
Operational definitions for frequently used terms in this project were drawn from a
comprehensive literature review are listed below.
Digital/transliteracy - the ability to read, write, and interact across a range of platforms,
tools, media, and social networks (Ipri, 2010); evolving multi-communication modalities
involving viewing, listening, reading, and understanding (Jaeger, 2011).

13

Information/Digital age - a shift from traditional industry to an economy and workplace
based on information access through computerized means (Pillania, 2009).
School librarian - highly credential professionals possessing state teacher certification in
addition to an advanced degree (SBEC, 2009); a title accorded individuals holding state
certification and/or an academic title as a result of formal training leading to a master of
library science or master of library and information studies degree (Reitz, 2013).
Perception – knowledge and insight identified as important to the understanding of a
discernible reality; opinion, interpretation or recognition of a belief, interpretation of
conclusions about others (Bernstein, 2018)).
Technology Leadership – techniques or strategies utilized in the enactment of digital
resources utilization designed to enhance teaching and learning; the infusion of
pedagogical knowledge in the selection, application, and evaluation of technology tools;
expert competency in the use of technology (Johnston, 2012b).
Urban - populated centers having 50,000 or more people characterized by population
density per square mile (United States Census Bureau, 2010); marketing expression
characterized by demographics and popular culture (Agosto & Hughes-Hassell, 2010).
1.10 Research Purpose
The primary purpose of the study was to explore urban school principals’ perceptions of
school librarians’ leadership in technology integration. A second purpose is to explore urban
school librarians’ self-perceptions of their leadership roles. Because of specialized training,
school librarians are uniquely qualified to prepare both adults and student learners "with the
skills necessary to enhance proper use and integration of computer tools into instruction (Kidd &
Keengwe, 2010, p. 52). School librarians are situated to contribute to the successful integration
14

of technology into the school curriculum (Haycock, 2010; Everhart, Mardis, & Johnston, 2011;
Dotson & Jones, 2011; Johnston, 2012a; Moreillon, 2013; Smith, 2014). Despite professional
standards calling for leadership, along with the training and experience to lead, school librarians
are not able to consistently reach their leadership potential. Even when they are in leadership
positions, rapid technological change may render school librarians uncertain of how to maintain
their roles when in competition with other campus-based technology specialists.
School principals are positioned to recognize and support the leadership activities of
faculty members, including school librarians. The efficacy with which the school librarian
assumes the task of technology integration leader is dependent upon a variety of external factors,
which includes the campus administrator's appreciation of the school librarian's specialized skills
as a teacher, instructional partner, program administrator, information specialist, and leader
(Church, 2010).
1.10.1 Research Questions
Through the exploration of critical perceptual influences of school principals and school
librarians that affect technology leadership, this study added to the body of research in the
technology leadership role of school librarians by addressing the following questions:
RQ1. To what extent do principals perceive school librarians as technology leaders?
RQ2. How do principals perceive that they enable school librarians to demonstrate
leadership in technology integration?
RQ3. To what extent do school librarians' self-reports of leadership activities reflect
themselves as entry level, adaptive, or transformative technology leaders?

15

1.11 Overview of Research Context and Method
The Houston Independent School District (HISD), the largest public school district in
Texas and the seventh largest in the United States, was the site of the study. HISD is an urban
district with 215,627 students located in the largest city in Texas and the fourth largest city in the
United States. Within HISD, the number of certified school librarians has been declining, with
30% of school libraries currently staffed with a certified school librarian.
Presently HISD library staffing includes personnel credentialed as certified school
librarians; persons holding state teacher certificates, but not school librarian certificates, and both
degreed and non-degreed paraprofessionals. As a site-based decision making district, the
building level administrator (principal) determines the staffing patterns. Because HISD uses sitebased decision-making, principals choose to retain or release their school librarians.
Prior to 1999 Texas state school librarian certification could be achieved by the
successful completion of a state certification test. Following a 1999 revision to state school
librarian certification requirements, public school librarians are required to participate in a state
approved Alternative Certification Program (ACP) or obtain certification through the university
system and pass a state certification test. Applicants for Texas school librarian certification must
have a master's degree, but are not limited to a master's degree in library science. According to
the Texas State Board of Educator Certification (SBEC) Administrative Code Rule §239.60,
Persons applying for state certification as a school librarian must hold state certification as a
classroom teacher (SBEC, 2009). Despite the competency of state certified school librarians,
HISD administrators often demonstrate a lack of recognition of the school librarian's expertise by
their hiring decisions.

16

HISD district leaders recognize that “[t]he world is changing rapidly, and students must
be prepared to live and work productively in a new economy with new technology, new
competition, and new expectations.” (HISD, 2010, p.2). This belief is linked to a district-wide
focus on technology integration. For these reasons, HISD is an ideal setting in which to
investigate urban school librarian and principal perceptions of school librarians' role in
enhancing teaching and learning using technology. Study participants will be restricted to library
personnel that hold Texas state certification as school librarians, regardless of master's degree
status.
1.12 Overview of the Theory: Information Worlds
This researcher used the theory of Information Worlds as a lens through which to view
the priorities and perceptions of urban school principals and school librarians. Information
Worlds examines the social phenomenon of both external and internal factors of overlapping
worlds. The information worlds theory, according to Burnett (G. Burnett, personal
communication, March 15, 2011), is flexible and robust and is useful in probing the flow of
information across varying social viewpoints. Information Worlds distances itself from
methodology so that it is applicable to case studies, ethnography, participant observation, or
mixed methods research. It is suitable for the investigation of the interplay between technology,
school reform, cultural aspects of teaching and learning, and the changing roles and
responsibilities of school librarians.
Technology is well integrated within the school community. Through the lens of the
information worlds viewpoint, school libraries are social spaces where collaborative interactions
involving a broad spectrum of technology users can occur. Within this space, the school librarian
is a potential wellspring of knowledge and expertise needed to lead meaningful integration of
17

technology into teaching and learning (DiScala & Subramaniam, 2011; Johnston, 2012b).
Information worlds presents the theoretical framework for understanding how principals’
perceptions potentially affect their support of the school librarian's engagement in technology
leadership and how these perceptions are ”embedded in the social worlds of [the] people" (Jaeger
& Burnett, 2010, p. 20) who are major stakeholders in schools.
1.13 Overview of the Method: Sequential Explanatory Mixed Methods
Determining the particular method to use in conducting research entails making decisions
about the purpose or intent of the research. Schutt (2009) suggested that selecting a specific
method is as much about the type of data as the reason for the research. Sequential explanatory is
one of three main approaches identified by Creswell (2003) as useful in conducting mixed
methods research.
The mixed methods sequential explanatory design is a method that collects both
quantitative and qualitative data in separate phases of one study (Ivankova, Creswell, & Stick,
2006). This research design "can expand the impact and enhance the flexibility" (Gilbert, 2006,
p. 205) of the research study. The knowledge gained in this method is extended by the
complementary nature of the two methods. Creswell (1994) provides an historical overview of
combining methods and articulates a compelling argument for the efficacy of mixed methods.
Sequential explanatory mixed methods research is one of the most frequently used
research designs (Creswell, 2003). In the sequential mixed methods employed in this research,
the researcher collected quantitative data in the first phase, analyze those data, and use the
second phase of the study to explain the results of the first phase. The first phase of the study
utilized a detailed survey of school principals and school librarians. The second phase involved

18

semi-structured interviews of administrators and school librarians. At the conclusion of the two
phases, the data was integrated to draw the conclusions.
1.14 Overview of Subsequent Chapters
This is the first chapter in a three-chapter prospectus. Chapter 1 provided an overview of
a study to investigate the perceptual influences of the school principal and school librarian on the
leadership engagement of school librarians within the context of urban schools. In Chapter 2, I
defined school leadership as it relates to principals, teachers, and school librarians. Also in
Chapter 2, I looked at the historical underpinnings of school librarian leadership, the educational
setting of the urban school district, and the information worlds theoretical framework. In Chapter
3, I detailed the research method, research scope, and data collection and analysis procedures.

19

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter was to explore the ways technology influences the leadership
role of the school librarian. In this chapter, first, I defined school leadership as principals,
teachers, and school librarians enact it. Then, the chapter presented a closer look at school
librarian leadership by tracing it through time and linking it to student achievement. Finally, the
chapter explored one context in which this multifaceted leadership dynamic occurs – the urban
school district and provided an overview of the information worlds theoretical framework.
2.2 School Leadership
In the broadest sense of the term, educational leadership is the act of control, of guiding,
or giving direction (Louis, Leithwood, Wahlstrom, & Anderson, 2010). In formulating a
definition from their research, Louis et al (2010) defined leadership as moving people in the
direction of organizational improvement (Louis et al, 2010). Maxwell (2007) determined that
leadership is the process by which an individual can convince a group to accomplish the
objectives of the individual by exerting influence. Components of strong leadership include
developing a clear mission or vision and communicating the vision to the industry stakeholders
(Hallinger, 2011). The focus of this study was the particular elements that characterize the
leadership enactment of school librarians and the influence that principals bring to bear on that
leadership.
Research has indicated that a significant variable in student achievement is effective
leadership in schools (Payzant, 2011). School leadership references structured activities that
occur in learning organizations, specifically schools and encompasses both the instructional and
20

non-instructional aspects of leading a school (Louis et al, 2010). Much of the research concludes
that school "leadership is second only to classroom instruction among school-related factors that
affect student learning in school" (The Wallace Foundation, 2013, p. 5).
There are extensive examinations of school leadership and the relationship of leadership
to student outcomes (Braun, Gable, & Kite, 2011; Grissom & Loeb, 2011; Leithwood, Harris, &
Hopkins, 2008). Leithwood et al (2008) argued that the effect of leadership on student
achievement is noteworthy and that leadership is the "catalyst without which other good things
are quite unlikely to happen" (2008, p. 3) and that instructional leadership behaviors affect
student achievement. Significant research conducted during the late 1970s and 1980s confirmed
the correlation between the instructional leadership of principals and school effectiveness. The
conclusions derived from these earlier studies mirror more recent conclusions: effective
leadership, whether direct or indirect, influences student learning (National Association of
Secondary School Principals (NASSP) & National Association of Elementary School Principals
(NAESP), 2013; Hallinger, 2011; Hambrick & Tucker, 2016). During the past four decades
researchers studying instructional leadership, its influence on student achievement, and the
various constructs of leadership, such as shared, distributed, and transformational leadership
(Hallinger, 2011; Hallinger and Heck, 2010; Spillane, 2006) are consistent with the findings of
the earlier works of researchers such as Dwyer (1984), Edmonds, (1979), Hallinger & Heck,
(1996), and Blase´ and Blase´ (2004).
2.2.1 Instructional Leadership
The beginning of the 21st century brought a change to the concept of instructional
leadership (Hallinger, 2010). Although researchers vary widely in their definitions of
instructional leadership, it is considered a core component of school leadership (The Wallace
21

Foundation, 2009). One instructional leadership definition refers to the positional and informal
leadership that influences student success (Goldring, Grissom, Neumerski, Murphy, Blissett, &
Porter, 2015).
Instructional leadership is a collaborative process that incorporates discussion, problem
solving, reflection, and shared responsibility that purposefully aims to improve student
achievement (Louis et al, 2010; Jenkins, 2009). There are a myriad of behaviors and attitudes
that impact student accomplishment, school climate, and professional development that
encompass the links between leadership behaviors and student achievement. It includes the
beliefs, actions, and strategies used to affect change with a focus on improvements in classroom
practice. The contemporary definition of instructional leadership shifts the emphasis from that of
a positional leader to “leading learning communities, in which staff members meet on a regular
basis to discuss their work, collaborate to solve problems, reflect on their jobs, and take
responsibility for what students learn” (Jenkins, 2009, p. 36). Instructional leadership is
dependent upon both the positional leader and the informal leadership of the instructional staff
leading to improvements in instructional practice, educational achievement, and quality of
instructional personnel (Louis et al, 2010; Stronge, Richard, & Catano, 2008).
2.2.2 Leadership and School Reform
The influence of leadership on school reform efforts is demonstrated most easily in
schools that are significantly unsuccessful. Strong leadership accounts for the significant part of
change in under achieving schools (Hallinger & Heck, 2010). Other researchers concurred that
the connection between effective instruction, leadership competencies, and improved student
achievement is a strong one (Gray, 2009). Wahlstrom and York-Barr (2011), in accordance with
numerous others, reported that effective leadership influences "others in positive and productive
22

ways" (p. 23). They agreed with the research, which shows instructional leadership purposefully
aims to improve student achievement and school leadership undoubtedly influences student
academic growth. Strong instructional leadership contributes to improved educational outcomes
(Trujillo, 2013) and the role of school leaders is increasingly recognized (The Wallace
Foundation, 2009). The realization of positive organizational outcomes is the results of the
interplay of school context and effective leadership (Hallinger, 2011; NASSP & NAESP, 2013).
2.2.3 Leadership and Accountability
Current trends in school reform bolstered by the focus on accountability (Stronge,
Richard, & Catano, 2008) and student achievement (NASSP & NAESP, 2013) suggest that the
principal as the lone instructional leader is inadequate (Hallinger, 2010; Schmidt-Davis &
Bottom, 2011). High stakes testing and trends in educational reform increasingly shape the view
of what constitutes leadership and who can assume the mantle of leader. The prospect of the
principal as the solitary instructional leader in schools is fast giving way to a model of multiple
leaders (NASSP & NAESP, 2013).
The passage of the 2001 federal legislation No Child Left Behind (NCLB) initiated a
progression of school accountability measures that brought an emphasis to school leadership.
Under the mandate of federal law, demands for accountability were important. The
reauthorization of NCLB, the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA, 2015), reduced accountability
requirements (Klein, 2016), while presenting new leadership opportunities for teachers,
including school librarians (Fennell, 2016). State departments of education which will now be
responsible for schools are accountable for school quality, teacher evaluation, and closing
achievement gaps (Burnette, 2016). Although ESSA will not be fully implemented until 2017 –
2018, the collection of evidence-based data remains critical to documenting the leadership role of
23

principals and teachers (Chenoweth, 2016). ESSA authorizes the use of funds to allow "states to
help local school districts offer opportunities for effective teachers to lead professional
development for their peers" (Fennell, 2016, p. 64), thus allowing school librarians to seize the
reins of leadership in professional development. While the "highly qualified" requirements of
NCLB for teachers have been eliminated in ESSA, personnel working in schools with high
poverty rates must comply with state requirements for licensure and certification (Fennell, 2016).
School librarians are already mandated to meet certification standards and are poised to lead in
technology and professional development. The current climate of school accountability and
school reform kindled a new awareness of the importance of leadership in educational settings.
Because of the increased emphasis upon school accountability and national standards,
instructional leadership has been prioritized as an element of effective schools (Goldring et al,
2015; Miller, Goddard, Goddard, Larsen, & Jacob, 2010). School effectiveness as demonstrated
by student success on state assessments and student achievement in the classroom is linked to the
efficacy of principal leadership, the competence with which teachers teach, and how well
students learn (Portin, Knapp, Dareff, Feldman, Russell, Samuelson, & Yeh, 2009). The focus on
evidence-based results has encouraged the study of the leadership factors that contribute to
effective schools. Leadership in schools extends to instruction, technology, and professional
development. Each is intricately interwoven into school reforms in student achievement and
improvement in teaching and learning.
2.2.4 Principal Leadership
The term “principal” is derived from the title of “principal teacher,” that is, a teacher who
acted as the head of the school (Hallinger, 2011). Principals are one of the enactors of
instructional leadership and the principal's leadership role has its own unique characteristics. The
24

principal as manager is the picture that comes to mind in terms of non-instructional aspects of
principal leadership. Duty schedules, balancing the budget, and maintaining supplies are
characteristics of management. Additional activities of the principal as manager include
personnel evaluation, data collection and analysis, strategic planning, and facilities management
(Goldring et al, 2015). The research provided clear indications of the critical importance of the
school leader in the allocation of time, observation and evaluation, and setting appropriate
expectations for staff and students (NASSP & NAESP, 2013; Schmidt-Davis & Bottom, 2011;
Leithwood, Wahlstrom, & Anderson, 2011).
Detailed behaviors considered to be indicators of effective school leadership include such
actions as setting a vision, organizing cross content planning, conducting evaluation
observational walk throughs, providing mentors, and encouraging professional study groups
(NASSP & NAESP, 2013; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2008). The administrative tasks such as
personnel supervision, fiscal responsibility, and facilities management remain within the domain
of the principal, but with increasing emphasis on student outcomes and ambitious accountability
measures teachers are assuming responsibilities beyond committee or department chair (Waldron
& McLeskey, 2010). The research provides clear indications of the importance of the principals'
support in the allocation of time, observation and evaluation, and setting appropriate expectations
for both students and staff (The Wallace Foundation, 2013).
According to Johnston (2012b) accomplished school librarians identified principals’
support as the element that allowed them “to assume these leadership responsibilities by
promoting them as leaders, recognizing their expertise, and providing encouragement” (p. 13).
Administrative support is strongly correlated to the success of the school librarians’ leadership
enactment (Johnston, 2012b; Shannon, 2009). Everhart (2006) also found that the determining
25

factor in the success of the school library and the school librarian is the principal’s support.
Shannon (2009) and Church (2010) found some enablers included budgeting, scheduling options,
provision of resources, including technology, performance expectations, promotion of the library
program, and recognition of the school librarian’s professional expertise. Johnston identified 724
enablers for school librarians’ "enacting leadership role in technology integration” (2012b, p.
10). Inadequate staffing was among the 366 barriers to the enactment of school librarians’
technology leadership (Johnston, 2012b).
Accordingly, historically, the principal is considered the instructional leader of a school,
but others on the campus can also fulfill instructional leadership roles (Göksoy, 2015; Hallinger,
2011; Louis et al, 2010; Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond, 2007). Subsequent considerations
were given to the examination of one model of shared leadership.
2.3 Principal Budgetary Decisions
While the expansion of the principal's leadership role has moved from manager to
collegial visionary, budgetary functions continue to set the climate and culture of the school. The
budgetary decisions that support the provision of library funding continue to remain in the
control of the principal (Church, 2008; Mardis, 2013). Funding for library materials is only one
aspect of a quality library program (Scholastic, 2016). Attention to the school library program,
the school librarian's role, and the positive influence on student achievement may be limited
(Shannon, 2012). This myopic view potentially may well result in the library being given a low
priority both financially and visibly (Shannon, 2012).
The most stanch finding of administrators' perceptions is the low regard they hold for
"the instructional and curricular leadership role of the school librarian" (Shannon, 2012, p. 17).
Studies of principals' perceptions of school librarians' roles reveal "a consistent finding across
26

studies" (Shannon, 2012, p. 17): principals rate school librarians’ "activities related to materials
provision and reference assistance" (Shannon, 2012, p. 17) higher than school librarians’
activities related to collaborative teaching, leadership, or technology. Research by Shannon
further indicated, "school principals value the interpersonal skills of the school librarian as much
as or more than professional competencies" (2012, p. 17). This traditional view of school
librarians’ value tends to express itself most clearly in principals’ investments in the school
librarians professional development, committee appointments, and library funding. Supportive
principals ensure that opportunities for professional growth are available even in the face of
dwindling financial resources.
2.4 Teacher Leadership
Increasingly the leadership capacity of classroom teachers is being expanded (ASCD,
2014), but "development of the teacher leader position has frequently been stifled by lack of
frameworks, professional growth paths, and even the myriad definitions that exist for the term"
(ASCD, 2014, p. 6). The models of teacher leadership include both formal and informal
leadership roles and the changing nature of schools is reframing the conversation about teacher
leadership development (ASCD, 2014). Teacher leadership has evolved to include mentoring,
coaching, and facilitating colleague and student improvement, rather than the more formalized
administrative position that is outside of the classroom (ASCD, 2014).
The top down leadership currently prevalent in schools fails "to meet the needs of
students in the new and challenging world they will face" (Helterbran, 2010, p. 364). The
hierarchical structure of schools poses an impediment to teacher leadership (Murphy, 2007) and
may result in the stifling of classroom focused teacher leadership (ASCD, 2014; Barth, 2013).To
assume leadership positions such as deans of instruction and content specialist necessitates
27

leaving the classroom (Helterbran, 2010; Fennell, 2016). Classroom teachers seeking to move to
the position of school principal are required to obtain additional education (Mardis, 2013) and
state certification to fulfill the positional title of leader, but "many teachers are seeking
opportunities to expand their roles while staying connected to the classroom" (ASCD, 2014, p.
26).
The mission of successful schools is changing from the mere acquisition of a job to the
development of civically engaged, culturally competent, and globally aware citizens; thus the
expansion of leadership opportunities for teachers is an agreed upon necessity (ASCD, 2014;
Commission on Effective Teachers and Teaching, 2011). The increased demands upon the
principal as the "instructional leader and building administrator" (ASCD, 2014, p. 9) are creating
new prospects for teachers as leaders (ASCD, 2014).
Teaching is characterized by Helterbran (2010) and Danielson (2007) as "a flat career"
(p. 365) and "becoming a teacher leader involves the breaking of stereotypical isolation familiar
to most teachers" (p. 366). Novice teachers entering the profession will perform the same duties
as their colleague with two to three times the experience as opposed to professions where the
gaining of experience results in increased responsibility (Danielson, 2007). Teachers desirous of
enhancing their influence as leaders (Mardis, 2013) may recognize that becoming an
administrator is not the right choice for them, but possibly will step away from the classroom for
economic and professional growth reasons.
While both teacher and principal leadership seem to have possibilities for shared
leadership approaches, teachers and principals rarely forge collaborative leadership relationships
(Barth, 2013). Although teacher preparation programs have rarely focused on developing the
leadership skills of classroom teachers, it is becoming increasingly more prevalent for teachers to
28

self-identify as leaders without "holding a formal leadership role outside the classroom" (ASCD,
2014, p. 8).
Investigations of pathways to instructional leadership indicated that teacher leadership
and administrative leadership differ and that "while creating pathways for teacher leadership, we
must differentiate between the skills and training needed by teacher leaders and those needed by
administrators" (ASCD, 2014, p. 13).
The recognition that instruction, leadership, and student achievement are intricately
interwoven has led to the rapid rise of professional development for teachers and administrators
in data driven instructional practices, but the training for administrators differs from that needed
by teacher leaders (ASCD, 2014). Teacher and administrator evaluations are also connected to
student academic growth. The quality of instruction and student performance coupled with
effective leadership has the potential to enhance substantially the educational experience of
students and teachers (ASCD, 2014; The Wallace Foundation, 2013).
2.5 School Librarian Leadership
School librarians are encouraged to enact leadership in four distinct areas organized
around the four school librarians’ roles first delineated in Information Power, the American
Association of School Librarians' (AASL) 1998 guidelines: instructional partner, teacher,
information specialist, and program administrator. These roles were subsequently expanded in
the AASL 2009 publication Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Programs to
include the role of leader. These five roles are further discussed below.
2.5.1 Teacher
Whether or not school librarians are considered part of the teaching staff, ancillary
support, or technologists varies from district to district. State requirements to obtain licensure as
29

a school librarian vary, with the majority of states, including Texas, requiring initial teacher
certification, classroom-teaching experience as well as an advanced degree (AASL,
http://www.ala.org/aasl/education/recruitment/licensing; University of Kentucky,
https://education.uky.edu/acadserv/pdac/certification-by-state/). School librarians are often
required to be among the most degreed and credentialed educators in schools.
School librarians who are knowledgeable about student learning and possess strong
content knowledge and who are well versed in curriculum and pedagogy can provide competent
instructional leadership. Because many school librarians hold dual certification as teacher and
school librarian, the role of teacher is easily fulfilled. In the teacher role, school librarians
promote reading, support student research initiatives, and work with both students and
professionals to enhance teaching and learning. School librarians’ leverage their knowledge of
the curriculum and student interests to enhance student learning (Hoffman & Mardis, 2008). In
contrast to principals, school librarians regularly engage in instruction delivery.
2.5.2 Instructional Partner
School librarians, through unique training and experiences, are prepared to interact with
students and adults to integrate a variety of resources into teaching and learning to achieve the
promises and opportunities of classroom technological innovations. The collaborative skills,
knowledge of curriculum and resources, outreach and dissemination activities, and ongoing
professional learning are components of the school librarian’s leadership as an instructional
partner (Moreillon, Kimmel, Gavigan, 2014). This distinctive role of the school librarian is
correlated to curriculum and instructional practice (AASL, 2009). As the instructional partner in
the school, the school librarian functions in an equal partnership with the classroom teacher to
deliver lessons, provide curricular support, and establish learning priorities for students.
30

The school librarians’ ability to advance and integrate developing technologies in
instruction is a key element of complementing the curriculum, encouraging multimodal learning,
modeling multiple literacies, and leading through instruction (Moreillon, Kimmel, Gavigan,
2014). The school librarian's conceptual knowledge of the location, evaluation, and ethical use of
information, coupled with the application of technology tools (Baker, 2016), characterize the
critical elements of the school librarian's role in the complex dimensions of the educational
process (Baker, 2016).
School librarians are equally involved in navigating the changes in their leadership roles
and maintaining technology adoption through collaborations with colleagues. While instructional
leadership is a challenging blend of resources, modeling, and instructional skill, the school
librarian's collegial collaboration inspires enhanced teaching and learning (Scholastic, 2016).
2.5.3 Information Specialist
The exponential growth of technological innovations and information requires the
expertise of an information specialist to assist library patrons to locate, use, and evaluate
emerging technologies, data, and global communication. In response, school librarians are
bringing technology integration strategies into the school library instructional program. School
libraries are spaces where students and teachers work together exploring, investigating, and
creating in order to propel "learning to deeper levels and wider vistas" (AASL, 2009, p. 12). The
very definition of the school library is changing to include one of a venue that provides access to
an ever-widening array of information from online course modules to digital textbooks to data
sets (Johnston, 2012a).
School librarians are responsible for collecting resources in a variety of media types (e.g.,
digital video, electronic periodicals, podcasts, e-books, and audio books) and must be fluent in a
31

variety of devices through which this content is delivered (e.g., laptops, e-book readers, tablet
computers, smart boards, and student response systems). The ever-advancing state of technology,
distance learning, and virtual environments is transforming school libraries from "warehouses for
books and equipment into the hub of the learning community" (Purcell, 2010, p. 300).
The tools used in classrooms and libraries have radically changed, fundamentally altering
the ways educational tasks are performed. The technological tools provide a level of efficiency in
record keeping and communication that simultaneously has complicated and simplified
educations tasks. As society approaches the halfway point in the second decade of the 21st
century, technological innovation and rapid change are commonplace. Individuals may continue
to struggle with adapting and implementing a depth of instruction that moves beyond the
powerpoint or the smart board to augment a lecture. Teachers and students routinely use
technology for both personal and academic tasks (Project Tomorrow, 2012). Using technological
tools in entrepreneurial ways requires a depth of understanding of how "to construct deep and
connected knowledge, which can be applied to real situations" (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich,
2010, p. 257). In order to use technology tools to enhance instruction, at a minimum, teachers
need a basic knowledge of instructional technology, subject content, and "the pedagogical
methods that facilitate student learning, and the specific ways in which technology can support
those methods" (Ertmer & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010, p. 260).
A well-supported library staffed with a highly qualified school librarian is a safe space
where teachers can develop confidence in employing new technological tools and information
resources in instruction. Under the guidance of the school librarian functioning in the role of
information specialists, teachers can explore new learning media, engage with other
professionals in a learning community, and discover new uses for familiar tools (Ertmer &
32

Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010). Educators, especially school librarians, must teach students and
peers "how to evaluate, analyze, and utilize" (Johnston, 2013, p. 33) the massive amounts of
information that bombard them. Working in conjunction with classroom teachers, school
librarians are integral to "providing programming that benefits all students" (Everhart, 2007, p.
55) and successfully prepares both students and teachers to think critically about digital
information as capable participants in a globally connected society.
2.5.4 Program Administrator
While instructional leadership is undoubtedly a major component of the school librarian’s
position, much of the work fits the definition of the administrative component of educational
leadership. The quality of the library program is influenced by the school librarian's skill as a
program administrator. The school librarian as a passionate library advocate communicates the
value and vision of the program to campus personnel and the community at large (AASL, 1998;
AASL, 2009). As the program administrator, the school librarian promotes the resources of the
library, engages learners in both physical and virtual spaces, encourages parental involvement,
create communities of practice, and develops a school wide culture of information literacy
instruction and technology integration.
As program administrator, the school librarian is as fiscally responsible as the principal in
utilizing the funds allocated to the library. The library program administrator seeks to work with
the school administration to create and communicate a shared vision for student learning and
achievement. The effective administrator goes beyond the boundaries of the physical library to
build partnerships. The program administrator works with the entire school community as the
bridge between content areas, standards and policy development, and information evaluation.

33

2.5.5 Leader
School librarians have a unique role among educators in that they alone have the
responsibility to connect teachers and students to the resources needed for instruction and
learning (Johnston, 2012b). AASL supports the leadership role of the school librarian in
promoting activities and technology tools that engage students, encourage the development of
lifelong learning, and the endorsement of the various aspects inherent in a participatory culture.
In the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) most recent professional guidelines,
Empowering Learners (AASL, 2009), national leaders in school librarianship emphasized that
school librarians must broaden the four Information Power roles to embrace leadership as they
actively express professional effectiveness. According to Mardis and Hoffman (2007),
“classrooms and school library media centers are parallel universes struggling with their own
reform issues and with documenting their own positive impacts” (p. 1). Assuming the role of
leader will enable school librarians to take control of "building 21st century skills throughout the
school environment" (AASL, 2009, p. 17). School librarians must determine how their roles
intersect with improved instruction and student learning.
Both the library and the school librarian are evolving into unique roles relative to
technology integration, school reform, and student achievement (Johnston, 2012b). The
traditional school librarian roles of locating, collecting, organizing, and disseminating
information are strengthened when these skills are applied through technology use. This very
traditional aspect of school librarianship demands technology integration leadership in order to
expose students to the learning modes and resources they need to become 21st century learners
(Johnston, 2012a; Kuhlthau, 2010). The specialized knowledge of the school librarian as a
technology integration leader offers the most direct connection to potent educational reform in
34

support of improved student achievement. School librarians' leadership in all the defined roles
can only flourish in a climate of support that values innovation and autonomy based on respect
for professional competence.
School librarians are challenged to meet the opportunities as well as the threats posed by
the rising tide of technological change in schools and the resultant transformation of the ways
students use technology to satisfy both personal curiosity and academic endeavors (Johnston,
2015). Dynamic technological innovations present new opportunities to school librarians relative
to technology integration and the promotion of technology through the library program in order
to strengthen student learning and solidify professional partnerships. Research that highlights the
school librarian's unique combination of professional expertise can encourage teachers and
principals to utilize this often-untapped human capital (Johnston, 2015).
2.6 Foundations of School Librarian Leadership
School libraries have long been venues for information access and technology innovation.
The history of school libraries dates back as far as the late 16th century. In early 1578, two
centuries before America was established as a sovereign nation, in Shrewsbury, England, school
libraries were mentioned as centers for providing various media (McGinnis, 1962). In 1827, the
governor of New York proposed legislation for public school libraries (Johnson, 2013). Fully
twelve years after this initial legislation funds were appropriated to acquire "materials that would
further students' education" (Johnson, 2013, p. 15). The National Defense Education Act of 1958
and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 helped fuel elementary school library
proliferation as sites of innovative learning, providing "direct federal assistance for the
acquisition of school library resources and other instructional materials" (Johnson, 2013, p. 16).
These federal acts were in response to the technology advances represented by the launch of
35

Sputnik and the success of the Soviet space program. The Soviet program accomplishment
impelled the United States federal government to invest heavily in education.
The growth of school libraries was accompanied by the recognition that these sites
required dedicated staff to manage and promote their innovative services. School librarianship
evolved as a professional specialty through the late 19th century and into the mid-20th century.
The National Education Association (NEA) formalized “the roles and responsibilities of school
librarians” (Johnson, 2013, p. 8) in 1896. In response, the American Library Association (ALA)
published their own school library standards in 1918 and 1920 which “directed school librarians
to select books on the basis of what was needed for classrooms, students’ recreational and
cultural needs, and curricular needs and recommendations by teachers” (Johnson, 2013, p. 9).
ALA and the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) remain pivotal organizations
in establishing and promoting standards that give guidance to school librarians in planning and
implementing quality school library programs. Standards relating to school libraries continued to
be revised and expanded throughout the century, suggesting that specific materials and
equipment be "housed in a central location" (Callison & Preddy, 2006, p. 210) rather than
dispersed throughout the school. Eventually, the notion of consistency and standards in school
libraries became the norm.
The standards based guidelines (AASL, 1998a, 1998b, 2009; NBPTS, 2010) for school
librarian leadership in the areas of curriculum planning, collaboration, technology integration,
and student achievement often go unrecognized by campus administrators (Church, 2010). Many
school principals continue to place emphasis on the more traditional school librarian roles, such
as collection development, materials circulations, reference and library instruction rather than the
more current school librarian responsibilities needed to support students realization of "the full
36

promise of new technologies" (Palfrey, Gasser, & MacClay, 2011, p. 1). The most recent
information from the National Center for Education Statistics (2011-12) indicated that 79,000
public schools, representing 92% of all traditional public schools (85,500), reported having a
school library. Public schools reporting school libraries indicated that 67% of the schools
employee a state certified school librarian.
2.7 21st Century Learners
Students spend inordinate amounts of time in and out of school engaged in social
networks, texting, instant messaging, and creating other types of digital content. The dominance
of images, sounds, and digital texts, coupled with the capacity to multitask, enable students to
simultaneously view, listen, and react in a multimodal environment in a non-linear way (Walsh,
2008). Fluency in texting, blogging, and gaming utilize literacy skills that are seen as separate
and apart from the reading and writing literacies of school and with which school librarians are
most familiar (Irvin, Meltzer, & Dukes, 2007). Academic literacies incorporate all aspects of
human communication and include "reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing, and
representing" (Irvin, et al, 2007, p. 9), which students employ as "they are chatting, posting
pictures, setting their schedules, playing games, shopping, and even creating and working
together to maintain entire imagined societies – all in a virtual world" (Cook & Cassidy, 2011, p.
27). This world has swiftly become a part of an already full school curriculum. The range of
technology innovations give students options for sources of knowledge as well as avenues for
information creation and dissemination.
Today’s youth engage with learning systems that allow for a level of interactivity and
connectedness that previous systems did not permit (Prensky, 2001). The variety of names for
the young people of today includes Net Generation, Millennials, Echo Boomers, and Generation
37

Y (Connaway, Radford, Dickey, Williams & Confer, 2008). As described by Connaway et al
(2008) these young people are collaborative; active learners; efficient visual processors; multitaskers; confident; achievement oriented; and prefer the immediate responsiveness of present-day
technology. These students "share a common global culture defined less by age than by their
experience growing up immersed in digital technology (Palfrey, Gasser, & Maclay, 2011, p. 1).
Contemporary learners function in environments that are perpetual and virtual producing digital
content as text, images, and audio.
School librarians are positioned to be leaders in collaboration, advocacy, and instruction.
A complementary, yet simultaneously conflicting, professional role in schools is that of the
instructional technologist (Wine, 2016). The prevalence of campus technology and the school
librarian's efficacy as technology integrationist coupled with the school librarian's instructional
acumen affords school librarians' collaborative opportunities with additional instructional
professionals (Wine, 2016). Given the expectations of professional organizations, particularly the
American Association of School Librarians (AASL), school librarians are not only encouraged to
lead in teaching and professional development, but to also play a "prominent role in instructing
students, faculty, and administrators in a range of literacies, including information, digital, print,
visual and textual literacies" (AASL, 2007, p. 1). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the
students with whom school librarians work.
Table 1.
Characteristics of contemporary learners (Palfrey & Gasser, 2008)
Personality Traits
Technology Use
Self-confident
Prolific users
Self-reliant
Digital content generating
Social
Continuous connectivity
Creatively expressive
Globally connected
38

Table 1. - continued
Personality Traits
Comfortable with frequent
change
At ease with loss of privacy
Interest Driven

Technology Use
Unrestricted by time and
space
Prefer mobile portability
Multi-taskers

As Table 1 suggests, the preferences and needs of current learners have significant
implications for the role of the school librarian as a technology leader. Hoffman and Mardis
(2008) found the school librarians’ role was essential to working with learners and educators in
“digitally-centered” (p. 8) environments. The leadership role of school librarians would mandate
that they are the early adopters of technological change. The school librarian is both an adopter
and a change facilitator. Numerous media and technology resources require the highly
specialized expertise of the school librarian to "keep students and teachers abreast of how to use
technology for education" (Pascopella, 2002, p. 40). National, state, and local professional
organizations recognize the school librarian's leadership role as a key component of student
achievement and school success (AASL, 1998; AASL, 2009).
By examining the changes brought about by multimodal learning resources, new
knowledge of the leadership role of the school librarian in technology adoption and integration
can inform policy decisions, generate strategies for learning with technology, improve facilities
design, and enhance library programming for students and the larger education community.
2.8 Leadership and Student Achievement
Numerous researchers have exhaustively investigated the factors that contribute to
improved student achievement. Many educators define achievement as the attainment of a set of
educational goals as indicated on state or national standards (Newmann, Smith, Allensworth, &
39

Bryk, 2011). The comprehensive and careful examination of leadership, teacher expectations,
teacher efficacy, class size, educator training and experience, and pedagogical practices reached
conclusions that multiple contributing elements compel enhanced student learning (Rivkin,
Hanushek, & Kain, 2005). One or more of these factors is exacerbated by attendance at an urban
school (Jacob, 2010). Nationally, federal educational policymakers point to faltering public
school reform initiatives and declining test scores on international measures of mathematics,
science, and reading as trends culminating in a population of students ill prepared to compete in
a global, technologically infused society (Duncan, 2010).
Post-NCLB students were bombarded with a barrage of standardized assessments, some
of which will be tempered by ESSA. While backlash against excessive testing has effectively
reduced the demand, assessment is not likely to end entirely. There are both local and national
testing programs to determine students' academic competence. These assessments have varied
and unique criteria that indicate positive achievement. While understanding of achievement
varies with location, agency, and assessment, measuring achievement remains a common
parameter of success.
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is administered
internationally to 15-year-old school students. PISA measures acquired knowledge and skills of
students nearing the completion of their high school careers in the areas of science and
mathematics literacy, reading, and problem solving (PISA, 2009; PISA, 2012). The assessment is
less concerned with what students know than how well students can successfully apply what they
have learned in school to real world circumstances. Achievement as indicated by PISA is the
ability to apply learned knowledge to situations in everyday life. The assessment is conducted in
the core areas of reading, math, and science on a three-year rotation. The Organisation for
40

Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has oversight of the international assessment
given in 65 cooperating countries (OECD, 2013). The United States PISA results for 2012
showed "no significant changes in the average performance of U.S. 15 year old students in the
mathematics, reading, and science over time (OECD, 2013). Despite higher expenditures per
student than other countries, in each of the core areas US students ranked below less developed
countries such as Korea, Finland, and China. The 2012 PISA revealed a standing of 17th out of
34 industrialized nations in reading, 20th in science, and 27th in math for the United States.
The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) is a national representative
sampling of the subject matter achievement of American fourth, eighth, and twelfth graders.
NAEP is referred to as "the nation's report card" and is a congressionally mandated assessment
administered by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES, 2015). The goal of NAEP is
to track achievement changes of students in the content areas of mathematics, reading, science,
writing, and other subject matter (geography, U. S. history, civics). Results have been reported
since 1969. The initial reading assessment was conducted in 1992 and the comparison of the
scores of 23 years ago and 2015 indicated a decline in reading. A two-year comparison between
2013 and 2015 reading scores indicated no significant difference (National Center for Education
Statistics, 2015). The trend toward declining test scores in math and dormant scores in reading
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2015) raised alarm that the current generation of
students will be competitively disadvantaged in meeting the challenges of a global society and
faltering economy (Duncan, 2010).
Despite the best intensive efforts and infusion of financial resources, substantial learning
gains as indicated on national and state assessments have yet to be realized. Participants in the
national discourse on the poor academic performance of public school students imply a cause41

and-effect association (Heck, 2009) between classroom practice and student learning. Education
reformers propose solutions ranging from charter schools to school vouchers to merit pay for
high performing educators. High stakes testing and accountability requirements have created a
sense of urgency in implementing programs and practices with expectations of dramatic
academic gains. Considerable effort has been invested in determining the observable and
quantifiable variables that make a difference in student academic learning. The persistent
achievement gap experienced by minority populations remains a worrisome and controversial
disparity in the teaching/learning process (U.S. Department of Education, 2013). Library and
information professionals contend that a viable and evidenced based solution to mediate the
achievement gap and stagnant test scores already exists.
2.9 School Librarian Leadership and Student Achievement
Decades of research studies persistently affirm the positive contribution to student
achievement realized through a fully staffed, resource rich, well-funded school library (Lance,
Welborn, & Hamilton-Pennell, 1997; Lance, 2001; Todd & Kuhlthau, 2005; Francis, Lance &
Lietzau, 2010, Kachel, 2011). Rutgers University took up the mantle of studying school library
programs during the 1960s and school library impact studies, as they have come to be called,
proliferated in the 20th century. The original school impact study was conducted in Colorado
(Lance, Wellborn & Hamilton-Pennell, 1997; Lance, 2001) and initiated a series of studies that
confirmed the original findings of a strong correlation between "well-funded school library
media programs and increased student achievement" (Kaplan, 2010, p. 55).
Rutgers University researchers assumed the investigation of "the presumed effectiveness
of elementary-school libraries" (Gaver, 1961, p. 245) and published the findings of the first
phase of the research in Library Quarterly in 1961. This research was preceded by four prior
42

investigations that were master's theses. The grant funded Rutgers research, "under the
sponsorship of the Cooperative Research Program of the U.S. Office of Education" (Gaver,
1961, p. 245) used a co-variant, exploratory research design and was plagued by design
limitations, constricted study participation, and inexperienced researchers. The culminating
report was minimally distributed; Gaver reported only 200 copies were produced. This seminal
work held little significance beyond the studied population. The study evaluated a meager six
elementary school library programs. Despite the limited scope of the research and the lack of
generalizability, the researchers concluded that professional school library personnel offered
advantages to the elementary students.
With an acknowledgment of the noteworthy flaws in correlation studies, post-1990
researchers "statistically controlled for the demographic differences among the schools they
studied--a feature missing in the pre-1990 research" (Hartzell, 2003, p. 21). Details of school
library impact studies in the three decades between 1963 and 1993 are limited, but do provide
additional credence to the efficacy of quality library programs in schools. Lance and Loertscher
(2005) verify that, "between 1963 and 1993, numerous other smaller studies supported the same
findings" (front panel) as the studies prior to 1963. The primary objective of school improvement
efforts is to positively influence student academic growth and "successful library media
programs impact student achievement" (Harvey, 2008, p. xi). A sizeable body of research dating
from 1963 (Kachel, 2011) bolsters the state impact studies conducted in the early 1990s.
Although the early research referenced by Kachel (2011) was inadequately designed in
comparison to modern day research standards, the research conducted in 1963 and in the decades
following the study shaped a "volume of evidence alone [that] is cumulatively persuasive"
(Hartzell, 2003, p. 21).
43

The multitude of impact studies substantiates the long held consensus that the presence of
highly qualified school librarians exerts a positive effect on student outcomes and school
effectiveness. Significant research studies conclude that appropriately supported school library
programs make a difference in student learning (Francis, Lance & Lietzau, 2010). The Colorado
studies and subsequent state studies utilized quantitative data, which was analyzed with
"correlation-based research methods such as factor analysis and multiple regression" (Kaplan,
2010, p. 56) to confirm the "positive correlation between effective school library media programs
and student achievement" (Kaplan, 2010, p. 56). Comparisons of professionally staffed and
unstaffed school libraries repeatedly confirm differences in student academic achievement as
indicated on standardized measures.
Student achievement as determined by standardized assessments, along with program
and personnel variables were used to evaluate the existence of "statistically significant positive
correlations" (Hartzell, 2003, p.21). Kaplan (2010) condensed the 11 characteristics delineated
by Lance to six quantifiable variables:
1. Staffing/Availability - quantity of full-time certified and paraprofessional staff
2. Professional Development/Training - school librarian attended and conducted
training
3. Collaboration/Cooperation - collaborative lessons planned and taught
4. Availability of Electronic Data and Technology - available technology and
integrated instruction
5. Collections and Resources - quantity and currency of reading and curriculum
support materials
6. Usage - circulation statistics and patron volume
44

Todd and Kuhlthau in 2004 and 2005 reported similar results from studies that employed
both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis. An Ohio follow-up study
examined end user perceptions of the benefits personally derived from the school library. The
study verified a positive effect of school library programs on learning both in and out of school
(Todd & Kuhlthau, 2005). During the 17 years between 1993 and 2010, an assortment of
researchers completed 22 state studies with Colorado releasing follow-up studies in 2009 and
2010. Scholastic Publishing initiated the dissemination of summaries of these studies in 2004
(Kachel, 2011).
Despite extensive replication of the 22 state impact studies and distribution by a major
publisher, the consistently positive results were slow to reach critical decision makers in state
legislatures, state boards of education , and local school district administrative offices. The
Pennsylvania School Librarians Association (PSLA), under the leadership of Katchel (2011),
commenced the task of moving the consistent results of the research "beyond the school library
profession" (Kachel, 2011, p. 3). Working with masters level graduate students in the School
Library and Information Technologies Graduate School at Mansfield University, Kachel distilled
the "significant findings and index[ed] them in a chart by components of a school library
program, such as staffing, collections, budgets, etc." (Kachel, 2011, p. 3). The final report was
launched as a website. The website and subsequent paper garnered national attention and
synthesized the numerous state reports to the essential finding that "the presence of full-time,
certified school librarians and appropriate support staff who implement a quality, school
integrated program of library services" (Kachel, 2011, p. 4) provide quantifiable "educational
gains" (Kachel, 2011, p. 4).

45

Sixty impact studies from 22 states confirmed that the effect on the reading achievement
of students is positive and that the effects of poverty are offset with increased access to books
(Gretes, 2013). Several key factors determined by the research concluded that quality library
programs and credentialed school librarians "contribute to higher scores on standardized
achievement tests" (Gretes, 2013, p. 3).
2.10 The Challenge of Leadership in Urban Districts
Leadership can be challenged by its context and urban schools provide a challenging
context. The term “urban schools” has become synonymous with decaying structures, violence,
poverty, and failure (Council of the Great City Schools, 2014). Students in large central cities
face tremendous obstacles to gain a quality education (Foster, 2014). Large inner city
metropolitan areas are characterized by high-density housing, disproportionate numbers of
minority and limited English language speakers and high poverty rates (Portin, Knapp, Dareff,
Feldman, Russell, Samuelson, & Yeh, 2009; Council of the Great City Schools, 2014). While
these issues are common to rural areas, there is the persistent perception of the urban school
student as "at risk" (AASL, 2011, p. 2).
Decades of financial resources have flowed into urban schools in an effort to mitigate the
effects of students' low socio-economic status on student performance. Technology infusions
into urban schools were "hailed as the great equalizer of educational opportunity" (Paul, 2014).
The original digital divide, access to technology, has evolved into a skills gap; the way in which
students use and interact with technology from disparate social-economic backgrounds is a
greater concern. This concern is necessitating improved teacher training, enhanced instructional
practices, and a deeper focus on knowledge building (Paul, 2014).The federal government plays
a significant role in providing additional funding "to improve education for disadvantage
46

students" (Dynarski & Kainz,2015). Funding through the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act's Title 1 monies show "little evidence that the overall program is effective or that its funds
are used for effective services and activities" (Dynarsk & Kainz, 2015). The contention of
Dynarski and Kainz is that Title 1 provides restricted funds that are ineffectual in the battle
against the historical origins of social issues that plague poor schools. In Houston ISD 76.36% of
students are economically disadvantaged (Houston ISD, 2016).
2.10.1 Urban School Libraries
School libraries in urban districts report dated print collections, inadequate working
computers, and limited electronic resources (AASL, 2011; Jacobs, 2007). These facilities are
often poorly funded and may be staffed with under qualified library personnel and teaching staffs
(Berry, 2010; Jacobs, 2007; Johnson & Fargo, 2010). Nationally urban districts face many social
and educational difficulties. Urban often connotes high dropout rates, high mobility, high teen
pregnancy rates, and minimal resources in terms of technology. Despite the prominent role the
school library can play in providing access to curriculum aligned materials, digital resources, and
high quality print materials for the entire student body, urban school libraries are improperly
positioned to support the instructional and technological needs of the students (AASL, 2011).
2.11 The Lens of Distributed Leadership
Principals are inundated with instructional and managerial demands. The need to alleviate
some of the demands on principals and provide other campus personnel with leadership
opportunities can elevate the use of shared or distributed leadership (ASCD, 2014). Great
diversity exists in the school leadership models delineated in the research (Bruggencate, Luyten,
Scheerens & Sleegers, 2012; Haycock, 2010). Schools are organizational contexts that may
provide myriad opportunities for leadership to address a range of challenges. Urban districts tend
47

to be routinely beset by a array of challenges for which many types of leadership may be
required. The traditional view of school leadership places heavy emphasis on the actions of the
principal; however, school leadership is a complex array of behaviors, pedagogy, and adult and
student learning that may not be led solely by the principal. Educational leaders successfully
blend aspects of all areas in order to bring about improved student achievement (Witziers,
Bosker, & Kruger, 2003).. The sweeping paradigm shift away from the omniscient positional
leader and managerial tasks currently shaping the conversation about leadership in relationship to
student achievement entails sharing leadership across the school community.
Distributed leadership (Spillane, 2006) details the framework for school improvement
through a new model of leadership that highlights followers and leaders. Spillane (2006)
challenged several long-held perspectives of principal leadership, shifting from the “heroic
leader” (p. 2) to embedded interactions of leaders and followers. The "hero" leader, in the view
of Spillane, results in a misguided focus on outcomes, which in turn leads to an incomplete,
circular argument about the “relationship between leadership and the effects of leadership” (p.
9). Successful leadership practice shifts the focus from positional leaders “to the web of leaders,
followers, and their situations that gives form to leadership practice” (Spillane, 2006, p. 3).
Spillane defines leadership as activity that is intricately connected to the “core work of the
organization” (p. 11) and minimally dependent upon outcomes. Leadership is disconnected from
effectiveness and direction; Spillane reserves leadership “for activities that administrators and
teachers, design to influence others” (p. 12). Spillane contends that the traditional view of
distributed leadership is insufficient to “capture the complexity of the practice of leadership” (p.
4).

48

Former models of distributed or shared leadership stop short of the recognition that
effective school leadership involves collective actions. The former emphasis on the “what” of
leadership to the detriment of the “how” of leadership reveals an incomplete picture. Spillane
asserts that “knowing what leaders do is important, knowing how they do it is also essential” (p.
5). The interaction of positional leaders and followers in the context of the specific situation
defines the distributed perspective of leadership practice. Multiple leaders, some positional, some
self-designated, contribute to leadership practice in the distributed perspective. Spillane explains
the overarching standard of distributed practice as taking “shape in the interaction of leaders,
followers, and their situation” (p. 14). The actions of multiple leaders are designed, initiated, and
executed across time. Leaders’ roles are situationally differentiated and may overlap. Leadership
practices are defined and re-defined according to the structure of the organization. The leadership
practice is related to the interactions between leaders “that is more than the sum of the actions of
individual leaders” (p. 16). “Follow ship” is also central to leadership practice. Positional leaders
may find themselves in the role of follower sometimes. Spillane explains the distributed
leadership perspective as one that, “cast followers in a new light, as an essential element that
mutually constitutes leadership practice” (p. 17). The interactive roles of positional leaders and
followers, in conjunction with the situation, help to define leadership practice in the Spillane
framework. The distributed leadership perspective avoids acting in a prescriptive way. This fresh
perspective allows leaders to think about and view leadership through a new lens. This new lens
provides opportunities for school personnel who have never viewed themselves as leaders to take
gradual, measured responsibility for some aspect of school improvement, thereby building
confidence and a sense of community among co-workers.

49

2.12 Theoretical Framework –Information Worlds
Scientific theories attempt to explain phenomena in a systematic way that includes
observation, experimentation, hypothesis formulation and testing, data collection, and data
analysis. The utilization of theory is applicable in order to understand the ways in which
technology integration and leadership facilitate teaching and learning. The application of theory
is a means to bring order to the chaotic social sciences. While theories can help to explain how
technology and reform can bring educators together around a common goal, theories can also
shed light on the subcultures and groups within education stakeholder communities who must
enact reforms and embrace change. Information worlds (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010) theory provided
the theoretical framework through which to examine the research questions. Information worlds
is a derivative theoretical model from the concept of small worlds (Chatman, 1991, 1992, 1996,
2000).
2.12.1. Small Worlds
Elfreda Chatman (1991, 1992, 1996, 2000) developed the concept of small worlds. Small
worlds "examines the ways in which information is embedded in the social worlds of people"
(Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 20). The theory of small worlds, originally established by researcher
Elfreda Chatman as Life in the Round (Chatman, 1999), is an observational learning theory
through which to examine the dissemination of information to "definable, localized social
groupings of people," (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 21) or small worlds (Chatman, 1999). The
theory of small worlds expanded "beyond situations marked by information poverty" (Burnett &
Jaeger, 2008, p. 2) to include janitors, Internet users, and booksellers (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008) in
an effort to "examine the ways in which information is embedded in the social worlds of people"
(Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 20). Chatman had a particular interest in ordinary citizens and their
50

behavior relative to information. Chatman's work examined the information worlds of socioeconomically impoverished groups as well as financially affluent environments.
2.12.2 Small Worlds Assumptions
The term small worlds may lead to an assumption of limits, but the term refers to "the
concerns and interests that are active in specific social settings" (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 21).
The interplay of information in these settings is not constrained by geography, economics, or
gender. Chatman's observations were focused on the manner in which information was shared or
withheld. The "recognizable set of social norms and behaviors" (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 21)
defined the "social environments in which the interconnected groups" (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010,
p. 21) functioned in everyday life.
2.12.3 Small Worlds Concepts
Chatman delineated four concepts in the theory of small worlds; "social norms, social
types, worldview, and information behavior" (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 22). Social norms
govern the acceptable behaviors of group members. Boundaries exist within social norms and
participants in a particular small world conduct themselves according to the understood norms.
Social norms between groups vary and can raise disharmony between groups. Social types relate
to the perception members of a group have of each other. Perceptions of individuals may not
hold true in other worlds. The transference of information may be hindered or helped by the
perception held of the information source. Social groups hold common views of their specific
group and groups beyond their boundaries. Chatman saw this as "a collective perception held in
common by members of a social world regarding those things that are deemed important or
trivial" (Chatman in Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 23).

51

Chatman expands the definition of information behavior, the fourth concept of small
world theory, beyond the traditional LIS view of information seeking to include the many ways
individuals use information. Information behavior includes aspects of information needs,
seeking, and using as well as information avoidance (Case, 2008). In the course of a given day
individuals ask questions, seek solutions, plan activities, engage in conversations, exchange
ideas, search both print and electronic resources, read or watch news, and participate in a
plethora of other encounters in an effort to find, select, or use information (Case, 2008). All of
these activities constitute information behaviors without any indication of the value of the
information. The theory of small worlds adds to the cultural context of information behavior, but
is limited in that it does not extend beyond the boundaries of the small worlds. Individuals may
engage in information behavior without any recognition of doing so. According to Case (2008)
information behavior defies generalization and usually escapes observation. Information
behaviors vary from person to person and often is in response to some internal need or
discomfort that is unseen or unrecognized by outsiders. Much information seeking behavior
actually occurs in a person's mind, involving thinking about a curiosity, a goal, or some imposed
information need. Information behavior involves a variety of tasks conducted on a daily basis in
order to gratify both intermediate and long-term needs. There are both deliberate and accidental
information encounters.
The small worlds theorized by Chatman do not exist in a vacuum. In the normal course of
work, school, or home, individuals collide with other worlds. The context within which
individuals receive, give, and use information receives limited consideration in Chatman's theory
of small worlds. Jaeger and Burnett (2010) assert, "the unique small worlds are vital to
understanding the normative behaviors and choices of individuals" (p. 29), but "small worlds are
52

situated within a larger lifeworld" (p. 29). Lifeworlds is a reference to the work of Jurgen
Habermas, but the "theory of information worlds borrows the most heavily from Chatman's
work" (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010, p. 32.)
2.12.4 Information Worlds
Burnett, Subramaniam & Gibson, (2009) drew upon the theoretical work of Chatman
extending the concept to information worlds proposed by Burnett and Jaeger (2008).
Chatman (2000) drew upon several social theories in constructing the theory of small worlds
(Thompson, 2009). The three theories developed by Chatman related to information poverty,
information behavior, and social populations (Thompson, 2009) drew heavily upon the social
science theories of diffusion (Rogers, 1962), gratification (Chatman, 1991; Dervin and
Greenberg, 1972), alienation (Seeman, 1959), and opinion leadership (Chatman, 1987; Chatman,
1990). These theories proved "useful for an examination of information-seeking" (Chatman,
1991, p. 447) and formed the foundation upon which Chatman constructed her theories as she
"searched for a theory that could explain the information behaviors she [Chatman] observed in
her ethnographic studies" (Thompson, 2009, p. 120). The aspects of behavior not explicated in
these theories gave rise to the construction of the theory of small worlds.
In the context of emerging technologies the small worlds theory can be applied to the
educational innovations and pedagogical reforms of the evolving school library, but the theory
fails to fully encompass the expansiveness of "the social and political context of information
behavior" (G. Burnett, personal communication, March 15, 2011). To examine the complexity of
technology-driven change in schools, an extension of small worlds, information worlds,
"provides a framework by which to examine the social dimensions and uses of information
simultaneously at the immediate and broader social levels" (G. Burnett, personal communication,
53

March 15, 2011). Information worlds theory "explores information behavior in terms of all the
intertwined levels of society - the small worlds of everyday life, the mediating social institutions,
the concerns of an entire society and the political and economic forces that shape society" (G.
Burnett, personal communication, March 15, 2011).
While this model of information worlds was developed to apply to individuals, it is
equally applicable to institutions. School is traditionally both an educational institution and a
social venue. The social, educational, and cultural complexities of social media and technology
in school settings require new applications of traditional theories. Burnett, Jaeger, and Thompson
(2008) delineated information access levels as physical, intellectual, and social; the combination
of these levels constitute true information access. The information seeker must gain access to the
information, understand the content, and utilize the option to communicate or exchange that
content in communal settings (Burnett, et al, 2008). Social groups, society, and institutions
influence and intermingle as the result of interactions. Individual school librarians,
administrators, students and parents are members of a plethora of small worlds and conform to
the established norms of each small world relative to accessing, understanding, and sharing
information. Information traverses the boundaries of numerous small worlds, thereby
constituting "the lifeworld of information" (G. Burnett, personal communication, March 15,
2011). Information worlds theory suggest a new perspective into the altered dynamics of
technology and information. The investigation of the interplay between technology, cultural
aspects of teaching and learning, and the changing roles and responsibilities of school librarians
is an ideal context in which to use the theory of information worlds.
Information worlds is a developing theory differing from more established theories that
focus on the restricted setting of the library only. This theory encompasses groups of people and
54

behaviors (Burnett & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010) which affect the spread of
information across the boundaries of each of these worlds. According to Jaeger & Burnett (2010)
"the theory of information worlds is designed to provide a framework through which the multiple
interactions between information, information behavior, and the many different social contexts
within which it exist" (G. Burnett, personal communication, March 15, 2011). The information
rich world of library professionals interacts with the equally rich worlds of campus leaders and
politically connected worlds of district administrators, as well as the information-impoverished
worlds of students. The social norms of each of these groups are often at odds with each other
and acceptable standards may be in conflict. Information behaviors may also be very different
across the worlds.
The theory of information worlds can be applied to the investigation of information
generation and transfer in the school environment. The school librarian functions within the
information rich world of library professionals. Transferring information to all participants in the
school program is a task of the school librarian. The world of the classroom overlaps and the
school librarian moves between the two worlds on a consistently regular basis. Within the
school, additional worlds exist. The students operate within a world that moves back and forth
between home and school. In addition to the information world of the school and the library,
school members move between worlds as members of professional organizations and student
organizations, all while maintaining contact with out-of-school worlds that may or may not
overlap in any way.
All stakeholders in the world of schools may have differing values that become
boundaries. The boundaries may revolve around learning, the value of an education, the
importance of technology, or the need to change. These revolving worlds are bounded by
55

national, state, and local organizations that impose upon them. Information, expectations, and
innovations from these surrounding worlds have the potential to cause dissonance, as well as to
create harmony. The theory of information worlds attempts to look objectively at the interaction
of all these worlds and offers a means to analyze the interplay between sometimes competing
elements of the larger world of the school. This model applies to individuals and is equally
applicable to groups of students, administrators, and teachers. The assumptions of information
worlds readily intertwine with the specific concerns and technology utilization decisions unique
to educational settings.
2.12.5 Application of Information Worlds to Principal and School Librarian Perceptions
Chatman's theory of small worlds examines the influence on worldview for members of a
specific small world (Chatman, 2000). Worldview as defined by Chatman is the "collective
perceptions members of a social world hold in common regarding those things which are
important" (Chatman, 2000, p. 11). Burnett, Besant, and Chatman, (2001) contended that
worldview is "an implicit set of assumptions about what is or is not important". Jaeger and
Burnett (2010) expanded upon the theory of Chatman's small worlds in the development of
information worlds. Information worlds theory is applicable to varied research contexts (Jaeger
& Burnett, 2010), although it is used extensively in the LIS field.
One key concept of information worlds, among four additional concepts, is that of social
types. According to Jaeger and Burnett, social types are derived from the perceptions of the
context within which roles are assigned to individuals (2010) and "refers to the ways in which
individuals are perceived and labeled within a Small World" (Burnett & Nocasian, 2008, p. 6).
Members within the information worlds interact with one another, although they are
simultaneously connected and separated by existing boundaries (Jaeger & Burnett, 2010).
56

Another concept by Jaeger and Burnett derived from Chatman is that of information behavior.
Jaeger and Burnett, however, extend this concept to include how information is used by the
members of the small world (2010).
As suggested by Chatman, principals and school librarians "share a similar cultural and
intellectual space" (Huotari & Chatman, 2001, p. 352), with each giving priority and importance
to what matters most to them. Within the overlapping small worlds of the overall library
community, there are common interests, but the perceptions held by the members of the small
world, influences behavior. The organizational structure and complex variables of school
libraries are represented by information worlds "in the sense that its day-to-day activities and
interests are structured and defined by a recognizable set of social norms and behaviors" (G.
Burnett, personal communication, March 15, 2011). In the context of this study, the world of the
school librarian is encompassed by the interconnected worlds of the school, which includes
building level professional educators and administrative level personnel. Students and parents
operate within worlds of their own as well as the worlds of teachers and administrators.
Ultimately, local, state, and national groups bound each of these worlds (Burnett & Jaeger,
2008). The school librarian is situated within the information rich world of library professionals
in addition to the overlapping worlds of the educational setting. For purposes of the study,
information worlds was useful as a framework to guide the research. It was also used to explain
the behavior of principals and school librarians in relationship to the enactment of leadership
activities.
2.13 Summary
The gradual growth of American school libraries accelerated with the passage of the
National Defense Act of 1958 and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. Thirty57

six years later another federal legislation, No Child Left Behind, fueled the proliferation of
technology in school and school libraries. In addition to a strong reliance on data driven
accountability measures, educational entities turned to technology to facilitate student learning.
Technological innovations fundamentally restructured classrooms and school libraries. School
libraries evolved from physical repositories to 24/7/365 centers of communal lifelong learning.
School librarians were catapulted into the role of technology leaders to support the
technology needs of students and adults alike. Innovative school librarians embraced the
challenges of moving beyond the routine use of technology to meaningful integration of
technology into the school culture. Simultaneous to the emergence of technological innovation
was the solidification of definitive roles guiding the work of school librarians.
Professional standards clearly established the school librarian's function within the
learning environment. This research seeks to understand the perceptions of school librarians
themselves as technology leaders and the perceptions of the campus positional leader, the
principal. These perceptions have the potential to maximize or hinder the efficacy with which
school librarians engage in leading technology integration in a school.
Chapter 2 examined the ways technology influences the leadership role of the school
librarian and how enacted leadership is defined by principals, teachers, and school librarians.
Chapter 2 also presented school librarian leadership through the lens of time and student
achievement. Finally, chapter 2 explored the unique challenges of urban school districts in
technology advancement and leadership. Urban school districts differ from their suburban and
rural counterparts in terms of size, resources, and population. This research proposes to examine
the perceptions of school principals and the perceptions of school librarians within the Houston
Independent School district.
58

CHAPTER 3
METHOD
Whether a social science researcher studies things or people, this researcher’s objective is
to use "the most effective and most appropriate methods for investigating specific problems"
(Tillman, 2009, p. 458). Because research in the social science area of information studies
mainly focuses on the interactions between people and information, it is not only well suited to
qualitative research methods, but also purely quantitative and mixed research methods can be
employed to provide a range of insights on research questions.
This investigation used both quantitative and qualitative methods in a mixed-method
design that will address research questions that pertain to principals’ and school librarians
perceptions of school librarians’ technology leadership roles. The study employed a mixed
methods sequential explanatory research approach (Creswell, 2008; Creswell & Clark, 2007;
Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2006), using an email survey, followed by school librarian and principal
interviews.
3.1 Research Purpose
The primary purpose of the study was to examine urban school principals' perceptions of
school librarians as technology leaders; the secondary purpose of the study was to explore the
self-perceptions of school librarians as technology leaders. A mixed method design was selected
to ensure that diverse perceptions were gathered and explored.
3.2 Research Questions
As stated in Chapter 1, three research questions guide this research:
RQ1. To what extent do principals perceive school librarians as technology leaders?

59

RQ2. How do principals perceive that they enable school librarians to demonstrate
leadership in technology integration?
RQ3. To what extent do school librarians' self-reports of leadership activities reflect
themselves as entry level, adaptive, or transformative technology leaders?
3.3 Population and Unit of Analysis
The unit of analysis for this study is the school librarian and the principal working in an
urban school environment. The study participants were selected from secondary (grades 6-12)
school principals and school librarians currently employed in the Houston Independent School
District (HISD). As described previously, HISD is the largest public school district in Texas and
the seventh largest district in the United States. The district comprises 301 square miles in the
Houston metroplex and is the largest employer in Houston, employing 29,402 full and part-time
employees. Among this number are 169 administrators assigned to district headquarters. Student
enrollment in the 2015-2016 academic year reached a high of 215,627 students. The district is
86.5% minority (Hispanic and African American) and 76.36 % of students are economically
disadvantaged. Of the 283 schools, 128 are secondary schools, consisting of middle grades 6-8
and high school, grades 9-12. Forty-two campuses are multilevel, either grades K-8 or grades 612. Sixty-seven campuses are magnet schools, offering specialized themed educational choice
programs.
3.4 Study Context
The predominant issue within the district is the lack of fully credentialed library
personnel. Sixty eight percent of district campuses, across all grade levels, have library programs
that are managed by a paraprofessional, a non-school librarian certified teacher, or are vacant.
The HISD staffing percentages are shown in Figure 1.
60

13%

32%

School librarians
Clerks

26%

29%

Teachers - non school
librarian certified
Vacant

Figure 1: HISD 2015-2016 School Library Staffing
As Figure 1 shows school librarian hiring and retention lags behind that of non-school
librarian certified teachers and paraprofessionals. In a district of nearly 215,000 students with
284 schools, only 32% of the possible 221 positions were held by fully credentialed school
librarians. The decision to hire a school librarian is at the discretion of the principal.
As a site-based decision-making district, principals are autonomous in staffing decisions.
Schools have varying staffing patterns that may not include a school librarian, a school nurse, or
a counselor and the district does not provide for a foundational staffing formula that makes
available a mandated baseline of staffing services at all campuses. Rather than a district directive
regarding the allocation of a basic staffing pattern at all schools, staffing patterns vary according
to the discretion of the principal. Principals may choose to assign "library duty" to the reading
interventionist, the magnet coordinator, or an assistant principal.
Within the Houston Independent School District (HISD) city schools provide broadband
access, school computer labs, a minimum of 12 desktops in every school library. New schools
receive the latest in video conferencing equipment and students have access to mobile devices
such as iPads, Kindles, Nooks, and Sony E-readers. The district provides free access to a
collection of e-books through Follett eshelf, MackinVia (a comprehensive collection of ebooks,
61

audio books, databases and video), and a suite of online digital resources, including
encyclopedias, streaming video, health related databases, and archival news stories and video, to
each of the 215,000 students and their families. Within the last two years (2014-16) the district
initiated a 1:1 laptop initiative for all secondary students. Laptops were made available to all
students and teachers in grades 9 through 12.
While the investment in technology in HISD is extensive, the human capital within the
school library required to help students effectively exploit these resources is limited. Frequently,
the library has not received funds for materials for extensive periods of time and the collections
contain discards from the Houston Public library, donated items from families, or items
purchased with "book fair" proceeds (HISD Library Services). Technology access and utilization
is prevalent in campus areas (classrooms, computer labs) outside of the school library. School
librarians are rarely included in the implementation of or the professional development for
district wide literacy initiatives, such as Literacy by 3 and Literacy in the Middle. Literacy by 3
and Literacy in the Middle are a structured approach to ameliorate the literacy crisis in the
Houston community with an emphasis on classroom collections, high frequency words, leveled
readers, and guided reading (http://www.houstonisd.org/literacyby3).
Although the research into the perceptions of certified school librarians and district
principals has not been undertaken, anecdotal evidence suggests that the perceptual attitude
towards the value of a certified school librarian on the majority of HISD campuses is dismal.
3.5 Research Design
Creswell and Plano-Clark (2007; 2011) defined mixed methods as approaches that
connect "both quantitative and qualitative data to provide a unified understanding of a research
problem" (2007, p. 211). Creswell and Plano-Clark (2007; 2011) further clarified the
62

characteristics of mixed methods designs. Johnson and Onwuegbuzie (2004) provided a formal
definition of mixed methods research: "a class of research where the researcher mixes or
combines quantitative and qualitative research techniques, methods, approaches, concepts or
language in a single study" (p. 17).
Mixed methods research, as the name implies, "involves the use of both approaches in
tandem so that the overall strength of a study is greater than either qualitative or quantitative"
(Creswell, 2009, p. 4). Mixed methods research is the combination of quantitative and qualitative
methods in the same study (Dures, et al., 2010). Dures et al. further characterized mixed methods
as aiming "to identify, to look at relationships and to examine links between the phenomena
under investigation" (p. 333). Social researchers, according to Greene (2008), use mixed
methods research in various ways for sense making and to determine important and valuable
points of view.
Mixed methods studies employ three main designs:
1.

Sequential exploratory, in which the findings of the data analysis resulting from the
first method of data collection are further explored through data collection and
analysis performed in a subsequent method;

2.

Sequential explanatory, in which data collection is accomplished in distinct and
separate phases. During the initial phase of research quantitative data precedes the
collection of qualitative data;

3.

Concurrent, in which quantitative and qualitative data are collected in a single phase
of the study. The two forms of data are analyzed comparatively.

The sequential explanatory mixed methods study sought to investigate urban school
librarian and principal perceptions of the school librarian's role in using technology to enhance
63

teaching and learning. This investigation used a survey in the first phase and interviews in the
second phase framed by questions based on the survey results to gain further insight into the
perceptions of the school librarian's engagement in leadership roles. The survey results and
interview transcripts analyses were compared and the data used to draw conclusions. This
sequential explanatory design is well suited for providing a deeper understanding and
clarification of the influences of perception on factors that enable the school librarian's ability to
engage in leadership roles. The qualitative components inform the quantitative aspects of the
study as indicated by Creswell (2009). This type of hybrid design further corroborates the study
results of each component (Keptner, 2011).
3.5.1 Advantages of Mixed Methods
Researchers generally accept the tenet that the grouping of methods results in the
combined strength of each method. Johnson and Onweuebguzie (2004) contended that mixed
methods research is not meant as a replacement for quantitative or qualitative research. Mixed
methods research will enhance "the strengths and minimized the weaknesses of both" (Johnson
& Onwuegbuzie, 2004, p. 15). Quantitative research, according to Creswell (2009), lends itself
to "testing objective theories by examining the relationship among variables" (p. 4) while
qualitative research "is a means for exploring and understanding the meaning individuals or
groups ascribe to a social or human problem" (Creswell, 2009, p. 4). Qualitative research, with
an emphasis on the individual, strives to "explain a phenomenon or relationship" (Sullivan &
Sargent, 2011, p. 449) while quantitative research strives to "describe the relationship between
two or more variables of interest (Gelo, Braakmann, & Benetka, 2008, p. 272).
Combining methods has the potential to uncover solutions that are not possible with
either method alone. Using both quantitative and qualitative strategies is a mixed methods
64

approach that "clearly specifies the sequencing and priority given to the quantitative and
qualitative elements of data collection and analysis" (Dures, Rumsey, Morris, & Gleeson, 2010,
p. 333). Quantitative methods are better suited to evaluative, explanatory, or descriptive
purposes, while qualitative research lends itself to exploratory motives, although researchers may
choose either approach regardless of the research purposes (Creswell, 2008). Using mixed
methods makes possible the utilization of a variety of data collection methods, instruments, and
data analysis procedures (Niglas, 2009). The aim of integrating methods includes establishing the
intersection of the results (convergence), exposing any overlaps in the study phenomenon,
enlightening the second method, expanding the study scope and breadth, and exploring new
ideas. The additional insight gained through convergence and corroboration of multi-method
findings produces stronger research conclusions than possible with solely quantitative or
qualitative methods (Okpala, Hopson, Chapman, & Fort, 2011).
3.5.2 Disadvantages of Mixed Methods
Creswell noted that the suitability of a particular problem for qualitative or quantitative
methods remains "open for debate" (Creswell, 1994, p. 10). Creswell further outlined additional
criteria for research design selection, which includes the topic of concern, researchers'
preferences, and potential audience. Creswell (2009) conceded that mixed methods research
varies in terms of design, techniques, interpretation, epistemology, and nomenclature. Additional
problems that exist with mixed methods research include paradigm mixing, data analysis, and
interpretation of results. The researcher using the mixed methods sequential explanatory design
is forced to decide how or whether to integrate the data and at which point in the process to
connect the quantitative to the qualitative results. Utilizing two phases of a study may add
considerable time to the process. The time required to collect and analyze two types of data can
65

prove intimidating (Ivankova, Creswell, & Stick, 2006). The sequential explanatory design is
well suited for providing a deeper understanding and clarification of the influence of perception
on the school librarian's ability to engage in a technology leadership role.
The research design included interviews and surveys in a mixed methods design, as
depicted in Figure 2

Figure 2. Sequential Explanatory Mixed Methods Design

As Figure 2 shows, secondary principals and school librarians were surveyed in the first phase of
the study. Semi-structured interviews followed in the second phase (qualitative), with data
integration and conclusions drawn at the close of phase 2.
3.6 Data Collection
Two data collection procedures were used in the study. In order to capture the details of
the study and to provide greater insight into the research questions, data collection involved both
qualitative and quantitative methods. Using both methods enhances the strengths of each
(Ivankova, Creswell, & Stick, 2006). The procedures were quantitative in the form of an email
survey, and qualitative in the form of semi-structured interviews. The latter were carried out with
principals and with school librarians (Sargeant, 2012).

66

Data collection and analysis was conducted in discreet stages, making it possible to
integrate the data during interpretation (Creswell, 2008). In designing the study, the researcher
had the option to select a theoretical perspective and confirm the findings from one method to the
other. The qualitative results were useful to explain in more detail the quantitative findings
(Creswell, 2008).
The study consisted of two consecutive phases. The qualitative data collected in the
second phase was used to further refine the quantitative data collected from the survey. The
qualitative data was given priority by focusing the quantitative results through the semistructured interview questions. The reliability and validity of the survey were established using
the instrument in prior studies. The survey had content validity and instrument reliability as a
result of repeated use (Schutt, 2006). Dependability was increased through the use of an
established survey instrument, along with the detailed and transparent description of the research
design, the study implementation, and the details of data gathering, which will enable other
researchers to repeat the study. Standardized interview questions and triangulated data collection
were used to mitigate validity threats and increase the credibility and trustworthiness of the
study's conclusions. The audio recording of the interviews enabled repeated listening and
verbatim transcription allowed for multiple readings of the interview data to reveal atypical data
and identify similar patterns, thereby reducing the risk of bias and chance associations, while
promoting the confirmability of the study. Credibility was enhanced through triangulated
collection and analysis, in addition to the depth of the coding analysis.
The survey was distributed via email to 104 secondary principals, including 6-8 middle
grades and 9-12 high school levels, resulting in 14 respondents and seven principals completing
the survey in full. Subsequently, 91 non-respondents were again invited to participate in the
67

survey, which yielded five respondents and two completers. The survey invitees were expanded
to include 45 elementary school principals. Of the 45 elementary principals, four responded and
three completed the survey in full. This represents a 22% response rate and a 15% completion
rate.
The number of principals reported by Qualtrics as completing the survey totaled 13 (N =
13); one principal completed Parts I and II of the survey, navigated completely through Part III
of the survey, but did not answer any questions in Part III. Although Part III was not completed
by this principal, Qualtrics recorded the individual’s survey as completed in full; therefore this
principal was not removed from the analysis. This one person represented 7.7% of the principals
included in the survey. After the administration of the email survey to principals and school
librarians, semi-structured one-on-one interviews were conducted.
3.6.1 Survey
As noted, the purpose of the study was to identify and clarify the factors that affect
school librarians' engagement in leadership activities. Traditional procedures for developing
themes and coding from the email survey were used (Creswell & Plano-Clark, 2007).
Participants' responses to the survey questions were analyzed to discover the emerging categories
of levels of school librarian leadership, entry, adaptive, or transformative, utilizing descriptive
statistics.
Survey research is particularly appropriate to explanatory purposes and for research in
which the unit of analysis is individuals (Babbie, 2010). Babbie further explains that survey
research is well suited to original descriptive data. Distributing the survey as an email survey is
this researcher's preferred method for data collection. Principals and school librarians have daily

68

access to computers and/or mobile devices. Assigned email addresses were readily available via
the district's global address book and participants were blind copied to maintain anonymity.
The email survey enabled the researcher to query respondents with the same questions in
the same way. The versatility of computer-based surveys resulted in quick, low cost, and
efficient research (Schutt, 2009). The strength of surveys was the ease of administration,
especially to large sample populations, and required a minimal amount of time for completion
(Schutt, 2009). Researchers utilizing survey research must be mindful of measurement and
sampling errors, non-response rates, and inadequate population coverage (Schutt, 2009).
Surveys permit the statistical analysis of quantitative data to test research questions, but
in the assessment of Babbie (2010), validity in survey research is low, while reliability is strong.
Reliability is increased by the standardization of the survey questions (Babbie, 2010). Surveys do
not involve variables or treatment and cannot explain causal effects (Connaway & Powell, 2010).
Respondents may only report what they believe to be acceptable answers. The reliance
upon self-reported surveys is a weakness of survey research strategies (Babbie, 2010). Survey
participants must interpret question meaning without the benefit of the researcher present to fully
explain or clarify the intent of the questions. Another concern with surveys was the response
rate. Researchers experienced difficulty in obtaining a high response rate. A high response rate
reduces the possibility of non-response bias (Babbie, 2010).
3.6.1.1 School librarian surveys
This investigation used the Partnerships Advancing Library Media (PALM) survey, The
School Library Media Specialist and Technology Integration Survey (Appendix K). The PALM
survey instrument was created to examine school librarians' technology integration leadership
and identified three levels of leadership; entry, adaptive, and transformative. This original
69

research survey was developed by principal investigators Nancy Everhart, Ph.D. and Marcia
Mardis, Ed.D as part of an Institute for Museum and Library Services grant awarded to Florida
State University (PALM, 2009) in order to determine the technology integration leadership
practices of school librarians. School librarians seeking NBPTS certification do so on a voluntary
basis, submitting to a peer-reviewed, performance assessment of their teaching expertise
(NBPTS, 2011). These standards identify the skills and dispositions an accomplished school
librarian should demonstrate. This study utilized the NBPTS standards that were operational
between 2000 and 2011.
Using the NBPTS category scores, the technology leadership levels were weighted and a
leadership score was assigned to each question (1 entry; 2 adaptive; and 3 transformative). The
weight of the each of the survey question responses was multiplied by the level of the response
given by principals and school librarians to calculate the participants’ total technology leadership
score. Each category produced an overall technology leadership level score. The total minimum
technology leadership score was 156 and the total maximum technology leadership score was
780. School librarians were asked to respond to the questions to the extent or degree in which
each activity applied to their practice as a school librarian.
3.6.1.2 School librarian survey instrument
The School Library Media Specialist and Technology Integration Survey is divided into
three sections: demographic information, Internet access, and technology leadership activities.
The survey was field-tested and had been used in two prior studies, one of National Board
Certified K-12 school librarians and one of school librarians nationally. The construct reliability
of the study was achieved by collecting quantitative (survey) and qualitative (interview) data.
Both survey and interview data were kept in the original format until analyzed and transcribed.
70

Survey data were kept in the Qualtrics survey software, on a password protected computer, until
exported into the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) for analysis.
3.7 School Librarian Survey Data Analysis
In the study, qualitative semi-structured interviews augmented a quantitative survey. The
data were collected in separate phases and priority was given to either or both data collection and
analysis approaches (Ivankova, et al, 2006). The qualitative data were used to "help explain or
elaborate on the quantitative results" (Creswell, 2008, p. 560). The sequential explanatory mixed
methods design "captures the best of both quantitative and qualitative data" (Creswell, 2008, p.
560), but integration or convergence is not necessary (Creswell, 2008). The advantage of this
method is that the use of the qualitative data to refine the quantitative results will "capture the
trends and details of a situation" (Ivankova, et al, p. 3). The study gave priority to the qualitative
data collection and analysis because the purpose of the study was to identify and explain the
factors of perception that affected school librarian's engagement in technology leadership.
3.7.1 School Librarian Survey Frequencies
Respondents to the survey denoted agreement with each survey statement, using a Likerttype scale ranging from one (never involved) to five (fully involved), indicating the extent to
which each leadership activity applies to their current job situation. The frequency of each
response was calculated.
3.7.2 School Librarian Sample
There are currently 222 staffed campus libraries, 89 of which were staffed by fully
credentialed school librarians serving grades PK-12. Of the 128 HISD secondary schools, the
pool is limited to secondary campuses presently employing certified school librarians. Study

71

participation will be solicited from individuals currently serving in the position of school
librarian in secondary schools (grades 6-12).
Initially, 30 secondary (grades 6-8 and 9-12) school librarians were invited to participate
in the study. Of this number 15 responded and 12 completed the survey in full. A second
invitation was sent via email to 42 elementary school librarians (grades PreK - 5), which yielded
nine respondents with seven completing the survey in full. The two groups of invited participants
totaled 72 school librarians from grades PreK to 12. A third and final reminder email was sent to
the non-responders. Eight study participants responded with six completing the survey in full.
The number of school librarians completing the survey in full was 25, a 44% response rate and a
35% completion rate.
3.7.3 School Librarian Demographics
There were 25 or 66% of the total survey participants who expressed their position as
school librarian in response to survey (Appendix K) statement six. Seventy-two school librarians
accessed the survey. The total number of school librarians completing the survey in full was 25,
a 44% response rate and a 35% completion rate. The 25 (N = 25) school librarians completing
the survey in full included 22 females (88%) and three males (12%). Survey statement three
(Appendix K) asked about the survey participants’ gender. Twenty four (n = 24) of the school
librarians responded to the question of age in response to question five (Appendix K). One
school librarian or 4% failed to respond to the question of age. The youngest school librarian was
35 and the oldest school librarian was 73, with a median age of 55 (n = 24). The reported
ethnicities, in response to survey statement four (Appendix K), included 13 white (52%), nine
African American (36%), one Hispanic/Latino (4%), 1 Asian (4%), and 1 identified as “other”
(4%), as is shown in Table 2.
72

Table 2.
Frequency Distribution of School Librarians’ Demographics (N=25)
Variables
Male
Female
Hispanic/Latino
White
African American
Asian
Other

Frequency (%)
3 (12)
22 (88)
1 (4)
13 (52)
9 (36)
1 (4)
1 (4)

3.7.4 School Librarians’ Experience and Certification
School librarians were asked about their classroom experience in survey (Appendix K)
statement 11. Twenty four (96%) of the surveyed school librarians (N = 25) met all of the state
requirements for school librarian certification, except for the one (4%) school librarian who did
not meet the mandatory classroom experience requirement. This school librarian indicated no
classroom experience.
Included in the demographics section of the survey (Appendix K) were questions about
certification (survey statement six), grade level taught (survey statement 13), subject area taught
(survey statement 14), and the level at which the school librarian taught the longest (survey
statement 12). Survey (Appendix K) respondents were asked to indicate the state (survey
statement seven) where they received school librarian certification. Twenty three (92%) of the
school librarian (N=25) respondents were certified in the state of Texas. One school librarian
(4%) respondent was certified in New York and one school librarian respondent (4%) was
certified in Illinois.

73

School librarians (n=9) indicated they taught English/Language arts (16%), science (4%),
and reading (4%). Other subjects taught by the school librarians (n=3) included business
education (4%), library science (4%), and special education (4%).
Fifteen (60%) of the school librarians (N = 25) taught the longest at the elementary level,
6 (24%) taught the longest at the middle/junior high level, and four (16%) taught the longest at
the high school level. The frequency distributions for school librarians by grade levels (survey
statement 13) taught are shown in Table 3
Table 3.
Frequency Distribution of School Librarians’ by Grade Levels Taught (N=25)
Grade Level
K
1
2
3
4
5
Special Education
MS
HS

Frequency (%)
2 (8)
1 (4)
5 (20)
1 (4)
4 (16)
2 (8)
3 (8)
6 (24)
4 (16)

The school librarian survey (Appendix K) respondents were typically female, white, over
age 50, with teaching experience across all levels (elementary, middle/junior high, and high
school). All (N = 25) school librarians indicated they worked in only one school.
In response to survey statement 17, 25 school librarians (N=25) indicated they are the
lone full-time school library media specialists for their campus, although 1 principal (N=13)
reported employing 2 full-time fully credentialed school librarians.

74

On the question of the number of certified part-time school library media specialist work
in the school, two school librarians (n=22) reported working .5 FTE, which means they worked
19.5 hours per week.
Survey statement #18 asked if there are other paid non-certified school library staff
working at the campus. No school librarians (N=25) reported having paraprofessional staff or
clerical assistance in the school library.
Six school librarians (N=25) responded positively to the survey (Appendix K) question
about volunteer help in the library, with volunteer hours ranging from one to 15 hours per week.
3.8 Survey Part II – Technology Availability
Part II of the survey focused on technology availability. There were seven questions
related to the number of desktop computers, laptops, and tablets or mobile devices available and
either under the supervision of the school librarian or connected to the library as a resource. The
number of desktops reported by the school librarians (N=25) to be in the school library under the
supervision of the school librarian (N=25) ranged from zero to 200.
The number of computers in other areas of the school, not under the supervision of the
school ranged from zero to 250 as reported by the school librarians (n= 21). The number of
laptops under the supervision of the school librarians (N = 25) ranged from zero to 999. The
number of laptops, as reported by the school librarians (n = 22), in areas outside of the school
librarians’ supervision ranged from zero to 999. School librarians (n = 24) reported having
supervision of zero to 90 tablets and other mobile devices. The number of tablets and other
mobile devices not under the supervision of the school librarian ranged from zero to 180 as
reported by the school librarians (n = 20). According to the school librarians (N = 25), 12
campuses (48%) allowed BYOD, while 13 campuses (52%) did not.
75

3.8.1 Instructional Technology Personnel
Sixteen (64%) of school librarians (N=25) indicated that full time instructional
technology personnel are employed at their campuses. Three (12%) school librarians (n=21)
reported that part-time instructional technology personnel are employed at their campuses and
two (8%) of school librarians (n=21) indicated that both part-time and full-time instructional
technology personnel are employed at the campus. Twelve school librarians responded that there
are zero part-time instructional technology staff work at the campus. Four (16%) of school
librarian survey respondents did not answer this question. School library scheduling was also
addressed in Part II of the survey. Among school librarians (N=25) 24% were on a fixed
schedule, 52% were on a flexible schedule, and 24% were on a combination fixed/flexible
schedule.
3.8.2 Internet Type, Availability and Reliability
In response to the type of internet access available in the library, the majority (n = 21) of
school librarians reported having broadband (high speed) internet, 84%. Four school librarians
(16%) did not know the type of internet available in the school library. The subsequent question
about the speed and reliable access to the internet indicated that 80% of school librarians (n=20)
felt that the speed and reliability of the internet was adequate for instructional purposes.
The survey questioned school librarians about filtered and unfiltered internet access in the
school library for both students and professional staff. Results showed that 84% (n=21) of school
librarians reported having filtered only internet access for students. The remaining 16% (n=4) of
school librarians reported having both filtered and unfiltered internet access for students.
In response to the survey statement about filtered or unfiltered internet access for
professional staff, school librarians’ indicated that 44% (n=11) have filtered only access, 4%
76

(n=1) have unfiltered access, 48% (n=12) have both filtered and unfiltered access for
professional staff, and 4% (n=1) did not know whether the internet was filtered or not.
3.9 School Librarian Survey Technology Leadership Scores
Each of the survey questions were assigned to one of these categories: entry, adaptive, or
transformative. These categories were not visible to the survey respondent, but were used to
determine the level of leadership required to undertake the task described in the question.
The levels were defined as one of the following:
x

Entry (Level 1): An entry level technology experience is defined as one where
“the teacher begins to use technology tools to deliver curriculum content to
students” (Florida Center for Instructional Technology, 2015).

x

Adaptive (Level 2): An adaptive level technology experience is defined as one
where “the teacher facilitates students in exploring and independently using
technology tools” (Florida Center for Instructional Technology, 2015).

x

Transformational (Level 3): A transformation level technology experience is
defined as one where “the teacher encourages the innovative use of technology
tools” and where those tools “are used to facilitate higher order learning activities
that may not have been possible without the use of technology” (Florida Center
for Instructional Technology, 2015).

These categories are based on the Technology Integration Matrix created by researchers
at the University of South Florida (http://fcit.usf.edu/matrix/matrix.php) to describe teachers’
experiences with technology in Florida schools as a result of Florida K-12 technology initiatives.
The matrix was designed to facilitate professional development for technology integration in
77

education and to provide a common vocabulary for its discussion (Kemker, Welsh & Papke,
2011). Each respondent’s technology score was calculated by multiplying the question level (1,
2, or 3) by the ranked response (1-5 Likert) for each and adding them together for an overall
technology leadership score (Mardis, personal communication, 2016). The scores will indicate
the school librarian's perceived level of engagement in technology integration leadership.
There are “Five Core Propositions” (Garry, 2010, p. 9) upon which the NBPTS standards
are based. These core propositions include teacher commitment to students, knowledge of the
subjects taught, accountability in student learning management, reflective practice, and
continuous professional development (Garry, 2010). National Board Certification is a voluntary
certification beyond state licensure. National Board certified individuals are considered to be
“accomplished teachers” (NBPTS, 2012), having successfully met a set of rigorous performance
assessments. The standards are the framework for the assessment of the accomplished practices
of school librarians and teachers. The NBPTS standards use the term "accomplished" to indicate
a high level of quality (NBPTS, 2012).
The NBPTS standards were organized into the following sections: Knowledge of
Learners; Knowledge of Teaching and Learning; Integrating Instruction; Knowledge of Library
and Information Studies (Resource Focus); Leading Innovation Through Library Media
Program; Administering the Library Media Program; Reflective Practice; Professional Growth;
Ethics, Equity, and Diversity; and Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships. Within
the 10 categories of the survey, the respondents were asked to respond to the statement choices
relative to the degree with which they (the respondents) engaged in or perceived the school
librarian to be engaged in the technology integration activity: 1 = not involved (never involved);
2 = Rarely involved (infrequently, hardly ever, not often, seldom); 3 = partially involved
78

(somewhat, moderately, sometimes); 4 = substantially involved (frequently, often, most of the
time, significantly); 5 = fully involved (completely, entirely).
3.10 Principal Surveys
The modified version of the survey used with principals is included in Appendix L. In
each part of the survey, principals and school librarians were asked the same questions and
scored on the same Likert Scale (1-5). Principals will be asked to respond to the survey from the
perspective of their assessment of the school librarians' use and involvement with technology.
Principals' responses were ranked on the leadership engagement as entry, adaptive, or
transformative.
3.10.1 Principal Sample
The participants for each procedure were campus principals and state certified school
librarians currently working in HISD at middle and high school levels (grades 6-12). It was
anticipated that 20 school librarians and their corresponding principals would be paired based
upon their respective technology leadership scores.
3.10.2 Principal Survey Data Analysis.
As proposed in section 3.6.1.1.3, School Librarian Survey Data Analysis, both survey and
interview data were collected. The principal survey data analysis occurred in the first phase and
was followed by interviews. As with the school librarians, the data were collected in separate
phases and was used in interpreting the quantitative data (Creswell, 2008). Interviews following
the completion of email surveys were intended to describe the phenomenon of school librarian
and principal perception of school librarian technology leadership enactment in an urban setting.

79

3.10.3 Principal Survey Frequencies.
Principal responses to the survey indicated agreement with each survey statement as
reflective of his/her perception of the school librarians' involvement with the indicated leadership
activities. The same Likert-type scale ranging from one (never involved) to five (fully involved),
indicating the extent to which each leadership activity applied to the school librarian were used
and the frequency of each principal's response was calculated.
3.11 Survey Parts I and II
3.11.1 Quantitative Results – Survey Categories Survey Part I - Demographics
Information in Part 1 of the survey consisted of demographic questions which defined the
survey participants descriptively by their ethnicity, gender, and age. The variable, position, was
measured in two categories – school principal and school librarian.
3.11.2 School Principal Demographics
Twenty principals responded to the survey with 13 (n = 13) completing this portion; five
females (38.5%) and eight (61.5%) males. There were 13 or 34% of the participants who
reported their position as school principal.
3.11.3 School Principals Experience and Certification
Following the demographic information in Part I of the survey, this section included
question six which asked principals to indicate their certification and experience. Eleven (84.6%)
of the principals (N=13) have master’s degrees and held both teacher and principal/administrator
certification. Two principals (15.4%) had doctorates and were certified as both a teacher and
principal/administrator. Question seven asked principal participants in which state they were
certified. All (N = 13) of the principal respondents received principal/administrator certification
in the state of Texas. The next question was “do you have experience as a classroom teacher?”
80

All (N = 13) of the principals had classroom teaching experience. For principals who responded
“yes” to the classroom teaching experience, question 13 asked ‘at what grade level did you
teach?” The responses are shown on Table 4. The distribution of principal experience was
relatively evenly spread across the grade levels; no principal indicated teaching experience at
first grade.
Table 4.
Frequency Distribution of School Principals’ by Grade Levels Taught (N=12)
Grade Level
K
2
3
4
5
MS
HS

Frequency (%)
1 (7.7)
1 (7.7)
2 (15.4)
1 (7.7)
2 (15.4)
3 (24)
2 (15.4)

Principal (N=13) respondents were then asked “at what level did you teach the longest
period?” Six (46.2%) taught the longest at the elementary level; three (23.1%) taught the longest
at the middle/junior high level, and four (30.8%) taught the longest at high school level. The next
question asked “what subject did you teach?” Principals (N=13) reported subject content areas
taught which included mathematics (15.4%), science (7.7%), English Language Arts (7.7%),
reading (7.7%), and history (7.7%). One principal taught law (7.7%). Following the subjects
taught the next survey question inquired about the number of schools served. Two principals
(N=13) reported serving more than one school. One school is a magnet school with gifted and
talented students (grades K - 8), deaf and hearing impaired students (K - 8), and multiple
impairment students (special education). The multiple impairment students range in age from 3
81

years to 22 years. All students are housed at this single location and all students interact with
each other to the extent possible in areas such as lunch, recess, extracurricular activities, and
specialty classes, such as sign language for hearing students. This particular campus has two
libraries, one for the elementary students and one for secondary students. The second school is a
single gender, college preparatory science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
and leadership focused magnet school serving male students in grades 6 through 8 and grades 9
through 12. In response to the survey question “do you serve as an executive principal?” all 13
principals responded “no.”
Survey questions 17 and 18 were “how many certified full-time school library media
specialists work in your school?” and “how many part-time school library media specialists work
in your school?” Six (46%) principals reported having one full time, fully credentialed school
librarian; one (8%) principal reported 2 full time, fully credentialed school librarians; six (46%)
principals indicated they have no fully credential school librarians employed at their schools.
In summary, the school principals were predominately Hispanic/Latino, slightly over age
40, with advanced degrees (masters and doctorates), and primarily experienced as elementary
educators.
3.11.4 Principals’ Library Staffing
In response to the survey question “are there other paid staffs working in your library
who are not a certified school library media specialist (e.g. clerk, aide, paraprofessional)?” three
principals (N=13) indicated there are full time paraprofessionals in the library. The final survey
question in Part I asked “how many hours a week do you have library volunteer help? Five
(38%) principals (N=13) indicated that there is volunteer help in the campus library with the
number of volunteer hours ranging from 10 to 45 hours per week.
82

3.12 Survey Part II – Technology Availability - Principals
The next two questions in the second section of the survey asked “do you have any fulltime instructional technology staff in your school?” and “do you have any part-time instructional
technology staff in your school?” Ten (77%) of the 13 principals indicated there was full-time
instructional technology personnel at their campus. One principal indicated that both full and
part- time instructional technology personnel were employed at the campus and one principal
reported only part-time instruction technology personnel.
Twelve principal (n=12) survey respondents answered the question “on what type of
schedule does your school library (media center) operate?” Seven (53.8%) principals (N=13)
reported their school library operates on a flexible schedule and five (38.5%) reported their
school library operates on a combination fixed/flexible schedule.
The next set of survey questions related to the internet type, internet adequacy, and
internet reliability. In response to the survey question, “what type of internet access exists in
your library”, the majority of principals (N=13) reported having broadband (high speed) internet,
84.6%. Among the 13 principals, 15.4% did not know the type of internet available in their
school. In response to the question about the adequate speed and reliable access to the internet
for instructional purposes, 84.6% of principals (N=13) felt that the internet was adequate and
reliable.
Included in this section were two questions about internet filtering for students and for
professional staff. Survey results disclosed 69.2% of principals (N = 13) reported filtered only
internet access for students. Three (21.3%) of the principals (N=13) did not know whether the
student internet access was filtered or unfiltered. The responses to the question of filtered or
unfiltered access for professional staff revealed that 53.8% of principals (N=13) reported filtered
83

only access, 23.1% filtered and unfiltered access, and 23.1% did not know whether professional
staff had filtered or unfiltered internet access.
The next seven questions asked the survey respondents about the number of computers in
the library media center: “desktops located in or under the supervision of the school library
media center; desktops located elsewhere in the school, not under the library media center
(LMC) control, but connected to LMC resources; laptops located in or under the supervision of
the school library media center; laptops located elsewhere in the school, not under the library
media center (LMC) control, but connected to LMC resources; tablets located in or under the
supervision of the school library media center; tablets located elsewhere in the school, not under
the library media center (LMC) control, but connected to LMC resources. The number of
desktops reported to be in the school library under the supervision of the school librarian was
reported by principals (N=13) to range from zero to 20 desktops. The number of desktop
computers in other areas of the school ranged from zero to 850 as reported by principals (N =
13). Principals (N=13) reported that zero to 10 laptops were under the supervision of the school
librarians. Laptops in other areas of the school ranged from zero to 999 as indicated by the
principals (N=13). Principals (N=13) indicted that the school librarians (N=25) had supervision
of zero to 50 tablets and other mobile devices. The number of tablets and other mobile devices
not under the supervision of the school librarian (N=25) ranged from zero to 270 as reported by
principals (N=13). See Appendix M for the frequency distribution of the results of the principals’
(N=13) responses to the school librarians’ supervision of computers, laptops, and mobile
devices.

84

The final question in Part II of the survey was whether “bring your own device (BYOD)
is permitted school wide.” BYOD was permitted in seven (53.8%) of the principal (N=13)
respondents’ schools, while six (46.2%) did not permit BYOD.
3.13 Technology Leadership Scores - Principals
I also calculated a technology leadership score from each principal survey participant for
the school librarians. As described in section 3.9, the technology leadership score represented the
principals’ perceived level of the school librarians' involvement in technology leadership. The
use of frequency distribution determined the categories of entry (low), adaptive (medium), or
transformative (high) technology involvement. Each question was assigned a technology
leadership category of entry, adaptive, and transformative. The category scores were likewise
divided into the three levels, with the minimum (156) and the maximum (780) scores in the 10
categories. The technology leadership score ranges were 156-364, entry (low); 365-572, adaptive
(medium), and 573-780, transformative, (high).
3.14 Interviews
Quantitative and qualitative research utilizes interviews (Kumar, 2011). Person-to-person
interactions "between two or more individuals with a specific purpose in mind" (Kumar, 2011, p.
9) is the definition offered for an interview. Interviews used in the same study can augment the
survey results (Schutt, 2009). Semi-structured interviews using questions framed from the survey
responses were conducted face-to-face, online, or by telephone at the participants' convenience in
order to increase participation rates. Emails were sent to the survey completers offering to meet
at their convenience and options to meet virtually, face to face, or by telephone were offered.
Thirteen of the 25 school librarian completers agreed to participate in the one-on-one interviews.
Two of the 13 principal completers agreed to participate. Follow up phone calls to the remaining
85

11 principals netted another two participants, for a total of 17 principals and school librarian
interview participants.
3.14.1 Principal Interview Participants' Demographics
Among principal interview participants, three were males and one female; two identified
as African American, one identified as Hispanic, and one identified as White.
3.15 School Librarian Interview Participants' Demographics
Seven (54%) of the school librarian interview participants identified as White and six
(46%) identified as African American. Two (15%) of the 13 school librarian interview
participants were male.
3.16 Strengths and Weaknesses of Interviews
The strength of semi-structured interviews lies in the researcher's ability to develop
questions in the context of the participants' responses. The researcher decides the wording,
question formulation, content, and order of the questions. Creswell (2008) posits that open-ended
questioning in interviews allow responses from participants that are "unconstrained by any
perspectives of the researcher or past research findings" (p. 225). One-on-one interviews are time
consuming, but the researcher can query the participants for clarification and amplification.
Face-to-face interviews permit the researcher to observe study participants "general
reactions to the study" (Babbie, 2010, p. 275). For purposes of this study, participant responses
were audio-recorded and notes were taken to supplement the recorded responses. Written notes
were used to record dates, times, locations, and brief notations of any unusual occurrences,
feelings, and impressions of the interview participants or the interview process. Note taking
minimized inconsistent data collection, lack of recall of events, and provided documentation for

86

later data analysis. Note taking was brief and minimal so as not to become a distraction
(Creswell, 2009; Schutt, 2009).
Unrestraint, choice, and openness typify semi-structured interviews, but researcher bias
is heightened and the interviewer's presence may alter participant responses (Creswell, 2008).
The role of the interviewer is to be the "neutral medium through which questions and answers
are transmitted" (Babbie, 2010, p. 275). Participant responses may be distorted by the
participants' tendency to respond with answers they perceive to be expected by the researcher or
to seek general agreement with the interviewer. The interviewer assumes that the participants are
truthful in their responses (Kumar, 2011).
The lapse of time between behavior and the interview may cause the participants to have
limited recall of the survey responses. The length of the semi-structured interviews and the
difficulty of one-to-one interaction may contribute to researcher and participant fatigue. Limiting
the number of interviews conducted on any given day may alleviate this problem. Another way
to diminish the effects of researcher fatigue is to take a break if either researcher or participant
exhibits signs of fatigue. Despite these weaknesses, the researcher can elicit detailed information
and maintain "control over the types of information received" (Creswell, 2008, p. 226).
3.16.1 Interview Sample
After the conclusion of the survey phase, I interviewed principals and school librarians
currently employed in HISD at the secondary level, grades 6 - 12. The number of principals and
school librarians presently stands at 24 pairs (48 persons). Because the goal of the study was to
examine aspects of an occurring phenomenon rather than generalize to a population, purposive
sampling was used to select participants "best positioned to provide you the needed information
for [the] study" (Kumar, 2011, p. 207). However, it should be noted that purposive sampling
87

restricts the generalization of results (Babbie, 2010; Connaway & Powell, 2010; Kumar, 2011;
Schutt, 2009).
3.16.2 Interview Questions
Once the results of the survey data analysis were examined, an interview guide was
developed to ensure the collection of "similar data from all participants" (Doody & Noonan,
2013, p. 30). Open-ended questions may be asked in any order and additional questions may
further probe for clarification (Doody & Noonan). Interview questions for school librarian and
principal participants are in Appendices F and G.
In order to establish rapport with the study participants and create a friendly, nonthreatening environment, the interviewer began with general information about the study
purpose, the researcher, consent and confidentiality, and participant rights (Schutt, 2009). The
purpose and relevance of the study was clearly explained to the study participants. The
interviewer asked subsequent questions with additional questions based on participants' replies.
Participants were asked to describe in their own words how and why they perceive technology
leadership roles in the urban school setting and the ways in which technology leadership is
enacted.
As the data collection progressed, more specific questions were asked, questions were
reworded, and additional questions were added (Kumar, 2011). The researcher solicited
additional information with prompts such as “tell me more” or “explain in more detail." The
researcher probed additional ideas of personal leadership activities, but was cautious about
revealing personal biases or perceptions or leading the participants into general agreement with
the interviewer. In order to minimize bias, the researcher refrained from revealing personal
opinions of technology leadership and was careful not to allow personal feelings or bias to
88

become known to the participants. The interviews continued to the point of saturation where new
information was unlikely to be obtained or no additional information leading to other patterns or
themes was likely.
Interviews were conducted in settings most comfortable for the participants and/or in a
location of the interview participants’ choice. Study participants were asked to commit to a
minimum of a one-hour interview. The actual length of some of the interviews were less than an
hour dependent upon the interview participants’ responses to the interview questions. The
researcher made every effort to honor the requested time, but was receptive to those participants
who volunteered to continue beyond an hour.
3.16.3 Interview Data Analysis
Qualitative interview data were collected using a digital audio recorder. Audio recordings
were reviewed repeatedly and remained available after the conclusion of the interviews. The
researcher transcribed the recordings within a 24-hour period. Audio recording ensured that
collected data from each individual was accurately transcribed.
The researcher transcribed audio recordings and notes in order to discover the themes or
categories revealed in the text. Coding was used to interpret the text data obtained from the notes
and audio transcriptions. The researcher actively searched the data to identify coding themes
related to the entry, adaptive, and transformational levels of leadership activity as defined in
section 3.9, School Librarian Survey Technology Leadership Scores.
Interview responses were first coded for technology leadership codes in accordance with
the NBPTS Library Media Standards (Appendix O). The interview responses were also coded for
Information Worlds (IW) concepts. The IW codebook in this research (Appendix O) was derived
from an established IW codebook developed by Burnett, Hollister, Lee, and Skinner (Burnett,
89

personal communication, 2014). The IW codebook was further modified from the IW codebook
of Luetkemeyer (2016). The IW codebook consisted of 27 codes under the five IW concepts:
social norms, social types, information behavior, information value, and boundaries.
A qualitative, descriptive approach was used to analyze the interview responses. In order
to discover similarities and differences, thematic analysis was done. Widely used in psychology
as an analytic method (Braun & Clarke, 2006), thematic analysis has applications beyond mental
health care (Vaismoradi, 2013). One goal of this approach is to "seek to arrive at an
understanding of a particular phenomenon from the perspective of those experiencing it"
(Vaismoradi, 2013, p. 398). Braun & Clarke (2006) described thematic analysis as "a method for
identifying, analysing [sic], and reporting patterns (themes) within data" (Braun & Clarke, 2006,
p. 79). Accordingly, thematic analysis is the identification of the "common threads that extend
across an entire interview or set of interviews" (Vaismoradi, 2013, p. 400). Thematic analysis
looks at the qualitative data and attempts to identify patterns and understand what the data
indicates. A research of the relevant qualitative analysis methods revealed that in the absence of
“quantifiable measures” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 82), the use of themes could “capture
something important in relation to the overall research question” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 82).
Thematic analysis could “offer a more accessible form of analysis, particularly for those early in
a qualitative research career” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 82).
3.16.4 Data Integration
The accuracy of a research study was enhanced by the triangulation of different data
sources (Creswell, 2008). Data sources included, but were not limited to types of data, data
collection methods, or "corroborating evidence from different individuals" (Creswell, 2008, p.
266). Triangulation, originally a military term, is the integration of "different kinds of data
90

bearing on the same phenomenon" (Creswell, 2008, p. 553). Schutt (2009) indicated that using
two or more measures for the same variable produces more confidence "in the validity of each
measure" (p. 122).
Data analysis becomes the critical decision as the next step in the process after the
selection of the research approach (mixed methods sequential explanatory) and the determination
of the data collection methods (survey, semi-structured interviews) (Creswell, 2008). By
definition of sequential, the phase of data collection followed one after the other. The
quantitative results were explained in greater depth with the qualitative data. At this juncture the
"inferences drawn from the quantitative and the qualitative phases" (Collins & O'Cathain, 2009,
p. 6) ensured the "interpretive rigor of the study's outcomes" (p. 6). Drawing the "appropriate
inferences and generalizations" (Collins & O'Cathain, 2009, p. 6) facilitated inference
transferability (Onwuegbuzie & Johnson, 2006).
Mixing or connecting the quantitative and qualitative data refers to the integration phase
of the research. The analysis of the qualitative data was used to explain the survey (quantitative)
results through the in depth exploration of the participants' views. The development of the
interview questions was based on the survey responses and was integrated during the outcomes
discussion. Further data analysis was based on the comparative analysis of the frequencies and
technology leadership scores to the themes emerging from the interview responses.
3.17 Ethical Considerations
There are always concerns when working with human subjects (Schutt, 2009; Sullivan &
Sargeant, 2011). The research was conducted with full compliance of the federal guidelines for
the protection of human subjects. IRB permission forms were filed with Florida State University
and the HISD Research Committee. Permission was obtained from the Florida State University
91

Institutional Review Board (IRB) as well as from the Houston Independent School District
(HISD). Initial HISD approval was granted through the Department of Research and
Accountability in accordance with district Regulation DME2. The study began after the
application process for both agencies was completed and approved.
3.18 Participant Recruitment
The study was subject to Institutional Review Board (IRB) by the Florida State
University (FSU) Human Subjects Committee and the HISD Research and Accountability
Department. Once each institution approved the study and the researcher had received the
official letters of permission to conduct research from FSU and HISD, the researcher gained
entry into the school by contacting the school principal. Subsequent to university and district
IRB approval, invitation letters (Appendices A, B) soliciting participation, describing the project,
explaining the purpose and methodology of the study, and contact information for the researcher
were sent to the school librarians and principals via the inter-office mail.
The survey participants were employed in the Houston Independent School District
(HISD), the largest urban school district in Texas and the seventh largest school district in the
United States, with a student enrollment of 214,175. The research utilized a purposive sample of
school librarians and principals working at elementary and secondary levels in HISD. The
population (N = 38) for this study consisted of 13 school principals and 25 school librarians.
Elementary (K - 5) and secondary school principals (grades 6 - 12) and school librarians (grades
K - 12) in HISD participated in the study.
According to the HISD 2017-2018 Facts and Figures, within HISD there are 283 schools,
117 are secondary schools (middle grades 6 - 8 and high school, grades 9 - 12). Forty-two
campuses are multilevel, either grades Pre-K - 8 or grades 6 - 12. The student population in
92

HISD is overwhelmingly minority with 85.9% minority students (Hispanic and African
American) and 74.9% economically disadvantaged students. Economically disadvantaged was
specified by the number of students eligible for free and reduced lunch (US Department of
Education, 2012).
For non-responders to the letter, the principals of each of the selected campuses were
contacted via email soliciting participation in the study. This email explained the purpose and
methodology of the study to garner cooperation for their personal participation. The participation
of the campus school librarian was requested in both the letter and the follow up email.
Participation was solicited a minimum of three times by letter and email.
3.19. Informed Consent
The researcher secured informed consent (Appendices C, D, E) from each study
participant, provided details of the study, answered any questions, and established a working
relationship with the study participants (Babbie, 2010). Informed consent was obtained with a
written consent form for each phase of data collection. Risks to study participants were minimal
in compliance with IRB requirements. Although there were no direct benefits to study
participants, this dissertation provided indirect benefits of a better understanding of varying
perspectives on leadership, increased reflection of personal practices, and increased knowledge
of school librarians' engagement in technology leadership roles.
The researcher is committed to the code of ethics that ensures informed consent, the
accuracy of data collected, protection of privacy and confidentiality, and freedom from
deception. The participants were assured that they would not be harmed in any way and that
every effort was taken to guard their well-being. The study participants were assured that

93

participation in the study was purely voluntary and could be discontinued at any point in the
process.
The researcher addressed potential study participant's concerns about the research by
willingly responding to any questions. Although uncertain at this time, if by district policy an
academic memo alerting principals of the opportunity to participate in the study was required,
that memo must be posted on the district intranet 2 weeks before expected action.
3.20 Data Management
Research data obtained from the email survey was retained in digital format on a
password-protected laptop. The researcher performed the transcription of all audio recordings
and written notes. Notes, recordings, and transcriptions were kept in digital format and will be
deleted or destroyed in accordance with prescribed guidelines.
3.21 Confidentiality
Complete anonymity was not be possible in the study; however, subject confidentiality
for the survey responses was maintained in a secure location known only to the investigator.
Privacy was ensured by maintaining names and demographic information in a secure location
accessible only to the researcher. Survey respondents were assigned numbers and the names
associated with those numbers was available only to trusted persons associated with the research
(Schutt, 2009). Anonymity and privacy was ensured by maintaining names and demographic
information in a secure location accessible to the researcher only. The surveys, audio recordings,
and researcher notes were kept confidential.
3.22 Study Quality
A clearly articulated purpose is a top priority in designing rigorous research and the
"reason, rationale, and the purpose for mixing serve to differentiate the mixed methods research
94

process from other research processes" (Collins & O'Cathain, 2009, p. 4). The intent and the
focus in quantitative and qualitative research are different; therefore, ensuring study quality
varies for each approach (Sargeant, 2012). The standardized measures of quality in quantitative
research are generally well known to researchers (Venkatesh, Brown, & Bala, 2013). Mixed
methods research in itself raises concerns about validity (Creswell & Plano-Clark, 2007). In
mixed methods research Teddlie and Tashakkori (2009) used the term inference quality as a
substitute term for the validity referenced in solely quantitative and qualitative methods.
Inference quality is the "accuracy of inductively and deductively derived conclusions in a study
or research inquiry" (Venkatesh et al, 2013, p. 35).
3.23 Data Quality
Whatever the research methodology, validity is a concern (Gelo et al, 2008). Concepts of
validity and reliability derived "from the quantitative tradition (Sullivan & Sargeant, 2011, p.
452) are thought by some researchers to be insufficient for qualitative research (Sullivan &
Sargeant, 2011). As a separate and distinct approach, Teddlie and Tashakkori (2003) correlate
reliability with data quality, in mixed methods. Data quality is defined as "the degree to which
collected data (results of measurement or observation) meet the standards of quality to be
considered valid (e.g., trustworthiness) and reliable (e.g., dependable)" (Venkatesh et al, 2013, p.
35).
Questions on the survey were the same for both study participants. The interview
questions were standardized for the specific group of participants. Principals were asked the
same questions in the interview, as were the school librarians. Data were maintained in a
password protected computer and was accessed by the researcher only. Survey data was
maintained in the Qualtrics software until the survey closed and the data were ready to be entered
95

into SPSS. Audio recordings of the interviews were held in a protected data recorder and
transcribed after all interviews had been conducted.
3.24 Limitations
A weakness in the qualitative aspect of mixed methods is ensuring validity and reliability.
The utilization of a non-random sampling scheme and the relatively small sample size negatively
affects the external validity (Onwuegbuzie & Collins, 2007). Inconsistency is inherent in data
collection and personal bias may influence the findings. Other limitations include the reactive
effect of the interview situation and the interviewees’ knowledge of their participation in a
research study. The awareness that study subjects are participating in a research study may cause
a change in the participants’ behavior (Babbie, 2010). Researcher familiarity and cordial
relationships with the study participants may introduce subjective interpretations and create
possible bias (Ivankova, Creswell, & Stick, 2006). Another limitation is the difficulty other
researchers experience in trying to replicate the study. The specificity of the situation and the
time required to conduct the research make it difficult to re-create. Causal links are difficult to
establish in mixed methods research.
3.25 Summary
This chapter began with an overview of the research design and a synopsis of mixed
methods research. This study was designed to explore the perceptions of principals of the school
librarian's technology leadership role in urban schools, as well as the school librarian's selfperception as technology leaders. The research used a mixed methods sequential explanatory
research design. This chapter presented the research method, research scope, and data analysis
procedures.

96

CHAPTER 4
RESEARCH RESULTS
Chapter 4 presents the findings from this study. The purpose of the study was to explore
urban school principals’ perceptions of school librarians’ leadership in technology integration. A
second purpose was to explore urban school librarians’ self-perceptions of their technology
integration leadership roles. Specifically, this study was concerned with the perceptions of school
librarians and school principals as it pertains to the school librarian’s level of engagement in
leading students and teachers’ access to and use of technology available in schools.
Based on the review of the literature and personal professional experience I proposed that
school librarians perceived themselves to be technology leaders at a level higher than principals
perceived them to be. In addition, because of the principals’ perceptions, principals appear to
place greater value on the school librarians’ participation in activities other than technology
integration (reading promotion, materials provision, and reference support) (Church, 2008).
Chapter 4 begins with the findings from the email survey completed by school librarians and
school principals. Chapter 4 reviews the three parts of the survey, reviews the data analysis
results, and concludes with a summary of the research findings.
4.1 Survey Part III- Technology Integration
4.1.1 Technology Leadership
In this section, I first present the overall technology leadership scores and then detail the
leadership scores by survey category. As stated in Chapter 3, the survey categories were drawn
from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NPBTS) School Library Media
Standards (2011). Each question was assigned a technology leadership category of entry,
adaptive, and transformative, as explained in Chapter 3. The category scores were likewise
97

divided into the three levels, with the minimum (156) and the maximum (780) scores in the 10
categories. The technology leadership score ranges were the same on the principals' survey and
the school librarians survey instruments. The technology leadership score ranges as calculated as
previously described for both survey instruments are shown in Table 5 below.
Table 5.
Technology Leadership Levels Score Ranges

Category
Category 1:
Knowledge of
Learners

Scores
Category
Score
Ranges
Minimum Maximum Entry
Adaptive Transformative
12
60
12 – 27
28 – 44
45 - 60

Category 2:
Knowledge of
Teaching and
Learning

20

100

20 - 46

47 – 73

74 – 100

Category 3:
Integrating
Instruction

20

100

20 - 46

47 – 73

74 – 100

13

65

13 - 29

30 – 48

49 – 65

31

155

31 - 72

73 – 113

114 – 155

9

45

9 – 20

21 – 33

34 - 45

Category 4:
Knowledge of
Library and
Information
Studies (Resource
Focus)
Category 5:
Leading
Innovation
Through Library
Media Program
Category 6:
Administering the
Library Media
Program

98

Table 5. – continued

Category
Category 7:
Reflective
Practice

Scores
Category
Score
Ranges
Minimum Maximum Entry
Adaptive Transformative

12

60

12 – 27

28 – 44

45 - 60

Category 8:
Professional
Growth

10

50

10 – 23

24 – 36

37 – 50

Category 9:
Ethics, Equity,
and Diversity

18

90

18 - 41

42 – 66

67 – 90

Category 10:
Leadership,
Advocacy and
Community
Partnerships

11

55

11 – 25

26 – 40

41 – 55

4.2 Survey Categories
Part III of the survey required the study participants, principals and school librarians, to
respond to 10 categories of questions derived from the National Board for Professional Teaching
Standards (NBPTS) Library Media Standards (2011) as explained above. The frequencies of
each principals’ (N=12) survey responses by survey (Appendix L) statements were calculated
using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS).
4.2.1 Category 1 Knowledge of Learners
The norm in this standard is the school librarians’ understanding of the varying student
needs and abilities. There were six survey (Appendix L) statements in this category. The six
survey statements assessed the school librarians’ level of technology leadership engagement in
the provision of technological tools, including assistive and adaptive technologies, impact on
school- wide technology decision making and learning, and the development and management of
99

content in the district’s learning management system. The minimum score in this category was
12 and the maximum score was 60. The principals scored the school librarians from a minimum
of 12 to a maximum of 48.
Of the principals (N=12) completing the survey, 23.1% (n=3) perceived the school
librarians’ technology leadership level in category 1 to be entry. In this category, more than half,
53.8%, of the principals (n=7) perceived the school librarians' level of technology leadership to
be adaptive. The remaining principals (n=2) or 15.40% perceived the school librarians to be
transformative level technology leaders.
4.2.2 Category 2 Knowledge of Teaching and Learning
School library users benefit from the school librarians’ expertise in the search, location
and retrieval of information in order to satisfy patrons’ information needs and the application of
effective teaching strategies to support student learning. The 10 survey (Appendix L) statements
in this category assessed the school librarians’ leadership in modeling the use of emerging
technologies, instructional differentiation, technology alignment to local, state, and national
standards, specifically the AASL Standards for the 21st Century Learner, and the technological
support for teachers and learners in science, mathematics, social studies, and English/Language
Arts. The minimum score in this category was 20 and the maximum score was 100. The
principals (n=12) scored the school librarians’ from a minimum of 20 to a maximum of 94. In the
category of Knowledge of Teaching and Learning, 23.1% of the principals (n=3) perceived the
school librarians to be entry level technology leaders, while 30.8% (n=4) perceived the school
librarians to be adaptive level technology leaders. Responding to the 10 survey statements in this
category, 38.5% of principals (n=5) reported that the school librarians functioned at the
transformative technology leadership level.
100

4.2.3 Category 3 Integrating Instruction
The primary purpose of integrating technology into instruction was to encourage the
creative and entrepreneurial use of new and emerging technologies to advance students'
comprehension and critical thinking. There were nine survey (Appendix L) statements in the
Integrating Instruction category. These nine survey (Appendix L) statements assessed the school
librarians’ leadership in setting learning objectives, participation in instructional materials
selection, including digital textbooks, teacher and school librarian collaboration, connecting
learning activities to technology content standards, and demonstration of alternative technologies
to enhance instruction. The minimum technology leadership score for Integrating Instruction was
20 and the maximum technology leadership score was 100. The principals (n=12) scored the
school librarians’ from a minimum of 20 to a maximum of 89. In this category, 38.5% of principals
(n=5) reported that the school librarians functioned at the entry level of leadership. School
librarians in this category, as perceived by the principals (n=4) were adaptive level technology
leaders, 30.8% and 23.1% of principals (n=3) perceived the school librarians to be transformative
level technology leaders.
4.2.4 Category 4 Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus)
Seven survey (Appendix L) statements in category four assessed the school librarians’
understanding and application of the foundational principles of the profession. Accomplished
school librarians are adept at the management of library collections and promote intellectual
freedom for all patrons based upon the knowledge gained through the study of library science. The
seven survey (Appendix L) statements in the Knowledge of Library and Information Studies
(Resource Focus) category considered the school librarians’ procedures and evaluative criteria for
the selection of digital resources, collaboration with the learning community in budgetary
101

considerations, connections to digital resources within and beyond the school, and the fostering of
an information rich environment. The minimum technology leadership score in this category was
13 and the maximum technology leadership score was 65. The principals (n=12) scored the school
librarians' (N=25) from a minimum of 13 to a maximum of 65. In this category, 15.4% of principals
(n=2) perceived the school librarians to be entry level technology leaders, 38.5% of principals
(n=5) reported that the school librarians functioned at the adaptive level and 38.5% of principals
(n=5) reported school librarians performed at transformative levels,
4.2.5 Category 5 Leading Innovation through Library Media Program
Accomplished school librarians are innovative in creating library programs that are
characterized by continuous improvement and positive change. There were 12 survey (Appendix
L) statements in category 5, with a minimum technology leadership score of 31 and a maximum
technology leadership score of 155. The 12 survey (Appendix L) statements assessed the school
librarians’ ability to act as a technology leader, participate on school committees, deliver
professional development, engage in district level educational technology decision making,
perform a role in the current or future use of digital textbooks, seek grant opportunities, and reduce
barriers to the constructive use of digital resources. The principals (n=12) scored the school
librarians’ from a minimum of 31 to a maximum of 133. The frequency distributions of the
principals’ perception in this category were as follows: 30.8% of principals (n=4) selected entry
level technology leadership, 30.8% (n=4) reported adaptive levels of technology leadership, and
30.8% of principals (n=4) reported that the school librarians functioned at the transformative level
of technology leadership.

102

4.2.6 Category 6 Administering the Library Media Program
The effective fiscal and physical management of the school library is inherent in this
category. The school librarians’ use of the reporting options in the school library management
system, the facilitation of special technology related programs and events, the maintenance of
technology equipment, and the continuous evolution of the school library media centers’
mission, were the basis for this survey (Appendix L) category. The minimum technology
leadership score was nine and the maximum technology leadership score was 45. The principals
(n=12) scored the school librarians’ from a minimum of nine to a maximum of 44. In this
category, with five survey statements, 23.1% of principals (n=3) reported that the school
librarians functioned at the entry technology leadership level. School librarians' technology
leadership level as perceived by principals (n=4) in the category of Administering the Library
Media Program was 30.8% adaptive and 38.5% of principals (n=5) perceived the school
librarians' technology leadership level to be transformative.
4.2.7 Category 7 Reflective Practice
School librarians functioning at the higher levels of leadership engagement are selfreflective in the strengths and weaknesses of the library program. This category had four survey
(Appendix L) statements, which assessed the school librarians’ solicitation of teacher and student
feedback related to technology, self-evaluation of technology effectiveness, and the selfexamination of necessary instructional modifications. The minimum technology leadership score
in Reflective Practice was 12 and the maximum technology leadership score is 60. The principals
(n=12) scored the school librarians’ from a minimum of 12 to a maximum of 48. In this
category, 38.5% of principals (n=5) indicated the school librarians’ leadership level to be entry;

103

30.8% of the principals (n=4) indicated the school librarians were adaptive technology leaders,
and 23.1% of the principals (n=3) selected the transformative level of technology leadership.
4.2.8 Category 8 Professional Growth
Continuous improvement is accomplished when school librarians engage in professional
development both as a consumer and as a producer. Category 8 had five survey (Appendix L)
statements, each totaling a minimum technology leadership score of 10 and a maximum
technology leadership score of 50. The five survey (Appendix L) statements assessed the school
librarians’ level of leadership in professional organizations, conference attendance, professional
development presentations, and continuing education. The principals (n=12) scored the school
librarians’ from a minimum of 10 to a maximum of 45. Principals (n=12) were evenly spread
across the three technology leadership levels in Category 8; 30.8% of principals(n=4) indicated
entry level school librarian technology leadership, 30.8% of principals’ (n=4) selected adaptive
level technology leadership, 30.8% of principals (n=4) chose the transformative level of
technology leadership.
4.2.9 Category 9 Ethics, Equity, and Diversity
The hallmark of an efficient library is the provision of materials and access to a variety of
resources. In this age of globalization, ensuring equitable access, along with diverse and
inclusive practices is important. There are nine survey (Appendix L) statements in the Ethics,
Equity, and Diversity category, yielding a minimum technology leadership score of 18 and a
maximum technology leadership score of 90. The nine survey (Appendix L) statements assessed
the school librarians’ awareness of and input into ethical and legal technology policies, modeling
instruction on ethical practices related to digital resources, the examination of web-based and
open source software, the sharing of information about Fair Use and Creative Commons, and the
104

provision of culturally diverse digital resources. The principals (n=12) scored the school
librarians’ from a minimum of 18 to a maximum of 84. Of the 12 principal respondents, four
(30.8%) rated the school librarians at the entry technology leadership level and three (23.1%) of
the principals indicated the school librarians were at the adaptive technology leadership level.
The majority of principals (n=5), 38.5%, reported transformative leadership levels for the school
librarians in this category.
4.2.10 Category 10 Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
The five survey (Appendix L) statements in the Leadership, Advocacy, and Community
Partnerships category measured the school librarians’ ability to generate collaborative
partnerships within and outside of the library in order to maximize the available resources for
library program expansion and enhancement. The five survey (Appendix L) statements in this
category assessed the school librarians’ leadership in local, state, and national advocacy efforts,
information dissemination within the school and to the broader community, awareness of
technological advancements, and the development of strategies to inspire student community
involvement. The minimum technology leadership score in this category was 11 and the
maximum was 55. The principals (n=12) scored the school librarians’ from the minimum of 11
to the maximum of 55. Principals evenly characterized the school librarians as entry level
technology leaders, 30.8% (n=4), adaptive level technology leaders, 30.8% (n=4), and
transformative level leaders, 30.8% (n=4).
4.3 Principal Perception of School Librarians' Technology Leadership Levels
Technology leadership scores were calculated for each of the 10 survey (Appendix L)
categories as was described in Chapter 3. In general, principals (n=12) perceived school

105

librarians (N=25) as adaptive technology leaders. Table 6 shows the principals’ (n=12) perceived
school librarians (N=25) technology scores and technology leadership levels.
Table 6.
Principals Perceived School Librarians’ Technology Leadership Scores (n=12)
Principal
Principal 1
Principal 2
Principal 3
Principal 4
Principal 5
Principal 6
Principal 7
Principal 8
Principal 9
Principal 10
Principal 11
Principal 12

Technology
Score
303
435
376
499
624
677
156
579
156
546
509
670

Technology
Leadership Level
Entry
Adaptive
Adaptive
Adaptive
Transformative
Transformative
Entry
Transformative
Entry
Adaptive
Adaptive
Transformative

4.4 Principals’ Enablement of School Librarian Leadership by NBPTS Categories
In order to determine the ways in which principals perceived they enabled school
librarians to demonstrate leadership in technology, 15 survey statements from the principals’
(n=12) survey (Appendix L) responses to Part III were considered, along with the principals’
(N=13) responses to the survey questions about scheduling, certified full and part-time school
librarians, non-certified paid staff, instructional technology staff, and library volunteer hours.
Principals (n=12) responses to seven of the 10 survey categories were determined to be
indicative of the principals enablement of the school librarians’ leadership engagement as
described in Johnston’s Domains of Enablers and Barriers to School Librarian Technology

106

Leadership (Johnston, 2012b). The frequency distributions of the principals’ (n=12) responses to
15 school librarian leadership enabling survey statements are shown on Table 7 below.
Table 7.
Principals’ School Librarian Leadership Enablement Survey Statements (n=12)
Survey Category

Survey Statements

Knowledge of Learners

My librarian develops
content for the school's
learning mangement
system (e.g., Moodle,
Blackboard, Edmodo,
ItsLearning).

Integrating Instruction

Distribution Frequency (%)
Partially
Substantially Fully
Involved
involved
Involved
4 (33)

3 (25)

0

4 (33)

3 (25)

0

4 (33)

1 (8.3)

1 (8.3)

2 (16)

4 (33)

0

My librarian participates
in instructional materials
selection decisions,
including digital
textbook resources.
Integrating Instruction
My librarian is involved
in the initial process of
setting learning
objectives and
promoting the
integration of
technology in classroom
instruction.
Integrating Instruction
My librarian
collaborates with
teachers to plan for
using technology in their
instruction.

107

Table 7. - continued
Survey Category

Survey Statements

Knowledge of Library
and Information Studies
(Resource Focus)

incorporate this
information when
considering immediate
and long-range budgets.
My librarian manages a
school library website.

2 (16)

4 (33)

2 (16)

2 (16)

3 (25)

1 (8.3)

The technology training
my librarian provides to
teachers is an integral
part of my school’s
professional development
plan.

4 (33)

3 (24)

0

2 (16)

6 (50)

0

3 (35)

0

0

4 (33)

2 (16)

0

1 (8.3)

6 (50)

1 (8.3)

Leading Innovation
through Library Media
Program
Leading Innovation
through Library Media
Program

Leading Innovation
through Library Media
Program

Leading Innovation
through Library Media
Program

Leading Innovation
through Library Media
Program

Ethics, Equity, and
Diversity

Distribution Frequency (%)
Partially
Substantially Fully
Involved
involved
Involved

My librarian actively
contributes to school
committees or teams to
make the learning
community aware of the
availability of
technologies and how
best to use them.
My librarian participates
in the educational
technology decisionmaking process in my
district.
My librarian has or will
have a role in my
schools’ current or future
use of digital textbooks.
My librarian provides
input on policies on the
use of technology and
digital resources.

108

Table 7. - continued
Survey Category

Survey Statements

Administering the Library
Media Program

My librarian
organizes special
programs and
events related to
technology

Professional Growth

Distribution Frequency (%)
Partially
Substantially Fully
Involved
involved
Involved
1 (8.3)

5 (42)

1 (8.3)

3 (25)

4 (33)

2 (16)

3 (25)

4 (33)

0

4 (33)

2 (16)

1 (8.3)

My librarian
belongs to
professional
organizations that
promote the use of
technology in
education.
Professional Growth
My librarian
presents
technology related
professional
development
activities at
conferences.
Professional Growth
My librarian
presents
technology related
professional
development
activities to the
learning
community.
4.5 School Librarian Quantitative Results – Survey Part III
4.5.1 Survey Part III- Technology Integration
Survey data were collected from school librarian survey participants using the
Partnerships Advancing Library Media (PALM) survey, The School Library Media Specialist
and Technology Integration Survey (Appendix K) as indicated in chapter 3. This study utilized
109

the NBPTS standards that were operational between 2000 and 2011. School librarians’ responses
to 72 survey statements were used to examine urban school librarians' self-perceptions of their
technology leadership roles, as well as the school librarians’ self-perception of their level of
engagement in technology leadership.
4.5.2 Category 1 Knowledge of Learners
There were six survey statements in the Knowledge of Learners standard. The six survey
statements were:
1. I provide learners with technological tools to meet their needs.
2. I instruct learners in using the most appropriate technology to meet their needs.
3. I impact school-wide decision-making concerning technology and learning.
4. I provide assistive and adaptive technologies for learners.
5. I ensure that the content in district’s learning management system (e.g., Moodle,
Blackboard) meets student needs.
6. I develop content for the school’s learning management system (e.g., Moodle,
Blackboard).
The frequency of each response was calculated using the Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences (SPSS). In this section the minimum technology leadership score was 12 and the highest
score was 60. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 19 to 60. The scores
in this category were grouped into the following three ranges in order to determine the levels of
leadership engagement, entry, 12-27, adaptive, 28-44, and transformative, 44-60. Of the school
librarians (N=25) who completed the survey, 28% (n=7) fell in the entry level of technology
leadership, 44.0% (n=11) were in the adaptive technology leadership level, and 28% (n=7) in the
transformative technology leadership level.
110

4.5.3 Category 2 Knowledge of Teaching and Learning
The second category of the NBPTS standards focused on the school librarians'
instructional expertise. In the Knowledge of Teaching and Learning category there were 10
questions:
1. I use technology to differentiate my instruction.
2. I understand that appropriate use of technology can pique learners’ interest.
3. My instruction integrates technology that is aligned to local, state and/or national
professional and technology standards.
4. In my instruction I model use of emerging technologies.
5. I teach learners how to identify the appropriate technology for their needs.
6. I use AASL Standards for the 21st Century Learner to guide the development of my
instruction.
7. I am confident supporting science and mathematics teachers and learners with
technology.
8. I am confident supporting mathematics teachers and learners with technology.
9. I am confident supporting English/Language Arts teachers and learners with
technology.
10. I am confident supporting social studies teachers and learners with technology.
In this section, the minimum technology leadership score was 20 and the highest score
was 100. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 36 to 100. The scores
in this category were grouped into the following three ranges in order to determine the levels of
leadership engagement, entry, 20-46, adaptive, 47-73, and transformative, 74-100. Entry level
technology leadership was perceived by 8% (n=2) of the school librarians, while 36% (n=9) were
111

in the adaptive technology leadership level. In this category 56% of the school librarians (n=14)
were transformative level technology leaders.
4.5.4 Category 3 Integrating Instruction
Given that school librarians are experienced teachers, the expectation is that school
librarians understand how to use the best strategies for teaching. In the Integrating Instructions
category there are 9 statements. The survey statements were:
1. I collaborate with teachers to plan for using technology in their instruction.
2. I provide teachers with access to technology that enhances their instruction.
3. I provide teachers with a range of technological alternatives for assessing students
learning.
4. I advocate for the use of technology for alternative demonstrations of student learning.
5. I am involved in the initial process of setting learning objectives and promoting the
integration of technology in classroom instruction.
6. I promote learning activities that connect the use of technology to content standards.
7. I help learners create their products using various types of technology.
8. I facilitate learners’ use of technology to create products that express new ideas.
9. I participate in instructional materials selection decisions, including digital textbook
resources.
In this section, the minimum technology leadership score was 20 and the highest score
was 100. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 23 to 100. The scores
in this category were grouped into the following three ranges in order to determine the levels of
leadership engagement, entry, 20 - 46, adaptive, 47 – 73, and transformative, 74 - 100. In this
category, 24% (n=6) of the school librarians were entry level technology leaders, 36% (n=9)
112

were at the adaptive level of technology leadership, and 40% (n=10) of the school librarians were
transformative level technology leaders.
4.5.5 Category 4 Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus)
In category 4, school librarians are called upon to demonstrate the knowledge of the
profession based upon prior training and education. In category, 4 there were seven survey
statements. The seven survey statements were:
1. I apply evaluative criteria to select digital resources for acquisition.
2. I collaborate with the school learning community to assess curricular needs for digital
resources and incorporate this information when considering immediate and long-range
budgets.
3. I foster an information rich environment where learners can explore their personal
interests.
4. I follow a consistent procedure to assess the effectiveness of digital resources.
5. I ensure connections to a wide variety of digital resources within and beyond the school
walls.
6. I employ effective management skills in collecting, organizing, disseminating, and
maintaining digital resources in order to enhance access.
7. I include digital resources in my online catalog.
In this section the minimum technology leadership score was 13 and the highest score
was 65. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 23 to 65. The scores in
this category were grouped into the following three ranges in order to determine the levels of
leadership engagement, entry, 13 - 29, adaptive, 30 – 48, and transformative, 49 – 65. Sixteen
percent of school librarians (n=4) fell into the entry leadership level, 36% (n=9) were in the
113

adaptive technology leadership level. In this category 48% of the school librarians (n=12) were
transformative level technology leaders.
4.5.6 Category 5 Leading Innovation through Library Media Program
The fifth category of the NBPTS standards focused on the school librarians' ability to
provide access to library materials, both print and digital, in new and innovative ways. In this
category there are 12 survey statements. The 12 survey statements are:
1. I possess the knowledge, confidence and courage to act as a technology leader.
2. I maximize access to technology equipment for all members of the learning community.
3. I manage a school library website.
4. I take the lead in the delivery of information beyond the school walls.
5. I seek grants and funding opportunities to provide technology and/or digital resources to
the school community.
6. I strive to reduce barriers to constructive use of digital resources.
7. The technology training I provide to teachers is an integral part of my school’s
professional development plan.
8. I actively contribute to school committees or teams to make the learning community
aware of the availability of technologies and how best to use them.
9. I participate in the educational technology decision-making process in my district.
10. I make partnerships throughout the community to increase digital resources and
technologies offered to learners.
11. I advocate for the supply and utilization of broadband for appropriate for instructional
uses.
12. I have or will have a role in my school’s current or future use of digital textbooks.
114

In Leading Innovation through Library Media Program the minimum technology
leadership score was 31 and the highest score was 155. The school librarian’s technology
leadership scores ranged from 32 to 143. The scores in this category were grouped into the
following three ranges in order to determine the levels of leadership engagement, entry, 31-71,
adaptive, 73-113, and transformative, 114-155. In the category of Leading Innovation through
Library Media Program 24% of the school librarians were transformative level technology leaders.
Twenty eight percent of school librarians (n=7) were at the entry level of technology leadership
and 48% of the school librarians (n=12) were at the adaptive technology leadership level. Twentyfour percent of the school librarians (n=6) were transformative level technology leaders.
4.5.7 Category 6 Administering the Library Media Program
In the sixth category of the NBPTS standards the school librarian must demonstrate
proficiency in the organization and management of the library resources including technology.
The survey statements in this category are indicative of the school librarians' ability to be an
effective school library program administrator, in addition to the other four expected roles of the
school librarian.
In the category of Administering the Library Media Program there were five survey
statements. The survey statements were:
1. I choose technology tools appropriate for administrative tasks.
2. I use the reporting options of library management systems (e.g., circulation systems,
reading programs, collection analysis).
3. I ensure that the school library media center’s mission continues to evolve as
technology changes.
4. I organize special programs and events related to technology.
115

5. I maintain technology equipment.
In Administering the Library Media Program the minimum technology leadership score
was 9 and the highest score was 45. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged
from 21 to 45. The scores in this category were grouped into the following three ranges in order
to determine the levels of leadership engagement, entry, 9-20, adaptive, 21-33, and
transformative, 34-55. There were zero school librarians who rated in the entry level of
technology leadership in Administering the Library Media Program and 44% of the school
librarians (n=11) were in the adaptive level of technology leadership. In this category 56% of the
school librarians (n=14) were transformative level technology leaders.
4.5.8 Category 7 Reflective Practice
The seventh category, Reflective Practice, asked school librarians to respond to four
survey statements on the ways in which they solicit feedback from teachers and students in order
to assess the effectiveness of the program. The four survey statements were:
1. I solicit feedback from teachers about technology.
2. I solicit feedback from students about technology.
3. I reflect on and learn from student assessments and modify instruction as necessary.
4. I actively employ strategies to evaluate the effectiveness of technology in my school
library program.
In Reflective Practice the minimum technology leadership score was 12 and the highest score
was 60. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 12 to 60. The Reflective
Practice scores were grouped into the following three ranges in order to determine the levels of
leadership engagement, entry, 12-27, adaptive, 28-44, and transformative, 45-60. In Reflective
Practice 16% (n=4) of school librarians indicated they were entry level technology leaders.
116

Adaptive level technology leadership was reported by 20% (n=5) of school librarians and 64%
(n=16) of the school librarians perceived their technology leadership level to be transformative.
4.5.9 Category 8 Professional Growth
The five survey statements in this category assessed the school librarians continued
professional growth through professional organizational membership, conference attendance, and
interactions with the professional learning community through presentations and learning
activities both virtually and face-to-face. The survey statements were:
1. I stay abreast of innovations in technology through reading professional materials in
both print and online.
2. I belong to professional organizations that promote the use of technology in
education.
3. I present technology related professional development activities at conferences.
4. I present technology related professional development activities to the learning
community.
5. I engage in face-to-face and/or online professional interactions with peers and
experts.
In the Professional Growth category, the minimum technology leadership score was 10
and the highest score was 50. The school librarian's technology leadership scores ranged from 12
to 44. The scores in Professional Growth were grouped into the following three ranges in order
to determine the levels of leadership engagement, entry, 12-23, adaptive, 24-36, and
transformative, 37-50. In Professional Growth 24% (n=6) of the school librarians were
transformative technology leaders. Fifty-two percent (n=13) of school librarians perceived
themselves to be at the adaptive level of technology leadership in Professional Growth, while
117

24% (n=6) of the school librarians indicated they were at the entry level of technology
leadership.
4.5.10 Category 9 Ethics, Equity, and Diversity
Accomplished school librarians recognize that equitable access to all library resources is
paramount to successful programs. In addition, accomplished school librarians promote ideas of
diversity and inclusion, as well as the use of information with integrity. The high levels of
leadership engagement indicated that school librarians' model ethical behavior and practice in
both diverse and empowered leadership. There were nine survey statements in this category. The
nine survey statements were:
1. I am aware of policies on the use of technology and digital resources.
2. I provide input on policies on the use of technology and digital resources.
3. I provide instruction for teachers on the ethical and legal policies and practices
relating to technology and digital resources.
4. I provide instruction for students on the ethical and legal policies and practices
relating to technology and digital resources.
5. I model the ethical and legal policies and practices relating to technology and digital
resources.
6. I ensure that digital resources reflect the diversity of cultural expression.
7. I use technology to enable and empower learners with diverse backgrounds.
8. I understand the new developments in Fair Use and Creative Commons and share that
knowledge with learners using and producing media
9. I examine web-based and free or open-source software alternatives to promote equity.

118

The minimum possible score for the Ethics, Equity, and Diversity category was 18 and
maximum was 90. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores ranged from 18 to 90. The
scores in Ethics, Equity, and Diversity were grouped into the following three ranges in order to
determine the levels of technology leadership engagement; entry, 18-41, adaptive, 42-66, and
transformative, 67-90. In Ethics, Equity, and Diversity 12% (n=3) of school librarians indicated
they were at the entry level of technology leadership. Thirty-six percent (n=9) of school librarians
were at the adaptive level of technology leadership and 52% (n=13) of the school librarians were
transformative technology level leaders.
4.5.11 Category 10 Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
The final category in the NBPTS standards required school librarians to take leadership
in the advocacy and the promotion of the school library program to the community at large and
to develop partnerships on the local, state and national levels.
There were five survey statements in this category. The survey statements were:
1. I disseminate information about the use of technology and digital resources within the
school to the community at large.
2. I disseminate information about advances in educational technology and digital
resources to the community at large.
3. I advocate on local, state and/or national levels for the implementation of technology
in education.
4. I develop strategies and use technology to inspire students to make a contribution to
the community at large.
5. I am aware of information about advances in technology and digital resources.

119

The minimum possible score for the Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
category was 11 and maximum was 55. The school librarians’ technology leadership scores
ranged from 11 to 55. The scores in this category were grouped into the following three ranges in
order to determine the levels of leadership engagement, entry, 11-25, adaptive, 26-40, and
transformative, 41-55. In the Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships category 32%
(n=8) school librarians indicated they were entry level technology leaders, 44% (n=11) of the
school librarians were at the adaptive level of technology leadership, and 24% (n=6) of the
school librarians were transformative technology leaders.
4.6 School Librarians’ Self-Perception of Technology Leadership Levels
An analysis of each of the NBPTS standards on the PALM survey revealed that in six of
the ten categories the majority of school librarians perceived themselves to be transformative
level technology leaders. School librarians (N=25) clearly perceived themselves to be highly
engaged leaders in the area of Reflective Practice, with 64% (n=16) of school librarians
indicating the transformative level of technology leadership engagement. In category 2,
Knowledge of Teaching and Learning, 56% (n=14) of school librarians perceived themselves to
be transformative technology leaders. Administering the Library Media Program (category 6)
was one of the six areas where school librarians clearly perceived themselves to be
transformative level leaders. In Administering the Library Media Program, 56% (n=14) of school
librarians indicated transformative level technology leadership. Zero school librarians considered
themselves to be entry level technology leaders in this category. In the Ethics, Equity and
Diversity category (9), 13 (52%) of school librarians, indicated transformative leadership.
School librarians' (N=25) survey results revealed that in the area of Integrating Instruction
(category 3), 40% (n=10) of school librarians perceived themselves to be transformative
120

technology leaders, but a nearly equal percentage of school librarians, 36%,(n=9) saw
themselves as adaptive level technology leaders. In the area of Knowledge of Library and
Information Studies 48% (n=12) of school librarians judged themselves to be transformative
technology leaders. Four categories of school librarians self-perceived adaptive technology
leadership included Knowledge of Learners, Leading Innovation through Library Media
Program, Professional Growth, and Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships.
Ten (40%) of school librarians had technology leadership scores that fell in the
transformative level, 11 (44%)had technology leadership scores that were adaptive level, and
four (16%) school librarians had technology leadership scores that were entry level technology
leadership. Overall, school librarians (n=11) were more likely to perceive themselves as adaptive
technology level leaders, rather than entry (n= 4) or transformative (n=10) level technology
leaders. Table 8 shows the school librarians (N=25) technology leadership scores and leadership
levels.
Table 8.
School Librarians Technology Scores and Technology Leadership Levels (N=25)
Librarian
School Librarian A
School Librarian B
School Librarian C
School Librarian D
School Librarian E
School Librarian F
School Librarian G
School Librarian H
School Librarian I
School Librarian J
School Librarian K
School Librarian L

Technology
Score
712
592
597
566
619
455
513
435
582
702
222
745

Technology
Leadership Level
Transformative
Transformative
Transformative
Adaptive
Transformative
Adaptive
Adaptive
Adaptive
Transformative
Transformative
Entry
Transformative
121

Table 8. - continued
Librarian
School Librarian M
School Librarian N
School Librarian O
School Librarian P
School Librarian Q
School Librarian R
School Librarian S
School Librarian T
School Librarian U
School Librarian V
School Librarian W
School Librarian X
School Librarian Y

Technology
Score
314
486

644
516
499
531
223
602
294
663
448
426
402

Technology
Leadership Level
Entry
Adaptive
Transformative
Adaptive
Adaptive
Adaptive
Entry
Transformative
Entry
Transformative
Adaptive
Adaptive
Adaptive
4.7 Qualitative Results

4.7.1 Semi-Structured Interviews
Following the completion of the surveys, participation in semi-structured interviews was
solicited among principal and school librarian survey completers (N = 38). Four of the 12
principal (33%) survey completers agreed to participate in the semi-structured interviews.
Thirteen (52%) of the 25 school librarian completers agreed to participate in the one-on-one
semi-structured interviews. The semi-structured interviews were conducted to identify and
clarify the perceptual factors that influence the technology leadership roles of the school
librarians as evidenced in the quantitative survey.
4.7.2 School Principal Interview Results
The principal interview protocol described in Chapter 3 was followed. The six open
ended questions in Appendix I were asked of the four principal interview participants. Additional

122

open-ended questions were asked to further clarify the survey responses and to encourage further
elaboration to interview questions. The additional questions are listed in Appendix I.
4.7.3 Category 1 Knowledge of Learners
Of the principals (n=4) interviewed, 50% viewed the school librarians as adaptive level
technology leaders. The interview responses reflected the adaptive level of engagement, although
only two (50%) principals made mention of Knowledge of Learners in the interviews. Principal 1
indicated that the,
“librarian is willing to learn, open to trying to figure out ways to help other people.
Technology seems to be a very big part of that, especially in the library with all the
opportunity for the kids to access literacy, literature and [the school librarian] is very
aware of that.”
4.7.4 Category 2 Knowledge of Teaching and Learning
One principal (25%) made mention of the category of Knowledge of Teaching and
Learning in the interviews with the statement: “The librarian definitely has a good grasp about
the media and technology and uses it in her work every day.” (Principal 6)
4.7.5 Category 3 Integrating Instruction
Three principals (75%) commented in interviews on the school librarians’ role in
integrating instruction. Principal 1 commented: “Teachers are so concerned about time that they
have to see what you are doing is relevant to what they’re teaching kids so that they know it is
not a waste of time. And so trying to makes sure that that’s tighter helps improve both teacher
and librarian. Helps to improve both and their skills are better. They realize, oh, wow! You do
know what you are doing. “Cause that’s a whole lot of that mistrust, is, ‘I don’t think the

123

librarian knows what they’re doing. I’m teaching these TEK skills, and kids have to know it, and
I can’t be in there for 45 minutes, when I really have to drill down.” Principal 2 indicated that,
“The librarian has the potential to be one of the stronger reading specialist type media people to
help support your academic program, if and when the rest of the campus is accepting and open
to it.” Principal 6 stated: “The librarian provides support to the teachers using technology, goes
into classrooms, does PLC, talking about the latest access that we have, for example like
Ontrack and how to use modules.”
4.7.6 Category 4 Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus)
The Category of Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resources Focus)
addressed the school librarian’s specific preparation for the role of a school librarian. This
category was not represented in the principal interviews
4.7.7 Category 5 Leading Innovation through Library Media Program
Two principals (50%) made reference to Leading Innovation through the School Library
Media Program. One of the two principals spoke about the need for school librarians to model
and support the use of technology with comments such as Principal 2, "the librarian must
embrace technology as a tool and use technology as a different way of approaching instruction."
Principal 11 commented: “Being able to cheer students on in the use of technology. Someone
who’s not afraid of technology, and embraces it as a cutting-edge mode of education, a tool, and
helping our kids access that.”
4.7.8 Category 6 Administering the Library Media Program
One principal (25%) spoke highly of the school librarians’ Administering the Library
Media Program by saying: “And this week they have ‘party in the stacks’, so the kids are coming
to do some activities in the library this week to kinda highlight what’s going on in the library,
124

and how they’re assessing it. And then there’s ‘rock around the library’, something where
they’re doing like skits and small … videos and dancing. And she is doing that to promote not
only the library, but to build some of that culture around the libraries for everyone in our school.
That is what we need to be using in terms of helping teach kids. And getting just different
attractions to get kids to come in. Parties in the library, celebrations about kids reading books,
and some of the challenges, and some are readings, and so it’s really advertising and … doing a
really good job of keeping that going on our campus throughout the summer with kids reading”
(Principal 2). Principal 6 commented: “The librarian is having authors that are coming here or
taking kids to see authors at other schools, it lets me know, wow, the librarian is still working to
improve literacy on our campus.”
4.7.9 Category 7 Reflective Practice
Only one principal (25%) made a comment in the interview that could be categorized as
Reflective Practice. “The librarian must have the critical relational skills, so that she can cross
that …I don’t know, that barrier or that wall to go into the classroom” (Principal 1).
4.7.10 Category 8 Professional Growth
Three principals (75%) made statements in the area of Professional Growth.
Representative quotes by the principals included one by Principal 2, who said: “Well, there has
to be professional development. There has to be support for the librarians. And I’m not sure that
there’s a lot of that.” Principal 6 stated: “The librarian does professional development and preservice. They do some of those trainings with the teachers as well. For example, the librarian is
responsible for the SMART Boards and makes sure that they’re given to the teachers, that the
teachers are trained on it."

125

Principal 2 explained the low leadership rating in professional growth by stating, “If they
don’t go to a conference somewhere to learn about being a librarian chances they are not going
to get it in the district. Should be more often. As a principal, I don’t know where to send you; I
don’t know if there is anything available for you, so what are we to do? We are both scratching
our heads thinking I don’t know.” Principal 2 continued, "And so now that we have the position
… we've always had the position, but now that the funding is there to make sure that the position
is secured, there also still needs to be a question as to, okay, now how do we train them better, so
that they can be the force that they're supposed to be to help support your literacy program
across your campus?" Principal 11 said “We should really have a better system around training
and keeping up to date with the latest things for our librarians.” Zero principals mentioned or
made any comment on professional organizational memberships.
4.7.11 Category 9 Ethics, Equity, and Diversity
This category was represented only once (25%) in the principal interviews. “There has to
be a plan that ensures equity across all campuses for the kinds of technology the kids are getting
their hands on, and the support of teachers and librarians that all staff are getting on the
campus” (Principal 2).
4.7.12 Category 10 Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
This was the most referenced category among school principals; all four (100%) of the
principal interview participants referenced Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
in their comments. Principal 11 made comments such as, “It’s more so when outside community
members or organizations reference what they hear and see about our school, whether it’s on
line, whether it’s using our social media and our library is being part of those conversations or
the librarian is being part of those conversations it just reminds me, oh yeah, she is doing that
126

or, yeah, I forgot that this is happening.” Another comment in reference to category 10 from
Principal 2 was “I didn’t even know she was in the community doing this, with the, I forget, the
book mobile that she was driving. It’s like you went and drove that?” Principal 6 made a
comment that was related to the category of Leadership, Advocacy, and Community
Partnerships, “It’s a lot of that publicity work that we wouldn’t necessarily think that a librarian
would have to do but she does it because she knows it’s the right thing to do to keep our kids
interested in what’s going on in school and to keep them reading.” Another principal response
(Principal 1) coded as Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships stated “When you
are hearing from community members about what the good things that are happening around us,
you know the library is working with the community.”
Technology leadership scores were calculated to determine the school librarians’
technology leadership level as perceived by the principal interview participants. Among the
principal interview participants (n=4), 50% (n=2) perceived the school librarians (n=13) to be
adaptive level technology leaders, 25% entry level leaders and 25% had transformative level
leaders. Table 9 shows the principal interview participants' perceived school librarian technology
leadership scores and technology leadership levels.
Table 9.
Principal Perceived School Librarian Technology Leadership Scores and Technology
Leadership Levels (n=4)
Interview
Participants
Principal 1
Principal 2
Principal 6
Principal 11

Technology
Score
303
435
677
509

Technology
Leadership Level
Entry
Adaptive
Transformative
Adaptive

127

4.8 School Librarian Interview Results
During the interview process with the first school librarian (n=13), question number two
of the School Librarian Interview Protocol (Appendix J) was modified to "In what ways do you
perceive yourself to be a technology leader?" The original question number two resulted in a
simple "yes" from the first interviewee with no further elaboration.
4.9 School Librarians Interview Participants' Technology Leadership
4.9.1 Category 1 Knowledge of Learners
Knowledge of Learners was represented eight times by school librarian (62%) interview
participants. School librarian B stated: “I have to teach the child. I am in a position to work with
a subgroup of low performing students on a daily basis and modify instruction as necessary.”
Additional representative quotes in the Knowledge of Learners category included the statement
of school librarian D: “And we’re all very focused on that student and what that student needs
and how that student is gonna become successful utilizing this tool.” School librarian L said: “I
tell them, "I'm your first source. 'Cause I see all the classes, see all the kids. We also use
technology for research, and we're also teaching the students how to use technology and
evaluate what they're getting when they get information from other sources other than a book
that's been printed and vetted.” School librarian N also indicated Knowledge of Learners in the
statement: “I have to be able to help the students with it (technology) because everything you do
is technology driven.” School librarian W indicated that “It is necessary to go back and review
so that students retain the information they learned earlier. It meets the needs of the students,
and the campus staff, so students do not fall behind.”

128

4.9.2 Category 2 Knowledge of Teaching and Learning
School librarians (n=13) made reference to Knowledge of Teaching and Learning five
times (39%). School librarian D has a background in math and science. She stated: “I do a lot of
lessons on science and math. I've got a math background. I taught middle school math for 14
years. I'm more of the science-based stuff. And so I try to support every aspect of what they're
learning. You're gonna know your algebra because each side of the equation has to equal.”
School librarian W indicated that: “I am a dyslexia interventionist and work one on one with
students using technology, especially to promote high levels of literacy.” School librarian E
made the statement that “We help students learn for a career that can help the community.”
4.9.3 Category 3 Integrating Instruction
Among the most frequently referenced standard during the school librarian (n=10)
interviews was Integrating Instruction; 77% of school librarian interview participants indicated
that technology was used every day and articulated the ways in which technology was integrated
with instruction. References were made to the use of technology by school librarian N for
"research, grades, tests, to upload or download portfolios", although school librarian N
indicated that technology use is "not driven by the librarian. My campus has hired two people to
manage the technology." School librarian R indicated “In fact, every ELA teacher brings her
class in and we either plan ahead of time, or we plan during. And so we collaborate that way so
it's usually very informal, which is the best way to get it done because then when they walk in,
they know they're already going to ask me about something or see if we can do something, or
they will send me a quick email. There's a lot of collaboration.” This category was further
referenced by school librarian O in the statement: “Technology is best taught in collaboration
with what they are learning at that particular time and not taught in isolation.”
129

4.9.4 Category 4 Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus)
Category 4 was the one of the two least mentioned categories with only one school
librarian (7.7%) making any reference with the statement: “Well, I really think that, that I
suppose this is going on, but all librarians now, I mean, they have to have that component in
training. You can just be a librarian.” (school librarian T).
4.9.5 Category 5 Leading Innovation through Library Media Program
Leading Innovation through the Library Media Program was represented five (38%)
times. School librarian B indicated involvement in this category with the statement: “I meet with
administrators to show what is new and useful; they come to me to learn new innovative
software. The campus is abreast of every new thing. I can see through the marketplace and pick
out what's relevant and what's not and introduce teachers to what is emerging. I must find cost
effective ways to bring technology into the homes of the children.”
School librarian (D) said: “There's a whole other section of instruction that I do and push, and
that’s through coding and manipulation of just understanding electric circuits and how things
are put together to make light or movement or whatever; to encourage students I am a promoter
of tech and supporter of devices and concepts and behaviors surrounding technology.” School
librarian L indicated the importance of looking for “new ways to bring technology in, or new
technologies that might work in what they're trying to solve.” School librarian N commented:
“So, I have a … library course. And I am the administrator, so I enrolled every student and
teacher in my course. So, everything that I do, they could have access to it.” School librarian W
made it clear of the entrenchment in Leading Innovation through the Library Media Program
with the statements: “We have our own YouTube channel and our own cable channel. We are
producing a game show for Name That Book titles and modeling a beyond kahoot game to use in
130

our maker space. We are using makey-makey and electronic circuits. I no longer use paper and
send all information to teachers electronically. I use an electronic calendar and I model the use
of new technology and resources.”
4.9.6 Category 6 Administering the Library Media Program
School librarians (n=4) (31%) who mentioned Administering the Library Media Program
said: “Well, besides the checking out and checking in books, I do a lot of stuff for them. We do
Name That Book which helps with the GT kiddos. But I do a lot of lessons on nonfiction books”
(school librarian L); “The library is underutilized” (school librarian W); “The library is not
being utilized to the optimum” (school librarian B); and “I feel like the role of a librarians has to
be incorporated into the world of technology and we do that through little programming events
and stuff” (school librarian D).
4.9.7 Category 7 Reflective Practice
School librarians (n=16) functioned at the transformative level in reflective practice
(64%), which was the most represented category (77%) in the school librarian (n=10) semistructured interviews. School librarian L illustrated this in her statement: “So I show them there
are lots of different sources and that they can validate, go back to the written source, but they
can use the internet to get started. I tell, them, "Ask me first, and if I don't know I'll find out and
then I'll show you how to do it, so that I can do this quickly for you and save your time." School
librarian N stated, "the niche I find for myself and I still find this frustrating, is that students have
this digital information at their fingertips and I am sure they're using it in classrooms taking
tests, getting books, and all that, but I still find that there is just a need for research instruction. I
think that is what my role is." School librarian T stated that "I have online chat with kids and
parents and I have technology that is assigned at nighttime, so they can go on and have fun and
131

do technology at home that extends school". School librarian B said: “I work with the leadership
of the campus; those responsible for new teachers coming in; to show them what's new, relevant;
I bring in vendors who can take time to show them the different aspects of new products;
collaborate with teachers on weekly planning. School librarian W stated: “I go to an individual
teacher's room, but typically one shot PD, maybe for 15 minutes. I am often not asked for help,
but I support the 2 instructional technologists in my schools to provide resources for staff, model
the use of electronic resources for project. I am doing a genre review and I have after school
clubs book clubs and literacy groups.”
4.9.8 Category 8 Professional Growth
School librarian interview participants (n=13) rated this area among the lowest leadership
level in the interviews, with only three (23%) school librarians making any reference to either
attending or presenting professional development. School librarian W did comment, “I have to
find something on line or I’ll find this conference that is half way around the world to go to.”
This school librarian also stated: “My hands are tied for doing in-services; I am limited on that.”
School librarian O expressed a need for professional growth by commenting that “As a
technology leader you need to continue to be in-serviced on different programs that are out
there.” School librarian X mentioned the benefit to Professional Development of being on a
flexible schedule by stating: “I’m on a flexible schedule. So I do have the flexibility, that
whenever I need to work with a teacher or a student that I’m able to do that. Also, that I can
schedule professional development, or getting together with the teachers during their planning
time, that sort of thing. I think if I was on a … was on a rotation of seeing classes, I would not be
able to do that.”

132

4.9.9 Category 9 Ethics, Equity, and Diversity
Two responses (15%) were coded as Ethics, Equity, and Diversity. School librarian L
stated: “We have 90 different cultures represented on our campus. So we have quite a diverse
group of kiddos. I teach them about lots of things that the teachers just don't have time for. And
that way the kids are culturally and globally culturally aware.” School librarian B indicated that
“There’s a lot of poverty in my neighborhood, we’re like 98% Title 1. I mean 98% economically
disadvantaged.”
4.9.10 Category 10 Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
Along with Knowledge of Library and Information Studies, this category was mentioned
only once (7.6%) during school librarian (n=13) interviews. School librarian W made the
statement: “We bring in sponsors to help students pay for the required deposits on devices and
for book donations. We also work with our students to make them aware of what the community
needs; how what the students are learning can be useful to the community and the students will
know how to do community programming.”
The leadership scores of the school librarian interview participants were calculated to
determine the school librarians’ functioning leadership levels. Table 10 illustrates the technology
leadership scores and the leadership levels of each school librarian interview participant.
Table 10.
School Librarian Interview Participants Technology Leadership Scores and Levels (N=13)
Interview Participants
School Librarian B
School Librarian C
School Librarian D
School Librarian E
School Librarian L

Technology Technology
Score
Leadership Level
592
597
566
619
745

Transformative
Transformative
Adaptive
Transformative
Transformative
133

Table 10. – continued
Interview Participants
School Librarian N
School Librarian O
School Librarian Q
School Librarian R
School Librarian T
School Librarian W
School Librarian X
School Librarian Y

Technology Technology
Score
Leadership Level
486
644
499
531
602
448
426
402

Adaptive
Transformative
Adaptive
Adaptive
Transformative
Adaptive
Adaptive
Adaptive

4.10 Information Worlds Theory
School librarians and principals operate in complex, information rich connected worlds.
Information Worlds (IW) theory provided the framework for the examination of the perceptions
of school principals and school librarians in an urban school setting. The theoretical
understanding of the activities associated with leadership engagement within expected
professional teaching standards were explored using the five IW concepts (Burnett, 2017) of IW:
x

Social norms – appropriate, acceptable behavior in the specific environment

x

Social types – defined roles of principal and school librarian

x

Information behavior – normative behaviors suitable for information seeking, sharing,
and exchange.

x

Information value – the intrinsic value of school librarian leadership

x

Boundaries – limitations of information transfer

134

4.10.1 Social Norms
Principals (n=4) and school librarians (n=13) expressed specific expectations for the
acceptable technology leadership of the school librarian in the school. School librarian C stated
that
“Beyond just incorporating technology in what you already do, I’m also a promoter of
technology and a supporter of devices and concepts and behaviors surrounding
technology. I help teachers to incorporate technology, I help teachers to flip their
classrooms, using like Google classroom or One Note. So that kind of part. Then I train
students on how to like comport themselves through the Internet, with digital citizenship
lessons and stuff like that and then I also support like the laptop; like a kid will come in
and say “this isn’t working, how do I fix this? We’ll troubleshoot and navigate together.
All the while I’m still a very active librarian.”
4.10.2 Social Types
There was clear delineation between the positional role of the principal and the school
librarian relative to decision-making and the perception of who fulfilled the technology
leadership role as expressed by one school librarian. School Librarian E clearly stated that the
decision to hire two campus instructional technology specialists (CITS) had impacted her ability
to lead in the management of technology resources. School librarian E also stated that
“Librarian technology leadership has changed from what I thought it would be to what it
is, to what I do. Because it used to be that the librarian absolutely was the technology
leader because every individual library had its own level of technology and the school
had its own level of technology and that changed for me when the whole district went 1-1
because now the district now controls the technology.”
135

4.10.3 Information Behavior
The campus school librarians (n=13) indicated the use of several means of sharing
information to students and teachers. All (n=13) of the school librarians took advantage of
technologies such as electronic calendars, email, social media, texting, survey software, and
district provided resources to help students and teachers with lesson assignments, research,
project production, and book selection. School librarian L stated,
“And that’s a crucial aspect of what librarians do, it to help people navigate because
there’s so much information out here, it’s to help people navigate through all this
information, and to meet that information need that they have themselves.” Relative to
information behavior, School librarian B indicated that, “I provide services in terms of
telling them where to go for research. And I also help them find what’s available on our
portal and outside our portal.”
School librarians gave no indication of the ways in which they help principals with information
needs.
4.10.4 Information Value
The school librarians (n=13) indicated that providing information was important for
student academic development, but spoke less frequently of the value of information for
principals. School librarian F stated that
“You should be able to help the students with the technology that they are able to stay on
top of their game and be able to work with any technology that is provided to them.”
4.10.5 Boundaries
By examining the transcripts of the interviews, it was evident that the interplay of
boundaries was a prevalent element. It must be assumed, for instance, that the school librarian
136

would know where and how to obtain professional development. Principals 2 and 3 indicated
that the knowledge of training opportunities for school librarians was limited and even intimated
that the school librarian also did not have this information. Principals 2 and 4 also commented
that the school librarian’s activities outside of the school were unknown to them. Principal 1
commented,
“Well, there has to be professional development. There has to be support for the
librarians. And I’m not sure that there’s a lot of that.”
4.11 Summary
The School Library Media Specialist and Technology Integration Survey was analyzed
using SPSS. As previously stated survey questions were weighted and assigned to one of three
categories: entry (1), adaptive (2), or transformative (3). These categories were used to determine
a technology leadership score and the level of technology leadership as described in the survey
statements.
The findings from this research indicated that 16% of school librarians (n=4) reported
entry as their technology leadership level, 44% of school librarians (n=11) reported adaptive as
their technology leadership level, and 40% of school librarians (n=10) perceived themselves to
engage in technology leadership at the transformative level, based upon the survey responses.
The survey responses of urban principals indicated that 33% (n=4) of urban principals perceived
school librarians to be entry level technology leaders, 42% (n=5) of urban principals perceived
school librarians to be adaptive level technology leaders, and 25% (n=3) perceived school
librarians to be transformative level technology leaders.
The perception of interviewed principals (n=4) regarding the technology leadership
activity roles of school librarians indicated that principals (n=2) considered the school librarians
137

technology leadership level highest at the adaptive level, 50%. One (25%) principal interview
participant indicated that the quantity of technological programs were inhibitive to school
librarian technology leadership. Principal B commented that,
“But we struggle, too, because there are so many things in the HUB, and so many
resources that you can’t possibly do them all.”
The qualitative data from the semi-structured school librarian interviews indicated that
three (23%) of the school librarian interview participants (n=13) did not perceive themselves to
be technology leaders. Two (67%) of the three school librarian interview participants identified
the campus instructional technologist as the technology leader. One (33%) of the three school
librarian interview participants felt that the large student enrollment and the lack of clerical
support prevented the fulfillment of the role of technology leader. School librarian Y stated,
“I would say that in HISD, so in this current district that I serve, I do not see myself as
the technology leader that I’m used to being. In my previous district, I was thought of in
that capacity, that I was part instructional technology leader and part librarian. And
because of the staffing situation per student population, so in my previous employment we
had about 700 kids at that campus, and we had a librarian who served… me … as a
librarian who served the campus as a technology leader, but also as a librarian. And
then we had a clerk. So, a lot of the things that I do now in my new district, which serves
a population of about 900, but does not have a clerk, and I’m not thought of as an
instructional leader.”
The results of the analysis of the technology leadership survey, as well as the analysis of
the semi-structured interviews were discussed in this chapter. Chapter 5 includes my conclusions
of these findings and recommendations for future research.
138

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The final chapter of this dissertation contains the discussion of the findings from the
examination of the survey and interview responses of urban school principals and school
librarians into the perceptions of school librarians as technology leaders. The Partnerships
Advancing Library Media (PALM) (PALM Center, 2009) survey, The School Library Media
Specialist and Technology Integration Survey, was the instrument used to collect and examine
the perceptions of principals and the self-perceptions of school librarians of the technology
integration leadership role of school librarians. Qualitative data were collected through semistructured one-on-one interviews. In chapter 4 the research findings were detailed.
Chapter 5 will begin with the problem restatement, and then a discussion of the findings
as reported in chapter 4. Chapter 5 will conclude with implications and recommendations for
future research.
5.1 Problem Restatement
School librarians have long operated under state and national guidelines mandating a
leadership role in a variety of areas. Several professional organizations such as the American
Association of School Librarians (AASL) (1998, 2009, 2010, 2017), The National Board for
Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) (2000, 2009, 2012), the International Society for
Technology in Education (ISTE) (2010, 2017), as well as state school librarian professional
organizations such as the Texas Library Association have long held the view that school
librarians are trained, capable, competent educators and experienced technology leaders. Texas
recently approved new School Library Programs: Standards and Guidelines for Texas (SBEC,
2017). Embedded within the guidelines is a component of school librarian leadership, which
139

encourages school librarians to provide evidence of leadership activities in library best practices,
learning community, and professional development.
5.2 School Librarian Leadership
AASL first published standards and guidelines for school library programs in 1988.
Information Power: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs, became the established
model for the roles of school librarians. Information Power delineated three roles for the school
librarian, information specialist, teacher, and instructional consultant (AASL, 1988). As the
availability of technology increased in the K-12 setting, Information Power: Building
Partnerships for Learning (AASL, 1998), “described four roles of the school librarian: teacher,
instructional partner, information specialist, and program administrator” (AASL, 2017, p. 6).
Standards for the 21st Century Learner (AASL, 2009) expanded the school librarian’s role to
include leader. The five school librarian roles are embedded within the new AASL National
School Library Standards (2017).
The school library is a repository of resources that in today’s society includes books,
alongside computers, mobile devices, 3D printers, robots, circuitry kits, and virtual reality
devices. In the area of technology, school librarians are called upon to exhibit strong leadership
in the provision of technology resources, as well as the implementation of technology initiatives
centered on information literacy. As technology has become more prevalent in K-12 education,
the role of the school librarian is transitioning to a position of technology leader. School
librarians are called upon to demonstrate expertise in the acquisition, use, and management of a
variety of current, new and emerging technologies.
New frameworks designed to guide the school librarian’s development as technology
leaders have developed. One such framework, Future Ready Librarians, is an outgrowth of a
140

White House initiative, Future Ready Schools, which originally launched in 2014. Future Ready
Librarians builds upon the work of the Alliance for Excellent Education. A report by the
Alliance, Leading in and Beyond the Library (2014) explained the important role school
librarians “should play in state – and district wide efforts to transition to digital learning, or the
effective use of technology to improve teaching and learning” (2014). In 2016, the American
Library Association (ALA) and ISTE rolled out the vision for supporting school librarians as
leaders in digital learning. In 2017 ISTE announced revised Standards for Educators. While
these standards are not specific to school librarians, they give emphasis to the “role librarians
play in digital citizenship education” (Hanson, 2017). Digital Promise: Accelerating Innovation
in Education at http://digitalpromise.org/ is an additional approach to supporting all educators in
the use of technology as a way to personalize education and to engage students with new
strategies for the use of technology in improved student learning. While not specific to school
librarians such initiatives can support the school librarian’s personal professional development
and continued growth in technology literacy. The professional competence of school librarians is
promoted and encouraged in the expectations of the standards and national initiatives as school
librarians are prepared to effectively integrate technology into the learning process.
Given the strong mandate for school librarian leadership, the answers to three
research questions were sought in this study.
RQ1. To what extent do principals perceive school librarians as technology leaders?
RQ2. How do principals perceive that they enable school librarians to demonstrate
leadership in technology integration?
RQ3. To what extent do school librarians’ self-reports of leadership activities reflect
themselves as entry level, adaptive, or transformative technology leaders?
141

5.3 Review of the Method
This study concentrated on urban principals in the Houston Independent School District
(HISD). School librarians employed in HISD were also included in the study. Academic
improvement is a critical issue in the urban school setting. The challenges of urban school
districts include high concentrations of ethnic and racially diverse populations, high levels of
poverty, large numbers of second language learners, limited monetary resources, minimally
experienced teachers and high mobility rates for students and educators (Ahram, Stembridge,
Fergus, & Noguera, 2012). Given the strong mandate from professional school library
organizations, school librarians are uniquely positioned to lead literacy and technology initiatives
(Johnston, 2015). The specialized expertise that school librarians bring to the educational
environment can be leveraged to influence student learning and enhance teaching (Henri, 2014).
The study employed a mixed methods sequential explanatory method, which utilized a
refined technology leadership survey and semi-structured one-on-one interviews for quantitative
and qualitative data. The survey was distributed via email. In this study 38 completed surveys
were collected and 17 follow-up semi-structured one-on-one interviews were conducted. Six
interviews were conducted face to face and 1l were conducted by phone. The recorded
interviews ranged from 20 minutes to 65 minutes in length. All interviews were transcribed
verbatim.
There were 106 survey questions, 72 of which addressed the issue of school librarians’
technology leadership. Descriptive analysis techniques were used to analyze the first 31 survey
statements. The demographic data in survey statements 1 – 18 were analyzed and reported as
frequencies. Survey statements 32 through 104 were used to calculate a technology leadership
score level. The leadership scores were calculated to determine the school librarians’
142

functioning leadership level of entry, adaptive, or transformative. A technology leadership score
was calculated from survey data for the school librarians and a technology leadership score was
derived from the principals' responses of the extent to which the school librarian enacted
technology leadership.
A qualitative, descriptive approach using thematic analysis was used to analyze the
interview responses. The thematic analysis examined the interview data in order to identify
common patterns and to understand what the data indicated. Further analysis was done on 22
survey statements to determine how principals enable school librarians to demonstrate leadership
in technology integration.
5.4 Discussion of Findings
The following sections discuss the research findings and the relationship of the findings
to the research questions.
5.4.1. RQ1: To What Extent Do Principals Perceive School Librarians as Technology
Leaders?
This first question asked principals about the areas of technology leadership they
perceived school librarians demonstrated. To examine school principals perception of the
leadership activity roles of school librarians the ten sections of the investigation survey
addressed this phenomenon. Responses to the survey statements were considered to determine
the extent to which principals perceived school librarians to be technology leaders. Principals’
(N=12) technology leadership scores for school librarians (N=25) ranged from a low (entry) of
156 to a high (transformative) of 670.

143

5.4.1.2 Principals perceptions of school librarians’ technology leadership
Principal support is vital to the successful leadership enactment of all school personnel.
Having experienced the classroom as teachers themselves, principals should have an
understanding of the relationship and role of the teacher. Research indicates that the principal’s
understanding of school librarian leadership may be mired in prior experiences and limited
exposure to the roles and responsibilities of school librarians through principals’ training
(Church, 2010).
The principals’ (N=12) perceptions of school librarians as transformative leaders
compared to the school librarians’ perceptions were relatively low, although it could be
concluded that the principals’ perceptions of the school librarians’ technology leadership is more
likely to be adaptive than transformative. In the areas where school librarians tended to perceive
themselves as transformative, principals were far less likely to rate the school librarians as
transformative.
A rating at the adaptive level indicates that principals perceived school librarians to be
above the beginning stages of technology leadership. Adaptive level school librarians exhibit the
ability to be effective in the use of technology to meet students’ needs. Where student learning
management systems are utilized, the adaptive level school librarian is able to evaluate the
content for the veracity with which the technology resources are appropriate for formal
instruction.
Principals (N=12) rated school librarians as transformative level leaders in four of the
same categories as the school librarians (N=25), Knowledge of Teaching and Learning,
Knowledge of Library and Information Studies, and Administering the Library Media Program,
and Ethics, Equity, and Diversity. Principals (N=12) perceived school librarians to be
144

transformative at much lower percentages, 38.5% in the four matching categories. In the semistructured interviews, principals referenced Knowledge of Teaching and Learning only once. In
the category of Knowledge of School Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus),
principals and school librarians were in agreement that the school librarians were equally
distributed between adaptive and transformative levels of technology leadership. Principals
perceptions of school librarians’ technology leadership in the area of Ethics, Equity, and
Diversity were significantly lower than the school librarians.
Relative to Administering the Library Media Program, principals in the study perceived
school librarians to be highly proficient in the maintenance of facilities, resources, reflections of
diversity, and the ethical considerations in policies and practices related to digital platforms and
content. Principals spoke highly of the school librarians’ program administration in the
discussions, frequently praising the school librarians for well-planned and executed reading
celebrations, author visits, reading promotions and student engagement.
The majority of principals perceived school librarians to be at the entry level in an area of
growing responsibility, the integration of technology into instruction. The majority of principals
indicated an entry or lower adaptive level of technology leadership in the area of reflective
practice. Principals and school librarians held similar perceptions of the school librarians’
technology leadership in knowledge of teaching. Principals were equally distributed in the
perceptions of school librarians as entry, adaptive and transformative in the category of Leading
Innovation through Library Media Program. Principals perceived school librarians to have a
higher level of transformative technology leadership than the school librarians in the area of
Leading Innovation through Library Media Program, but were lower than the school librarians in
the adaptive leadership level.
145

At the adaptive level the school librarian is able to help students use technology
independently, as well as collaboratively with other students. The school librarian uses the
technology tools in a conventional way, but understands the importance of giving students access
to technology tools and guiding the student to greater independence in making the technology an
integral part of the learning tasks. School librarians perceived themselves to be adept in the
integration of technology and understood the advantages and disadvantages of the effective use
of technology. In the area of Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus),
school librarians and principals had similar perceptions, although the school librarians gave a
slight edge to the transformative level by 10 percentage points. Accomplished school librarians
perform at levels in reflective practice that allows for the critical personal evaluation of the
school library program and the school librarian. Adaptive and transformative level school
librarians increase program effectiveness, relevance, and rigor.
In two categories, principals perceived the school librarians to perform at the entry level,
Integrating Instruction, and Reflective Practice. In the category of Reflective Practice the school
librarians were at opposite ends of the spectrum. At the entry level school librarians are
minimally able to fully execute leadership activities as required by the standards.
5.5 Principal and School Librarian Agreement
Surprisingly, principals and school librarians were in agreement in the category of
Knowledge of Learners. Given that school librarians are certified teachers with classroom
experience, the higher rating in this category was expected. School librarians self-reported
themselves at the adaptive level of leadership at 44% to the principals’ 53.8% of the school
librarians’ adaptive leadership level. As accomplished teachers, school librarians work
collaboratively with classroom teachers and other educators incorporating the characteristics and
146

needs of student learners in order “to develop and modify instruction and programs to make
learning possible for all students.” (NBPTS, 2012). At the transformative level, school librarians
use technology in creative ways to enhance students’ higher-level thinking. The technology is
integral to the instruction rather than a functionless substitution (NBPTS, 2012).
Working collaboratively with other educators, school librarians use available technology
to design instruction that advances students’ learning goals. School librarians encourage digital
citizenship, appropriate use of social media, internet search strategies, and the ethical use of
information. School librarians practice self-evaluation to ensure continuous improvement.
Accomplished school librarians think critically about the daily best practices and conduct regular
self-evaluation/assessment of both the strengths and weaknesses of the program and themselves.
Developing strategies to evaluate decision making and choices can result in increased
professional growth, improved programs, and enhanced instruction.
Continuously acquiring new knowledge through seminars, workshops, online training,
and conference attendance is a way for accomplished school librarians to be both progressive and
innovative. School librarians, in accordance with state, local, and national standard, design and
deliver professional development. Interacting with other professionals keeps the school librarian
abreast of the trends and improvements in the profession.
School libraries are safe spaces where all users are welcome without regard to race,
nationality, language, ethnicity, religion, socio-economic status, gender, sexual orientation,
physical challenges or any other condition that may exist. Accomplished school librarians are
able to maintain environments that are comfortable, well lit, inviting, and physically accessible.
The expectation is for school librarians to provide open, least restricted access to the library
space and materials.
147

Accomplished school librarians are consistently engaged in activities that help advance
the library program in the community. They are advocates for the best educational opportunities
for all learners and help to build the image of the library with all stakeholders.
5.6. RQ2. How Do Principals Perceive That They Enable School Librarians to
Demonstrate Leadership in Technology Integration?
The work of Church (2010) indicates that the persistent perceptions that structure the
relationships between principals and the school librarians may have originated in the principals’
years as students, early in their classroom teaching, during principals’ training, and even into
their careers as principals having worked with or supervised a school librarian (Church, 2010;
Shannon, 2012). In addition to the principals’ experiential knowledge of the school librarian,
principals have limited exposure to library related publications or professional development
(Church, 2010, Kaplan, 2006).
To extract the enablers from the survey data, the 15 survey (Appendix N) statements
were analyzed and categorized by the list of enablers identified in the literature by Johnston
(2012b) and other researchers. The enablers (Johnston, 2012b) correlated to the survey
statements were opportunity for a leadership role and responsibilities, desire to make a difference
for students and teachers, professional development opportunities, commitment to continual
professional growth, expertise, professional organizations, technology resources, flexible
schedule, full time clerk, full-time on site tech support, and volunteers. Six survey statements
from Part I and Part II of the survey included the number of full-time fully credentialed school
librarians, number of desktops, laptops, and tablets under the supervision of the school librarian,
and whether BYOD is permitted. The corresponding survey questions can be found in Appendix
N.
148

The enabler descriptors delineated within Johnston’s Domains of Enablers and Barriers
to School Librarian Technology Leadership framework (Johnston, 2012b) were used. The
identified descriptors defined by Johnston were:
x

Opportunities for a leadership role and responsibilities

x

Desire to make a difference for students and teachers

x

Professional development opportunities

x

Commitment to continual professional growth

x

Expertise

x

Professional organizations

x

Technology resources

x

Flexible schedule

x

Full-time clerk

x

Full-time on-site tech support

x

Volunteers (Johnston, 2012b).

There were seven technology integration survey (Appendix N) categories into which one
or more of the descriptors fell and for which the school librarians’ enactment of technology
leadership required 1) full principal knowledge of the activity, 2) principal granted authority to
engage in the activity, and 3) principal delegation of the activity to the school librarian at the
campus and/or district level. The seven categories were Knowledge of Learners; Integrating
Instruction; Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus); Leading
Innovation through Library Media Program; Administering the Library Media Program;

149

Professional Growth; and Ethics, Equity, and Diversity. Principal responses of partially,
substantially, and fully engaged were analyzed for frequency distributions.
Of the 12 principals in this study, only one (8.3%) provided additional fully credentialed
professional support to the school librarian. Five (16%) principals permitted library volunteers,
with hours ranging from 10 hours per week to 45 hours per week. Eleven (92%) principals had
full time on site tech support. Seven (58%) of the school librarians were on a flexible schedule.
Relative to the availability of technology under the supervision of the school librarian one (8.3%)
principal provided desktops (20) to accommodate a typical class, 3 (25%) provided at least 10
laptops, and 3 (25%)provided enough tablets (20 – 30) to accommodate 2 typical classes. Seven
(58%) principals allowed BYOD. Three (25%) of the principals had displaced the school
librarian with full time clerical staff in the library. For the 20% (n=6) of the school librarians on
a fixed schedule the opportunities to participate in district, or campus, leadership opportunities
are hampered. Of the 11 identified enabling behaviors, the principals supported only five.
5.7 RQ3. To What Extent Do School Librarians’ Self-reports of Leadership Activities
Reflect Themselves as Entry Level, Adaptive, or Transformative Technology Leaders?
This third question asked school librarians to respond to the survey statements in the
NBPTS standards categories. School librarians’ responses in the study indicated the levels of
technology leadership they perceived themselves to exhibit. A technology score was calculated
for each section. The minimum total score was 156 and the maximum was 780. Responses to the
survey statements were considered to determine to what extent the school librarians’ selfreported leadership activities reflect themselves as entry level, adaptive level, or transformative
level technology leaders. Relative to the self-perception of technology leadership 40% of the
school librarians (N=25) perceived themselves to be transformative with minimal differences
150

between adaptive and transformative (44%) levels. In response to the survey, the school
librarians (N=25) had technology leadership scores that ranged from 222 to 745. Within the
group of semi-structured school librarian interview participants (n=13), 54% perceived the
school librarians’ level of technology leadership to be adaptive. The school librarian interview
participants’ technology leadership scores ranged from 402 to 745.
School librarians self-reported technology leadership at the transformative level in six of
the 10 NBPTS categories. The areas in which school librarians reported high levels of
technology leadership were Knowledge of Teaching and Learning, Integrating Instruction,
Knowledge of Library and Information Studies, Administering the Library Media Program,
Reflective Practice, and Ethics, Equity, and Diversity. An accomplished school librarians
understand and apply effective instructional design, employing learning strategies that address
differentiation and scaffolding, and allowing for the full participation of differing learning
abilities during instruction. The school librarians Knowledge of Teaching and Learning allows
for the application of “learning theories and best practices to design instructional opportunities
for the full range of students” (NBPTS, 2012). The school librarians’ expertise in this category
directly parallels the school librarians’ skills in providing open, least restrictive access, called for
in the category of Ethics, Equity, and Diversity. Accomplished school librarians allow for
cultural expression and promote fair use and proper attribution. Accomplished school librarian
provides all learners with the resources to become lifelong learners.
School librarians are effective program managers. Local, state, and national guidelines
have set the expectation that school librarians have effective oversight of the physical and fiscal
management of personnel, facilities, collections, and digital content. Accomplished school
librarians use data to evaluate the responsible management of the library budget, fundraising, and
151

to complete strategic planning. Using evidence based practices, school librarians communicate
the program successes, new acquisitions, scheduled library events, and provide technology
reviews to library patrons and other stakeholders. School librarians are leaders in directing
students and others to the resources to satisfy an information need. While school librarians have
traditionally provided access to resources, the addition of technology in the school setting
requires the application of and adherence to the research based foundational principles of the
profession.
School librarians are visionary leaders who work to inspire others. Using a collaborative
approach, school librarians use evidence based practices to strengthen the school library program
and create constructive change and new ways to solve problems. School librarians’ perceived
themselves to be transformative leaders in percentages that ranged from 48% (Knowledge of
Library and Information Studies) to 64% (Reflective Practice).
In the semi-structured interviews, school librarians referenced Knowledge of Teaching
and Learning the second most frequently, five times. It stands to reason, however, that school
librarian’s daily engagement in teaching in the school library would make this foremost in the
interview discussions.
From the quantitative data derived from the semi-structured interviews, Reflective
Practice, school librarians clearly perceive themselves to enact transformative leadership (64%).
School principals, on the other hand, perceived school librarians to engage in transformative
Reflective Practice leadership at only 23.1%. The self-examination of personal practices is useful
for professional growth
At the adaptive level the school librarian is able to help students use technology
independently, as well as collaboratively with other students. The school librarian uses the
152

technology tools in a conventional way, but understands the importance of giving students access
to technology tools and guiding the student to greater independence in making the technology an
integral part of the learning tasks. School librarians perceived themselves to be adept in the
integration of technology and understood the advantages and disadvantages of the effective use
of technology. In the area of Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus),
school librarians and principals had similar perceptions, although the school librarians gave a
slight edge to the transformative level by 10 percentage points. Accomplished school librarians
perform at levels in reflective practice that allows for the critical personal evaluation of the
school library program and the school librarian. Adaptive and transformative level school
librarians increase program effectiveness, relevance, and rigor.
5.7.1 Interpretation by Category
5.7.1.2 Knowledge of learners
As classroom teachers, school librarians have the skills to plan instruction based on the
knowledgeable insights of human development, learning theories, and factors that influence
students learning. At the adaptive level of technology leadership, the school librarian provides
students with some choice in technology tool selection and allows for the independent use of the
technology tools in conventional ways.
School librarians in this study tended toward a self-perception of the adaptive level of
technology leadership. Principals perceived school librarians to be adaptive level technology
leaders in this category. Principals also rated the school librarians in this category at a lower
(15%) transformative technology leadership level than the school librarians’ self-perception of
their transformative leadership level (28%).

153

5.7.1.3 Knowledge of Teaching and Learning
Accomplished school librarians employ numerous strategies to optimize student learning
based upon their knowledge of teaching and learning. They also demonstrate a broad based
understanding of the curriculum. At the transformative level school librarians use tools in ways
that have not been tried before and moves beyond the simple substitution of technology tool to
the adaptation of the technology tool for new applications. Compared to the principals (n=12)
(38.5%), school librarians (N=25) in the study perceived themselves to be transformative (56%)
level leaders in the category of Knowledge of Teaching and Learning.
5.7.1.4 Integrating Instruction
The integration of technology into instruction permits the development of varied lesson
design and delivery. The accomplished school librarian uses well-crafted instructional objections
to guide technology use. In the integrating instruction area of the survey, school librarians selfreported a transformative level of leadership. School librarians and principals in the study
differed significantly in their perceptions of the school librarians’ technology leadership level in
this category.
5.7.1.5 Knowledge of Library and Information Studies (Resource Focus)
This fourth category of the NBPTS standards states that “accomplished library media
specialist recognize that knowledge of and adherence to the principles of the profession are the
foundation upon which effective library media programs are built” (NBPTS, 2012, 27). School
librarians in the study perceived themselves to be transformative technology leaders in this area,
48%. They self-reported adaptive levels of technology leadership as well, 36% while only 16%
perceive themselves to be entry level. The principals and school librarians had similar

154

perceptions with principals indicating that in this area school librarians are generally
transformative and adaptive level technology leaders.
5.7.1.6 Leading Innovation through Library Media Program
As with integrating instruction, accomplished school librarians make good use of
instructional objectives to address a range of literacies that lead to lifelong learning.
School librarians in the study differed slightly from the principals in that the majority
self-reported the adaptive level of technology leadership, 48%, with transformative levels of
leadership at 24% and entry level leadership at 28%, while principals perceived the level of
transformative leadership at 30.8%.
5.7.1.7 Administering the Library Media Program
School librarians undoubtedly perceive that they are transformative leaders in the area of
program administration, which clearly stands to reason. The administration of the library program
is the core aspect of the library. The distribution was close to a normal curve with outliers on the
low end. School librarians did not perceive any one to be entry level technology leaders in this
area. School librarians rated themselves to be clearly transformative leaders, 56% and adaptive at
44%.
5.7.1.8 Reflective Practice
NBPTS standards indicate that accomplished school librarians purposefully employ
personal self-examination, which is “central to the responsibilities, professional growth, and
leadership of the library media specialist” (NBPTS, 2012, p. 51).
School librarians self-perceive a high level of performance in the area of reflective
practice. School librarians indicated they are transformative at 64%. At the adaptive level the
percent is 20% and at the entry level 16%. The mean was 43.04 and the standard deviation 6.940.
155

School librarians and principals significantly differed in the perception of the technology
leadership level. Principals judged school librarians to be transformative, 23.1%, in this standard
as compared to the school librarians’ 64%.
5.7.1.9 Professional Growth
Accomplished school librarians extend their knowledge of the profession in order to set
and meet long and short-term goals. In this area, NBPTS indicates that improvement needs and
future changes require responsibility, professional growth, and leadership. As technology
changes so rapidly, school librarians must seek regular opportunities to learn new concepts.
School librarians self-perceived a high level of performance as adaptive leaders. School
librarians reported an adaptive level at 52%, transformative at 24%and entry at 24%. Principals’
perceptions were close to these levels, with principals rating school librarians as transformative
technology leaders 30.8%.
5.7.1.10 Ethics, Equity, and Diversity
The NBPTS Ethics Standard states, “accomplished library media specialists uphold and
promote professional ethics and ethical information behavior” (NBPTS, 2012, p. 45). In this
digital age, the need to teach students to exhibit integrity in informational ethics is critical.
School Librarians are in a position to lead students and adults’ digital citizenship and respect for
the intellectual property of others.
School librarians perceived themselves to be one at the highest level of technology
leadership in this area, 52%. Another 36% perceived themselves to be adaptive, with only 12% at
the entry level.

156

5.7.1.11 Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships
Accomplished school librarians work within the community, but also across the globe in
building partnerships which will result in positive lasting changes for the improvement of the
library program. Transformative leadership in this standard includes the delivery of “professional
development opportunities to … colleagues both synchronously and asynchronously” (NBPTS,
2012, p. 33). School librarians perceived themselves to be largely adaptive (44%) in this area.
While principals scored school librarians as transformative (30.8%) slightly higher than the
school librarians (24%) did themselves, principals also scored entry and adaptive at the same
score (30.8%). School librarians (32%) perceived themselves to be entry slightly more than
principals.
5.8 School Librarians Self-Perceptions of Technology Leadership - Interviews
Three school librarians indicated that they did not perceive themselves to be technology
leaders. One school librarian in particular explained that the role of technology leader had been
eliminated from the library practice because of the district’s one to one laptop program. Because
of the one-to-one laptop initiative, the campus had hired two Campus Instructional Technology
Specialist (CITS) who now had responsibility for training, laptop maintenance, as well as the
development of online lessons. Another complaint was that all of the curriculum and textbooks
are totally on line and with the new district initiative school librarians did not have the same
access to digital content as “teachers of record. But it's not as driven by school librarians as it
used to be in my experience.” (school librarian E).
In HISD the licensing for some digital content did not include school librarians, content
specialists, assistant principals, counselors, or nurses. Another school librarian indicated that she
was a technology leader. Specifically, she indicated
157

"In my previous district, I was thought of in that capacity that I was part instructional
technology leader and part librarian. And because of the staffing situation per student
population, so in my previous employment we had about 700 kids at that campus, and we
had a librarian who served, me, as a librarian who served the campus as a technology
leader but also as a librarian. And then we had a clerk. So, a lot of the things that I do
now in my new district, which serves a population of about 900, but does not have a
clerk, and I'm not thought of as an instructional leader, I then do the job of that clerk and
that librarian. And so, I've had to drop that instructional technology piece almost
completely 'cause I serve more people and then I've lost an entire person. And then at
first, we didn't have the technology that I could even give suggestions on or for." (school
librarian L)
The third school librarian said,
"Because our district is a one to one and part of that progression is an instructional
technology role... Which is not me; it's another person on campus and I work in
conjunction with that person. We sometimes team create, like I work with her for that
digital citizenship stuff. So we build those lessons together." (school librarian C)
5.9 Summary
The school librarians in this study, in general, perceived themselves to be adaptive
technology leaders in such areas as knowledge of learners, leading innovation, professional
growth, and leadership, advocacy and community partnerships.
School librarians and the school principals possessed similar perceptions with regard to
the total leadership activities role of school librarians, however, the school librarians’ perception
of their technology leadership roles was more likely to be adaptive than entry or transformative.
158

With regard to the Knowledge of Learners component of the technology leadership activities of
the school librarians, it was concluded that the perceptions of the school librarians and principals
were not found to be significantly different; however, principals perceived the school librarians
to be more adaptive than transformative.
In the area of Knowledge of Teaching and Learning, school librarians perceived
themselves to be more transformative along with principals who also saw the school librarian as
transformative. School librarians perceived themselves to be more adaptive than entry level
technology leaders as well.
Category 3, Integrating Instruction was a category where school librarians tended to be
fairly evenly distributed between transformative (40%) and adaptive (36%) technology
leadership levels, with principals giving a higher percentage (38.5%) to entry level technology
leadership in this category. Integrating Instruction is the area that specifically addresses the
school librarians’ personal evaluation of their daily leadership activities, which promote the use
and facilitation of technology in instruction. Integrating technology is dependent upon the school
librarians’ personal knowledge and background in subject content areas and the skill with which
the school librarian employs technology tools. School librarians were nearly evenly distributed
between entry (28%) and transformative (24%) in adaptive leadership. The school librarians’
ratings were higher than the principals’ evaluations by 18 percentage points.
School librarians had significantly higher favorable perception of themselves
(transformative) than principals did specifically in the categories of Reflective Practice, and
Administering the Library Media Program. School librarians undoubtedly perceive themselves as
self-reflective (64%) and transformative school library administrators (56%).

159

In regards to Professional Growth, the perceptions of the school librarians and principals
were not significantly different; however, principals’ perceived school librarians to have a
slightly higher transformative technology leadership level than the school librarians. This was
one of three categories in which principals (N=12) perceived school librarians to be equally
distributed between entry, adaptive, and transformative.
Principals and school librarians held similar perceptions of the school librarians’
technology leadership level in Leadership, Advocacy and Community Partnerships, with
principals giving school librarians a slightly higher technology leadership score.

160

CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this study was to provide a description of the technology leadership levels
of urban school librarians as perceived by the school librarians and to describe the urban school
principals’ perceptions of the technology leadership levels of school librarians. In addition, this
study explored the ways in which principals enabled school librarians to engage in technology
leadership activities. The school librarian's perceptions were self-reported. This study used a
mixed methods sequential explanatory research design. Both quantitative and qualitative data
were collected using an email survey and semi-structured interviews. All of the study
participants were employees of the Houston Independent School District (HISD).
As data were analyzed, minimal differences between perceptions held by school
librarians and principals emerged. Principals (42%) perceived the school librarians to be adaptive
level technology leaders. Thirty-three percent of principals perceived school librarians to be
transformative level leaders. At the lower end of technology leadership, entry level technology
leadership, 25% of principals perceived school librarians to be at the beginning stages of using
technology in instruction.
The most frequently referenced area of principal enablement identified in the qualitative
data was the area of Leadership, Advocacy, and Community Partnerships. The principal
interview participants (n=4) expressed surprise that the school librarian was actively engaged in
the larger community.
An analysis of the data revealed that, in general, school librarians (44%) perceived
themselves to be adaptive level technology leaders. The surprising category that school
librarians self-perceived a transformative level of technology leadership was Reflective Practice,
161

64%. Given the nature of the daily practices of school librarians, it was expected that in the areas
of Knowledge of Teaching and Learning and Administering the Library Media Program school
librarians would self-report transformative technology leadership, both at 56%. Equally
surprising was that Knowledge of Learners was among the lowest percent (7%) of self-perceived
transformative leadership categories. Knowledge of Learners was the category that school
librarians most referenced in the interviews, and yet, they self-reported being adaptive level
technology leaders.
6.1 Limitations
The sampling method was a limitation. This study had a small sample size, used a
purposive sample, and was restricted to a single urban district. Although this study was limited
by the small sample and purposive sampling method, this exploratory study provided initial
findings that warrant future study and consideration for expansion into other areas. There was no
attempt to solicit participation from school librarians or principals from surrounding school
districts. The results are purely descriptive and are not generalizable to other districts. The
statistical tests that could be used were strictly limited by the use of a purposive sample. While
percentages are reported, they are not useful for comparisons between the two groups of study
participants.
Uneven study respondent numbers also hampered this research. The number of
respondents was extremely low among both principals and school librarians. While the expected
principal/school librarian pairs did not materialize, four principal/school librarians were
identified. The numeric technology leadership level scores, ranging from entry (one) to adaptive
(two) to transformative (three), could potentially be used to establish school librarian/principal
pairs based upon the technology leadership levels for future research.
162

The upheaval in the selected district was also a contributing factor in the limited
participation. The retirement and the subsequent search for a new superintendent occurred
during the survey release. The Texas State Legislature also assessed the district a $261 million
payment under a process known as “recapture”. Recapture is the requirement for property
wealthy school districts to send a payment to the state to equalize the disparities between
property-wealthy and property-poor districts. The district launched a proposition to be included
on the November election ballot, which entailed district-wide town hall meetings held in
available schools. The final issue was the potential state takeover of 13 chronically low
performing schools within HISD. State oversight of the entire district was threatened. A
proposed school improvement plan, Achieve 180, designated 32 campuses as off limits to
research.
The survey was released at the end of the 2017 school year, which also accounts for the
low response rates. The survey was extended to include the fall semester. Just days before the
start of school in September, Hurricane Harvey hit the Gulf Coast and Houston was particularly
devastated by massive flooding. The start of school was delayed for 2 weeks, with approximately
20% of HISD schools experiencing opening delays well into October.
As can be expected with self-reported phenomenon and personal interviews, a level of
bias is expected in the results. While interviews and self-report questionnaires allow the study
participants to describe their personal experience in their own words the questions can be
leading. In addition the respondents may or may not be prompted to elaborate. The responses
from predetermined lists of options produce insightful answers.

163

Another limitation of this research was the researcher’s familiarity with the study
participants. The researcher had worked with many of the survey respondents for more than a
decade. As a result, the anonymity of the participants was imperfect.
The use of the PALM survey, although used in at least four other research studies, proved
to be challenging. The survey instrument itself is long and several survey respondents did not
complete the survey in full. In particular, questions about the availability and quantity of
computers, laptops, and mobile devices inside and outside of the library proved to be redundant
and resulted in disparate responses ranging from zero to 999.
The email survey has several advantages over more traditional surveys, but a low
response rate, which increases the risk of bias, is a potential shortcoming (McPeake, Bateson, &
O’Neill, (2014). Data integrity must be maintained, but shortening the survey may increase the
response rate (Sahlqvist, Song, Bull, Adams, Preston, Ogilivie, 2011). The effect of survey
length on the response rate is unconfirmed, but one study suggests, “the level of survey response
can be influenced by questionnaire length” (Beebe, Rey, Ziegenfuss, Jenkins, Lackore, Talley, &
Locke, 2010).
6.2 Implications for Future Research
Technology has resulted in significant change over the last four decades. Students in
today’s schools have never known a world without computers. The rapid change with which
technology evolves has created opportunities and the necessity for school librarians who are
prepared to provide access to current and emerging technologies, to teach information literacy,
and to guide students through the tsunami of Internet information.
The sample was limited to experienced school librarians whose tenure in school libraries
ranged from seven years to 43 years. Early career school librarians possibly will self-report
164

higher levels of technology leadership as they may demonstrate greater comfort with the rapidity
of change in technologies.
This study revealed the necessity to conduct further investigations into school librarians’
self-perceptions of their technology leadership in light of newly released National School Library
Standards (AASL, 2017). The National School Library Standards indicate that upon completion
of school librarian preparation programs, new school librarians “are expected to base
instructional and collaborative efforts on their knowledge of learners and work to develop their
teaching to engage learner interest and motivation” (AASL, 2017, p. 31). In this study, 40% of
participating school librarians were transformative level technology leaders and 46% of the
school librarian interview participants were transformative level technology leaders.
One area for further research is an investigation into the perceptions that classroom
teachers hold of school librarians. Classroom teachers and school librarians are contemporaries.
Additionally, the rise of some of the technology related positions in schools of Classroom
Instructional Technologist have caused tension and concern among school librarians (Johnston,
2015) as those and similar positions have some of the same responsibilities as school librarians
for integrating technology into the classroom.
The sample in this study mirrored the demographics of the library profession in general.
HISD is a predominately minority school district and yet minority educators are not entering the
library profession in HISD. Some factors that may inhibit minority educators participation in
school librarian preparation programs may include the high cost of obtaining the degree, the lack
of monetary incentive to acquire a master’s degree (HISD no longer provides a pay increase for
an advanced degree), and lack of job security for leaving the “classroom.” While classroom
teachers experience job security, school librarians are frequently replaced with non-certified
165

personnel. As a site-based decision-making district, principals make the final decisions in regards
to hiring and retention of all campus personnel. A study of HISD as a site-based decision-making
district and a district with a mandate for fully credentialed school librarians may be warranted.
Principals and school librarians both had previous experience as elementary teachers.
Given the national emphasis on STEM education, perhaps more educators with experience in
STEM subjects would bring a different perception of technology leadership to the library.
Having worked as a mathematics teacher before, one school librarian was interested in providing
technology leadership in the areas of STEM. A study of the school librarian’s support of STEM
education is an area of possibility for further study.
Another area of possible study includes the relationship of the provision of school library
support and the school librarians’ ability to enact technology leadership. A strongly noted
hindrance to school librarian technology leadership was the difficulty experienced as the school
librarian is often responsible for the many clerical tasks associated with the school library (book
check in/out, shelving, collecting and recording fines, book order processing).
As new state and national standards are released, the mandates for school librarians to
exhibit high levels of technology leadership are increasing. A beginning step is the school
librarians’ recognition of the unique expertise inherent in professional preparation training and
the emerging leadership opportunities as school instructional technology evolves. The inclusion
of leadership training prospects in school librarian professional organizations and in school
librarian preparation programs warrants investigation. This study has implications for the preservice training school librarians receive in university based school librarian preparation
programs. School librarian preparation programs adhere to national standards that promote both
school librarian leadership and the use of technology in school libraries. The development of
166

leadership skills and competence in technology integration are integral components of exemplary
training for future school librarians.
The role of the school librarian has evolved in the decades since the first NBPTS
standards were developed beginning in 1998. The standards, Integrating Instruction and
Professional Growth, were interwoven throughout the standards and were updated to include a
separate section, Leadership, as well as the separation of Ethics from the original Ethics, Equity
and Diversity standard. Every ten years the NBPTS standards are updated (Garry, 2010). School
librarians provide instruction to every student on the campus and "must educate students in a
variety of ways, from formal instruction to individualized attention, as students seek information
for personal interests" (NBPTS, 2012, p. 19).