Abstract
With the advancement of information technology, national library websites have become
an essential vehicle for their users to access official information and library resources.
They serve the general public from different countries, age groups, ethnicities, and
educational levels. The purpose of this dissertation research is to examine the usability,
user experience (UX), and information architecture (IA) of national library websites in
different countries. Focal areas of investigation include: (1) the primary content elements
on national library websites' homepages, (2) the extent to which various quantitative
measures of heuristic evaluation and IA assessment overlap with those measures from
task-based usability testing, (3) the extent of the impact of cultural and national origins on
participants’ assessment of usability of national libraries’ websites. The research design
of this dissertation study features (1) a content inventory of 28 national library websites,
(2) a web IA assessment and a usability evaluation of five national library websites, and
(3) usability tests for three national library websites involving 30 participants. The key
findings of this dissertation research help to establish a list of common content elements
on the homepages of national library websites worldwide and provide a concrete,
practical, and feasible procedure to evaluate such websites. The results show statistically
significant differences in task performance with the use of national library websites
between different groups of users, such as those from different genders and educational
backgrounds. Significant correlations were found between the overall participant
satisfaction of a national library website and multiple variables such as the content, visual design, and information architecture, as well as between heuristic evaluation scores and
participants’ ratings of some aspects of the websites.
Based on the specific results from various phases of the research, this dissertation
presented detailed recommendations that could help to make national library websites
more usable for all its users, including the first-time users across different genders, age
groups, and educational backgrounds. Furthermore, in order to achieve a high level of
satisfaction, it is recommended that national libraries focus on six factors affecting
participants’ satisfaction: the quality of information, the trustworthiness of the content, the
credibility of the content producers/providers, the website’s overall structure, the design,
and the aesthetics of the website.
Another significant contribution of this dissertation research is its use of various
methods used to evaluate national library websites and its integration of the results of the
different methods to obtain a broader and more comprehensive understanding of these
findings. Future UX research on national library websites could expand the research by
incorporating the methodology used in this research, testing a greater number of national
library websites around the world, and involving users from all walks of life.

Keywords: national library websites, usability, user experience, information
architecture, content inventory, heuristic evaluation, usability testing

Chapter 1 Introduction
With the advancement of information technology, national library websites have
become an essential access point to information. There are a number of definitions for
the term “national library.” While some authors believe that a national library must have a
copy of every book published in the country, others claim that a national library should
have a comprehensive collection that enables it to perform national service (Brackmann,
2014). The European definition for the term suggests that a national library is a library
that keeps “the nation’s published identity by collecting every work by, for, or about the
nation, in an almost archival sense” (Brackmann, 2014, p. 34). Examples of national
libraries include the National Library of Kuwait, the National Library of Australia, the Royal
Library of Belgium, the National Library of Brazil, and the National Library of China.
This dissertation research investigates the usability, user experience (UX
henceforth), and information architecture (IA henceforth) of the websites of national
libraries from a variety of countries. First, content inventory of 28 national library websites
was performed. Following content inventory exercises, Web IA assessment and a
usability evaluation of five national library websites were conducted. The third phase of
the dissertation research involves usability tests for three national library websites.

1.1 Problem Statement
National libraries are often considered the most notable libraries within their
respective countries. They have large collections, and one of their key missions is to
collect and preserve everything that is published in or about the country. A good portion
17

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

of national libraries’ collections is made available online through the libraries’ websites.
With the advancement of the internet and the development of digital collection platforms,
the importance of library websites is increasing. National library websites are accessible
24/7, serving people from different countries, ages, ethnicities, and educational levels
with their digital collections and online services.
Since a national library serves people of all backgrounds, age groups, and
educational levels, it is important to ensure a high level of usability and IA (information
architecture), as well as positive UX of the website. Usability is “how effectively, efficiently
and satisfactorily a user can interact with a user interface” (U.S. Dept. of Health and
Human Services [HHS], n.d. a). UX (user experience) is defined as “how a person feels
when interfacing with a system” (Gube, 2010), whereas IA is defined as “the process of
organizing information including defining site hierarchies, web content, labeling schemes
and navigation in a way that is easy for people to find, understand and manage the
information” (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services [HHS], n.d. a).
Previous research on national libraries has largely focused on comparing national
libraries within particular regions or one or two continents. Seldom has any research
investigation explored the differences among websites of national libraries in more than
two continents. It is important to look at national library websites from a worldwide
perspective, as users of national libraries may have common needs. Without a cross
examination and comparative analysis of national libraries worldwide, it is difficult to
generalize the findings of one or two national library websites.

18

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

To fill this gap, this dissertation research investigates the usability, UX, and IA of
national library websites worldwide. It samples national library websites from all
continents and sub-regional groups that are set by the United Nations. The three research
questions that are investigated are:
RQ1. What are the primary content elements on national library websites' homepages?
RQ2. To what extent do the results of heuristic evaluation and IA assessment, which are
based on an evaluation checklist of a website, correlate with the results of task-based
usability testing?
RQ3. To what extent do cultural and national origins impact participants’ assessment of
the usability of national libraries’ websites?
The findings of this dissertation research help improve our understanding of UX
and identify usability problems and user needs related to the use of national library
websites worldwide. They shed light on how IA is related to usability and user satisfaction
as well as provide insight into the evaluation of IA and on the question of whether cultural
and national origins have an impact on participants’ user experience with national library
websites. This dissertation research also contributes to systematic evaluation of national
library websites and assist in enhancing the IA and UX of these websites and library
websites in general.

19

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

1.2 Definitions
This section covers various definitions presented in the existing literature on main
concepts pertaining to this dissertation research: usability, user experience (UX), and
information architecture (IA).
1.2.1 Usability. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) (n.d. b), “usability refers to the quality of a user's experience when interacting with
products or systems, including websites, software, devices, or applications.” It is
connected to three things, effectiveness, efficiency and user satisfaction, and consists of
several factors including intuitive design, ease of learning, efficiency of use, memorability,
error frequency and severity, and subjective satisfaction (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human
Services [HHS], n.d. b). Similarly, Nielsen (2012) says that usability is defined by five
components: learnability, efficiency, memorability, errors, and satisfaction. Meanwhile,
ISO 9241-11 defines usability as the “extent to which a product can be used by
specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and
satisfaction in a specified context of use” (International Organization for
Standardization [ISO], 1998). This last definition is used as the proper definition for this
dissertation research.
1.2.2 User experience. User experience (UX) is a wider concept. According to
U.S. Department of Health and Human Service, UX is “a broad term for several disciplines
that study the effect of design on the ease of use and level of satisfaction with a product,
site, or system” (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services [HHS], n.d. a). According to
ISO (2010), UX is a “person's perceptions and responses resulting from the use
20

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

and/or anticipated use of a product, system or service.” It focuses on understanding
users, their abilities and needs, and how they feel about a product. Designers of UX not
only consider the navigation of websites, but also their capability for easy engagement
(Northcott, 2002). They consider users’ needs in every step of the product’s lifecycle
(Krug, 2014). UX is "every aspect of the user's interaction with a product, service, or
company that make up the user's perceptions of the whole” (Usability Body of Knowledge,
n.d.). It “comprehends all aspects of digital products and services that users experience
directly—and perceive, learn, and use—including products’ form, behavior, and content”
(Gabriel-Petit, n.d.). It also considers the users’ broader experience and their response
to it. The major factors that affect the quality of UX are learnability, usability, usefulness,
and the attractive appeal of the products (Gabriel-Petit, n.d.). In this dissertation, the
definition of UX by ISO (2010), as cited earlier, is employed.
1.2.3 Information architecture. The term “information architecture” was first
introduced in 1975 by Wurman, who was an architect (Isa, Noor, & Mehad, 2010).
However, Davis (2013) stated that if we look into the history of IA, we will find that its
foundations come from library science. Nowadays, IA has become a popular term in
studies that are related to UX and website design and evaluation.
IA can be defined in different ways. Rosenfeld, Morville, and Arango (2015) pointed
out that it is difficult to describe everything that IA is about in a single definition. Therefore,
they proposed four definitions to describe this term. First, they defined it as the “structural
design of shared information environments” and second as the “synthesis of organization,
labeling, research, and navigation systems within digital, physical, and cross-channel
21

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

ecosystems” (Rosenfeld et al., 2015, p. 24). They described it in the third definition as the
“art and science of shaping information products and experiences to support usability,
findability, and understanding” (Rosenfeld et al., 2015, p. 24). Their last definition was
that IA is an “emerging discipline and community of practice focused on bringing
principles of design and architecture to the digital landscape” (Rosenfeld et al., 2015, p.
24). IA is also defined as “the process of organizing information including defining
site hierarchies, web content, labeling schemes and navigation in a way that is easy
for people to find, understand and manage the information” (U.S. Dept. of Health
and Human Services [HHS], n.d. a), and this is the definition for this dissertation research.
In short, what architects do to buildings is similar to what information architects do to
websites and software. Information architects build bridges between users and content
and help users to know where they are and what to expect (Morville, 2012).

1.3 Dissertation Organization
This dissertation consists of six chapters. Chapter 1 (the present chapter) is the
introductory chapter and contains the problem statement, definitions of main concepts
mentioned in this dissertation, and the organization of this dissertation. Chapter 2 reviews
literature about national libraries, the UX and IA of library websites, empirical studies
about national libraries, and main matrices for evaluating the usability and IA of websites.
Chapter 3 presents the three research questions and the three research methods used
in the dissertation research: the content inventory, IA and usability evaluation, and
usability testing. Chapter 4 reports the results of dissertation research, and Chapter 5
22

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

discusses those results and their implications. Finally, Chapter 6 presents a summary of
the findings and compares them to previous research. It also presents the dissertation’s
scholarly contributions, practical value, and limitations, as well as recommendations for
future research.

23

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chapter 2 Literature Review
This literature review covers research in five areas: first, literature about national
libraries and their history and roles; second, previous studies about the UX and IA of
library websites; third, empirical studies about national libraries; fourth, major matrices
used to evaluate usability and web IA; and fifth, studies that looked at the relation between
culture or nationality on usability evaluation.

2.1 National Libraries
Libraries are important to societies and countries “both historically and culturally”
(Altay, 2015, p. 48). They have a major educational role through providing knowledge that
has been preserved for ages in books and other resources (Osborne, 2004). National
libraries, in particular, preserve intellectual resources for future generations, represent the
heritage of countries, and nurture and develop education, culture, and research. Osborne
(2004) describes the role of national libraries as follows:
The existence of a national library signals a country’s dedication to establishing
itself confidently in its cultural and literary heritage, while providing its citizens with
a sanctuary of last resort in the pursuit of knowledge and information. A national
library is not only regarded as a source of national pride but also as a symbol of
nationhood, representing the collective memory of the nation. (p. 1-2)
National libraries serve not only traditional users, but also “virtual users (both
domestic and foreign)” (Sroka, 2002, p. 67). They should make resources available for
both the people of the country and users from all around the world (Khan & Shehzad,
24

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

2015). That could be done through websites. National library websites began appearing
in the mid-1990s (Iqbal & Warraich, 2012). However, having a website is both an
opportunity and a challenge for a national library because the website’s design could
either engage or disengage users (Sroka, 2002).

2.2 Empirical Studies on UX and Web IA of Library Websites
Usability makes websites more user-friendly (“Website Usability is Important,”
2015). The increase of usability in a website helps to “increase repeat visitor traffic,”
“increase overall traffic,” “increase sales (for commerce sites),” “reduce abandoned
sessions,” “increase outside links to the site,” and “increase worker productivity” when
using intranets and web applications (“Why Usability?,” n.d.). If users find that a website
requires too much effort or skill to use, notice difficulty in finding information, or have
difficulty reading the content, they simply abandon the website because there are
thousands of other websites available that they can use instead (Nielsen, 2012).
A great number of research studies have been conducted to evaluate usability,
UX, and IA of library websites, especially academic library websites. Robins and Kelsey
(2002) conducted a study about the IA of Louisiana State University Libraries’ website.
To do that, they used two data collection methods. First, they conducted a survey that
had questions based on the Software Usability Measurement Inventory (SUMI), a
standard software usability instrument. The aim of the survey was to better understand
the users’ overall opinions and feelings about the website and its navigation, design,
layout, colors, graphics, headings, and language. A total of 74 individuals participated in
25

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

the survey, including graduate and undergraduate students, faculty, staff, and people not
affiliated with the university. Second, the researchers conducted usability tests in which
314 undergraduate students participated. Each student was asked to perform two tasks
only. The survey provided the researchers with a general understanding about user
attitudes toward the website, while the usability tests guided them to specific usability
problems. Based on the findings, some changes were made to the website. For example,
many out-of-date files were removed, and a database of resources was added.
Becker and Yannotta (2013) also conducted a study involving four rounds of
usability tests to help redesign a website for the Hunter College Libraries. They began
with a content inventory of the existing website. Next, they conducted usability sessions
to evaluate the usability and IA of the old website and the drafts of the new one by
performing the same tasks with the participation of 20 students. Each session was about
35 minutes long and involved the use of think-aloud protocol. The researchers were able
to design a user-centered website based on the users’ needs. One of the unexpected
outcomes of this dissertation research is that no matter how usable a website was, user
training was needed.
Another research study by Battleson, Booth, and Weintrop (2001) evaluated the
website of the University at Buffalo Libraries. To do so, they conducted 11 sessions of
usability testing in which undergraduate students participated. Students were encouraged
to “think aloud” and were instructed to return to the homepage before beginning each of
the tasks. The researchers stated that usability problems found could not have been

26

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

identified without the usability testing. They emphasized on the importance of users’
insights and comments in finding out where and why problems occurred.
Chow, Bridges, and Commander (2014) conducted a nationwide study in which
they evaluated 1,469 library websites through an evaluation of experts and an online
survey. The evaluated websites were of academic and public libraries in all 50 American
states, and the study looked at usability, IA, design, layout, navigation, website
management, and content. The researchers found that there were commonalities among
the library websites, including providing information about operation hours, library
location, events, OPACs access, and online renewal, as well as contact information and
the option to send feedback. One of the major findings was that the majority of libraries,
72.3%, did not conduct any usability testing to evaluate their websites. Another finding
was that half of the library websites were managed by librarians.
Khan, Zahid, and Rafiq (2014) used a questionnaire to evaluate the usability of the
website of the University of Management and Technology Library in Lahore, Pakistan,
focusing mainly on user satisfaction. Based on their findings, they recommended updating
the library website on a regular basis and using a graphical user interface (GUI) to make
searching easier and more user-friendly. They also recommended adding a video on the
website on how to use different services and including a demo of the library website for
new students’ orientation.
Several other studies focused on the evaluation of mobile websites’ usability,
which is a new field of inquiry (Fung, Chiu, Ko, & Lo, 2016). One of these studies was
conducted by Fung et al. (2016). The researchers evaluated the usability of the University
27

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

of Hong Kong Libraries’ mobile website using the usability heuristics developed by
Nielsen (1994). They found that there were usability problems in five specific areas of
heuristics of the mobile website, including problems related to content display.
Table 2.1 summarizes the methods used to evaluate websites in six empirical
studies reviewed in this section. These methods are questionnaires, usability testing,
content inventories, and heuristic evaluation. The majority of studies focused on
academic libraries, suggesting a gap for usability research on national library websites.
This gap is further addressed in the next section of the literature review.

Table 2.1
Empirical Studies on Usability and Web IA of Library Websites

Authors

Websites

Targeted
Evaluation
Areas

Methods

User Participants

Robins
and
Kelsey
(2002)

Louisiana State
University
Libraries

IA

questionnaire,
usability tests

74 participants
(students, faculty,
staff, general
public) 314
undergraduate
students

Becker
and
Yannotta
(2013)

Hunter College
Libraries

IA, usability

content
inventory,
usability tests

20 students

Battleson
et al.
(2001)

University at
Buffalo Libraries

usability

usability tests

11 undergraduate
students

28

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chow et
al. (2014)

1,469 academic
and public
libraries in the
USA

IA, usability,
design, layout,
content,
website
management

usability
checklist,
online
questionnaire

1,266 participants

Khan et
al. (2014)

University of
Management
and Technology
Library, Lahore

usability, user
satisfaction

questionnaire

100 participants

Fung et
al. (2016)

University of
Hong Kong
Libraries’ mobile
website

usability

heuristic
evaluation

none

2.3 Empirical Studies on National Libraries
Very few studies evaluated the usability of national library websites. One of them
is the study by Inal (2018) in which the usability of the National Library of Turkey website
was examined. The website was evaluated by 57 undergraduate university students
enrolled in the departments of information systems engineering and software engineering
who took the human computer interaction course. To perform the evaluation, the students
used the checklist by Jacob Nielsen (Nielsen’s heuristics). The data collected was later
enriched using the System Usability Scale (SUS) and the Net Promoter Score (NPS). The
research study identified 519 usability problems in a website rated as having low usability
characteristics, especially in the aspect of “consistency and standards.” The study
showed that the website needed improvement in the consistency aspect: “All the design
elements, content, interactions and actions on the website should be consistent and
standard so that users can easily adopt and use it without difficulties” (Inal, 2018, p. 74).
29

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

One of the limitations of the study was that the evaluators of the website were not usability
experts, as acknowledged by Inal (2018).
Khan and Shehzad (2015) evaluated the websites of five national libraries:
National Archives and National Library of Bangladesh, National Library of India, National
Library of Pakistan, National Library Board of Singapore, and National Library of Sri
Lanka. Khan and Shehzad (2015) found that the website of the National Library Board of
Singapore was the best among the five websites and that the website of the National
Library of Bangladesh ranked fifth. The researchers recommended that national libraries
should design their websites in a way that appeals to international users and make
content available in several languages. They emphasized that the purposes of the
websites should be clear and that links to the libraries’ social media accounts should be
made available.
Another study on the usability of national library websites is that of Walia and Gupta
(2013) in which homepages of 23 websites of national libraries in Asia were evaluated
using a usability evaluation checklist. According to the study, the website of the National
Library of Japan came first, and the website of the Asia and National Library of Maldives
came last. The researchers suggested that national library websites should have a simple
URL that is easy to memorize and uses the country’s top-level domain name, user-friendly
terminology, and navigational tools that enable people to use the website easily. They
also recommended that national library websites include a page for previous events and
avoid using moving animations that could divert the attention of users.

30

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Mohamadesmaeil and Koohbanani (2012) conducted a study about the usability
of Iran National Library’s website. For their evaluation, a checklist consisting of 11
evaluation criteria and 160 components was developed. It found that the lowest usability
was in the website’s appearance and the highest was in the navigation. One of the major
recommendations of the study was that a national library website should be designed in
a way that supports the main goals of the library.
As shown in Table 2.2, most of the studies focusing on the usability of national
library websites concerned national library websites in Asia. No studies were found about
the usability of such websites in other regions of the world. Another gap identified in the
existing literature is that all studies used expert evaluation as a method to evaluate the
websites. None of them used usability testing, involved any participants, or considered
user feedback. A third gap is that most of the studies focused on usability, rather than UX
in general or IA.

Table 2.2
Empirical Studies on National Library Websites

Authors

Websites

Inal (2018)

National Library
of Turkey

Targeted
Evaluation
Areas

Methods/Metrics

User
Participants

usability

Heuristic
evaluation by
undergraduate
students

Yes, but
no user
testing

31

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Khan and
Shehzad (2015)

National libraries
of Bangladesh,
India, Pakistan,
Singapore, Sri
Lanka

usability,
impact

expert
evaluation

none

Walia and Gupta
(2013)

23 websites
of national
libraries in Asia

usability

usability
checklist

none

Mohamadesmaeil
and Koohbanani
(2012)

Iran National
Library

usability

usability
checklist

none

2.4 Matrices and Measurements for Usability and Web IA
There are several methods to evaluate usability and web IA. The most common
methods to evaluate usability are card sorting, focus groups, contextual task analysis,
participatory design, surveys, charrettes, cognitive walkthrough, heuristic evaluation, oneon-one interviews, quality assurance testing, and usability testing. Methods related to
usability testing are hallway testing, expert review, thinking aloud protocol, RITE method,
“subjects in tandem,” remote, unmoderated, or asynchronous usability, and componentbased usability testing (Iqbal & Warraich, 2012).
One of the best-known methods to evaluate usability is using heuristic evaluation.
Nielsen developed several versions of heuristics that are inexpensive, fast, and easy to
use and could help in finding usability problems (Nielsen, 1994). The latest version of
these heuristics includes ten principles: “visibility of system status,” “match between
system and the real world,” “user control and freedom,” “consistency and standards,”
“error prevention,” “recognition rather than recall,” “flexibility and efficiency of use,”
32

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

“aesthetic and minimalist design,” “help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from
errors,” and “help and documentation” (Nielsen, 1995a). The process of heuristic
evaluation consists of four steps: a training session that precedes the evaluation; the
actual evaluation, which requires a group of evaluators to examine an interface
individually then discuss usability problems together; a debriefing session to discuss the
outcome of the evaluation; and a severity rating of the usability problems found. Severity
is rated based on three factors: frequency, impact, and persistence (Nielsen, 1994).
Nielsen (2001) suggested 113 design guidelines for homepage usability that
covered 26 areas including the website’s purpose, content writing, archives, links,
navigation, and graphics. These guidelines could be used to evaluate the usability of any
website’s homepage.
To evaluate IA in particular, the only model found was the Web ArchitecturalInducing Model (WA-IM) developed by Isa, Rahim, and Mehad (2010) (see Figure 2.1).
The scholars developed a model based on user perspectives rather than on practitioners’
perceptions. This model is composed of various areas: information availability,
information quantity, validity, reliability, overall structure, main topic, cue sign, font, sign,
transition zone, point entry, color, and information placement. These areas are divided
into five categories, called factors. The five factors are content-information, content-trust,
navigation-traits, navigation-wayfindings, and context-information design (Isa et al.,
2010). The model was tested empirically by the researchers using an online survey in
which 427 users participated. They concluded that it was a good model to investigate the
IA of products such as websites and mobile applications.
33

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

There are other matrices that focus on IA as well as other factors. Travis (2016)
suggested 247 web usability guidelines, which are grouped into nine categories: “home
page usability,” “task orientation,” “navigation and IA,” “forms and data entry,” “writing and
credibility,” “page layout and visual design,” “search usability,” “help, feedback,” and “error
tolerance” (see Appendix A). The guidelines are extensive and exhaustive, and they cover
almost all areas relevant to website evaluation. In addition, Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014) designed a checklist to evaluate library websites and used it to
evaluate 1,469 public and academic library websites. The checklist includes 67 questions,
on IA, usability, design, layout, navigation, website management, and content. Not all
questions were published by the researchers; see Appendix B for some of the questions
included in the checklist.

34

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 2.1 Web Architectural-Inducing Model (WA-IM)

These checklists, including the checklists of Khan and Shehzad (2015), Walia and
Gupta (2013), and Mohamadesmaeil and Koohbanani (2012), were used to evaluate
national library websites in particular. Khan and Shehzad (2015) evaluated the websites
of five national libraries of Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Singapore, and Sri Lanka. To do
so, they evaluated 35 factors (see Table 2.3) that were divided into several categories:
accessibility, speed and bandwidth sensitivity, navigation and links, legality, graphic
design, purpose, human interactivity, vision, and overall effectiveness.
35

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 2.3
Factors Used by Khan and Shehzad (2015) to Evaluate National Library Websites
Category

Factor

Accessibility

Breadth of browser compatibility
Minimum & maximum monitor resolutions
Plain text/HTML alternate entry paths
Appeal to universal audience
Multilingual translations
Disability access & services

Speed and bandwidth
sensitivity

Overall page sizes & Complexity
Average download times
Download order & image redraws
Wait to first reaction/ interaction times

Navigation and links

Navigation functionality & clarity
Link integrity
Quality & depth of links provided
External vs. internal link ratios for access to core information

Legality

Original artwork, music, intellectual property, etc.
International copyright laws are correctly observed
Quotations, images & intellectual property from 3rd parties
are appropriately cited
Legal site content & legal site activities

Graphic Design

Exceptional artistry
Elegance & sophistication of core design concepts
Typography & font styles
Clever synergies of visual elements

Purpose

Specific mission or website goals
Message & its expression
Usefulness & quality of content, free resources, etc.

Human interactivity

Social Blogging

Vision

Forward thinking
Advanced solutions
Quality of predictive research

36

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Overall Effectiveness

Professionalism in achieving website goals
Updated
Use of Web 2.0
URL clarity
Quality Standards
Search Engine Visibility

Walia and Gupta (2013) evaluated the homepages of 23 websites of national
libraries in Asia using a usability evaluation checklist that was designed based on
guidelines suggested by Nielsen and the National Informative Center (NIC). The checklist
was divided into eight major areas: general features, URL of the homepage, window title,
date and time, navigation, search, graphic, and animation. Its evaluation factors are listed
in Table 2.4.
Mohamadesmaeil and Koohbanani (2012) developed a checklist that they used to
evaluate the usability of Iran National Library’s website (See Appendix C). It consisted of
160 components and 11 evaluation criteria: data credibility, data accuracy, data currency,
surface of coverage and specific audiences, interactive and interchangeable views, data
objectivity, non-textual views, accessibility, efficiency, appearance, and navigation.
Navigation was divided into several areas: features of explorer’s title, features of page’s
title, textual and meta-textual links, internet logo of page, site map or profiles, and internal
search engine.

37

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 2.4
Factors Used by Walia and Gupta (2013) to Evaluate National Library Websites
Category

Factor

General features

Show the library name and/or logo in a reasonable size and
noticeable location
"About Us" link on the homepage
“Contact Us” link on the homepage
Archiving and accessing the past events
Related information underline appropriate heading
Emphasize the highest priority

URL of the homepage

Recall value of URL
Responsiveness with both www.library.com and “library.com”
Use of country’s top-level domain

Begin the widow title with the informative word
Features of the window
Don’t include the top-level domain name such as “.com” in the
title of the homepage
window title
Features of the date
and time

Use international time zone
Spell out the month in date

Use user-friendly language
Features of the content Avoid redundant content
writing
Labelling a clearly defined area should be avoided
Spell out abbreviations and acronyms

Navigation features
of the website

An active link to the homepage on the homepage should be
avoided
Path information on each webpage should be avoided
Provide homepage link in every page
Link should start with informative words
Allow link colours
Don’t use generic instructions, such as “Click Here” as a link
name
Don’t use the word “Links” to indicate links on the page

Searching feature
of the website

Provide an input box instead of just giving them a link to
search
Input boxes should be wide
Don’t label the search area with a heading; instead use a
“Search” button to the right of the box
38

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Alternate tag provided for non-text elements
Graphics and animation
Avoid watermark graphics
of the website
Having mechanism to control scrolling and blinking the content

Most of the evaluation tools used in the reviewed literature focused on usability
only, as shown in Table 2.5. A couple of the tools mentioned IA, like the checklists of
Travis (2016) and Chow et al. (2014), and only one, is the model of Isa et al. (2010),
focused on IA alone.

Table 2.5
Measurement Tools for Evaluating Library Websites

Authors

Measurement Tool
Used

Areas
Evaluated

Number of
Components

Nielsen (1994)

heuristic evaluation
checklist

usability

10

Khan and Shehzad
(2015)

checklist

usability

35

Walia and Gupta
(2013)

checklist

usability

30

Nielsen (2001)

Checklist

usability

113

Isa et al. (2010)

Web ArchitecturalInducing Model
(WA-IM)

IA

13

Travis (2016)

checklist

usability, IA

247

Chow et al. (2014)

checklist

usability, IA

67

39

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Mohamadesmaeil and
Koohbanani (2012)

checklist

usability

160

The measurements used for evaluating national library websites do not differ a lot
from general usability measurements. Therefore, they can be used to evaluate any library
website and any other kind of website. However, national library website evaluation
checklists that were reviewed had a few unique factors that are important for national
library websites in particular, since they serve not only people of certain countries, but
also international audience. These factors include appeal to universal audience,
multilingual translations, correct observation of international copyright laws, use of
country’s top-level domain in the homepage’s URL, and use of international time zone.
Common factors mentioned in the three checklists used to evaluate national library
websites are shown in Table 2.6. The three checklists mentioned content, navigation,
search, and graphics as important areas in website evaluation. Because there is no
checklist that contains all important areas that need to be included in the evaluation of
national library websites, there is a need to come up with an integrated checklist.

40

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 2.6
Common Factors in Checklists Used to Evaluate National Library Websites
Authors of Checklists
Factors

Accessibility

Khan and
Shehzad (2015)

Walia and Gupta
(2013)

√

Mohamadesmaeil
and Koohbanani
(2012)
√

Contact us

√

√

√

√

Content

√

Credibility

√

√

Currency

√

√

Dates in international
format

√

Font

√

Graphics

√

√
√

Logo

√

√

√

√

Navigation

√

√

√

Search

√

√

√

URL

√

√

2.5 Usability Testing and Culture
Previous studies have rarely focused on cultural influence on usability testing.
Clemmensen, Hertzum, Hornbæk, Shi, and Yammiyavar (2009) found the following:
…the cultural background of experimental participants is rarely reported, task
41

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

scenarios are assumed to be culturally unbiased, interface heuristics are
presented as universals, and disagreements between studies are rarely discussed
in terms of cultural effects. This is surprising because definitions of usability (e.g.,
ISO 9241, 1998), and HCI in general, emphasize the importance of concepts such
as the context of use, which includes users’ cultural background. (p. 212)
The few research studies that have investigated the relation between culture and
the results of usability testing had contradictory or inconsistent findings. Some, such as
Sears, Jacko, and Dubach (2000) and Vatrapu and Pérez-Quiñones (2006), indicated
that culture actually did influence usability evaluations, while others, such as Hall, De
Jong, and Steehouder (2004), found that it did not.
In 2000, Sears et al. (2000) investigated whether international differences
influenced the usability of websites. They recruited participants who were internet users
from the United States and Switzerland and conducted their study in Zurich, Chicago, and
Miami. The participants were 53 people recruited at a bank in Zurich and 193 people who
were recruited at DePaul University and Florida International University. The research
design included task performance and two questionnaires: a pre-task demographics
questionnaire and a post-task usability questionnaire. Sears et al. found that there were
some significant differences in the website’s assessment provided by participants from
different countries. For example, Swiss participants disagreed that the information on the
website was of high quality more than American participants did. In addition, Swiss
participants gave low ratings to the tested website in regard to being interesting, likability,
the possibility of using the website regularly, and the possibility of recommending the
42

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

websites to others.
Six years later, Vatrapu and Pérez-Quiñones (2006) examined how culture could
affect usability testing when participants and evaluators were from different cultures. The
website that they used for their study was that of Virginia Tech’s chapter of the Association
for India's Development (AID), which was mainly used by Indian students. Vatrapu and
Pérez-Quiñones (2006) introduced usability problems in website that had previously
matched Nielsen’s ten heuristics (1994). For instance, they changed the color of the
homepage’s background from white to orange and made the navigation bars inconsistent
across pages. They then recruited 16 Indian graduate students from different Virginia
Tech programs to evaluate the website. Half of the sessions were moderated by an Indian
evaluator, while the other half of the session was moderated by an Anglo-American
evaluator. The study’s findings indicated that more usability problems were identified, and
more suggestions were made about the website when the participant and evaluator had
a similar cultural background.
Meanwhile, Hall et al. (2004) compared the user experiences of participants from
different regions of the world using a website. The testing was conducted in English, which
was not the first language for any of the participants, and the website used was a
database of the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) called Web of Science. All
participants were male doctoral students of technical sciences at the University of Twente,
and most of them had previous experience in using the database. Two methods were
used in the study: a usability test involving retrospective think-aloud protocols as well as
a plus-minus evaluation. With retrospective think-aloud protocols, participants performed
43

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

tasks and were videotaped as they did so; they then were asked to watch their recording
and try to verbalize they thoughts they had during the task performance. With the plusminus evaluation, participants were given printouts of help pages from the database and
were asked to put pluses and minuses in the margins to represent what they thought
about what was on the pages. They were also asked to explain the reason for their
judgments. The study found that there were no significant differences between the
participants from different regions in terms of the tasks completed successfully and in the
number of problems identified in the retrospective think-aloud sessions.
Several other studies focused on the relation of culture on the think-aloud protocol
used in usability testing. For example, Shi (2010) investigated the cultural perspective of
the think-aloud usability testing and the communication between the participants and the
moderators. To do that, Danish and Chinese evaluators and participants were recruited,
and four kinds of usability tests were held: with Chinese participants and Chinese
evaluators; with Danish participants and Danish evaluators; with Chinese participants and
Danish evaluators; and with Danish participants and Chinese evaluators. Usability tests
involving Chinese participants were held in China, and tests involving Danish participants
were held in Denmark. The number of tests conducted was 64, involving 16 evaluators
who moderated four tests each, and the software used was a wedding invitation
application prototype. Each of the two-hour sessions included an hour-long task
performance, as well as an interview and a questionnaire. The participants were asked
to think aloud as they performed tasks using the system, while evaluators took notes of
the usability problems that were faced. Shi (2010) found that the culture of the moderators
44

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

did affect the testing. Chinese evaluators tended to choose the middle rank when they
were asked to rate the severity of usability problems found. However, the study found that
the culture of participants did not always influence the results of the testing. When
comparing the time spent on thinking aloud, it was found that Danish participants spent
significantly more time thinking aloud than the time they spent in silence, while Chinese
participants spent more time in silence than they spent thinking aloud. In addition, Danish
participants also made more negative comments than Chinese participants did. There
were also some similarities between the participants from different countries. For
example, both Danish and Chinese participants gave culture-related comments about the
application when the evaluators were foreign than when the evaluators were from the
same country as them.
Clemmensen et al. (2009) reviewed studies that investigated the differences in
cultural cognition when using the thinking-aloud method. According to their study, culture
has an impact on the relationship between participants in usability tests and evaluators
and on how participants verbalize their opinions. Based on the studies they reviewed,
Clemmensen et al. (2009) presented several practical recommendations for practitioners
conducting usability testing in cross-cultural settings. These recommendations include
the need for having pauses when Eastern participants are thinking aloud because Eastern
participants’ task performance is hindered by thinking aloud, unlike participants from the
West. Another recommendation was to have evaluators and participants from similar
cultures when possible because the number of usability problems identified could be
affected if there were cultural differences, according to Clemmensen et al. (2009).
45

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

In conclusion, a number of research studies showed that there was a difference in
how participants from different regions expressed themselves and interacted with
evaluators during usability testing sessions. They also showed that the results vary in
terms of the relation between culture and between task performance and usability
evaluation. It should be noted that these studies used different kinds of websites, and
none of the studies investigated the relation of culture and the usability evaluation of
national library websites. One would imagine the design of a national library website
should consider the cultural aspect because of it serves users from different cultures and
have a global audience.

46

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chapter 3 Methodology
This chapter covers the questions and methods used in the dissertation research.
It thoroughly explains how the study’s three phases—of content inventory, IA and usability
evaluation, and usability testing—were executed.

3.1 Research Questions
There are three research questions for this dissertation research. They are:
RQ1. What are the primary content elements on national library websites' homepages?
RQ2. To what extent do the results of heuristic evaluation and IA assessment, which are
based on an evaluation checklist of a website, correlate with the results of taskbased usability testing?
RQ3. To what extent do cultural and national origins impact participants’ assessment of
the usability of national libraries’ websites?
The research approach used for dissertation research is the mixed methods
approach of collecting and analyzing both qualitative and quantitative data. This approach
was chosen because it suits the research problem and would help to better evaluate the
national library websites’ IA and usability and to understand the UX.

3.2 Method
The research methods used are content inventory, IA evaluation, usability heuristic
evaluation, and usability testing. Both qualitative and quantitative data were collected
through each method used. The targeted areas of investigation that were within the scope
47

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

of investigation are the usability (efficiency, effectiveness, and satisfaction), UX, and IA
of the websites. Figure 3.1 shows the study’s three phases and targeted areas that were
investigated in each phase.

Phase I
Content Inventory
•IA

Phase II
Heuristic Evaluation
•IA
•Usability

Phase III
Usability Testing
•IA
•Usability
•UX

Figure 3.1 Phases of the dissertation research data collection

3.2.1 Phase I. In this phase, a content inventory was conducted for the homepages
of national websites of countries in different parts of the world. A content inventory is a
list of all the content on a website, including text, pictures, and documents. A content
inventory should include the following data for each piece of content: unique content ID,
title, URL, file format, author or provider, location, meta description, categories or tags,
and the creation, revision, and access dates (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services
[HHS], n.d. c). The aim of the content inventory was to come up with the major content
elements mentioned based on the frequency as well as unique content elements.
To conduct the content inventory, an inventory worksheet was employed (see
Table 3.1). The worksheet was developed by Dr. Rong Tang for her Usability and User
Experience Research course based on the template provided by Maadmob.com, an
48

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Australian freelance agency specializing in IA and UX (see Appendix D) (Content
Inventory Spreadsheet, n.d.). To ensure validity, a content inventory of the first website
conducted by the researcher was reviewed by a library and information science professor.
The content inventory of the rest of the websites were conducted by the researcher by
herself.

Table 3.1
Content Inventory Worksheet

Item
Number

Content
Elements/
Navigation
Title

Description
of Content
Element

Keep?
Revise?
Delete?

Reason
for Decision

Notes

Sample. The sampling frame for this research study was developed based on a
list of national library websites that were found to have an English version. The process
began with the procurement of a list of all United Nations member countries from the
organization’s website. A search was conducted to locate the English website of the

49

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

national libraries of each country on the list. If a country had more than one national library
website in English, only one was listed.
The selection was based on the collection type. If a country had two or more
national library websites in English, the one with the general collection was listed. For
example, South Korea had several libraries including the National Digital Library of Korea,
the National Library for Children and Young Adults, as well as the National Library of
Korea. The website of National Library of Korea was chosen for the evaluation. For the
United States, there are websites of National Library of Education, the National
Transportation Library, National Library of Medicine, the National Agriculture Library, and
the Library of Congress (LOC). LOC was selected because it has a general collection and
is the largest library in the world. The total number of national library websites listed was
97, from 97 different countries. Next, the researcher selected from the list two websites
from each geographical sub-region. According to the United Nations’ classification, there
are five continental regions and 17 geographical sub-regions (United Nations Statistics
Division, 2016). See Table 3.2 for the continental regions and sub-regions.
A stratified random sampling was performed to select the websites, based on the
sub-regional country groups, using a web-based random selection tool, Random Choice
Generator of textfixer.com. The random sampling process did not include websites from
sub-regions that had no national library websites in English: Micronesia and Polynesia. It
also did not include websites from sub-regions that had only one national library in English
because the national library websites of those regions were directly included in the

50

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

sample. Those two sub-regions are Northern Africa and Melanesia. Websites selected
from each sub-region are presented in Table 3.3.

Table 3.2
Continental Regions and Geographical Sub-Regions
Continental
Regions

Geographical Sub-regions

Africa

North Africa

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Americas

Latin
America
and the
Caribbean

Northern
America

Asia

Central Asia

Eastern Asia

South-eastern
Asia

Southern
Asia

Europe

Eastern
Europe

Northern
Europe

Southern
Europe

Western
Europe

Australia and
New Zealand

Melanesia

Micronesia

Polynesia

Oceania

Western
Asia

Table 3.3
National Library Websites Evaluated in Phase I
Geographical
Sub-regions

Countries

Library Names

URLs of English Websites

North Africa

Egypt

Bibliotheca Alexandria

http://www.bibalex.eg/en/d
efault

Kenya

National Library Service of
Kenya

http://www.knls.ac.ke/

South
Africa

National Library of South
Africa

http://www.nlsa.ac.za/

Sub-Saharan
Africa

51

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

National Library of Bolivia

http://www.nationallibraryof
bolivia.org/

National Library and
Information System

https://www.nalis.gov.tt/

Canada

Library and Archives
Canada

http://www.baclac.gc.ca/eng/

United
States

Library of Congress

https://www.loc.gov/

Kazakhstan

National Library of the
Republic of Kazakhstan

https://nlrk.kz/page.php?lan
g=3

Uzbekistan

National Library of
Uzbekistan

http://www.natlib.uz/en

South
Korea

National Library of Korea

http://www.nl.go.kr/english/i
ndex.jsp

Mongolia

National Library of Mongolia

http://nationallibrary.mn/en/

Indonesia

National Library of
Indonesia

http://perpusnas.go.id/hom
epage/

Malaysia

National Library of Malaysia

http://www.pnm.gov.my/en
glish.php

Sri Lanka

National Library of Sri
Lanka

http://www.natlib.lk/

Pakistan

National Library of Pakistan

http://www.nlp.gov.pk/

Lebanon

The Lebanese National
Library

http://www.lnl.gov.lb/englis
h/index.html

Jordan

National Library of Jordan

http://www.nl.gov.jo/En/Ho
mePage.aspx

Hungary

National Széchényi Library

http://www.oszk.hu/en

Moldova

Moldova National Library

http://www.bnrm.md

Ireland

National Library of Ireland

http://www.nli.ie/

Norway

National Library of Norway

https://www.nb.no/en/thenational-library-of-norway/

Latin America Bolivia
and the
Trinidad
Caribbean
and Tobago
Northern
America

Central Asia

Eastern Asia

Southeastern Asia

Southern
Asia

Western Asia

Eastern
Europe

Northern
Europe

52

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Montenegro

National Library of
Montenegro

https://nb-cg.me/?lang=en

Slovenia

Slovak National Library

http://www.snk.sk/en

Belgium

Royal Library of Belgium

http://www.kbr.be/en

Austria

Austrian National Library

https://www.onb.ac.at/en/

Australia

National Library of Australia

https://www.nla.gov.au/

New
Zealand

National Library of New
Zealand

http://natlib.govt.nz/

Melanesia

Vanuatu

National Library and
Archives of Vanuatu

http://www.vanla.org/

Micronesia

No national library website in English found

Polynesia

No national library website in English found

Southern
Europe
Western
Europe
Australia and
New Zealand

3.2.2 Phase II. The second phase of data collection was a heuristic evaluation of
the usability and IA of five national library websites. The websites were evaluated using
five different metrics: Nielsen’s heuristics, homepage, navigation and information
architecture, page layout and visual design, and national library features. To do that, a
checklist was compiled from several sources. More information about the used checklist
is presented in Table 3.4.
Section 1 of the checklist consisted of and Nielsen’s heuristics (Nielsen, 1995a).
Sections 2, 3, and 4 were three parts of Travis’s (2016) web usability guidelines (see
Appendix A). Travis’s list consists of 9 parts, and the three sections used for this analysis
are: homepage, navigation and IA, and page layout and visual design. To make the
checklist more suitable for evaluating national library websites, a set of evaluation criteria
53

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

suitable for library website design were developed. This section consisted of principles
that are based on various sources. That brought the checklist used in Phase II to a total
of 115 principles (see Appendix E).

Table 3.4
Information About the Checklist Used in Phase II
Sections of the Checklist
Section 1
Evaluated
aspect

Usability

Section 2

Section 3

Section 4

Section 5

Homepage

Navigation
and IA

Page
layout and
visual
design

National library
features and content

Section
Principles
Source

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)
Khan and Shehzad
(2015)
Nielsen
(1995a)

Travis
(2016)

Travis
(2016)

Travis
(2016)

Mohamadesmaeil
and Koohbanani
(2012)
Walia and Gupta
(2013)
Principles suggested
by author

Number
of criteria
included
in section

10

20

29

54

38

18

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Phase II study sample. Five national library websites were selected out of the 28
websites used in Phase I. These websites are the website of the National Library of
Kuwait (NLK), the National Library of Pakistan (NLP), National Library of South Africa
(NLSA), the Royal Library of Belgium (KBR), and the Library of Congress (LOC) (see
Table 3.5). They are from five different geographical sub-regions: North America,
Southern Asia, Western Asia, Western Europe, and Sub-Saharan Africa.

Table 3.5
National Library Websites Evaluated in Phase II
Geographical
Sub-regions

Countries

Library Names

URLs of English
Websites

Western Asia

Kuwait

National Library of
Kuwait

https://www.nlk.gov.kw/

Southern Asia

Pakistan

National Library of
Pakistan

http://www.nlp.gov.pk/

Sub-Saharan
Africa

South Africa

National Library of
South Africa

http://www.nlsa.ac.za/

Western Europe

Belgium

Royal Library of Belgium

http://www.kbr.be/en

Northern
America

United States

Library of Congress

https://www.loc.gov/

3.2.3 Phase III. Three national library websites were selected out of the five
websites evaluated in Phase II. The three websites were of the National Library of Kuwait
(NLK), the National Library of Pakistan (NLP), and the Library of Congress (LOC). They
represented three different geographical sub-regions: North America, Southern Asia, and
55

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Western Asia. See Table 3.6 for information about the websites and see figures 3.2-3.4
for screenshots of the websites’ homepages. Usability tests were conducted to evaluate
the IA, UX, and usability of the websites.

Table 3.6
National Library Websites Tested in Phase III
Geographical
Sub-regions

Countries

Library Names

URLs of English
Websites

Western Asia

Kuwait

National Library of
Kuwait

https://www.nlk.gov.kw/

Southern Asia

Pakistan

National Library of
Pakistan

http://www.nlp.gov.pk/

Northern
America

United States

Library of Congress

https://www.loc.gov/

56

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 3.2 Homepage of the National Library of Kuwait (National Library of Kuwait, 2018)

57

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 3.3 Homepage of the National Library of Pakistan’s website (National Library of Pakistan,
2018)

58

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 3.4 Homepage of the Library of Congress’s website (Library of Congress, 2018)

Phase III study population. The population of the usability tests were users of
national library websites. Nonprobability convenience sampling was employed.
Phase III study sample. Thirty people participated in the usability testing. They
were all students, both graduates and undergraduates, to ensure that they had similar
characteristics, needs, and experiences in using national library websites. Fifteen of the
participants were natives from the countries whose websites were tested and fifteen were
nonnatives, because a national library website is usually used by the people of that
country and is also used by people from other countries.

59

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

The recruitment of participants began in September 2017 and continued till the
usability testing sessions were completed in December 2017. Due to the fact that
participants from particular countries were required, the recruitment process lasted three
months. To recruit participants, fliers were posted around the campus of Simmons
College, where the usability testing was to be held. Because international participants
were needed, the fliers were also emailed to offices of international students of
universities in the Fenway area in Boston, Massachusetts. Universities were chosen for
the distribution of flyers because the targeted study population included both graduate
and undergraduate students. The flyers and recruitment message are in appendices F
and G.
Usability testing procedure. To measure UX, IA, and usability, another method
for data collection was used: usability testing. There were three different tests. Each test
involved the use of one national library website by ten participants: five participants native
to each of the countries whose websites are being tested and five nonnatives. Both the
native and nonnative participants used the English version of library websites for their
tasks. The decision to use only the English versions for the usability testing was based
on the consideration of the fact that the content of the English version of the library
website typically differs from the native version. For the purpose of task performance
comparison, the participants should use the exact same websites. The participant
composition for each website tested is presented in Table 3.7.

60

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 3.7
Participant composition for tested websites

Tested Websites

Number of participants
Natives

Nonnatives

Total

National Library of Kuwait

5

5

10

National Library of Pakistan

5

5

10

Library of Congress

5

5

10

The

usability

testing

sessions

were

run

at

Simmons

Usability

(http://internal.simmons.edu/students/slis/slis-tech/technology-spaces/usability-lab)

Lab
at

Simmons University (known as Simmons College until September 2018) in Boston,
Massachusetts, from October 25, 2017, to December 15, 2017. Each participant took the
test individually, accompanied only by the researcher. Each session was about 45
minutes long and began with the researcher greeting the participant and asking him or
her to read and sign the consent form (see Appendix H). Next, instructions were written
and read aloud to the participant to ensure consistency in all sessions. The participants
were encouraged to think out loud while performing the tasks and be frank in their
comments about the websites. They were told that the aim of the session was not to judge
them or test their abilities or knowledge in using the websites so that they feel comfortable.
They were also ensured of confidentiality.
Every session consisted of three components: a pre-test interview, task
performance, and post-test questionnaires. In the interview, the researcher asked the
61

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

participant questions intended to gather basic information such as age and education
level. The interview also included questions about the participants’ use of the internet and
library websites (see Appendix I for the interview questions).
After the interview, each participant was provided with a printed list of seven tasks
that were performed on a desktop computer. The tasks were very similar for the three
websites and included finding the library website, finding the “About” page, finding the
names of the books available in the library about a specific topic, finding e-books about
another topic, finding the opening times of the library, finding the contact information, and
finding the social media accounts of the library or library activities. The tasks are
summarized in Table 3.8 (see appendices J, K, and L for the tasks in details).
The participants were observed as they performed the tasks, and the sessions
were recorded by Morae software through a document camera for later review. The
researcher also took notes on the participants’ behaviors, comments, and nonverbal
expressions, as well as any difficulties they encountered. After performing the tasks, the
participants responded to a questionnaire provided through Morae software. The
questionnaire, found in appendices M, N and O, intended to identify participant
satisfaction rate as well as opinions regarding the website and its usability and IA. After
each session, participants were provided with a $25 Amazon gift card.

62

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 3.8
Tasks for Each of the Tested Websites
Tested Websites

Task
Number

National Library
of Kuwait

National Library
of Pakistan

1

Go to English version of
website

Go to English version of
website

Go to website

2

Locate the “About us”
page

Locate the “About us”
page

Locate the “About us”
page

3

Find resources about
public health

Find resources about
public health

Find resources about
public health

Find books about
Kuwait

Find e-books about
higher education

Find books/printed
materials about higher
education

5

Find library’s opening
hours

Find library’s opening
hours

Find library’s opening
hours

6

Find library’s contact
information

Find library’s contact
information

Find library’s contact
information

7

Find library’s social
media accounts

Find information about
library’s activities

Find library’s social
media accounts

4

Library of Congress

Data analysis. In the analysis of data, a variety of focal areas of investigation were
addressed for three phases of the research study. Based on the content inventory, the IA
of the websites was addressed; based on the usability and IA evaluation, usability and IA
were addressed; and based on the usability testing, three areas were analyzed: usability,
UX, and IA.
In analyzing the qualitative data collected through the usability sessions, the
researcher looked for themes that were repeated by several participants. A code was set
63

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

for each theme. After coding, the coded data from different usability testing sessions were
compared with each other.
The analysis of quantitative data was done using SPSS software. First, descriptive
statistics were presented about the data. Next, different kinds of statistical tests were
used. The Mann–Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis test were used to analyze several
questions to see if there were significant statistical differences in the user satisfaction
among the websites. Nonparametric correlations were used to see if there were relations
between different variables such as between the satisfaction rate and the different IA
factors and between internet skills and the satisfaction rate.

64

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chapter 4 Results
This chapter reports the results of the three phases of this dissertation research.
The Phase I section presents results of the content inventory of 28 national library
websites worldwide, including the common and unique content elements on the
homepages of those websites. The Phase II section provides findings from the usability
evaluation as well as the IA evaluation of five selected national library websites using a
checklist. Lastly, the Phase III section outlines both the quantitative and qualitative results
of the usability testing involving 30 participants of three national library websites.

4.1 Phase I Content Inventory
From June to August 2017, the researcher conducted a content inventory of the
English version of the homepages of 28 national library websites using a table (see Table
3.1) based on the template provided by Maadmob.com (see Appendix D) (Content
Inventory Spreadsheet, n.d.). To establish a list of sample websites for the study, national
library websites that had an English version were included in the list. If a country had
more than one national library website in English, only one was included in the list.
Overall, the total number of websites included in the sample list was 97. Next, a stratified
random sampling was performed to select two websites from each geographical subregion from the list based on the United Nations’ classification, which groups countries
into five continental regions and 17 geographical sub-regions (United Nations Statistics
Division, 2016). The selection was done using a web-based random selection tool, the
Random Choice Generator at textfixer.com. The random sampling process did not include
65

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

the sub-regions of Micronesia and Polynesia because these sub-regions did not have an
English version of their national library websites. It also did not include the sub-regions of
Northern Africa and Melanesia because each of them had only one national library
website in English, which was directly included in the sample. The final list of 28 reviewed
websites is in Table 3.3.
4.1.1 Websites overview. The 28 national library websites selected for the Phase
I review varied a lot in terms of design. Some, such as the Library of Alexandria of Egypt
(Figure 4.1) and the Library of Congress (LOC), had modern clean styles of look and feel.
Other websites might need to consider updating their designs. For instance, the website
of National Library of Malaysia consisted of a good variation of colors, images, and
flashing text. The look of both the websites of National Library of the Republic of
Kazakhstan (see Figure 4.2) and the National Library of South Africa appeared rather
outdated.

66

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 4.1 Homepage of the Library of Alexandria’s website (Library of Alexandria, 2018)

67

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 4.2 Homepage of the National Library of the Republic of Kazakhstan’s website (National
Library of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 2018)

Several of the websites had sections with content targeting specific groups of
users. LOC’s website had a section with special content for school teachers to help them
in teaching and in professional development. The website of the Library of Alexandria had
sections for visitors, children (up to 11 years old), “young people” (from 12 to 16 years
old), book lovers, and the academic community. Sections on the Kenya National Library
Service’s website included those for kids and families, librarians, publishers, researchers,
institutions, and farmers. Meanwhile, the website of the National Library of Indonesia had
sections with special content for toddlers, kids, teenagers, adults, and the elderly.

68

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

A few of the websites included information about the dates when the sites were
last updated. These websites included the website of the Lebanese National Library and
the website of the Library and Archives of Canada. For those that did not list the last
updated dates, many of them had dates on stories that were posted in the news section.
None of the websites provided information about when the sites were initially created.
However, there were dates next to the copyright information on 19 out of the 28 websites,
and these sites counted for 67.86% of all the reviewed websites. The website with the
oldest date is the website of the National Library of South Africa, which says “1989-2012,”
followed by the website of the National Library of Ireland, which says 2000. Meanwhile,
the websites with the most recent date (2018) were those of the National Library of
Jordan, Moldova National Library, and the National Library of Australia. The most
repeated copyright dates were 2015, 2017, and 2018, each mentioned on three websites.
Figure 4.3 shows copyright dates and records the number of websites that included these
dates.
All reviewed national library websites had simple and memorable URLs. A total of
25 of the websites, making up 89.29%, used the country’s top-level domains. Three
websites did not use the country’s top-level domains: the Library of Congress, the
National Library of Bolivia, and the National Library and Archives of Vanuatu.

69

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Number of national library websites

3

2

1

0
1989

2000

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Copyright years
Figure 4.3 Copyright years and the frequency of the websites for copyright year listed

4.1.2 Common content elements. The content inventory of the 28 national library
websites showed that there were content elements that were mentioned in most of the
homepages of the national library websites. These content elements were the library’s
name and/or logo, links to the resources and collections, information about the library, a
search box, the option to change the page’s language, a link to the catalog, contact
information, events, news, social media accounts, the library’s opening hours, and
information on how to get to the library. Some homepages had this information, while
others had links to it. These elements are shown in Figure 4.4.

70

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Library’s name and/or logo
Resources/Collection
Contact us
About us

Content Elements

Events
Search
News
Catalog
Language option
Social media accounts
Opening hours
Location information
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Percentage
Figure 4.4 Common content elements in homepages of reviewed websites

4.1.3 Unique content elements. Unique content elements were found in a
number of the reviewed homepages and are summarized in Table 4.1. The homepages
71

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

of the library websites of Jordan, Malaysia, and Kazakhstan had visitor counters. The
National Library of Malaysia had counters showing the number of visitors over different
periods—today, this week, and last month—as well as a counter that showed the total
number of visitors. The National Library of the Republic of Kazakhstan had counters for
visitors visiting the website currently, visitors today, visitors this year, and the total number
of visitors. The counter of the National Library of Jordan’s website reads: “You are visitor
number [X].”
Most websites had information about the libraries, but the website of the National
Library of New Zealand was the only reviewed website that had a page especially for
information about the website itself. A page that had the heading “About this site” had
information about accessibility, copyright, privacy, and website ownership. On the other
hand, the website of the National Library of Ireland had a page about the freedom of
information and data protection. Information about accessibility in the library was
mentioned on the website of the Library of Congress (LOC).
LOC’s homepage had another unique feature: a link to a shopping page that
enables users to buy various products online such as books and prints, as well as
souvenirs with the library’s logo. A similar link to a shopping page was found in the
homepage of the National Library of New Zealand’s website. LOC’s homepage also had
a link to a page about donating to the library, including the option to make an online
donation. The homepage of the National Library of Australia’s website had a similar
“Donate” link taking the user to another page to either make an online donation to the
library or to get instructions on mailing a donation.
72

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.1
Unique Content Elements Found in Some National Library Websites

Content Element

Website

Counter of visitors

National Library of Malaysia
National Library of the Republic of Kazakhstan
National Library of Jordan

Information about the website

National Library of New Zealand

Information about accessibility
in the library

Library of Congress

Link to shopping page

Library of Congress
National Library of New Zealand

Link to donation page

Library of Congress
National Library of Australia

Poll to evaluate the website

National Library of Kuwait
National Library of Jordan

Information about recent holidays

National Library and Information System of
Trinidad and Tobago

List of best browsers to view website

National Library and Information System of
Trinidad and Tobago

Website view options

National Library of Malaysia

Page on freedom of information and
data protection

National Library of Ireland

A notable, unique feature of both the website of the National Library of Kuwait and
that of the National Library of Jordan was a poll that enabled visitors to rate the website.
The website of the National Library of Kuwait had a yes-or-no question on its homepage
that said: “Are you satisfied with our website?” The National Library of Jordan’s websites
featured a 1 to 10 scale with a heading stating, “Evaluate the website to get the best.”
73

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Next to the scale are two buttons, “Rate Us” and “Graph.” The first saves the visitor’s
rating, while the second shows a graph of all ratings made by visitors to date.
The homepage of National Library and Information System’s website of Trinidad
and Tobago also had a unique culture-oriented content element: information about EidUl-Fitr, an Islamic holiday that was celebrated at that time of year. The library website
posted information about various national, religious, and traditional holidays and
celebrations as they occurred. The homepage had another unique content element: a list
of browsers in which the website will work best. The National Library of Malaysia’s website
has several options for how a user customization, including changing the layout width,
contrast, font size, and font color. It also had three font options: Arial, Verdana, and Comic
Sans MS.
In summary, through Phase I content inventory, most common and unique content
elements of national library websites were identified. The results of this phase showed
that national library websites from different continents and regions of the world shared
more commonalities than discrepancies. These common content elements could be used
as core content areas when designing new national library websites, whereas unique
content elements might be useful to consider as customizable and special elements to
incorporate into an already established website. The analysis in Phase I served as a good
starting point for the next two phases of evaluation and testing, as it helped in
understanding how national library websites are designed and what content they have.

74

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

4.2 Phase II Usability and IA Heuristic Evaluation
In Phase II of this dissertation research, a series of heuristic evaluations was
conducted in September 2017 for the usability and IA of five national library websites: the
websites of the National Library of Kuwait (NLK henceforth), National Library of Pakistan
(NLP henceforth), National Library of South Africa (NLSA henceforth), the Royal Library
of Belgium (KBR henceforth), and the Library of Congress (LOC henceforth). The
websites were assessed based on the 115 principles included on a heuristic evaluation
checklist (see Appendix E), and each received a score out of a 100 for each of checklist’s
five sections: Nielsen’s heuristics, homepage, navigation and information architecture,
page layout and visual design, and national library features. Each website also received
an overall score out of a 100. Table 4.2 presents the scores based on each heuristic
metrics and the average score based on the five sections.

Table 4.2
Scores of Websites Evaluated in Phase II
Website

Nielsen’s Homepage
Heuristics
Score
Score

Navigation
and IA
Score

Page
Layout and
Visual
Design
Score

National
Library
Feature
Score

Average
Score

National
Library
of Kuwait

60

95

81

96

69

80

National
Library
of Pakistan

56

73

83

95

73

76

75

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

National
Library
of South
Africa

50

65

77

75

69

67

Royal
Library
of Belgium

100

89

94

97

73

91

Library
of Congress

100

73

81

96

81

86

4.2.1 Evaluation based on Nielsen’s Heuristics Principles. The websites of
KBR and LOC received a 100 for the Nielsen’s heuristics score because each of them
complied with every principle in this section: visibility of system status; match between
system and the real world; user control and freedom; consistency and standards; error
prevention; recognition rather than recall; flexibility and efficiency of use; aesthetic and
minimalist design; helping users to recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors; and
help and documentation. Both websites had clean designs and well-organized menus,
used terminology familiar to users, organized information in a logical order, and provided
clear instructions in various parts.
Meanwhile, among the libraries, NLSA received the lowest score—50—for this
section. The website did not comply with the guidelines of having an aesthetic and
minimalist design and helping users to recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors. For
example, when a user inputs wrong login information, the system does not suggest
solutions such as having a “forgot user name” button. In addition, it got low scores for the

76

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

guidelines of match between system and the real world, user control and freedom,
consistency and standards, error prevention, and flexibility and efficiency of use.
4.2.2 Evaluation based on Homepage Heuristic Principles. For the homepage
evaluation, NLSA’s website received the lowest score of 65. The website’s homepage
does not create a positive first impression and needs a more attractive design. It has no
graphics or pictures at all, except for the library’s logo, and has a lot of empty space in
the middle. Some of the important information on the page is not clearly visible: it is either
hidden in a single drop-down menu on the top or mentioned at the very end of the page.
The homepage of NLK got the highest scores of 95 for complying with 17 out of 20
principles in this section. A sample of these principles is listed in Table 4.3. The homepage
has an attractive design and would encourage users to explore the website further. The
homepage has search boxes that are placed at the top, useful content, and clearly labeled
links. However, it does not comply with the value proposition guidelines. KBR’s homepage
was excellent as well and only got 89% because it lacked a title in English, in addition to
not complying with the value proposition guidelines, as the NLK homepage did.

77

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.3
Sample of NLK’s Compliance with Homepage Heuristic Principles
Homepage Heuristics
1

The homepage contains a search input box.

2

Useful content is presented on the home page or within one click of the
homepage.

3

Navigation choices are ordered in the most logical or task-oriented manner
(with the less important corporate information at the bottom).

4

All corporate information is grouped in one distinct area (e.g., "About Us").*

5

By just looking at the homepage, the first-time user will understand where to
start.

6

The homepage of the site has a memorable URL.

7

The homepage is professionally designed and will create a positive first
impression.

8

The design of the homepage will encourage people to explore the site.

* "Corporate" was interpreted as "national library."

4.2.3 Evaluation based on Navigation and IA Heuristic Principles. KBR’s
website got the highest score of 94 for the navigation and IA section. It complied with 25
out of 29 guidelines for this section. A sample of these principles is listed in Table 4.4.
These guidelines include enabling an easy return to the homepage from all other pages,
making access to important sections available from every page, providing several ways
to access significant content, and having a simple structure with no unnecessary levels.
The website also has a shallow navigation system, with only one level in its main menu,
78

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

which is better than having a deep navigation system with many confusing levels. Links
and navigation labels are clear, correctly describe the content, and do not include any
jargon. However, the website did not comply with other guidelines, such as having a site
map that presents an overview of the content.
NLSA’s website got the lowest score of 77 for the navigation and IA section. It was
not easy to navigate the website or to find needed information because content was listed
in three different menus: the main menu on the upper part of the homepage, a drop-down
menu, and a menu at the bottom of the homepage. The top main menu only contained
two items: Home and Contact Us. Other content was listed in a single drop-down menu
that was difficult to find. The website’s main content, including link to the About Us and
Services pages, was listed at the very end of the homepage.

Table 4.4
Sample of KBR’s Compliance with Navigation and IA Heuristic Principles
Navigation and IA Principles
1

There is a convenient and obvious way to move between related pages and
sections, and it is easy to return to the home page.

2

The information that users are most likely to need is easy to navigate to from
most pages.

3

Navigation choices are ordered in the most logical or task-oriented manner.

4

The navigation system is broad and shallow (many items on a menu) rather
than deep (many menu levels).

5

The site structure is simple, with a clear conceptual model and no unnecessary
levels.

6

The major sections of the site are available from every page (persistent
navigation) and there are no dead ends.
79

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

7

Navigation tabs are located at the top of the page and look like clickable
versions of real-world tabs.

8

Category labels accurately describe the information in the category.

9

Important content can be accessed from more than one link (different users
may require different link labels).

4.2.4 Evaluation Based on Page Layout and Visual Design Principles. For this
section, NLSA’s website received the lowest score of 75. The scores for websites of NLK,
NLP, KBR, and LOC were very similar, and KBR received the highest score of 97. KBR’s
website complied with 36 out of 38 principles for this section, according to Travis’s (2016)
checklist. Some of the principles that the website complied with are listed in Table 4.5.

Table 4.5
Sample of KBR Website’s Compliance with Page Layout and Visual Design
Principles
Principles
1

On all pages, the most important information (such as frequently used topics,
features, and functions) is presented on the first screenful of information
(“above the fold”).

2

The site can be used without scrolling horizontally.

3

Fonts are used consistently.

4

Each page on the site shares a consistent layout.

5

There is a good balance between information density and use of white space.

80

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

6

On content pages, line lengths are neither too short (<50 characters per line)
nor too long (>100 characters per line) when viewed in a standard browser
width window.

7

Pages have been designed to an underlying grid, with items and widgets
aligned both horizontally and vertically.

8

Standard elements (such as page titles, site navigation, page navigation,
privacy policy etc.) are easy to locate.

4.2.5 Evaluation based on National Library Content and Functions Principles. A
checklist was compiled to evaluate the national library content and functions features (see
Table 4.6). No existing checklist that covered major national library content and features
was found, so principles were compiled based on principles from the checklists of Chow,
Bridges, and Commander (2014), Khan and Shehzad (2015), Mohamadesmaeil and
Koohbanani (2012), and Walia and Gupta (2013). The researcher added other principles,
which were also incorporated into this checklist.

Table 4.6
National Library Content and Functions Principles
National Library Website Content and Function
Principles

Source

1

The library’s name and logo are in a reasonable size
and location.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

2

The country’s top-level domain is used in the URL of
the homepage.

Walia and Gupta
(2013)

3

There is a link to access electronic resources.

81

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

4

There is a link to the OPAC.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

5

There is information about the library's location, such
as an address.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

6

There is a list of names and details of individuals in
charge or the library.

Mohamadesmaeil and
Koohbanani (2012)

7

There is contact information for key staff individuals.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

8

The date of the last update is indicated.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

9

There is information about the library news and events.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

10

Dates are presented in an international format.

11

Library opening hours are available.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

12

Library contact details are posted.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

13

There is information about circulation.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

14

There is information about the library's policies.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

15

Users can renew books or materials online.

Chow, Bridges, and
Commander (2014)

16

The website is accessible through Internet Explorer
software.

Added
by this author

17

The website is accessible through Safari software.

Added
by this author

18

The website is accessible through Google Chrome
software.

Added
by this author

82

Mohamadesmaeil and
Koohbanani (2012)

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

For this section, LOC’s website received the highest score of 81%. It complied with 13
out of the 18 guidelines for this section. The website had the library’s name and logo in a
visible location at the top left corner of the pages. It had electronic resources, an online
public access catalog (OPAC), information about the library news and events, and
information about the library’s location and opening hours. The website also had a list of
names and details of individuals in charge of the library as well as contact information for
key staff individuals. Dates on the website were presented in an international format. The
website was accessible through different browsers: Internet Explorer software, Safari, and
Google Chrome. Meanwhile, the websites of NLK and NLSA got the lowest scores for this
section. Each of them got a score of 69%.
4.2.6 Average score. Among the five websites, KBR’s website got the highest
average score, 91%, and was followed by LOC’s with 86%, NLK’s with 80%, NLP’s with
76%, then NLSA’s with 67%. Overall, the average scores of the five websites do not differ
greatly, even though there are stronger variations in individual heuristics.
In summary, the evaluation performed in Phase II showed that national library
websites have strengths in some aspects but are lacking in others, as presented in Figure
4.5. For example, NLK’s website got the highest score of 95 in the homepage evaluation
but got the lowest score of 69 along with NLSA’s website in the evaluation of national
library features. The results of this phase also showed how different dimensions may
affect the overall evaluation of a library website. Therefore, a variety of aspects should be
considered and evaluated regularly, such as the homepage, navigation and information
architecture, page layout, visual design, and national library features and content. In
83

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

addition, this phase showed that Nielsen’s heuristic evaluation may not show precise
aspects of weaknesses in library websites. Both the KBR and LOC websites received a
score of 100 in Nielsen’s heuristic evaluation. However, in the evaluations of specific
aspects of the websites, the two websites got lower scores. For example, KBR got a score
of 73 for the national library features aspect, while LOC got 73 for the homepage aspect.

84

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

National Library of Kuwait
National Library of Pakistan
National Library of South Africa
Royal Library of Belgium
Library of Congress
100
90
80
70

Score

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Nielsen’s
Heuristics

Homepage

Navigation Page Layout
and IA
and Visual
Design

National
Library
Features

Evaluation Aspects
Figure 4.4 Scores of websites evaluated in Phase II

85

Average
Score

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

4.3 Phase III Usability Testing
The usability testing sessions were held at Simmons Usability Lab at Simmons
College (now known as Simmons University since September 2018) in Boston,
Massachusetts. A pilot test for the usability testing was held on October 22, 2017, and
the formal testing sessions were held from October 25, 2017, to December 15, 2017.
4.3.1 Phase III Participants. Thirty participants were involved in the usability tests.
This section includes some demographic information about them.
Gender. Twenty participants were female (66.67%) and ten were male (33.33%).
Age. The age of participants ranged from 19 to 49 years (M = 26.3). Fifty percent
of the participants were between 19 and 24 years of age, and the remaining 50.00% were
between 26 and 49 years old.
Nationality. Fifteen of the participants were natives from the countries whose
websites were tested. The other fifteen participants were nonnatives. Participants came
from the United States, Kuwait, Pakistan, Turkey, Syria, the Philippines, China, and
Thailand.
Native language. English was the native language of 53.33% of the participants,
while 46.67% were nonnative English speakers. The native languages for nonnative
speakers included Arabic, Somali, Turkish, Mandarin, Thai, Tagalog, Russian, and
Spanish.
Academic status. Nineteen of the participants (63.33%) were graduate students,
while 11 (36.67%) were undergraduates.

86

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Discipline. The disciplines of the participants’ specializations varied. About 53%
of them were social sciences students, 40% were natural sciences students, and 6.67%
studied arts and humanities (see Table 4.7).

Table 4.7
Disciplines of Participants (N=30)
Discipline

Frequency

Percent

Arts and Humanities

2

6.67%

Social Sciences

16

53.30%

Natural Sciences

12

40.00%

Internet skill. On a scale for 1 to 7, the participants rated their skill in using the
internet in the range from 4 to 7, with the average as 5.63.
Familiarity with national libraries. Participants were asked to rate their familiarity
with national libraries on a scale for 1 to 7. The average of the rating was 3.23, with the
range from 1 to 7.
Use experience. The participants were asked whether they have used a national
library website before or not. Exactly half of the participants said yes, while the other half
said no.

87

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

4.3.2 Website of the National Library of Kuwait (NLK). This section presents
demographic information about the participants who took part testing the website of NLK.
In addition, this part presents the results of the testing sessions.
Participants. Half of the ten participants who tested the website of the National
Library of Kuwait were natives of Kuwait, and the other half were not. Sixty percent of the
participants spoke languages other than English as their native language. Those
languages were Arabic and Russian. English was the native language of 40% of the
participants. Nine of the participants were graduate students, and one was an
undergraduate. Their majors were pharmacy, dentistry, library and information science,
electrical engineering, and law. Sixty percent of the participants were social sciences
students, and 40% were natural sciences students. None of them studied arts and
humanities.
On a scale for 1 to 7, the participants rated their skill in using the internet between
4 and 7 (M = 5.7). They rated their familiarity with national libraries between 1 and 7 on a
scale from 1 to 7 (M = 3.5). Half of the ten participants had used a national library website
before and the other half had not.
Usability test task performance. Task 6 (finding the library’s contact information)
had the lowest average time on task, 9.54 seconds, while Task 3 (finding resources about
public health) had the highest average times on task, 118.84 seconds. The tasks with the
lowest average mouse clicks was task 6, with 0.10 clicks, while the task with the highest
average number of clicks was Task 3, with 17.40 clicks. In terms of the number of screen
changes, task 6 had the lowest average, 0, while Task 3 had the highest average, 17.
88

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

The average size of mouse movement was the highest for task 3, which was 33,516
pixels, and the lowest was Task 6 with 1638 pixels. Task 3 (finding resources about public
health) had the highest numbers of errors, 21, and tasks 2 (finding the “About Us” page)
and 6 (finding the library’s contact information) had the lowest number of errors, which is
0. Participants did not need any help in completing tasks 2, 5, 6, or 7. The number of help
prompts was 1 each Task 1 and Task 4, while 5 help prompts were needed during the
performance of Task 3. Task performance details for NLK’s website are presented in
Table 4.8.

Table 4.8
Usability Test Task Performance Using NLK’s Website
Task
number

Task
description

Average
time on
task
(seconds)

Average
number
of mouse
clicks

Average
number
of
screen
changes

Average
size of
mouse
movement
(pixels)

Number
of errors

Number
of help
prompts

1

Finding the
library’s
website

50.46

5.80

4

13,657

5

1

2

Finding the
“About Us”
page

12.83

1.50

1

3457

0

0

3

Finding
resources
about public
health

118.84

17.40

17

33,516

21

5

4

Finding
books
about Kuwait

121.03

21.20

7

33,173

12

1

89

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5

Finding
library’s
opening
hours

44.52

5.80

4

18,839

7

0

6

Finding
contact
information

9.54

0.10

0

1638

0

0

7

Finding
library’s
social media
accounts

30.29

1.90

1

7901

3

0

Average

55.36

7.67

3.5

16,025

4.80

0.70

All ten participants succeeded in completing tasks 1, 2, 5, and 7. One participant
failed to complete tasks 3 and 7. The majority of participants failed to complete Task 4
(finding books about Kuwait). Tasks 2 and 6 were completed with ease by all participants,
while there was some difficulty in completing tasks 1, 3, 4, and 5. Details about the
difficulty levels of tasks when using NLK’s website are presented in Table 4.9.

Table 4.9
Difficulty Levels of Tasks Using NLK’s Website
Task
Number

Task
Description

Completed
with Ease

Completed
with Difficulty

1

Finding the library’s website

70%

30%

2

Finding the “About Us” page

100%

0%

3

Finding resources about public health

30%

60%

4

Finding books about Kuwait

10%

10%

90

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5

Finding library’s opening hours

60%

40%

6

Finding contact information

100%

0%

7

Finding library’s social media accounts

90%

0%

65.71%

20.00%

Average

4.3.3 Website of the National Library of Pakistan (NLP). The second website
that was tested was NLP’s website. This section presents demographic information about
the participants who took part in the usability testing as well as the results of the testing
sessions.
Participants. Half of the ten participants that tested the website of the National
Library of Pakistan were natives of Pakistan, and the other half were not. English was the
native language of 60% of the participants, while 40% spoke other languages as a native
language. Those languages were Urdu, Somali, and Spanish. Six of the participants were
undergraduate students, and four were graduate students. The disciplines of the
participants varied. Fifty percent of them were natural sciences students, 40% were social
sciences students, and 10% studied arts and humanities. Their majors were human
physiology, computer science, marketing, pharmacy, physical education, medicine,
library and information science, and English.
On a scale for 1 to 7, the participants rated their skill in using the internet between
4 and 7 (M = 5.80). They rated their familiarity with national libraries between 1 and 5 on

91

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

a scale from 1 to 7 (M = 3.10). Six of the ten participants had not used a national library
website before, and four have used a national library website.
Usability test task performance. Task 7 (finding the page with the library’s
activities) had the lowest average time on task, 6.54 seconds, while Task 3 (finding
resources about public health) had the highest average times on task, 69.05 seconds.
Tasks with the lowest average mouse clicks were tasks 5, and 7, with one click, while the
task with the highest average number of clicks was Task 3, with 11.60 clicks. In terms of
the number of screen changes, tasks 1, 5, 6, and 7 had the lowest average, 1, while Task
4 had the highest average, 6. Task performance details for NLP’s website are presented
in Table 4.10.
The average size of mouse movement was the highest for Task 2, which was
17,356 pixels, and the lowest was Task 7 with 1593 pixels. Task 3 (finding resources
about public health) and Task 4 (finding e-books about higher education) had the highest
numbers of errors, 28 errors each, and tasks 2, 5, and 7 had the lowest number of errors,
which is 0. Participants did not need any help in completing tasks 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7. The
number of help prompts was 1 for each of Task 3 and Task 4.

92

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.10
Usability Test Task Performance Using NLP’s Website
Task
number

Task
Description

Average
Time on
Task
(seconds)

Average
Number
of
Mouse
Clicks

Average
Number
of Screen
Changes

Average
Size of
Mouse
Movement
(pixels)

Number
of Errors

Number
of Help
Prompts

1

Finding the
library’s
website

42.26

6.90

4

10,049

1

0

2

Finding the
“About Us”
page

24.15

1.20

1

3280

0

0

3

Finding
resources
about public
health

69.05

11.60

5

17,356

28

1

4

Finding ebooks about
higher
education

68.99

10.40

6

16,228

28

1

5

Finding
library’s
opening
hours

8.25

1.00

1

3769

0

0

6

Finding
contact
information

9.48

1.70

1

2955

2

0

7

Finding
library’s
activities

6.54

1.00

1

1593

0

0

Average

33.20

2.77

8025

5.90

0.20

4.91

93

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

All ten participants succeeded in completing tasks 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7. They all failed
to complete tasks 3 and 4 (finding resources about public health and finding e-books
about higher education) because of system errors. Tasks 2, 6, and 7 were completed by
all participants, while tasks 1 and 5 were completed with ease by nine participants and
completed with difficulty by one. Details about the difficulty levels of tasks when using
NLP’s website are presented in Table 4.11.

Table 4.11
Difficulty Levels of Tasks Using NLP’s Website
Task
Number

Task
Description

Completed
with Ease

Completed
with Difficulty

1

Finding the library’s website

90%

10%

2

Finding the “About Us” page

100%

0%

3

Finding resources about public health

0%

0%

4

Finding e-books about higher
education

0%

0%

5

Finding library’s opening hours

90%

10%

6

Finding contact information

100%

0%

7

Finding library’s activities

100%

0%

68.57%

2.86%

Average

94

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

4.3.4 Website of the Library of Congress (LOC). The third website tested was
LOC’s website. This section presents demographic information about the participants who
took part in testing the website in addition to the results of the testing sessions.
Participants. Half of the ten participants who tested the website of the Library of
Congress were natives of the United States, and the other half were not. Sixty percent of
the participants spoke English as their native language and 40% spoke other languages
as a native language. Those other languages were Turkish, Mandarin, Tagalog, and Thai.
Six of the participants were graduate students and four were undergraduates. They
specialized in political science, economics, chemistry, anthropology and international
relations, nursing, religion and culture, library and information science. Sixty percent of
the participants were social sciences students, 30% were natural sciences students, and
10% were arts and humanities students.
On a scale for 1 to 7, the participants rated their skill in using the internet between
4 and 7 (M = 5.40). They rated their familiarity with national libraries between 1 and 5 on
a scale from 1 to 7 (M = 3.10). Six of the ten participants have used a national library
website before and four have not.
Usability test task performance. Task 7 (finding the library’s social media
accounts) had the lowest average time on task, 16.97 seconds, while Task 2 (finding the
“About” page) had the highest average times on task, 61.96 seconds. The tasks with the
lowest average mouse clicks was Task 7, with 1.70 clicks, while the task with the highest
average number of clicks was Task 3, with 6.20 clicks. Task performance details for
LOC’s website are presented in Table 4.12.
95

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

In terms of the number of screen changes, Task 7 had the lowest average, 0.80,
while Task 5 had the highest average, 2.20, which is also low. The average size of mouse
movement was the lowest for Task 1 and 3201 pixels. The highest that of Task 2 with
15455 pixels. No errors were made while performing Task 1 (finding the national library’s
website), while tasks 2 (finding the “About” page) and 5 (finding the library’s opening
hours) had the highest numbers of errors, which is 4. Participants did not need any help
in completing tasks 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7. The number of help prompts was 1 for Task 3 and 2
for Task 2.

Table 4.12
Usability Test Task Performance Using LOC’s Website
Task
Number

Task
Description

Average Average
Time on Number
Task
of
(seconds) Mouse
Clicks

Average
Number
of Screen
Changes

Average
Size of
Mouse
Movement
(pixels)

Number
of Errors

Number
of Help
Prompts

1

Finding the
library’s
website

25.38

3.00

1.70

3201

1

0

2

Finding the
“About” page

61.69

6.10

2.00

15,455

4

2

3

Finding
resources
about public
health

41.39

6.20

1.60

9883

0

1

4

Finding
books
about higher
education

29.97

2.90

1.30

5868

0

0

96

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5

Finding
library’s
opening
hours

29.97

4.60

2.20

7533

4

0

6

Finding
contact
information

33.09

3.80

1.90

9768

1

0

7

Finding
library’s
social media
accounts

16.97

1.70

0.80

6595

2

0

Average

34.07

4.04

2.59

3828

1.20

0.30

All ten participants succeeded in completing all the tasks. Tasks 1, 4, and 6 were
completed with ease by all participants, while tasks 3 and 5 were completed with ease by
nine participants and completed with difficulty by one. Four participants found difficulty in
performing Task 2, and six participants found difficulty in performing task 7. Details about
the difficulty levels of tasks when using LOC’s website are presented in Table 4.13.

Table 4.13
Difficulty Levels of Tasks Using LOC’s Website
Task
Number

Task
Description

Completed
with Ease

Completed
with Difficulty

1

Finding the library’s website

100%

0%

2

Finding the “About” page

60%

40%

3

Finding resources about public health

90%

10%

4

Finding books about higher education

100%

0%

97

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5

Finding library’s opening hours

90%

10%

6

Finding contact information

100%

0%

7

Finding library’s social media accounts

40%

60%

82.86%

17.14%

Average

4.3.5 Group differences. Mann-Whitney U Test was used to see if there were
statistical differences between males and females; graduate students and undergraduate
students; natives and nonnatives; native English speakers and nonnative English
speakers; participants who have used a national library website before and those who
have not; and participants from different disciplines. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used to
compare performance data among the three websites that were studied. There was no
statistical difference between natives and nonnatives; between native English speakers
and nonnative English speakers; or between participants from different disciplines in
terms of internet skill or familiarity with national libraries, level of satisfaction, rating of
different aspects of the website, and task performance. However, there were some
significant statistical differences, described below, among other groups.
Gender. There was a statistical difference between male and female participants in
terms task completion rates in performing tasks (U = 52.5, z = 2.2, p = .026). The test
indicated that the completion rates of females (M = 17.8) was greater than for males (M
= 10.7).

98

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Academic status. In terms of familiarity with national libraries, there was a significant
statistical difference between the graduate and undergraduate participants (U = 58.5, z =
2, p = .042). Graduate students (M = 17.92) were more familiar with national libraries than
undergraduates (M = 11.32)
Previous use experience with national library websites. There was a statistical
difference between participants who had used a national library website before and those
who had not in terms of familiarity with national libraries (U = 53.5, z = 2.5, p = .012).
Those who had used a national library website before (M = 19.4) were more familiar with
national libraries than those who had not used a national library website before (M = 11.6).
National library websites. The Kruskal-Wallis test showed that there were significant
statistical differences between the three websites in terms of the average time on task,
success rate in performing tasks, the ease and difficulty of tasks, the number of errors,
and the average clicks on task, page changes on task, and mouse movement (in pixels)
(see Table 4.14). Regarding the average time on task, tasks performed using NLP
website (M = 11.9) took significantly less time than tasks performed using NLK website
(M = 21.6) (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.700, p = .041). Regarding the number of tasks
completed with ease, there was a statistically significant difference between LOC website
(M = 21.3) and NLP website (M = 12.4), (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -8.900, p = .048).
With regard to the number of tasks completed successfully, there was a significant
difference among all three websites (H = 7.28, df = 2, p = .026). LOC’s website came first
(M = 25.0), NLK’s website second (M = 15.5), and NLP’s website third (M = 6.00). There
was also a significant difference in terms of the number of tasks completed with difficulty
99

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

between the websites (H = 9.91, df = 2, p = .026), as NLP’s website (M = 8.80) was better
than both LOC’s website (M = 18.3) and NLK’s website (M = 19.4). Fewer errors were
made by participants as they performed tasks using LOC’s website (M = 8.70) than while
they were using NLK’s website (M = 18.8) and NLP’s website (M = 19.1) (H = 9.14, df =
2, p = .010).

Table 4.14
Group Differences in Task Performance

Kruskal-Wallis H

Df

Asymp.
Sig.

Post Hoc Pairwise
Comparison

Average time on task

7.28

2

.026

NLP < NLK

Number of tasks
completed successfully

26.36

2

.000

LOC > NLP

Number of tasks
completed with ease

7.31

2

.026

LOC > NLK > NLP

Number of tasks
completed with difficulty

9.91

2

.007

NLP < LOC < NLK

Number of errors

9.14

2

.010

LOC < NLK < NLP

Average clicks on task

9.14

2

.010

LOC < NLK

Average page changes
on task

6.19

2

.045

LOC < NLK

Average mouse
movement (pixels)

7.46

2

.024

LOC < NLK

Several significant differences were found between LOC’s and NLK’s websites.
The first was in the average number of clicks per task (H = 9.14, df = 2, p = .010). LOC’s
100

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

website (M = 11.3) had a less average than NLK’s website (M = 22.3) (post hoc Dunn’s
test: d = 11.050, p = .015). The second was in the average page changes per task, with
NLK’s website getting a mean rank of 20.6 and LOC website 10.9 (post hoc Dunn’s test:
d = 9.750, p = .039). The third significant difference was in the average mouse movement
in pixels per task. LOC’s website had a lower average rank of 12.1 and NLK’s website
had 21.7 (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = 9.600, p = .044).
The test also showed that the there is a significant statistical difference between
the three groups in terms their rating of the quality of information, their trust of the content,
their trust of the entity generating the content of the website, clear elements indicating
separate zones or topics, and page layout (see Table 4.15). LOC’s website got a better
score (M = 20.3) than NLP’s website (M = 11.1) in regard to providing good quality
information (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.283, p = .037). It also got a better score (M =
19.5) than NLP’s website (M = 10.5) with respect to how much the participants trusted its
content (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.050, p = .042). LOC’s website (M = 21.1) was also
better than NLP’s website (M = 11.1) in regard to how much the participants trusted the
entities generating its content (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.956, p = .025). LOC’s website
also got a better score (M = 18.8) than NLP’s website (M = 9.80) in regard to having clear
elements that indicate separate zones or sections (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.033, p =
.045). The fifth significant difference between the two websites was in terms of having a
good page layout. LOC’s website (M = 19.3) was better than NLP’s website (M = 8.10)
(post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -11.233, p = .010). NLK’s website (M = 18.0) was also better
than NLP’s website in that regard (post hoc Dunn’s test: d = -9.900, p = .023).
101

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.15
Group Differences in Participants’ Perceptions
KruskalWallis H

Df

Asymp. Sig.

Post Hoc
Pairwise
Comparison

The information available in the
website was of good quality.

6.45

2

.040

LOC > NLP

I trust the content available on
the website.

6.08

2

.048

LOC > NLP

I trust the entities that generate
the website's content.

7.51

2

.023

LOC > NLP

The website has clear elements
to indicate separate zones or
topics.

6.61

2

.037

LOC > NLP

The website has good page
layout.

10.7

2

.005

LOC > NLK >
NLP

Summary of differences between tested websites. There were 13 aspects in which
statically significant differences were found between the tested websites. These aspects
are (1) the average time on task; (2) the number of tasks completed successfully; (3) the
number of tasks completed with ease; (4) the number of tasks completed with difficulty;
(5) the number of errors; (6) the average clicks on task; (7) the average page changes on
task; (8) the average mouse movement, as well as the participants’ perceptions about the
(9) information quality; (10) the trustworthiness of the websites’ content; (11) the
trustworthiness of the entities generating the content; (12) the websites’ layout; and (13)
having clear elements to indicate separate zones or topics.

102

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.16 presents the summary of differences between the three tested
websites. It shows the ranking of websites according to the different testing criteria and
participants’ perceptions. LOC ranked first in 11 of the 13 areas of evaluation and second
in two areas and was not ranked third in any. NLK ranked second in eight of the areas
and third in five areas and did not come first in any. NLP ranked third in eight of the areas,
second in three areas, and first in two areas: the average time of task and having the
least number of tasks completed with difficulty. In Table 4.16, all websites enclosed in
parentheses are those with which the differences are statistically significant in the post
hoc Dunn’s tests.

Table 4.16
Summary of Differences Between Websites Tested in Phase III

Ranking of Websites
1

2

3

Average time on task

NLP

(LOC)

NLK

Number of tasks completed successfully

LOC

NLK

NLP

Number of tasks completed with ease

LOC

(NLK)

NLP

Number of tasks completed with difficulty

NLP

LOC

NLK

Number of errors

LOC

NLK

NLP

Average clicks on task

LOC

(NLP)

NLK

Average page changes on task

LOC

(NLP)

NLK

Average mouse movement (pixels)

LOC

(NLP)

NLK

103

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

The information available in the website
was of good quality.

LOC

(NLK)

NLP

I trust the content available on the website.

LOC

(NLK)

NLP

I trust the entities that generate the
website's content.

LOC

(NLK)

NLP

The website has clear elements to indicate
separate zones or topics.

LOC

(NLK)

NLP

The website has good page layout.

LOC

NLK

NLP

4.3.6 Correlations. A Spearman's rho correlation was conducted to understand
whether there is an association between different ordinal variables, including internet
skills, familiarity with national libraries, satisfaction rate, and ratings of different aspects
of the national library websites (see Table 4.17). Statistically significant positive
correlations were found between the overall satisfaction with using the website and
multiple variables including (1) the rating of information quality (r = .60, p = .001), (2) the
level of trust of the website’s content (r = .50, p = .006), (3) the level of trust of the entities
generating the website’s content (r = .47, p = .011), and (4) the website’s overall structure
(r = .56, p = .002), (5) menus (r = .49, p = .007), and (6) colors (r = .51, p = .005).

104

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.17
Correlations Between Satisfaction and Various Variables

Satisfaction with Using the Website
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig. (2-tailed)

The information available in the website
was of good quality.

.60

.001

I trust the content available on the
website.

.50

.006

I trust the entities that generate the
website's content.

.47

.011

The website has a good overall structure.

.56

.002

The website has good menus.

.49

.007

The website's design uses suitable
colors.

.51

.005

4.3.7 Participants’ perceptions. This section discusses participants’ perceptions
on the three evaluated national library websites. These perceptions were examined based
on the pre-task interviews and the comments the participants made during the task
performance, as well as their answers to open-ended questions that were part of the posttask questionnaire. Some abbreviations will be used in this section to represent the
participant number and the website tested. These abbreviations are shown in Table 4.18.

105

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.18
Abbreviations Used in This Section
Abbreviation

Explanation

PX-NLK

Participant who tested the National Library of Kuwait’s website

PX-NLP

Participant who tested the National Library of Pakistan’s website

PX-LOC

Participant who tested the Library of Congress’s website

Ideal website. During the pre-task interviews, participants were asked about how
they envisioned the ideal national library website. The answers of 14 out of the 30
participants included the word “easy.” For example, P2-NLP said, “It has to look official
and easy for users to navigate through.” P7-NLP said, “The website should be broken
down into easy categories, and resources should be easy to find resources.” P25-LOC
answered, “[The website should be] easy to navigate and easy for everyone.” The second
most repeated term in the participants’ answers was “user-friendly.” The participants’
answers are summarized in Table 4.19.

Table 4.19
Participants’ Vision of Ideal National Library Website
Wanted Website Content

Wanted Website Characteristics

Search bar

User friendly

Library collection

Easy to navigate

Online courses

Official look

106

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Information about country’s history and
culture

Intuitive

Information about the library

Not intimidating

E-resources

Accessible

Events

Readable font

Chat with a librarian

Attractive design

Databases

Updated

How-to tutorials

Colorful

Frequently asked questions

Good for all levels

Policies

Convenient interface

Contact info

Multi lingual

Sitemap

Has responsive design

Kids section

Fun

Search box problems. There were several issues that made the performance of
tasks difficult, according to the participants. One of the most recurring issues was related
to the search box, particularly its location, design, and functionality. On this issue, P5NLP said, “The search box was not placed in an intuitive place and seemed like an ad on
the side. It also did not yield any results and instead gave me an error.” Likewise, P7-NLP
said, “The search bar was not working and was showing an error. Also, the search bar
was hidden towards the bottom and looked like it was part of an ad. I think the search bar
should be one of the very first things a person sees on the library webpage.” Similarly,
P9-NLP stated, “This portion [meaning Task 3] was a little more difficult because it wasn't
easy to access. The search bar is usually located somewhere near the top whereas in
107

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

this website it was located in the middle towards the left. It's different than what I have
usually seen.” P17-NLK complained about the design of the search icon by saying, “The
advanced search icon was small, the choice of search by books was not available in the
main search bar.”
Information overload. Participants criticized the websites for having a lot of
information. P7-NLP said, “There's a lot of content on each page including the modules
on the sides of the main content and those are kind of a distraction,” while P23-NLK
complained, “There are a lot of information and resources. It is a little hard for me to locate
particular or research specific text.” Similarly, P30-LOC said, “There is a lot of content on
each of the pages I visited. Many types of forms, many facets of visiting information, and
a lot of information on the homepage. I'm not sure it's necessary to have so much
division/specificity.”
Navigation-related problems. Participants commented how hard it was to find
resources and/or the catalog. For example, P7-NLP said, “The menus show a lot more
about the library than the contents available. It's easy to find the history of the library but
not to look for books that may be available.” P15-NLK said that in order to improve the
website, there is a need for a clear link to the catalog. P20-NLK said, “If there was a button
on the homepage to take one to the catalog, that would be better; perhaps if it were next
to the options to search the databases.” P29-LOC said, “[The website] gives out a lot of
information about what the library does, and how it functions, and when you can visit; I
would however, suggest making some of these areas more easily accessible. If not for
this study, I probably would have just done a Google search and found the exact area I
108

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

was looking for via the drop-down options Google automatically creates when you're
searching.”
According to the participants’ perceptions, a main factor in ease of task completion
on a national library website was the location of the link needed to perform a task. Having
a link or button on the upper area of a page was a significant reason a task was easy to
complete. For example, P1-NLP states that she considered Task 5 the easiest because
“this information was located on the opening page in a visible location (middle right hand
side of site). This made it easy to find and read.” Similarly, P4-NLP said about Task 6,
“This took the fewest clicks and least effort in navigating. The 'Contact us' button very
clearly indicated what it was for, and its location at the navigation bar at the top made it
easy to find.”
Information

organization

issues.

Several

participants

mentioned

the

disorganization of information as the reason of why a task was considered the hardest.
They were expecting to find certain information under a certain heading, but they were
disappointed to find it under another unexpected heading after a long search. For
example, P27-LOC said about Task 5, which required finding the library’s opening hours,
“The hours were not clearly stated on the page. The page detailing hours could be better
organized.” Commenting on the same task, P28-LOC said, “It is under 'visit.' I would
expect it to be under 'contact' or on the homepage. This is because most websites do not
have ‘visit’ tab.”
Language and terminology issues. When asked to describe any moment of
frustration experienced during the task performance, several participants mentioned
109

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

issues related to language. P14-NLK, who used the English page of NLK’s website, said,
“Frustrated with myself for not knowing Arabic.” P20-NLK said, “I kept finding information
only in Arabic, which I cannot read, unfortunately.”
In addition, participants had a lot to comment on in relation to terminology used in
the library websites. P4-NLP suggested clarifying what each section is, “perhaps by rewording some of them.” P15-NLK also said there was a need for “clear terminology.” P24LOC said, “It is easy to find documents that are required, however, better sub-titles in
terms of searching information, like working hours or mission, could be improved.”
Meanwhile, P27-LOC said, “Some of the keywords to access information are a bit unclear.
Being a librarian, I am comfortable with library website, but many users would probably
take more time to find information.” The issues and problems that were identified through
the participants’ perceptions and discussed in this section summarized in Table 4.20.

Table 4.20
Issues and Problems Identified Through Participants’ Perceptions

Category

Problems

Search box problems

Unclear location
Search yields to error
Small advanced search icon

Information overload

Pages contain a lot of content

Navigation-related problems

Menus do not show needed information
Important links placed in the bottom of pages

Information organization issues

Information placed in unrelated page

110

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Language and terminology
issues

English version of website contains content in other
languages
Headings do not reflect content

4.3.8 Summary of Phase III Results. Results of Phase III showed that there were
significant statistical differences in using national library websites between some groups
of participants, based on gender, academic status, and previous experience with using
national library websites. First, there was a statistical difference between male and female
participants in terms task completion rates. The task completion rate of females was
greater than that of males. Second, there was a significant statistical difference between
the graduate and undergraduate participants in terms of familiarity with national libraries.
Graduate students were more familiar with national libraries than were undergraduates.
Third, there was a statistical difference between participants who had used a national
library website before and those who had not in terms of familiarity with national libraries.
Those who had used a national library website before were more familiar with national
libraries than those who had not used a national library website before. In addition, there
were significant differences between the three tested national library websites in a
number of areas. The differences were in the average time on task, the number of tasks
completed successfully, the number of tasks completed with ease, the number of tasks
completed with difficulty, the number of errors, average clicks on task, average page
changes on task, average mouse movement, and the participants’ perceptions about the

111

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

information quality and the trustworthiness of the websites. Among the three websites,
LOC’s website was ranked first in most of these areas.
The results of Phase III also showed significant positive correlations between the
overall satisfaction with using a national library website and multiple variables. These
variables are (1) the rating of information quality, (2) the level of trust of the website’s
content, (3) the level of trust of the entities generating the website’s content, and (4) the
website’s overall structure, (5) menus, and (6) colors.
Several issues and problems were identified through the participants’ perceptions
during the usability testing sessions. They were mainly related to five areas including
search box problems, information overload, navigation-related problems, information
organization issues, and language and terminology issues.

4.4 Correlations Between Phase II and Phase III Results
A Spearman's rho correlation was performed to understand whether there is an
association between the score of the heuristic evaluation done in Phase II and results of
the usability testing done in Phase III. Statistically significant positive correlations were
found between the total scores from Phase II and some scores from Phase III. In addition,
positive correlations were found between scores of specific aspects of Phase II (Nielsen’s
heuristics score, navigation and IA score, and page layout and visual design score) and
some ratings provided by participants through the post-task questionnaire of Phase III.
These correlations are summarized in Table 4.21 and are presented in detail below.

112

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.21
Positive Correlations Between Heuristics Scores and the Participants’
Perceptions

Heuristic Evaluation Score

Participants’ Evaluation Score

Average heuristic score

Quality of information
Trust of entities that generate the website’s content
Trust of the website’s content
Having clear elements indicating separate zones or
topics
Page layout

Nielsen’s heuristics score

Quality of information
Trust of content available on the website
Trust of entities that generate the website’s content
Page layout

Page layout and visual
design score

Trust of content available on the website
Website’s overall structure
Having clear elements indicating separate zones or
topics
Page layout

4.4.1 Average heuristic score. Significant correlations were found between the
total scores from Phase II and the participants’ ratings of (1) the quality of information (r
= .39, p = .035), (2) the trust of entities that generate the website’s content (r = .47, p =
.011), (3) the trust of the website’s content (r = .41, p = .027), (4) having clear elements
indicating separate zones or topics (r = .39, p = .039), and (5) having a good page layout
(r = .56, p = .002) as shown in Table 4.22.

113

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.22
Correlations Between Participants’ Perceptions and the Average Heuristics
Scores

Average Heuristics Score
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig. (2-tailed)

The information available in the website was
of good quality.

.39

.035

I trust the entities that generate the website's
content.

.47

.011

I trust the content available on the website.

.41

.027

The website has clear elements to indicate
separate zones or topics.

.39

.039

The website has good page layout.

.56

.002

4.4.2 Nielsen’s heuristics. Significant correlations were found between Nielsen’s
heuristics scores and the participants’ rating of several aspects: (1) the quality of
information (r = .41, p = .026), (2) the trust of content available on the website (r = .37, p
= .049), (3) the trust of entities that generate the website’s content (r = .47, p = .010), (4)
having a good page layout (r = .41, p = .026) as shown in Table 4.23.

114

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.23
Correlations Between Participants’ Perceptions and Nielsen's Heuristics Scores
Nielsen’s Heuristics Score
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig. (2-tailed)

The information available in the website was
of good quality.

.41

.026

I trust the content available on the website.

.37

.049

I trust the entities that generate the website's
content.

.47

.010

The website has good page layout.

.41

.026

4.4.3 Page layout and visual design heuristic evaluation. Significant
correlations were found between the heuristic evaluation scores of page layout and visual
design and some participants’ rating made by the usability testing participants (see Table
4.24). The first positive correlation was found with the rating of trust of content available
on the website (r = .42, p = .024), the second was with the rating of the website’s overall
structure (r = .38, p = .044), and the third was with the rating of having clear elements
indicating separate zones or topics (r = .47, p = .009). The fourth positive correlation,
which is a strong one, was found with the participant’s rating of the page layout (r = .61,
p = .000).

115

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.24
Correlations Between Participants’ Perceptions and Page Layout and Visual
Design Scores
Page Layout and Visual Design Heuristics
Score
Correlation Coefficient

Sig. (2-tailed)

I trust the content available on the
website.

.42

.024

The website has a good overall
structure.

.38

.044

The website has clear elements to
indicate separate zones or topics.

.47

.009

The website has good page layout.

.61

.000

4.4.4 Negative correlations. Some negative correlations were found between the
scores of the heuristic evaluation, particularly the navigation and IA aspect scores, and
the scores of Phase III. Those correlations were with the participants’ ratings of two
aspects about the websites tested: (1) having a good overall structure (r = -.38, p = .044)
and (2) having clear elements to indicate separate zones or topics (r = -.47, p = .009) as
shown in Table 4.25.

116

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 4.25
Correlations Between Participants’ Perceptions and Navigation and IA Scores

Navigation and IA Heuristic Score
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig. (2-tailed)

The website has a good overall structure.

-.38

.044

The website has clear elements to indicate
separate zones or topics.

-.47

.009

4.5 Summary
In this chapter, results from various phases of the dissertation research, including
content inventory, usability and IA evaluation, and usability testing were reported. The
data provided an understanding of common content elements on the homepages of
national library websites worldwide, such as the library’s name and/or logo, the search
box, the option to change the page’s language, links to the resources and collections, the
link to the catalog, contact information, events, news, social media accounts, the library’s
opening hours, and information on how to get to the library. The chapter also outlined a
practical way to evaluate national library websites through a checklist. Additionally, it
provided a substantial understanding of the UX and IA of national library websites,
identifying a number of usability problems related to this type of websites. Statistically
significant differences were found in task performance with the use of national library
websites between groups that had different genders and educational statuses, and
between groups that had previous experience using such websites and groups with no
117

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

experience at all. The chapter also showed the positive correlations between the overall
satisfaction with using a national library website and multiple variables. It also showed
significant correlations, both positive and negative, between a number of heuristic
evaluation scores and participants’ ratings of some aspects of the websites. The next
chapter will discuss the findings presented in this chapter.

118

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chapter 5 Discussion
This chapter presents the implications of the major findings of the dissertation
research, including recommended content elements for national library websites and
recommendations for designing and evaluating such websites. This chapter also
discusses the meanings of correlational relationships between the overall satisfaction with
using a national library website and multiple variables. In addition, this chapter highlights
the statistically significant differences in task performance with the use of national library
websites between different groups of users.

5.1 Content Elements of National Library Websites
Based on the Phase I content inventory of the homepages of 28 national library
websites from different parts of the world, the Phase II evaluation of the UX and IA of five
national library websites, and the Phase III usability testing sessions, a list of content
elements suggested for national library websites was established. These 17
recommended content elements, which should be a part of contents on the homepage or
be linked from the homepage as further content or resource pages of the website, are
listed in Table 5.1. These elements are described further in this section, which addresses
Research Question 1, concerned with discovering the primary content elements on
national libraries' homepages.

119

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Table 5.1
Elements Recommended for National Library Websites Homepages

Content elements
Library’s name and logo
About us
Library website’s purpose
Information about the country
Language options
Search box
Catalog
Resources/Collection
Library’s location
Contact information
Ask a librarian
Library’s opening hours
Frequently asked questions
Social media accounts
Events
News
Poll to evaluate website

5.1.1 Library’s name and logo. Every national library, or library website in
general, should have the name and logo of the library that owns the website. The name
and logo should be consistently displayed as either header or footer elements on every
120

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

page of the website and be distinct among other elements around it on the page. Having
the logo on the upper-left corner appears to be the best location for English websites
(Nielsen, 2001).
A number of the reviewed national library websites during the content inventory
phase did not have the library’s name and logo in a visible place or did not have clear
logos indicating the library’s identity. For example, the website of the National Library of
Uzbekistan did not have the name and logo on the top of the homepage, but rather at the
bottom of the page. Visitors of the homepage might not have any clue on what website
they were viewing at the first glance and might have to scroll down to see the library’s
name. Figure 5.1 shows a screenshot from the top of the homepage, while Figure 5.2
shows a screenshot from the bottom. Another example was the website of the National
Library of Jordan, which had its logo on the top left corner of the page but said
“Department of the National Library” without making it clear what country it was from. A
user would need to browse through the website to know that it is Jordanian. Similarly, the
website of Trinidad and Tobago’s National Library and Information System Authority
featured a logo that lacked clarity. It read “NLISA” in big letters, but the full name of the
website and country was in rather tiny letters. A user would have to zoom in the page
several times to be able to read the text. Another example is the website of the National
Library of New Zealand. Its logo was an icon representing an open book, but it had no
accompanying text indicating the identity of this logo, making it difficult for visitors of the
website to know what that icon represents (see Figure 5.3).

121

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.1 National Library of Uzbekistan’s website (National Library of Uzbekistan, 2018) Top
Section

122

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.2 National Library of Uzbekistan’s website (National Library of Uzbekistan, 2018)
Bottom Section

Figure 5.3 Screenshot from the National Library of New Zealand’s website (National Library of
New Zealand, 2018)

5.1.2 About us. An “About Us” page is important because it provides users with
information about the library; the types of service it provides; its vision, mission, history;
123

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

and its organizational structure. One of the successful examples is the website of National
Széchényi Library (NSZL) of Hungary. Its “About Us” page had subpages with information
about the library including its mission statement, aims, history, organizational chart, and
projects. The information was either presented in bullet points or short paragraphs that
highlighted the key characteristics of the items and made them easier to read.
5.1.3 Website’s mission statement. The purpose of the national library website,
as well as what it offers to its users should be clear. Several of the national library
websites reviewed during the content inventory phase had the library’s mission statement,
which is very important, but none of the 28 websites mentioned the purpose and function
of the library’s website in particular, which is useful to include as well.
5.1.4 Information about the country. As a website of a library that represents a
country, it would be valuable that a national library website contains basic information
about the country and links to major government websites. This information would be
especially useful to the website’s international audiences. One of the successful
examples in this aspect is the website of the National Library of Malaysia, which had links
to important government websites, including a website about tourism in Malaysia.
5.1.5 Language options. Because national library websites serve both national
and international users, it is recommended that these websites deliver their content in
multiple language versions. The language options should include a given country’s official
languages. Most national library websites that were reviewed as part of this dissertation
research had multiple language options. For example, the National Library of Kuwait’s

124

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

website had Arabic and English versions, while Bibliotheca Alexandria of Egypt had
Arabic, English, and French versions.
5.1.6 Search box. As observed by Gambrell (2015), “Search is the primary action
a user takes on the library website.” Having a search box on the homepage is essential,
as it enables efficient and effective access to information. It has been generally advised
that the search box be simple, wide, and positioned at the top of the homepage with a
clear “search” button. Nielsen (2001) summarized the recommendations on search boxes
in three things: “make it visible, make it wide, and keep it simple.” The search box should
allow not only the search of the website but also the library’s catalog.
5.1.7 Library catalog. Whether the library catalog is included as an option within
the search box or listed separately on the main menu, having a link on the homepage to
the catalog is important.
5.1.8 Resources and collections. A library’s website is a gateway to its resources
and collections. Therefore, the website would include a secondary page that describes
these resources and collections. It is advised that the homepage features links to the
resources and collections page.
5.1.9 Library’s location. Although many electronic services can be provided
through the library’s website, users might also be considering a visit to the physical library.
Having the library’s location listed on the website is necessary. The reviewed national
library websites had this information under different headings: for example, “Visit”
appeared on the website of the Library or Congress (LOC); “Visit Us” appeared on the
website of the National Library of Ireland; and “How to Get There?” appeared on the
125

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

website of the National Library of Norway. Other websites included information on the
“Contact Us” page, as on the website of the National Library of Kuwait (NLK). It appears
to be important to have location information as well as a mapping tool such as Google
Maps showing how to get to the library via different transportation means. A simple
address may no longer be sufficient for visitors.
5.1.10 Contact information. As a part of basic information about the library, the
homepage of a national library website should include a link to a page containing the
contact information of the library including phone numbers and addresses.
5.1.11 Ask a librarian. Nowadays, some library interactive services feature a “Ask
a Librarian” live chat option. For those libraries that support such a function, their website
should list several means of communication that users could use to get support including
the “Ask a Librarian” button. For instance, the Library of Congress (LOC) website has
such a function.
5.1.12 Library’s opening hours. Library websites typically post the library’s
opening hours. It is helpful if hours of operation are posted on the website’s homepage
and next to the library’s location information. Several of the reviewed library websites had
the opening hours and location information on a page called “Visit the Library” instead of
the homepage.
5.1.13 Frequently asked questions. Through years of service to library’s users,
libraries typically accumulated a list of commonly asked questions from patrons. These
are often compiled into a list of frequently asked questions (FAQs). Featuring this list

126

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

would help patrons to address common queries through the website, saving the time and
efforts of the user and the library staff.
5.1.14 Social media accounts. Reports reveal that the number of social media
users around the world increased by 100 million people in the first three months of 2018,
according to Kemp (2018). With that increase, the number of social media users reached
about 3.3 billion by the end of March 2018 (Kemp, 2018). Therefore, it has become
necessary for national libraries to create social media accounts as a part of their outreach
services and marketing methods. The homepage should include information about the
library’s various social media contacts and/or have links to them on their homepages.
5.1.15 Events. Users of a library might visit a library website to learn about
upcoming events, programs, and activities held at the library. It would be helpful for the
homepage to include a link to an events page. Alternatively, a calendar of events might
be incorporated on the homepage, as well as a section or a banner of featured events.
5.1.16 News. Over 75% of the reviewed national library websites had a news
section on the homepage. A news section could include a news about the national library
and its community, such as the inauguration of a new exhibit or the welcoming of a visiting
delegation.
5.1.17 Poll to evaluate website. Some of the national library websites featured a
short survey or a poll to ask visitors’ questions about their experience with the website.
This would be an efficient way to discover real users’ needs and their experience with the
website and the services that library provides.

127

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

The results of the content inventory showed that national library websites from
different continents and regions of the world had more similarities than differences in
terms of content. Similarities of content were evident even though the websites were from
countries with diverse cultures and populations and different levels of education and
economic development.
Only a few research studies have explored the content of national libraries
websites. For example, Walia and Gupta (2013) evaluated homepages of 23 websites of
national libraries in Asia using a usability evaluation checklist. Like this dissertation
research, Walia and Gupta found that most all homepages of the reviewed websites had
a “Contact Us” link. They also found that the majority of the homepages had an “About
Us” link. However, they mentioned that the link was not present on the homepages of the
Indonesian, Lebanese, and Maldivian websites. The Indonesian and Lebanese websites
were among those reviewed in Phase I of this research. Both websites still have no “About
Us” link on the homepage. They have information about the library under multiple other
headings. For example, one of the headings used by the website of the National Library
of Lebanon is labeled “History of LNL.”

5.2 Evaluation of National Library Websites
This section discusses the interpretation and meaning of results in responding to
Research Question 2, namely, to what extent do the results of heuristic evaluation and IA
assessment, based on an evaluation checklist of a website, correlate with the results of
task-based usability testing. This section also presents recommendations for the
128

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

evaluation of national library websites based on the two methods used in this dissertation
research: heuristic evaluation and usability testing.
This research found that there were statistically significant positive correlations
between the score of the heuristic evaluation done in Phase 2 and results of the usability
testing done in Phase 3. The positive correlations were found between the average
heuristics score of Phase 2, Nielsen’s heuristics score, the heuristic evaluation’s
navigation and IA score, and the heuristic evaluation’s page layout and visual design
score of Phase 2, as well as between some ratings provided by participants through the
post-tasks questionnaire that was part of the usability testing session. The correlations
were found between the total scores from Phase 2 and the participants’ ratings of (1) the
quality of information, (2) the trustworthiness of entities that generate the website’s
content, (3) the trustworthiness of the website’s content, (4) clear elements indicating
separate zones or topics, and (5) page layout. The correlations were also found between
Nielsen’s heuristics scores and the participants’ rating of (1) the quality of information, (2)
the trustworthiness of content available on the website, (3) the trustworthiness of entities
that generate the website’s content, and (4) page layout. More positive correlations were
found between the heuristic evaluation scores of page layout and visual design and
between ratings made by the usability testing participants of four aspects: (1) the
trustworthiness of content available on the website, (2) the website’s overall structure, (3)
clear elements indicating separate zones or topics, and (4) page layout. At the same time,
some negative correlations were found between the scores of the heuristic evaluation,
particularly the navigation and IA aspect scores, and between some scores of Phase 3.
129

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Those correlations were with the participants’ ratings of two aspects of the websites
tested: (1) overall structure and (2) clear elements to indicate separate zones or topics.
Although the positive correlations occurred more than the negative correlations,
having both negative and positive correlations between the scores of the heuristics
evaluation and the usability testing means that those responsible for library websites, and
national library websites in particular, might need to employ multiple user research
methods when making decisions regarding the improvement of their websites. It would
be useful to employ both usability testing and heuristic evaluation whenever possible in
order to get different perspectives about the websites, that is, perspectives both of users
and of experts. Both usability testing and heuristic evaluation are successful methods in
helping in developing websites, and each has advantages and disadvantages. Heuristic
evaluation is quick and inexpensive (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services [HHS],
n.d. d); however, it is difficult to perform for a sole researcher to perform (Nielsen, 1995b),
requires knowledge and experience, takes time to find usability experts, and may identify
small rather than major issues (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services [HHS], n.d. d).
Usability testing focuses on the users, not the product. It allows the researcher to observe
the users as they use the website, listen to their comments, and see their body language
to know what frustrates them and what pleases them (Barnum, 2011). However, usability
testing can be time consuming in terms of time and effort to set up, conduct, and analyze
results. It can also be costly (Sauro, 2016).

130

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5.3 User Group Differences
As mentioned in the Results chapter, no statistically significant differences were found
between natives and nonnatives participants; between native English speakers and
nonnative English speakers; or between participants from different disciplines in terms of
internet skill or familiarity with national libraries, satisfaction level, or ratings of different
aspects of the national library websites that were tested. Therefore, as an answer to
Research Question 3 (To what extent do cultural and national origins impact on
participants’ assessment of the usability of national libraries’ websites?), the data from
this research showed that cultural and national origins do not impact participants’
assessment of usability of national libraries’ websites. This result is similar to the results
of studies such as Hall et al. (2004). However, it contradicts studies such as Shi (2010)
and Sears, Jacko, Dubach (2000), which both indicated that cultural background or
nationality affected users’ assessment of the usability of websites.
The results also showed that there were some significant statistical differences
between other groups: males and females, graduate students and undergraduates, and
participants who have used a national library website before and those who have not. The
meaning and implications of these differences are discussed below.
In terms of task completion rates and familiarity with national libraries, females got
better scores than males. Differences in evaluating the usability of websites based on
gender have also been found in previous studies, such as that of Sears, Jacko, and
Dubach (2000), which showed that females participants found it easier to find information
than male participants did. This research also found that graduate students were more
131

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

familiar with national libraries than undergraduates. These differences based on gender
and educational status indicate that that libraries should design their websites for the
general public and should ensure the usability of their websites for all users, regardless
of age, gender, and educational status, by conducting regular usability tests and making
every effort to include participants of different ages, genders, and educational levels
because the users of national libraries are not only graduate and undergraduate students
but also teenagers, professional workers, and elderly people, all of whom have different
skill levels and experience in using library websites and hence different needs and
expectations.
The present study also found a statistical difference in task performance between
participants who had used a national library website before and those who had not in
terms of familiarity with national libraries. Those who had used a national library website
before were more familiar with national libraries than those who had not used a national
library website before. Both groups of users might use national library websites, and
therefore, the website should be useable for those who know what national libraries are,
whom they serve, and what services they offer, as well as for first-time visitors who might
not have any idea about national libraries are and what they offer. During the pre-task
interviews in Phase III, several participants demonstrated confusion about the difference
between academic libraries, public libraries, and national libraries. For example, when
Participant 7 was asked if she has used a national library website before, she replied
“yes,” and when asked which website she used she said, “The website of Boston Public
Library.” Similarly, Participant 14 said he had used national library websites before. When
132

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

asked which one, he answered, “Do library websites of colleges count?” This indicates
that some users may not know the differences among kinds of libraries and may not know
what services and resources national libraries offer.

5.4 Overall Satisfaction and Other Variables
Results of this dissertation research showed a significant correlation between the
overall satisfaction with using a national library website and multiple variables. These
variables are (1) the rating of information quality, (2) the level of trust of the website’s
content, (3) the level of trust of the entities generating the website’s content, and (4) the
website’s overall structure, (5) menus, and (6) colors. Participants who were satisfied with
these variables were also satisfied with the website overall. This indicates that libraries
should focus on the quality of information they provide on the website, on the website’s
information architecture (IA), on the colors used, and on building trust with the users. This
also indicates that the overall satisfaction with national library websites is connected not
only to content, but also to trust and design, as shown in the variables mentioned above
and discussed below. These variables are presented in Figure 5.4.

133

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Content
• Information
quality

Trust
Visual Design
• Colors

Satisfaction
with
National Library
Websites

• Trust of
website's
content
• Trust of entities
generating the
content

Information
Architecture
• Overall
structure
• Menus

Figure 5.4 Significant variables correlated with overall satisfaction with using national
library websites

134

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5.4.1 Content. According to this research, users’ satisfaction with national library
websites is related to content, particularly information quality. Information quality has
been defined in different ways. According to Miller (1996), the quality of information has
ten dimensions: addressing the customers’ needs, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
coherence, format, accessibility, compatibility, security, and validity. Meanwhile,
Mavetera, Lubbe, and Meyer (2017) have created an evaluation framework for
information quality of websites consisting of 15 dimensions: accuracy, objectivity,
believability, reputation, relevancy, value added, timeliness, completeness, amount of
information, interpretability, ease of understanding, concise representation, consistent
representation, accessibility, and access security. For example, in the present study,
speaking about NLP’s website, Participant 7 said,
The menu shows a lot more about the library than the content available. It's easy
to find the history of the library but not to look for books that may be available . . .
There's a lot of content on each page including the modules on the sides of the
main content and those are kind of a distraction.
While Participant 30 said about LOC’s website,
There is a lot of content on each of the pages I visited. Many types of forms, many
facets of visiting information, and a lot of information on the homepage. I'm not
sure it's necessary to have so much division/specificity.
5.4.2 Trust. The second variable affecting users’ satisfaction is trust. Although
trust was not mentioned in any of the participants’ comments, its correlation with their
satisfaction was found through their answers to the post-task questionnaires. What is
135

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

meant by trust here is the trustworthiness both of the website’s content and of the entities
generating it. Nielsen (1999) listed four factors to communicate trustworthiness of a
website: design quality, up-front disclosure, comprehensive and current content, and
connection to the rest of the web. Seventeen years after Nielsen’s study (1999), Harley
(2016) found that those four factors still had influence on how much users trust a website.
Explaining those four factors, Harley (2016) concluded that a website should (1) be well
organized, have a color scheme that suits the type of website, and be free for spelling
mistakes and broken links; (2) be transparent with information that the user needs, such
as the contact information or fees; (3) display photos of services and have relevant useful
content; and (4) be connected to other websites, social media, or news outlets.
5.4.3 Information architecture (IA). The third variable affecting users’ satisfaction
with using national library websites is information architecture, particularly the website’s
overall structure and the menus.
Website’s overall structure. According to Rosenfeld et al. (2015), “Structuring
involves determining the appropriate levels of granularity for the information “atoms” in
your product or services, and deciding how to relate them to one another” (p. 25).
Websites can have a number of different organizational structures, such as the hierarchy,
the database model, the hypertext, or a combination of all three (Rosenfeld et al., 2015).
When participants in the usability testing were asked to compare the website that
they tested with the ideal image they had of a national library website, a couple of them
mentioned “structure.” Participant 9, who tested NLP’s website, said, “I believe the
website holds to the standard of what a library [website] should contain. I have used
136

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

various pharmaceutical databases before as well as libraries and they all have a similar
structure of how they operate.” Participant 12, who tested NLK’s website, said, “I think it
is a very well-structured website. It was easy to access information and find resources.
The interface is user-friendly. I think it’s well matching with the standards of national
libraries in general.”
Menus. Menus were mentioned several times in the participants’ answers to the
post-task questionnaire. There were diverse opinions regarding the menu of LOC’s
website in particular. Users had to click of the small icon, circled in red in Figure 5.5, to
reveal the hidden drop-down menu shown in Figure 5.6. When asked about her
suggestions to improve the website, Participant 22 said,
It would be easy for the user to have the main menu as a bar on the main page
because the slideshow at the top of the main page is the focus of attention and it
takes some time to see where the menu bar actually is.

137

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.5 Homepage of the Library of Congress’s website (Library of Congress, 2018)

138

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.6 Homepage of the Library of Congress’s website (Library of Congress, 2018)

Participant 28 had a similar problem in finding the hidden menu of LOC’s website. She
said,
The drop-down bar where the 'about' link lives was very hard to find: it wasn't listed
as a drop-down bar and was next to an icon with a flag of wavy bars, which made
me think the three, straight bars that indicated the drop-down menu were an
extension of that image. It didn't help that both icons were the same height, and
the same color, making it seem very much as if they were both part of the same
icon and not one icon and a drop-down menu separately.

139

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Other participants had different opinions about LOC’s menu. Participant 24 said,
“Everything is available online and the menu option is easy to locate,” while Participant
26 stated, “The format of the website is simple, with the drop-down menu visible enough
on the left.”
5.4.4 Visual design. The fourth and final variable affecting users’ satisfaction with
using national library websites was the website’s design, particularly its colors. According
to Whitenton (2018), “Visual details like fonts, colors, alignment, and images are
increasingly expected to not just create a usable experience, but also to express the
complex brand traits such as friendliness, reliability, or innovation.”
Participants in the usability testing phase made several comments about the tested
websites’ design and colors. For example, Participant 7 said about NLP’s website, “I
would imagine the library would have the same colors as they country's colors. I was
surprised to see blue instead of green. The pictures on the top of children reading were
a nice touch.” Participant 26 said that some of the things she like about LOC’s website
were the simple layout, bright colors, and images.

5.5 Recommendations to Improve National Library Websites
“Library websites are often the first point of contact for users, which means it’s
increasingly important to provide the best user experience possible” ("Improving Library
Websites," 2017). Based on the content inventory, the results of the websites’ heuristic
evaluations, and the usability testing sessions, here are some recommendations for the
developing and designers of national library websites which would hopefully help in
140

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

improving their UX and IA. These recommendations concern different issues such as
users, content, IA, language, and visual design.
5.5.1 Recommendations concerning users.
•

Understanding users and their needs. To be able to provide a better user

experience, knowing the users of the website and their needs is key. Those responsible
for national library websites should not try to predict what users want but should instead
ask them directly about their needs. One way to do that is by posting a short and simple
questionnaire on the website.
•

Readability for global users. Users of national library websites are usually from

different countries, so it is important that these websites use a date format that is
understandable to everyone. Some regions of the world mention the day before the
month, while other mention the month before the day. To prevent any confusion regarding
that, the month should be spelled out instead of appearing as a numeral.
•

Evaluation of websites. National library websites should be evaluated regularly.

Usability testing, whether in the library, in a lab, or remotely, could be conducted as well
as heuristic evaluations. Using the two methods of usability testing and heuristic
evaluation is recommended, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
•

Building trust. Trust should be built with the users of the website. No information

should be posted on the website unless it is verified. In addition, it is important that the
organization and people responsible for the website are clear to users.
•

Path suggestions to users. Users always make mistakes, and that should be taken

into considerations. Instead of showing an error message when users make mistakes, it
141

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

is recommended that the website shows suggestions to guide users to find what they are
looking for.
5.5.2 Recommendations concerning content.
•

Providing good content. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [HHS]
(n.d. e), identified a number of best practices of creating good web content. Based on
these best practices, a website’s content should reflect the organization’s goals. It
should be useful, updated, accessible, easy to understand, based on users’ needs,
and consistent in terms of writing style.

•

Updating content. A national library website should be updated regularly with
upcoming events and recent news.

Clarifying logos. If there are any logos on the website, they should have captions
underneath them explaining what they are. Not all logos are known to everyone. Users of
the website should not have to scroll over the logos or click on them to know what they
represent. Figure 5.7 is a screenshot from the website of National Széchényi Library of
Hungary providing an example of logos without captions.

142

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.7 Screenshot from the National Széchényi Library’s website (National Széchényi
Library, 2018)

A similar problem was also found in the English version of the website of the
National Library and Archives of Vanuatu. The website had a large picture in the first fold,
which might not be understandable by all users (see Figure 5.8). The picture has no
caption and does not link to any other page. It could be a historical artwork or could have
a cultural meaning, but that is not clear. Moreover, the space occupied by the picture
should be used for the search box and links to the library’s services and collections
instead.
143

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.8 National Library and Archives of Vanuatu (National Library and Archives of Vanuatu,
2015)

5.5.3 Recommendations concerning IA.
•

Menu levels. Designers should not add too many elements or levels to the

website’s menu. Too much complexity makes it difficult for users to find what they are
looking for. Instead, they should clearly group similar elements under a general item on
the menu. Figure 5.9, a screenshot from the Moldova National Library’s website, provides
an example of a menu with too many levels and a lot of text.
•

Information load. Designers should not try to mention everything on the homepage.

Users usually do not like to scroll down a long page to look for something. Instead,
144

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

designers should consider the homepage and its main menu a gateway to different pages
with detailed information.
•

Information organization. Designers should gather all related information on a

single page, if the content is not too long. The National Library of Kuwait (NLK)’s website
had good information about the library’s mission, vision, establishment, goals, and history.
However, that information was divided into three different pages. It is recommended that
all three pages are combined into one “About” page, especially if the information is not
too long.

Figure 5.9 Moldova National Library website (Biblioteca Nationala a Repeblicii Moldova, 2018)

145

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5.5.4 Recommendations concerning language.
•

Language consistency. There should be consistency in the language used on the

website. If there is an English version of the website, all of its content should be in English.
A big flaw of the National Library of Moldova’s website was not having the library name
in English (see Figure 5.10). International visitors to the website may not know what
website they are visiting at first glance. They would need to browse the website to find
out. Figure 5.11 shows a menu of the English version of the National Library of Indonesia
contains items that are not in English. These items are marked with the ovals. These
websites were among several reviewed websites with non-English content on their
English pages. Another website that had the same usability problem was the website of
the National Library of Kuwait (NLK). Participant 14, who used the English version of
NLK’s website said, “Frustrated with myself for not knowing Arabic.” Such reactions from
users should be avoided if a library wants visitors of its website to return.

Figure 5.10 National Library of Moldova (National Library of Moldova, 2018)

146

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Figure 5.11 Screenshot from the National Library of Indonesia website
(Perpustakaan Nasional Pepublik Indonesia, 2017)

•

Avoiding jargon. Jargon should be avoided, and instead clear labels and headings

should be used. One important thing to remember is that a library website is visited by
users from different backgrounds and educational levels. According to Gambrell (2015),
“Library jargon (aka Library-ese) is one of the most reported issues identified in user
testing. Unfamiliar terms are barriers to users fully utilizing library resources/services.”
Gambrell says terms that might not be understandable to some users, particularly
students, include Boolean, catalog, HTML full text, e-Book full text, EPUB, and database.
147

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

5.5.5 Recommendations concerning visual design.
•

Design elements. The website should have a good visual design that enhances the
content. Visual design elements include lines, shapes, the color palette, and font
color, type, size, alignment, and spacing (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services,
n.d. f).

•

Moving objects. The website should not have a lot of moving objects or text that may
distract the users.

5.6 Summary
This chapter has discussed the implications of the results from various phases of
the dissertation research, including content inventory, usability and IA evaluation, and
usability testing. First, recommended content elements for the homepages of national
library websites, such as the library’s name and logo, the “About Us” page, the website’s
mission statement, language options, library catalog, resources and collections, news,
events, frequently asked questions, contact information, and social media accounts, were
explored. Second, the evaluation of national library websites and the correlation between
results of heuristic evaluation and IA assessment based on a checklist as well as between
the results of task-based usability were examined. The recommendations for the
evaluation of national library websites based on the two methods used in this dissertation
research, the heuristic evaluation and usability testing, were presented. Third, the
implications of user group differences in task performance using national library
websites—particularly

between

males

and
148

females,

graduate

students

and

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

undergraduates, and participants who have used a national library website before and
those who have not—were discussed. The reason why cultural and national origins were
not found to have impacted participants’ assessment of usability of national libraries’
websites was also explored. Fourth, the meanings of significant correlations between the
overall satisfaction with using a national library website and multiple variables—including
content, trust, information architecture, and visual design—were discussed. A model
illustrating the relationship between the overall satisfaction and these variables was
presented. Fifth, this chapter provides recommendations to improve national library
website. These recommendations were divided into five categories concerning users,
content, IA, language, and visual design.

149

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Chapter 6 Conclusion
In this chapter, the key findings of this dissertation research are reiterated and
highlighted, followed by an articulation and discussion on the main scholarly and practical
contributions of the research. Next, the limitations of the research study are outlined.
Finally, directions for future research in this specific topic area are projected.

6.1 Key Findings
The purpose of this research was to investigate the usability, user experience (UX),
and information architecture (IA) of national library websites. The research’s aims were
to identify the primary content elements on national library websites’ homepages around
the world, to find out to what extent the results of heuristic evaluation correlate with the
results of task-based usability testing, and to find out if cultural and national origins
impacted participants’ assessment of the usability of national libraries’ websites. All three
research questions were answered, and additional noteworthy findings were found
through the research. The following are the key findings.
Through the Phase I content inventory, Research Question 1 (What are the
primary content elements on national library websites' homepages?) was answered and
the most common content elements of national library websites were identified. These
content elements are the library’s name and logo, the “About Us” page, resources and
collections, contact information, search, events, news, language options, catalog, social
media accounts, opening hours, and location information. The content inventory also
identified some unique content elements that were present in some of the reviewed
150

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

websites. No previous study was found to have looked at unique elements on national
library websites.
Results of phases II and III of this research showed that there were statistically
significant positive and negative correlations between the heuristic evaluation scores and
between the participants’ rating of some aspects of the tested websites provided during
the usability testing session. However, there were more positive correlations than the
negative correlations. That answers Research Question 2 of this research (To what extent
do the results of heuristic evaluation and IA assessment, which are based on an
evaluation checklist of a website, correlate with the results of task-based usability
testing?). No study was found comparing the results of heuristic evaluation and usability
testing in regard to national library websites, or library websites.
Answering Research Question 3 (To what extent do cultural and national origins
impact participants’ assessment of the usability of national libraries’ websites?), the
research found that there was no statistical difference between natives and nonnatives in
terms of task performance, satisfaction level, and rating of different aspects of national
library websites. For example, the task performance and satisfaction rate of Kuwaiti
participants who tested the website of NLK did not differ significantly with the performance
and satisfaction of non-Kuwaiti participants. Previous studies that have examined
usability testing and culture have had inconsistent results.

151

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

6.2. Scholarly Contributions
This research study has made several unique contributions to the UX research in
the field of library and information science. First, very few studies focused on the user
experience associated with national library websites, and no existing studies were found
that examined the UX and IA of national library websites across all regions of the world.
Second, seldom have any studies investigated the content of such websites worldwide.
This dissertation research included a content inventory of 28 national library websites
from 15 regions: North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean,
Northern America, Central Asia, Eastern Asia, South-eastern Asia, Southern Asia,
Western Asia, Eastern Europe, Northern Europe, Southern Europe, Western Europe,
Australia and New Zealand, and Melanesia. The large scope of the study enables the
coverage of a variety of national library websites and their contents. This dissertation
research has not only identified common content elements of these websites; it has also
recognized unique content elements. The content inventory based on a large number of
national library websites from various regions has revealed similarities and differences
among the websites.
Furthermore, this dissertation research was unique because it investigated how
gender and educational backgrounds impacted how people used national library
websites. This dissertation research’s findings have shown that there were significant
statistical differences in using this kind of websites between some groups of participants
based on gender, academic status, and previous experience with using national library
websites. The group differences in the use of national library websites was never the focal
152

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

area of investigation in the existing research. Lastly, this dissertation research has
investigated how culture or nationality impacted people’s use of national library websites,
identifying statistical differences between different groups of users from different
countries. Very few research studies in the past examined how culture impacted task
performance and usability evaluation, and none looked at that issue in the context of
national library websites.

6.3 Practical Value of Study
The findings of this research have implications for designing and evaluating
national library websites and library websites in general. Common and unique content
elements identified through this research could be used as guidelines to build or develop
national library websites. The literature review in Chapter 2 did not show that any studies
presented distinctive guidelines on what content national library websites should have.
Moreover, it did not show that any previous studies presented clear guidelines on how
this kind of website should be designed.
One of the main contributions of this dissertation research is that it showed that
there were significant differences in term of task performance and level of satisfaction
between certain groups of participants: males and females, graduate students and
undergraduates, and those who have used national library websites and those who have
not; national libraries should consider the needs of each of these groups and focus on
making the websites usable for participants regardless of gender or educational levels
because those two factors affected task performance and satisfaction level. They should
153

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

also make the websites usable for first-time users whose performance is different from
that of those who have experience in using such websites, as demonstrated by this
research. Detailed recommendations for improving usability of national library websites
can be found in Section 5.2 of this dissertation.
One of the major practical benefits of this dissertation research is its exploration of
how the UX of national library websites could be improved. For example, to achieve a
high level of satisfaction among their websites’ users, it is recommended that national
libraries focus on the five factors that were found to affect the participants’ satisfaction.
These factors are the quality of information available on the website, how much
participants trust the website’s content, how much the participants trust the entities
generating the content, the website’s overall structure, the menus, and the colors. These
factors are shown in Figure 5.4. In addition, the usability problems were identified several
times by participants across the tested websites should be out in consideration. These
problems were mainly related to the search box, amount of information, navigation,
information organization, and language.
Another practical benefit of the dissertation research is its use of different methods
to evaluate national library websites and comparison of the results. To evaluate national
library websites, it is recommended based on the results of this research that both
heuristic evaluation and usability testing be used. Although the research found that there
were more positive correlations between the results of the two evaluation methods than
negative correlations, using these two methods ensures that all evaluative aspects are
covered and that as many usability problems as possible are identified. Heuristic
154

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

evaluations may reveal general areas of weakness of websites in general, and usability
testing may identify specific usability problems. Heuristic evaluations provide expert
perspective, while usability testing provides user perspective. In other words, heuristic
evaluation and usability testing complement one another.
In addition, previous literature has proposed different tools for heuristic evaluation
of websites, but none of these tools was specifically designed for library websites or
national library websites in particular. The checklist used in Phase II of this research study
could fill that gap and assist in the evaluation of such websites.

6.4 Limitations of the Research
This dissertation research has several limitations related to the different phases.
The Phase II heuristic evaluation had two limitations. First, the evaluation of the national
library websites was conducted by only one evaluator: this author. Nielsen (1995b)
argued that the more evaluators are involved in the heuristic evaluation, the more usability
problems are detected:
In principle, individual evaluators can perform a heuristic evaluation of a user
interface on their own, but the experience from several projects indicates that fairly
poor results are achieved when relying on single evaluators. Averaged over six of
my projects, single evaluators found only 35 percent of the usability problems in
the interfaces. However, since different evaluators tend to find different problems,
it is possible to achieve substantially better performance by aggregating the
evaluations from several evaluators. (n.p.)
155

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

Nielsen (1995b) recommends having about five evaluators, but at least three: “The
exact number of evaluators to use would depend on a cost-benefit analysis. More
evaluators should obviously be used in cases where usability is critical or when large
payoffs can be expected due to extensive or mission-critical use of a system.”
The second limitation related to Phase I was that the compiled checklist was not
tested previously. Different parts of the checklist were used in previous studies as
standalone evaluation tools, but not as one single checklist.
Other limitations of the study are related to Phase III: the usability testing phase.
First, the usability testing participants were limited in their demographic attributes. All 30
participants were college students, graduates and undergraduates, which only
represented one group of the users of national library websites. Second, the number of
participants testing each of the three websites was not large. There were ten participants
per website: five native participants and five nonnative participants.
Third, the websites tested in this phase were not randomly selected from the
developed table of national library websites. In the beginning, three websites were
randomly selected, but there was some difficulty in finding participants from some of the
countries, particularly South Africa and Belgium. Therefore, other websites were
selected—the websites of the National Library of Kuwait (NLK), the National Library of
Pakistan (NLP), and the Library of Congress (LOC)—because it was easier to recruit
international students as participants from Kuwait, Pakistan, and the United States.
Fourth, not all three websites were primary (i.e., the original version). The website of LOC
was the library’s primary version, but the tested version of the websites of NLK and NLP
156

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

were not the websites’ primary versions. The primary version of NLK’s website is in
Arabic, while the primary version of NLP’s website is in Urdu. The English version of those
two websites were used in this research because, being in the United States, it was easier
to find native and nonnative participants who spoke English than it would have been to
find participants who were nonnatives and spoke Arabic and Urdu. In addition, using the
Urdu version of NLP’s website would have meant that the researcher would have had to
ask for assistance from someone who spoke Urdu to conduct the usability testing
because she does not speak that language.

6.5 Further Research
This dissertation research has focused on three areas: the primary content
elements on national library websites’ homepages around the world, the extent to which
the results of heuristic evaluation correlate with the results of task-based usability testing,
and whether cultural and national origins impacted participants’ assessment of the
usability of national libraries’ websites. There are several possible areas of investigation
for future research.
First, future research could look into other methods to evaluate national library
websites. The heuristic evaluation checklist used for evaluation in Phase II of this
research covered the major aspects of the websites, but its results did not correlate in all
respects with the results of the usability testing. Future research could propose and test
other checklists that could be used to evaluate the websites. Future research could also

157

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

invite experts to participate in the content inventory and evaluation of the UX and IA of
national library websites rather than just relying on one evaluator.
In addition, further research could focus on different user populations of national
library websites. Participants in the usability testing sessions of this research were limited
to graduate and undergraduate students. More research is needed on how other general
public population groups, such as children, teenagers, working professionals, or senior
citizens, use these websites.
Because this research has demonstrated that culture did not influence the task
performance and usability evaluation of national library websites and because previous
studies have shown inconsistent results with respect to the relation of culture and
usability, more research is needed in this area. In addition, further research is needed to
investigate the relation between user satisfaction and the factors found in this dissertation
research to be affecting it: content quality, trust, IA, and visual design. Future studies
could investigate how content quality could be improved, how national library could build
trusts with their users, and whether trust is related to what language the website is in or
not.
In conclusion, this dissertation has provided significant insights into the current
state of practice of national library websites and their UX and IA. It has investigated many
issues not explored in previous studies and has open up avenues of possible future
research. Day after day, people rely more on electronic resources to get information, and
national library websites are one of the main gateways to such resources. Considering
the importance of these websites and their international audiences, continued research
158

UX AND IA OF NATIONAL LIBRARY WEBSITES

in this area will be valuable in not only for improving the UX of these websites but also for
obtaining greater understanding of the users of these websites.