Approaching the Chasm: Faculty Support Roles for Community College Librarians in the
Adoption of Open Educational Resources

Abstract
Despite Open Educational Resources’ (OER) demonstrated potential to impact student
success and increase college affordability, OER remain only marginally popular in comparison
to traditional published materials. College faculty have significant freedom when choosing
course materials for their students, and they are the primary adopter population for OER.
Therefore, this study explores the roles academic librarians might play in supporting faculty
through OER adoption. The purpose of the study is to better understand the relationship between
faculty library use, faculty OER experience, and future OER plans, along with other factors and
faculty attitudes and opinions regarding the value and appropriateness the librarian OER support
roles. This is accomplished by means of an email survey of 689 community college faculty who
participated in the Virginia Community College System’s Zx23 2015-2016 OER initiative.
Results show that faculty who had adopted OER had high levels of library engagement. They
also reported fewer deterrents and a greater level of sophistication regarding open education
when compared to faculty in national surveys of OER awareness and adoption. While they did
not demonstrate strong awareness of librarian OER support roles and overall enthusiasm was
modest, only a small minority uniformly rejected librarians supporting faculty in OER adoption
efforts. Overall, with the exception of OER advocacy, faculty valued librarians in traditional
librarianship roles over more innovative roles. Recommendations include showcasing services
and resources to make high-quality and relevant OER visible to faculty, and leveraging OER
partnership opportunities to build awareness of the value librarians can provide.

Introduction
Approaching the Chasm: Faculty Support Roles for Community College Librarians in the
Adoption of Open Educational Resources
Open Educational Resources (OER) in the United States trace their origins back to MIT’s
Open Courseware Initiative (OCW) launched in 2001. This initiative had the objective of
making the full curriculum of the elite engineering institution available to all—transparently and
without cost. The principle behind the project was summarized by Toru Ilyoshi and Vijay
Kumar, two of the individuals behind the initiative, as “education can be improved by making
educational assets visible and accessible and by harnessing the collective wisdom of a
community of practice and reflection” (Iiyoshi & Kumar, 2008).
More than 15 years later, there is a substantial and global open education movement that
impacts both K-12 and higher education across much of the developed and developing world.
There are OER repositories, conferences, research teams, and dozens, if not hundreds, of
initiatives at the local, regional, and national levels to promulgate the adoption of OER and open
education. There has been ongoing and robust financial support, most notably from the Gates,
Hewlett, Saylor, and Shuttleworth Foundations, and a robust and widely adopted licensing
scheme in the form of the Creative Commons (CC), which underlies and facilitates the “some
rights reserved” model of open sharing.
Despite this progress and these advantages and support, overall, OER remains at the
margin of American higher education, even in the domain of community colleges, those
publicly-supported open-enrollment institutions who serve nearly half of the total collegeenrolled population in the United States (Community College Resource Center, n.d.). The most
highly visible survey of trends in OER adoption in the United States, Opening the Textbook

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

2

(Allen & Seaman, 2016), conducted by the Babson Survey Research Group under the
sponsorship of publishing giant Pearson, reports that only 5.3% of courses use an openly licensed
(CC or public domain) textbook of any variety. The authors observe that this percentage closely
tracks the similarly small percentage of faculty who report that they are “very aware” of OER
(Allen & Seaman, 2016, p. 29).
Since the publishing of the first edition of the landmark Diffusion of Innovations in 1962,
the work of Everett Rogers (2010) has been central in understanding the lifecycle of innovations
and mapping categories of adopters, from “innovators” to “laggards,” across a bell curve. In the
expansive literature on diffusion, a phenomenon known as the “chasm” (Moore, 2014) plays a
significant role. Simply stated, without crossing the roughly 16% adoption point that represents
the innovators (2.5%) and early adopters (13.5%) in a system and separates those groups from
the mainstream “early majority” population, innovations rarely take hold to the extent that they
have a significant impact on society. After 15-plus years in the marketplace of ideas, OER still
falls below this tipping point.
Librarians have been at the forefront of support for OER, operating in a range of
advocacy and curatorial roles. However, librarians cannot drive OER adoption across the chasm
by themselves—adoption takes place at the level of the individual or groups of faculty who make
decisions regarding the adoption of course materials, be they traditional publisher materials or
openly licensed materials. In this study the researcher will review the growing literature on the
role libraries and librarians play in supporting open education and OER and the studies of the
challenges that faculty face when contemplating OER adoption. Then, by means of a survey of
faculty who have already had exposure to OER in various degrees through participation in a
well-funded, statewide community college OER adoption initiative, the research seeks to better

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS
identify, understand, and describe where some of the most productive leadership opportunities
may lie for librarians seeing to promote and support OER adoption among the faculty with
whom they work.

3

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

4

Literature Review
Course Materials and College Affordability – The Case for Alternatives
In their 2016 update on the status of funding for public higher education, the Center on
Budget Priorities (CBP) reported that while “states have reversed some budget cuts,” support for
higher education is still down 18% since the start of the 2008 recession (with half of all states
down 20% or more), and that colleges and universities have responded with a combination of
tuition increases and cuts in programs and staff. However, against this background of reduced
resources, the CBP observed there was an expanding need: “The recession played a large role in
swelling enrollment numbers, particularly at community colleges [emphasis added], as many
high school graduates chose college over dim employment prospects and older workers returned
to retool and gain new skills” (p. 10). In 1988, CBP reported that public colleges and
universities received 3.2 times as much revenue from state and local governments as they did
from students. These institutions now receive only about 1.2 times as much from states and
localities as from students (Mitchell, Leachman, & Masterdon, 2016).
While federal funding in the form of Pell Grants has increased since before the recession,
it is not nearly sufficient enough to offset either the reduction in state funding for higher
education or the reductions in state aid for students. Also, while it has been argued that building
sprees and administrative bloat are to blame for increased tuition, Hiltonsmith (2015, p. 13)
documented that growth in administrative and facilities spending represents just over 10% of
tuition growth, and that higher instruction costs (due to increased enrollment, rising healthcare
costs, and wage increases) and decreased state support represent 11% and 78% of the cause of
rising tuition, respectively.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

5

One definition of college affordability is the Lumina Foundation’s “Rule of 10,” which
states that college is affordable if students can meet the total net price through 10 hours of work
per week and 10% of a family’s discretionary income over 10 years. Demos (Huelsman, 2016),
in their exploration of college affordability, applied this benchmark along alternative scenarios
that could apply to workers returning to college (as contrasted to first-time to college, traditional
students) and concluded that the average net price for low-income students—those from families
making $30,000 or less—was unaffordable in all 50 states.
A “Textbook Case of Price-Gouging”
In the community college context, the expense of course materials plays an outsized role
due to the lower tuition and emphasis on affordability and access central to the community
college mission. In the context of an overall $47,800 tuition, room, and board price tag at a
private institution, CollegeBoard’s (2015) figure of $1,249 for course materials and supplies is
only 2.6% of the total budget.1,2 In the community college context, the slightly higher $1,364
figure for the same materials is 8% of the total budget. When compared to the cost of tuition,
however, the cost of course materials and supplies for a community college student balloons to
40% of the cost of tuition.3 While faculty ranked the “Cost to Student” as the most important
factor in selecting course material, when it came to their actual satisfaction with the current
market, cost ranked lowest of a list of nine possible factors influencing adoption (Allen, 2015).
The ongoing escalation of cost course materials from commercial publishers has been a
concern in the higher education community for some time, and it has been the subject of
numerous analyses and reports. One chart is frequently used to sum up the overall problem and
1 Koch (2013) reported that financial aid directors generally estimate that “supplies” usually account for about one-quarter or
one-fifth of the Board’s “books and supplies” total.
2 Even at Harvard, textbook expense can have a negative impact on student success. For a recent account, see Paterson (2015).
3 As Senack and Donoghue (2016) documented, tuition and fees for a three credit hour Principles of Microeconomics course at
the Virginia Community College System in 2015 was $436. For that same year, the price of the most popular Microeconomics
textbook is $225.66 new, $100.06 on Amazon. In this instance, the book costs between 52% and 23% of the cost of enrollment.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

6

demonstrates that between 2002 and 2012, textbook priced rose 82%, or an average of 6%
yearly, more than twice the cumulative rate of inflation as reflected in the Consumer Price Index:

Figure 1. The growth of textbook prices vs. consumer prices. (P.T.W. & K. N. C., 2014)4
th
© The Economist Newspaper Ltd, London August 20 , 2014. Used with permission.
According to Koch (2013), the “Big Five” publishers (Cengage, Pearson, McGraw-Hill,
Worth, and Wiley) now appear to control more than 90% of the new textbook market.
Furthermore, when one looks at particular disciplines it is often the case that no more than one to
two of these players will “compete” within that sub-market, reducing the actual potential for
price competition even more than might initially be apparent. Further, Koch (2013) explained
that the textbook market is an example of a “trust market,” in which the trusted professional, in
this case the faculty member, tells the student what they need to purchase. Other examples of
trust markets are pharmaceuticals, auto repair, and plumbing. However, many faculty—despite a
professed concern over the cost of materials—do not actually know the cost of the textbooks
they ask students to purchase.
4 What is not reflected in this chart from The Economist is the percentage of increase in tuition and fees, which actually slightly
outpaces even the price of textbooks, at an average of 7% yearly for a cumulative total of an 89% increase over the same period
(2002-2012). However, as discussed above, much of the increase in the pricing of tuition and fees in the public higher education
context can be understood as a result in the ongoing reduction of state support for higher education.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

7

How Much Do Students Actually Pay, and What’s the Impact on Student Success?
In 2016, the Florida Virtual Campus followed up on a 2012 study by surveying more than
22,000 students in their “Student Textbook and Course Materials” survey. The headlines of the
study were summarized in four key findings: the high cost of textbooks is negatively impacting
student access, success, and completion; textbook costs for Florida students continue to trend
higher; required textbooks are purchased but not always used in course instruction; and in terms
of the cost of the textbook and other instructional materials, college students were in even worse
shape than university students.
Furthermore, Florida Virtual Campus (2016) found that more than half of students spent
over $300 on textbooks for the spring 2016 semester, and just under 18% paid over $500. As a
result, students did not purchase some of their required materials (66%), may have earned a poor
grade as a result of not having a textbook (37.6%), or even failed a course (19.8%). Students
also reported taking fewer courses, not registering for courses, dropping courses, and
withdrawing from courses due to textbook expenses.
The Florida Virtual Campus (2016) findings are consistent with those found elsewhere.
The Student Public Interest Research Groups (Senack & Donoghue, 2016) found that nearly onethird of students used financial aid to purchase textbooks, and for that population 70% of their
total textbook expenses were covered by financial aid. For these students, the average amount
financed was more than $300 per semester. Community college students were
disproportionately impacted, with nearly 50% turning to financial aid to cover the cost of course
materials.
The impact of what might at first seem to be relatively manageable sums spent for
commercial textbooks is magnified by the relative economic fragility of many students in access-

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

8

focused institutions. In a listing of the “top three” cost challenges faced by students, “Course
Materials” ranked fourth at 38%—just behind tuition (75%), housing (55%), and living expenses
(49%), and significantly ahead of transportation (32%) (OnCampus Research, 2015).
At Morgan State University, a historically black college (HBCU) where 89% of students
received Pell Grants, Tiffany Mifune oversees the college’s retention programs. When delving
into the college’s “stop-out” issues, where students withdraw from college while seeking to
secure the funding needed to pay tuition and fees to continue their education, she determined
these students often owed under $1,000—roughly equivalent to their yearly expense for
commercial textbooks. “But if I have zero, whether you’re telling me I owe $500 or $5,000, it’s
the same” (Guo, 2014, para. 25). Each semester, she reported about 1,200 to 2,000 of Morgan’s
7,500 students do not pay on time.
In recent years the range of options for commercially published course materials has
expanded. In additional to the options of new, used, and rental of print materials, and most
recently “inclusive access,” there have come a range of digital options, including “flat” etextbooks (no multimedia or interactivity), digital quizzes and flashcards, multimedia video and
audio materials, and adaptive tools. However, while the number of options has increased, there
has been a countervailing series of efforts by publishers to maintain their profits.
Open Educational Resources as an Alternative to the Affordability Crisis
In the United States and in the global context for OER as well, multiple definitions of
what constitutes open educational resources have come into play at various points in time. For
the purposes of this discussion, the researcher would like to cover some of the history and the
context of defining OER when talking about learning materials in community colleges.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

9

The term “open educational resources” dates back to 2002, when it was defined as
“teaching, learning and research materials in any medium, digital or otherwise, that reside in the
public domain or have been released under an open license that permits no-cost access, use,
adaptation and redistribution by others with no or limited restrictions” at a UNESCO conference
(Green, 2012). Other significant definitions are those from the OECD, the Cape Town Open
Education Declaration (2008), OER Commons, and the Hewlett Foundation (Creative Commons,
2016).
Creative Commons (2016) outlined four broad categories that play a part in definitions of
OER: (a) Open copyright license required; (b) Right of access, adaptation, and republication; (c)
Non-discriminatory (rights given to everyone, everywhere); and (d) Does not limit use or form
(does not include non-commercial limitations). When looking at these categories, there are two
definitions widely in use that address all four categories: the OECD (2007) definition and the
definition offered by the Hewlett Foundation:
OER are teaching, learning, and research resources that reside in the public domain or
have been released under an intellectual property license that permits their free use and
re-purposing by others. Open educational resources include full courses, course materials,
modules, textbooks, streaming videos, tests, software, and any other tools, materials, or
techniques used to support access to knowledge. (Hewlett Foundation, n.d.)
Within the US, the Hewlett Foundation (n.d.) definition has come to be widely accepted
as the definition of OER for higher education, no doubt in part to the Hewlett Foundation’s role
in advocating for and funding OER initiatives in this domain.
In Defining the "Open" in Open Content and Open Educational Resources, David Wiley
(2014) framed openness around a set of five rights (often referred to as the “5R’s”) that can be
supported though open licensing:

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

10

1. Retain - the right to make, own, and control copies of the content (e.g., download,
duplicate, store, and manage);
2. Reuse - the right to use the content in a wide range of ways (e.g., in a class, in a study
group, on a website, in a video);
3. Revise - the right to adapt, adjust, modify, or alter the content itself (e.g., translate the
content into another language);
4. Remix - the right to combine the original or revised content with other material to
create something new (e.g., incorporate the content into a mashup); and
5. Redistribute - the right to share copies of the original content, your revisions, or your
remixes with others (e.g., give a copy of the content to a friend).
When librarians think about OER as an alternative to materials purchased by students
from commercial publishers, they also need to think about how “open” includes rights that
unlock powerful possibilities beyond “free to our students” or “freely available on the web.”
These rights extend to students, for example the right to retain their course materials when they
are no longer, by license, eligible to access our library databases or the right to redistribute to a
friend at another school or who is not enrolled in higher education. However, such rights also
extend in important ways to faculty and students to actively engage, revise, and remix; update,
add to, delete; and expand in order to better serve their needs.
As valuable, useful, and needed as owned and licensed materials are, and while librarians
have both a professional responsibility and a stewardship role to advocate for the broad and
engaged use of those materials, librarians also should respect their limits and appreciate that
OER represents an opportunity for expansion of the role and influence of the library and
librarianship in service of students and the academic mission. In numerous conversations with

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

11

academic librarians over the past several years regarding OER, an understandable impulse has
been seen to first reach for licensed materials rather than first investigating to see if open
materials that would achieve the same end are available.
In some cases, the increasing popular term “Affordable Course Content” may serve as a
guise by which to privilege licensed library materials in favor of open materials. However, it is
critical that library initiatives such as the University of Minnesota’s Affordable Course Materials
and Digital Course Packs recognize that “free” and “open” are non-equivalent,5 and position the
library to add value both from unlocking the value of the investment in their collections but also
in seeking to make OER or open access (OA) materials the go-to option when availability,
quality, and appropriateness to curriculum support the choice. They also position the library in a
leadership position by supporting the development of new OER through library backing and
resources.
In economics there is the concept of rivalrous and non-rivalrous goods as well as
excludable and non-excludable goods. A pie can serve as an example of an excludable, rivalrous
good while an oceanic fishing ground6 might be considered rivalrous, but by comparison with
my pie, non-excludable. A non-rivalrous, but excludable good, such as a postal system (postage
required), or non-rivalrous, non-excludable good (e.g., public radio) can also exist.
In the world of open source software, openly licensed works may be considered not only
non-rivalrous, but also anti-rivalrous. In the act of sharing under an open license they become
available to new features, updated code, bugs fixes, and the like, unlike, for example, a
commercially licensed software product such as Microsoft Office. Weber (2004) expressed it as,

5 Many library materials, while “free to students” in the sense of “free or affordable,” are frequently bound by copyright or
publisher licensing terms that may embargo content, restrict access and sharing, and are not open to revision or remix. As such,
they are not 5Rs materials that faculty or students can modify or that students can retain.
6 See http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/08/obama-creates-world-s-largest-park-off-hawaii/.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

12

“Under conditions of antirivalness, as the size of the internet-connected group increases, and
there is a heterogeneous distribution of motivations with people who have a high level of interest
and some resources to invest, then the large group is more likely, all things being equal, to
provide the good than is a small group” (p. 155). These same dynamics apply to OER—the
broader the adoption and the wider the sharing, the greater the opportunity improve the resource,
make it richer and more diverse (e.g., translation into other languages, adding practice exams,
exercise sets, presentation materials), and thus increase its value.
Still, the terrain for OER adoption is not the same for four-year institutions as it is for
community colleges, and will likely not be for some time to come. As Wiley stated, “As I
vocally and energetically advocate for universally replacing traditional materials with OER, I am
acutely aware that there are essentially no OER available for 300 and 400 level courses or
graduate courses” (Wiley, 2016a). As a result of this, there is plenty of room and more than
enough demand to leverage both the investment in our collections and the increasing wealth in
the commons. We are in no danger of running out of challenges to address. However, again
referring to Wiley (2016b), “Don’t settle for affordable when you can have open.”
At the heart of OER is the principle of open licensing, which embraces the concept of
“some rights reserved.” As contrasted to the public domain, in which an author (or copyright
holder, who may or may not be one and the same) waives all rights, or in instances where the
author’s rights may have expired and a work has reverted under copyright law to the public
domain, under a CC license the author can seek to specify certain rights that she or he may wish
to grant others regarding a particular work.
Under CC licenses, creators choose a set of conditions they wish to apply to their work.
These licenses can be combined in various forms (Creative Commons, 2014, 2015a), such as

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

13

CC-BY (Attribution), BY-NC (Attribution-NonCommercial), or CC BY-SA-ND (AttributionShareAlike-NonCommercial). The most straightforward of the CC licenses is the CC-BY
License. CC-BY readily facilitates the sharing of OER, and all of the “5 R’s” are possible under
a CC-BY license. Its primary purpose is to allow the creator of a resource to receive credit for
their work, even as it may be shared forward, modified, or reused. It also makes clear to those
seeking to use the resource that is has explicitly been placed in the commons and is available for
use.
In a world where “open” to many faculty means “if I can link to it, and I don’t have to
pay for access to it, it’s ‘open’” or, where “fair use” to others means, “I’m an educator, so it’s
fair that I use it,” navigating these intellectual property concerns is where librarians can offer
support to faculty in navigating licensing and rights and helping to keep their institutions out of
legal trouble with the owners of copyrighted content.
In addition, despite the range of CC licenses that may apply to various OER, when it
comes to new content creation there is an increasing trend among grant-givers, government, and
institutions to strongly encourage and frequently require content creators to release OER under
the CC-BY license and to place their own output under a CC-BY license. The US Department of
Labor recently adopted a department-wide CC-BY licensing policy (Green, 2016). Creative
Commons “recommends that, wherever possible, OER should be released under the most
permissive license possible: CC-BY. We view this as the CC license most suited to the purposes
of the OER movement” (Creative Commons, 2009). At this time, CC-BY represents 24% of all
CC-licensed content (Creative Commons, 2015b).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

14

Opportunities for OER Impact in a Community College Context
Thus far, the researcher has established the impact of the concentration of players in the
higher-education course material marketplace and the outsized cost inflation of those materials
relative to other consumer goods (such as healthcare or the overall CPI). The researcher has also
explored the average yearly cost of course materials for students and how community college
students actually pay more, not only as a portion of their overall budget but in actual dollars
spent, than their peers at four-year institutions.
Also, this research has documented the impact of that expenditure in the context of the
use of financial aid resources along with the opportunity cost in terms of interest paid, hours
worked, or courses not taken. It is also clear that economic fragility is a factor for many students
at community colleges and other access-focused institutions, and how what might appear to be a
manageable educational expense can actually be the financial straw that breaks the back of our
most vulnerable students.
The researcher has shown how the cost of course materials plays a role in the selection of
courses, potentially resulting in students opting-out of courses and majors where they might—if
the cost of course materials were not a factor—obtain a greater long-term return on their
investment in time and tuition. This study has also shown alternatives that students employ in
their efforts to manage the expense and affordability of course materials. Finally, the researcher
has shown that despite the potential to address these concerns through the opportunities offered
by OER and open licensing, and the clear financial and social justice issues that OER addresses,
OER still remains the province of pioneers and visionaries. This is still the case after more than a
decade of development and millions of dollars in foundation investments and countless hours of

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

15

faculty time devoted to the adoption, adaptation, and building of openly licensed course
materials.
If OER are to become a high-impact and sustainable alternative to commercial course
materials, they must gain traction in gatekeeper courses with broad adoption potential across a
large number of institutions. While it has been seen how community college students may be
especially vulnerable to the impact of the cost of course materials, the upside is that community
colleges have number of intrinsic factors that make them particularly attractive to the adoption of
OER.
Community colleges enroll 42% of all college students, totaling 10.1 million students
nationwide (Community College Research Center, n.d.), of which disproportionate numbers are
Black and Hispanic students.7 There is a real opportunity for meaningful impact, both at scale
and for economically vulnerable student populations who stand to benefit the most by OER’s
cost savings, especially in a context where student success and indebtedness are on the national
agenda.
By their nature, community colleges focus on lower division, gatekeeper, and high
enrollment courses. For example, at Northern Virginia Community College (NOVA), a large,
multi-campus institution enrolling approximately 75,000 students annually in the metro
Washington, D.C. area, the top 20 courses have a combined yearly enrollment of just over
120,000 students. If those courses were to move to OER, the savings to students could be on the
order of $10.5 million annually, simply for one institution.8 By way of comparison, in the same

7 Of all students, 44% of black and 56% of Hispanic students were in the public two-year sector in 2014, compared to 29% from
these groups in the public four-year sector (Community College Research Center, n.d.).
8 Savings are based on NOVA’s AY13 enrollments in the top 20 courses, and calculated based on the formula the actual used
text price from the college’s bookstore (assuming no new book purchases), and assuming only an 80% purchase rate.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

16

year, NOVA students spent approximately $13 million on textbooks at the on-campus college
bookstore (not including any third-party purchases or rentals).9
As a result of the focus at community colleges on general education requirements and to
prepare students for transfer (80% of community college students intend to get a four-year
degree [Jenkins & Fink, 2015]) a preponderance of the high enrollment and gatekeeper courses
offered in community colleges across the country are similar in their curriculum and learning
outcomes. As such, they offer significant potential benefits of scale through a commitment to
development, improvement and sharing of open resources. Combining the high-impact
opportunity from high enrollment courses with targeting all courses on a degree or certificate
pathway—a strategy coming to be known as a “Z-Degree” based on the pioneering work done in
this area at Tidewater Community College—would mean that students would have a pathway to
their associate’s degree and opportunities for transfer and/or certificate credentialing with no
course materials cost.
OER Contrasted to Traditional Publisher Materials
One of the chief claims made by the commercial textbook industry is that their materials
are superior to what can be offered by the open community, which justifies the prices charged for
their materials, that “You get what you pay for” or what Wiley and Sebastian (2017) have
waggishly referred to as “The Grumpy Cat Hypothesis.” However, when examining the
evidence of efficacy for OER in community colleges and other access-focused institutions, there
is little evidence to support the inherent superiority of commercially published texts over OER.
The Open Education Research Group is “an interdisciplinary research group that (1)
conducts original, rigorous, empirical research on the impact of OER adoption on a range of
9 If, using the National Association of College Stores survey figures, only 55% of students were “loyal” to the campus bookstore
(purchasing all their materials there), and the remaining 45% purchase elsewhere, the total spend might be on the order of $15.25
million (Student Watch, 2015).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

17

educational outcomes and (2) designs and shares methodological and conceptual frameworks for
studying the impact of OER adoption” (Open Education Research Group, n.d.). Employing what
they refer to as the COUP model (Cost, Outcomes, Usage, and Perceptions), they have
assembled a body of research on OER outcomes. For example, Hilton (2016) reported that
across nine studies of OER efficacy including more than 46,000 students, only one showed lower
outcomes in the OER condition (and the majority of that study were non-significant differences).
In another group study (Fischer, Hilton, Robinson, & Wiley, 2015), the largest study to
date, a multi-institutional study of the impact of OER adoption looked at 16,727 students (of
which 12,599 were enrolled at community colleges) from 10 institutions (six of which were
community colleges) across 15 courses and found that in only one case did students in the
control condition (commercial textbooks) surpass the outcome of students in the OER condition,
as qualified by a grade of C- or better in the course. The preponderance of courses either
demonstrated better outcomes for OER (five of 15) or no significant difference (nine of 15). In
addition, the OER group “enrolled in a significantly higher number of credits in the next
semester” (Fischer et al., 2015, p. 164).
At Tidewater Community College, in the assessment of their Z-Degree program, findings
also supported institutional enrollment benefits from OER adoption. In Fischer et al. (2015) they
reported a 6% improvement in the success rate (defined as reduced drops, withdraws, and final
grade of C or better) in both face-to-face and online sections employing OER. In a subsequent
article, Wiley, Williams, DeMarte, and Hilton (2016) suggested that as a result of the increase in
student enrollment resulting from OER adoption (students took, on average, two additional
credits in the semester during which they took one OER course, and one additional credit in the
subsequent semester), OER adoption efforts might potentially be self-sustaining through the

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

18

increase in tuition generation alone. This is an important finding in the context of the challenges
to OER sustainability, outside of ongoing infusions of grant dollars.
So, beyond cost savings to students, the researcher has now also seen two critical sets of
findings demonstrated in the literature. The first is that OER appear to, at the very least, produce
no worse outcomes and sometimes better results for students at a lower cost than commercial
course materials. Second, not only is there increased retention and student success to potentially
be gained through OER adoption, but institutions can gain benefits as well, both via improved
outcomes and increased tuition revenue. Finally, in a performance-based funding context,
institutions that tilt towards OER may find themselves in the running for performance-based
funding enhancements when those incentive are in place as part of state funding models.
Academic Librarians’ Role in OER Adoption
The late OA champion, Robin Peek (2012), highlighted the parallels between the
scholarly publishing crisis and the textbook crisis, saying, “this has led to the same kind of sweet
deal that a few scholarly publishers have enjoyed. Classrooms must have textbooks; libraries
must have journals” (p. 26). In the case of scholarly publishing, librarians, especially those in
research-intensive universities, have taken a central role in raising awareness, developing
models, advocating for policy, and supporting faculty as well as maintaining the infrastructure to
support the shift to OA. In doing so, they have leveraged the digital shift to bring about a
revolution in scholarly communication.
In the world of higher education teaching, OER is the corollary to OA in scholarship.
The researcher therefore argues that in teaching intensive and access-focused institutions (i.e.,
community colleges and HBCUs) academic librarians have both an important role and a
professional responsibility to take the lead in supporting faculty and students in expanding the

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

19

range of OER in service, support innovative teaching, and provide a competitive counterweight
in the course material marketplace. Okamoto (2013) painted several broad categories where
librarians can play a role in OER advocacy: advocacy, promotion and discovery; evaluation,
collection, preservation, and access; curation, creation, and facilitation; and funding. KazakoffLane (2014), Belliston (2009), Robertson (2010), Kleymeer, Kleinman, and Hanss (2010), and
Bueno-de-la-Fuente, Robertson, and Boon (2012) have also sought to outline possible library
roles in supporting OER and course materials. Below is a summary listing drawn from across
these sources and notated with examples:
•

Adoption – Librarians model the adoption of OER for their faculty colleagues by
leveraging open content in their instructional and outreach roles.

•

Advocacy – Librarians who see the benefits of OER often serve as institutional advocates
for OER and other affordability strategies, such as multi-user e-book licensing, including
library content and OER to form hybrid course material sets, and reducing the cost of
course packs through leveraging licensed content.

•

Curation, Preservation, and Repositories – Librarians have critical expertise that is
sorely needed to support the long-term visibility and sustainability of OER through the
creation and maintenance of OER repositories.

•

Content Development – Librarians can adapt existing or develop new OER for their
own instructional purposes.

•

Description, Cataloging, and Metadata – Librarians can support the organization and
facilitate discovery by providing expertise related to the description, cataloging, and
developing OER metadata.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS
•

20

Discovery – Librarians can support faculty and students in effective search strategies to
identify OER and to develop and provide LibGuides and other finding aids to support
general or discipline-specific identification of high-quality OER.

•

Funding – Libraries can, on their own or in partnership with others on campus, develop
funding programs to encourage and support faculty seeking to make the change to OER
or more affordable course materials.

•

Information Literacy – Librarians can provide expert assistance for collection
development and instruction on identifying and evaluating the authority and quality of
OER materials.

•

Licensing/IP/Copyright Assistance – Librarians can serve as local experts on CC, Fair
Use, and copyright, and support faculty and students in making determinations regarding
how materials can be used, combined, and shared.

•

Policy Development – Librarians can take a leadership role in the development of
institutional policy regarding OER adoption and development.

•

Professional Development – Librarians support online and face-to-face professional
development for faculty seeking to improve their understanding of OER, or gain
certifications.

•

Publishing – Libraries can take on the role of OER publisher, soliciting authorship of
content, developing collateral materials, providing editing and proofreading services, and
creating a distribution channel for new OER.

•

Recognition – On their own or in partnership with academic leadership, student
government, or educational foundations, libraries can establish reward, recognition, and

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

21

awards for faculty who model best practices and leadership related to creating, adopting,
or promoting OER.
•

Team Members – Librarians can serve as information specialists and other roles on OER
development teams alongside faculty subject-matter experts, instructional
designers/technologists, and media developers.
Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al. (2012) conducted one of the only studies seeking to understand

perceptions of the roles of librarians and libraries in supporting OER. Their study examined the
role of librarians in OER project development teams in the US and EU and found the following:
Three out of four projects included at least one librarian, and, in half of the projects, the library
was either leading or serving as a partner in the initiative. The main areas of involvement
included: description/classification, management, preservation, dissemination, and promotion of
OER. Many of the librarians were expected to provide expertise in traditional information
science areas, such as metadata and classification, discovery, information literacy, and
repositories, along with some alternative skills such as search engine optimization and
intellectual property and licensing standards (Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al., 2012).
In this study, the population was very broadly defined as “any institution, initiative, or
expert worldwide dealing with OER and/or open content for learning and teaching, but focuses
on the higher education context” (Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al., 2012, p. 14). Responses were
solicited via two OER listservs. The identities of individual respondents were apparently not
recorded, so it is impossible to determine their specific role in a project team, be it project
manager, librarian, faculty member, instructional designer/technologist, or another category.
Overall, the librarians’ contributions were valued, with 61% of respondents rating their
role as either “indispensable” or “very valuable” (Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al., 2012, p. 7).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

22

However, one finding indicated that overall awareness of the role librarians can play in
supporting OER “is still not widespread, and a significant lack of awareness exists with regard to
library activities and from the libraries about the resources released from OER initiatives” (p. 7).
The recommendations concluded with a call to “promote the role libraries and librarians can play
in OER initiatives” (Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al., 2012, p. 7). However, because the study focused
on project development teams with the goal of adapting existing or building new OER, it does
not shed much light on the attitudes and opinions of faculty as the key decision makers in the
course material adoption process.
Faculty–Librarian Collaborations
Another critical area in considering the role of librarians in supporting OER initiatives is
the history of librarian–faculty collaboration. Woodward (2016), in her article on OER
advocacy, discovery, and adoption, drew a connection between librarian–faculty collaboration
and the priorities outlined in Oakleaf’s (2010) pivotal report on the Value of Academic Libraries,
stating that, “librarian contributions to a campus open textbook project (serve) as an opportunity
to build library value in faculty teaching” (Woodward, 2016, p. 2). She also pointed to
opportunities for collaboration with other campus units, in particular the college Center for
Teaching and Learning (CETL), as a parallel example for bridge-building opportunities that
shine a positive light on all participants.
However, the history of library–faculty collaborations are problematic, especially those
with their roots in information literacy instruction. A frequently cited essay, written by a new
faculty member, Aletha Stahl (1997), called for librarians to be proactive but respectful of
faculty prerogatives; provide communication regarding the limits of the librarian’s role in
research support and instruction, outreach, and openness to input on collection development; and

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

23

support faculty needs and interests around current awareness. She stated, “please communicate
clearly to me the human layout of the library” (p. 134).
Kotter (1999), in a literature review of library–faculty relationships, suggested that
relationships are “most often strained, unfriendly, and even acrimonious” (p. 295). In a study of
the BI/L/ILI-L listserv postings from 1995-2002, Given and Julien (2005) suggested that
differing roles and perspectives regarding information literacy (IL) and IL instruction may result
in approaching the conversation at cross-purposes. The authors suggested that librarians
generally considered students, not faculty, to be their clients. Recommendations included having
an open mind regarding the intentions of faculty and their commitment (if not understanding) to
information literacy; having empathy for the pressure that faculty face, both professional and
curricular; and to understand that faculty have likely not had the benefit of information literacy
instruction themselves and are often operating out of personally developed information seeking
and evaluation strategies. Finally, they recommended that librarians treat faculty more as clients
in their own rights and seek to connect them with the resources and services of the library
beyond IL instruction.
Several studies, including Julien and Pecoskie (2009), Pham and Tanner (2014, 2015),
and Saunders (2013), point to perceived power/status relationship disparities between faculty and
librarians in the instructional relationship, which can result in librarians feeling a need to defer to
the preferences or constraints placed on them by faculty in exchange for being granted access to
students for the purposes of information literacy instruction. Specific to community colleges,
Feldman and Sciammarella (2000) reported that 88% of librarians identified problems in
research assignments from faculty due to a mismatch with library resources; however, only 48%
of librarians took the opportunity to contact a faculty member in such circumstances to let them

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

24

know an assigned source was unavailable, despite the fact that 91% of faculty surveyed indicated
they were willing to be flexible regarding the resources students used in their assignments.
More optimistically, Delaney and Bates (2015) pointed to embedded librarianship as an
entry point for broader collaboration, citing evidence-based medicine as an example of where
“there is a growing awareness of the importance of using expert searchers to conduct systematic
reviews of the literature in health sciences” (p. 33). But even in this context, they suggested that
embedded services “rest too much on the excellence of individuals” and that librarians could act
in a “more entrepreneurial style, and need to seek out ways to add value to their roles and show
the impact of their work, and to do so they must go beyond the traditional parameters of the
library” (Delaney & Bates, 2015, p. 32).
With respect to OER, the question is whether challenges that librarians face regarding
information literacy instruction and collaboration with faculty may or may not apply to the OER
domain. It is an unexplored question as to whether faculty who have curiosity or commitment
regarding open education will see librarians as potential, or even natural, partners or if they will
face dismissal, rejection, or skepticism when they seek to advocate or support adoption of OER.
In diffusion theory, librarians in this context could be considered change agents, those who seek
to influence the decisions of a target population, which in this case is faculty who are making
adoption decisions regarding course materials. Granovetter’s (1973) “strength of weak ties”
model emphasizes the advantages that a change agent who is liminal to the target population may
have:
If the innovativeness of a research (or social) group is shackled by vested intellectual (or
cultural) interests, then new ideas must emanate from outsiders in the network of
individuals. Weak ties thus provide the basis both for microlevel change (by broadening
group horizons) and macrolevel (by expanding intergroup connections). (Schwartz, 1994,
p. 534)

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

25

So, to what extent are faculty who have evidenced interest in OER open to support from their
library colleagues? Will librarians face the same challenges they have struggled with for years
regarding information literacy instruction, or are faculty open to the idea that librarians can, as
Woodward (2016) suggested, “build library value in faculty teaching” through promotion and
support of OER?
Research Questions
In order to better understand the leadership and collaboration opportunities for librarians
seeking to advocate and support OER adoption, this research seeks to address the following
research questions:
RQ1: How familiar are community college faculty with the roles that librarians might
play in supporting OER?
RQ2: In which of these roles have faculty had personal experience with librarians while
considering or engaging in OER adoption or development?
RQ3: What is the level of favorability of faculty towards librarians in those roles
supporting OER with which they have had personal experience?
RQ4: Regardless of whether they have had prior experience with librarians in these
roles, which roles do faculty choose as important for librarians to play in
supporting OER?
RQ5: How does the use of other library resources or services by faculty correspond with
attitudes regarding the librarians’ role in supporting OER?
RQ6: Does a greater level of faculty engagement with OER correspond with attitudes
regarding the librarians’ role in supporting OER?

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS
RQ7: Does faculty engagement in online or hybrid learning correspond with attitudes
regarding the librarians’ role in supporting OER?

26

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

27

Methods
The Virginia Community College System (VCCS) has been at the forefront of the OER
movement among community colleges in the United States, having participated in several
national OER projects. In particular, Tidewater Community College’s Z-Degree program, which
has been the subject of several impact and outcomes studies of the efficacy of OER and has
served in part as a model for the 2016–2018 nationwide Achieving the Dream (2016) OER
initiative. In 2015–2016, the VCCS received a $400,000 grant from the Hewlett Foundation to
scale the Z-Degree model across 16 of the 23 VCCS colleges (hereafter referred to as Zx23). As
part of this grant, numerous professional development events for faculty were offered, and a
repository of OER courses materials, aligned with VCCS course content summaries (course
outcomes), were made available through the shared, system-wide learning management system.
This makes the VCCS an opportune setting to address the research questions.
For the purposes of this study, it was determined that a web-based survey of VCCS
faculty within the target population was an appropriate strategy to better understand the attitudes
and opinions of faculty about the librarianship role in supporting OER adoption. Survey research
is a well-accepted methodology for studying of attitudes and opinions, especially where the
individual is the unit of analysis, and the purpose of the survey is a comparison between
variables (Babbie, 1973, p. 43; Punch, 2003, p. 12). Furthermore, web-based surveys have
become increasingly accepted as wider range of respondents gain access to the web, as software
has improved, and as issues like limited bandwidth to provide for interactivity and graphics has
become less of a concern. “Online surveys have become a staple of the survey landscape.
Enabled by the rise and reach of the internet, they allow researchers to recruit large numbers of
Americans into a survey quickly and at low cost” (Deane, 2016).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

28

In the case of this survey, potential respondents can be reasonably presumed to have
access to institutionally supplied email addresses and Internet access, and each has demonstrated
a willingness to engage with email and the web, as they have already asked to participate in
either an email discussion list or to be given access to web-based OER materials.
Written permission (see Appendix A) was secured from the VCCS System Office to use
contact information collected over the scope of the Zx23 project for purposes of surveying
faculty who have participated in the project in some manner, from engaging in professional
development; considering, adopting, or adapting existing OER in the repository; or participating
in efforts to develop new OER that might be shared. To promote response rate and completion,
respondents were given the opportunity to enter a raffle for a $100 upon completion of the
survey. To protect confidentiality, entries for the raffle were collected separately from the
survey, so there was no connection between individuals’ entries and the data they provided.
Given that the target population is defined as faculty who have engaged at some level
regarding OER, it can be understood—compared with many of their peers—that the level of
OER awareness is likely to be greater than the 58% majority of faculty who reported that they
were generally unaware of OER (Allen & Seaman, 2016). As such, one can also surmise that
this population is more likely tilted toward the innovator and early adopter side of the adopter
category types.
The survey collected basic information from the respondents pertaining to their
institutional role, namely, full- or part-time faculty, discipline, years of service, and their level of
direct experience and familiarity with OER in order to conduct a comparison across groups and
determine if there are fundamental differences in attitudes or options based on demographic
characteristics within the larger group. In addition, a set of questions documented their recent

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

29

experience working with librarians or using library materials in support of instruction or
research. The core of the survey was questions intended to assess instructors’ level of familiarity
with the range of roles librarians might take in supporting OER, and to solicit feedback on their
attitudes and opinions regarding these roles. Finally, an opportunity was provided for openended feedback in order to help capture any topics that faculty wish to address that might not
have been covered in the survey and to provide an opportunity for feedback on the survey itself
(Appendix C).
Prior to initializing data collection, the survey was reviewed by the University at Buffalo
Institutional Review Board to insure that adequate safeguards were in place to protect
respondents, including privacy, data security, protection from harm, correct and sufficient
information regarding the study itself, and the rights of respondents (including the right to
withdraw or discontinue at any time, without negative consequences, and appropriate contact
information regarding the researchers and the Review Board itself, see Appendix B). In
addition, the survey was pre-tested with a group of five VCCS faculty prior to broader
distribution to ensure that the meaning of questions was clear, language unambiguous, and that
the length of the survey was not overly burdensome and kept to its intended completion time of
10 minutes per respondent.
The survey was distributed to a total of 689 VCCS faculty by means of the
SurveyMonkey software application. SurveyMonkey is a commonly used application for hosting
web-based surveys and supported a number of features important to the study, including SSL
encryption and secure data hosting, direct administration of surveys from an existing list of email
addresses, and survey response management features, such a skip logic and piping that allow
respondents to be easily and appropriately guided through the survey. The application was

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

30

designed in a manner that allowed participants to respond from a desktop browser, tablet, or
mobile device, and was ADA accessible, supporting the use of screen-reading devices. Analysis
of results was conducted through the use of SPSS software. In addition to basic descriptive
reports such as frequency analysis and measures of central tendency, additional analysis was
conducted by means of cross-tabulation across response categories.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

31

Results
In this section, the results of the data collection process are summarized, including the
responses to the survey and the demographic profiles of the respondents. More centrally, each of
the seven research questions proposed for the study will be addressed and the relevant
relationships that emerged in the process of reviewing the data collected will be explored.
Responses
Of the 689 total email invitations sent, 318 (46.2%) were opened and 20 (2.9%) were
returned as undeliverable. In total, 193 responses were received for the survey for a response rate
of 28.7% of valid addressees. Of these respondents, 27 (14.4%) respondents identified as other
than full- or part-time faculty and were screened out of the survey as ineligible.10 Of the 165
qualifying individuals, 162 completed the survey for a completion rate of 98.0%. Average time
to complete the survey was 6 minutes.
Demographics
Overall demographics of the sample are summarized in Table 1. Of the respondents, 108
(66.7%) identified as full-time faculty, and 54 (33.0%) as part-time or adjunct faculty. Out of the
23 VCCS institutions, there was at least one respondent from each of the member colleges; when
breaking out responses by Carnegie classification by institutional size, 6 (3.7%) were from small
colleges, 81 (50.0%) were from medium colleges, and 74 (45.0%) were from large colleges.
Small colleges were somewhat underrepresented relative to their overall faculty numbers.
However, this may be a reflection of their largely rural location, long travel times, and limited
resources to support professional development, even when those opportunities are within the
state.
10 Because the Zx23 project included librarians and academic counselors (the latter teach sections of a required student
development course) as well as academic technology staff as participants, these persons might well have been included in the
sample, but they were not eligible for the study based on the teaching faculty screen.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

32

Regarding the disciplinary affiliations of faculty respondents, faculty in the humanities
(N=48, 29.6%) and STEM fields (N=59, 36.4%) were most prominent, followed by Social
Sciences (N=25, 15.4%), Business Administration (N=13, 8.0%), Health Sciences (N=12, 7.4%),
and Other (N=5; 3.1%). Notably, there were no respondents from fields outside of those thought
of as academic degree transfer pathways but critical components of the community college
workforce development and vocational education mission: Technical Studies (i.e., HVAC,
electrical, plumbing, automotive, etc.), Workforce Development, or Law/Criminal Justice.
Table 1
Sample Demographics
Item
Teaching Role
Full-time
Part-time or adjunct
Primary Discipline
STEM
Humanities
Social Sciences
Business Administration
Health Sciences
Other
College Size
Medium
Large
Small
Years Teaching
6-10
11-15
16-20
More than 25 years
1-5
21-25
Age
61 years or over
41-50
51-60
31-40
30 years or under

%
66.7
33.3
36.4
29.6
15.4
8.0
7.4
3.1
50.3
46.0
3.7
21.0
20.4
19.8
13.6
13.0
12.3
29.4
28.8
28.1
13.8
0.0

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

33

The level of experience and tenure in position of respondents skews older, with 47
(29.4%) 61 years of age or older; 45 (28.1%) age 51–60; 46 (28.8%) age 41–50, and 22 (13.8%)
31–40 years of age. According to the VCCS, the average age of full-time faculty across the
system is 51 years (Personal Communication, July 26, 2017). No respondents were under 30
years of age. Regarding number of years teaching in higher education, 65 respondents (40.0%)
had between 11–20 years of experience, 55 (34.0%) had 1–10 years of experience, and 42
(26.0%) had more than 21 years of experience. Across the VCCS, the average years of service
was 12 years for full-time faculty and seven years for part-time faculty (Personal
Communication, July 26, 2017).
Teaching Modalities
The preponderance of faculty (N=135, 83.0%) teach both face-to-face and in
hybrid/online delivery modalities, although proportionally more part-time faculty than full-time
faculty (N=14, 26.0% vs N=13, 12.0%) taught only face-to-face. Looking across disciplinary
areas, 80.0% or more of faculty in each group taught online, with the largest percentage in
Business Administration at 92.0% and the lowest in STEM at 80.0%.
Library Engagement
The majority of faculty respondents reported making use of the library resources and
services or engaging with librarians in one or more ways (Table 2). More than 60.0% of
respondents reported using library database resources, assigning work to students that involved
library use, and visiting the library in person during the past year (N=108, 66.7%; N=104,
64.2%, and N=103, 63.6%, respectively). Thirty-eight percent (N=62) of respondents placed a
textbook on reserve and 37.0% (N=61) borrowed a book.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

34

Regarding librarian–faculty interactions, 29.0% (N=47) had a librarian deliver instruction
to students in their classes, 25.3% (N=41) consulted with a librarian regarding designing
assignments, and 21.6% (N=35) consulted with a librarian regarding their research interests.
Only 9.9% (N=17) reported no interaction with the library in the past year; of those, 13 were
full-time faculty and three were part-time or adjunct faculty, the majority of which were in
STEM disciplines.
Table 2
Library Engagement
Item
Used library databases to find articles for teaching or research
Assigned work to students that required using the library
Visited your college’s library in person
Placed a textbook or other course materials on reserve
Borrowed a book from your college’s library
Had a librarian deliver library instruction sessions to students
Consulted with a librarian regarding instruction for students
Consulted with a librarian regarding designing assignments
Consulted with a librarian regarding your research interests
Used your college library’s inter-library loan services
None of the above
Other

%
66.7
64.2
63.6
38.3
37.7
29.0
27.8
25.3
21.6
17.3
9.9
3.7

OER Awareness, Engagement, and Obstacles/Deterrents
As a group, the respondents had a very high level of awareness and engagement
regarding OER and open licensing. Of the respondents, 70.0% (N=114) said they were “highly
aware” and another 23.0% (N=37) were “moderately aware” of OER. Only 11 respondents
(7.0%) reported being either somewhat aware or slightly aware; just one respondent stated they
had no prior knowledge. Between 35.0–40.0% of faculty reported being knowledgeable of CC,
Public Domain, and copyright licensing; an additional 32.0–37.0% reported being moderately
knowledgeable.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

35

Regarding OER engagement (Table 3), only 4.0% (N=7) of faculty reported no OER
engagement in the prior 12 months. Notably, more than half of all respondents (56.8%, N=88)
reported adopting an OER primary text for a course they taught. In addition, 75.3% (N=122) had
participated in an OER-related professional development activity, 39.5% (N=64) had adopted
OER as supplementary course materials, 34.6% (N=55) had created new OER, and 32.1% had
adapted new OER materials as supplementary to their courses.
Looking deeper, 15.4% percent of faculty (N=25) engaged in Zx23 project activities such
as joining a listserv, participating in professional development or reviewing an OER text from
the project repository, but reported not yet having adopted OER as either primary or secondary
course materials. These faculty can be considered to be “persuadables” – interested in OER but
not yet committed – and will be discussed in greater detail in later sections.
Table 3
OER Engagement for Previous 12 Months
Item
Participated in a professional development activity on OER
Considered an OER textbook or supplementary course materials
Adopted OER as primary materials for a course you teach
Joined an email list or online forum where OER was subject
Adopted OER as supplementary materials for a course you teach
Adapted OER as primary materials for a course you teach
Created new OER for use in a course you teach
Adapted OER as supplemental materials for a course you teach
Shared OER materials you created or adapted under open license
None of the above
Other

%
75.3
66.0
56.8
43.8
39.5
39.5
34.6
32.1
29.6
4.3
0.0

Respondents were asked to identify the top three obstacles they encountered in adopting
OER (Table 4). Remarkably, more than a third indicated they perceived no obstacles to OER
adoption (N=57, 35.2%). Of those who reported obstacles, the most frequently cited were the
quality/currency of materials available (N=43, 26.5%), the scarcity of resources in their

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

36

discipline (N=37, 22.8%), and effort and time needed to integrate materials into their courses.
Lack of institutional support was selected by only 6.2% (N=10) of the respondents, and just
0.6% of respondents indicated that they had no interest or did not have sufficient experience to
have an opinion regarding deterrents.
Table 4
Perceived Deterrents to OER Adoption
Item
None of the above- There are no deterrents for me
Resources are not high-quality or up-to-date
Not enough resources for my subject
Too difficult or time consuming to integrate into courses
No comprehensive catalog of resources
Too hard to find what I need
Too difficult to change or edit
Other
Don’t know if I have permission to use or change materials
Not used by other faculty I know
Lack of support from my institution
I do not currently have an interest in using OER
I am unaware of OER and have no opinion about deterrents

%
35.2
26.5
22.8
18.5
17.9
16.0
14.2
9.9
9.3
6.8
6.2
1.2
0.6

Regarding their freedom to choose what materials they used for instruction, most faculty
felt they had “full control” over the selection of their course materials (N=98, 61.0%). Twentyseven percent (N=44) reported having input into the process, but were then expected to abide by
a departmental or college-wide adoption; only 6.0% (N=10) felt they could only use assigned
materials and did not have input into selection. All of these respondents who reported having no
input or control into the selection of course materials were also part-time or adjunct faculty, who
are frequently expected to work from assigned texts for their courses. Despite this, over half
(N=26, 52.0%) of part-time/adjunct faculty reported having full control over their choice of
course materials.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

37

Looking to the future, when faculty were asked about their intentions regarding OER
adoption, the responses were overwhelmingly in the affirmative, with 78.0% (N=121) reporting
they were either extremely likely (60.0%) or very likely (18.0%) to use OER as either primary or
supplementary materials in at least one course in the upcoming academic year. Only four
respondents (2.5%) stated they were not at all likely; 20.0% (N=31) said they were slightly or
somewhat likely.
Research Questions - Perceptions of Library Role in OER Support
The following presents the awareness, experience, favorability, and value faculty place
on the role librarians might play in supporting OER adoption, and whether the level of faculty
engagement with the library, OER, or mode of instructional delivery might have a corresponding
relationship with attitudes regarding librarian support.
RQ1 & RQ2: How familiar are community college faculty with the roles that librarians
might play in supporting OER? In which of these roles have faculty had personal experience
with librarians while considering or engaging in OER adoption or development?
When asked how familiar they were with a range of roles that librarians might play in
supporting OER from their own experience, there was a broad range of responses selected from
those available (Table 5). The top five, selected by at least 30 percent of respondents, were: OER
advocacy (N=66, 40.7%), discovery (N=63, 38.9%), adoption (N=60, 37.0%), information
literacy (N=60, 36.4%), and curation (N=49, 30.2%). Notably, just below the highest ranking
roles, was “None,” which was selected by 28.4% (N=46) of faculty respondents. The lowest
ranking roles regarding awareness, each selected by fewer than 20.0% of respondents, were as
follows: policy development (N=25, 15.4%), funding (N=12, 7.4%), serving as publisher (N=12,

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

38

7.4%), and providing rewards and recognition to faculty for OER adoption and support (N=7,
4.3%).
Table 5
Awareness of Librarian OER Roles from Experience
Item
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
None of the above
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
Other

%
40.7
38.9
37.0
36.4
30.2
28.4
28.4
27.8
24.7
22.8
21.6
15.4
7.4
7.4
4.3
3.7

RQ3. What is the level of favorability of faculty towards librarians in those roles
supporting OER with which they have had personal experience? When asked to select their top
five OER support activities that were “most appropriate for librarians to play” in their
professional role, faculty selected roles very much in line with traditional perceptions of
librarianship: discovery (N=91, 56.2%), curation (N=88, 54.3%), cataloging and metadata
(N=87, 53.7%), information literacy (N=78, 48.1%), and OER advocacy (N=77, 47.5%) (Table
6).
Only a third of faculty surveyed prioritized librarians serving as experts or in assisting or
managing licenses for OER as appropriate (N=50, 33.0%), and fewer than one in five saw an
appropriate role for librarians as key personnel in OER development or leadership roles, such as

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

39

serving as team members in OER development projects (N=30, 18.0%), as providers of
professional development around OER (N=21, 16.0%), as leaders in policy development (N=21,
13.0%), or in funding or publishing or OER development initiatives (7.0% and 6.0%,
respectively).
Table 6
Perceptions of Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
None of the above
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
Other
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER

%
56.2
54.3
53.7
48.1
47.5
30.9
26.5
22.8
18.5
16.7
13.0
7.4
6.8
6.2
4.3
3.1

RQ4. Regardless of whether they have had prior experience with librarians in these
roles, which roles do faculty choose as important for librarians to play in supporting OER?
When asked to rank the top five roles, from their perspective as faculty, that they valued for
librarians to play regarding OER, the responses roughly paralleled the ratings of what was
considered appropriate, again along the lines of traditional library roles: discovery (N=94,
58.0%), information literacy (N=74, 46.0%), cataloging and metadata (N=73, 45.0%), curation
(N=70, 43.0%), and content development (N=54, 33.0%). Again, fewer than 20.0% of
respondents perceived librarians as being valued as members of OER development teams (N=28,

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

40

17.0%), and in policy development (N=21, 13.0%), funding (N=15, 11.0%), publishing (N=14,
9.0%), or reward and recognition (N=6, 4.0%). A small number of respondents (N=14, 9.0%)
selected “none” of the activities as valuable to them.
RQ5. How does the use of other library resources or services by faculty correspond with
attitudes regarding the librarian’s role in supporting OER? In order to better understand the
relationship between these factors, the corresponding variables were combined to form a smaller
number of variables inclusive of several related factors. For library engagement, the original 11
response options were grouped to form categories, reflecting four levels of library engagement:
no engagement, visited library only, used library resources (collections, databases, services), and
interacting with librarians. These results were then compared (cross tabulation) against the
“appropriate” (those with more than 40.0% faculty support) and “valuable” (those with more
than 50.0% faculty support) activities.
For the valuable category (Table 7), the five highest-rated response options across
categories were: discovery (59.0%), information literacy (58.0%), cataloging and metadata
(48.0%), curation (44.0%), and content development (40.0%). Looking at roles by level of
library engagement, those who interacted with librarians (highly engaged faculty) were most
likely to value the librarian role in discovery (64.4%), information literacy (57.5%), cataloging
and metadata (49.3%), and content development (39.7%). In each of these instances, the leading
option was at least five percentage points ahead of the next highest category.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

41

Table 7
Library Use by Valuableness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
None
(n=16)
(%)
Adoption: Use OER in presentations and
instruction
Advocacy: Raise awareness of OER among
faculty
Curation: Add OER to library collections
Content Development: Create OER for
instruction
Cataloging and Metadata: Make OER more
retrievable
Discovery: Assist in locating appropriate OER
Funding: Assist with funding to support OER
Information Literacy: Help assess quality of
OER
Licensing: Assist with understanding OER
licenses
Policy Development: Help advance OER
policies
Professional Development: Lead workshops on
OER
Publishing: Publish materials under open
licenses
Recognition: Provide awards for contributions to
OER
Team Members: Serve as experts in OER
development
None of the above
Other

Visited
Only
(n=10)
(%)

Used
Interacted
Resources
with
(n=60)
Librarian
(%)
(n=73)
(%)
15.0
24.7

6.3

0.0

6.3

30.0

28.3

37.0

12.5
18.8

20.0
30.0

41.7
31.7

56.2
39.7

31.3

40.0

43.3

49.3

43.8
6.3
43.8

60.0
0.0
30.0

55.0
13.3
35.0

64.4
11.0
57.5

31.3

50.0

23.3

38.4

12.5

0.0

13.3

15.1

62.5

40.0

20.0

34.2

12.5

10.0

10.0

8.2

6.3

0.0

3.3

4.1

6.3

30.0

11.7

21.9

12.5
0.0

10.0
0.0

13.3
3.3

4.1
1.4

In the appropriate category (Table 8), the top five selections by respondents overall were:
discovery (60.0%), curation (58.0%), cataloging and metadata (57.0%), information literacy
(51.0%), and advocacy (51.0%). In this example, the pattern is less straightforward than on the
valuable category. The “visited only” group rated discovery the highest at 70.0%. The “visited
only” and “interacted with librarian” groups rated curation almost equally at 60.0% and 60.3%,

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

42

respectively; and “used resources” and “interacted with librarian” rated cataloging and metadata
almost equally at 58.3% and 58.9%, respectively; and rated information literacy almost equally
at 50.0% and 52.1%, respectively. The “visited” group rated advocacy at 60.0%.
Table 8
Library Use by Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
None
(n=16)
(%)
Adoption: Use OER in presentations and
instruction
Advocacy: Raise awareness of OER among faculty
Curation: Add OER to library collections
Content Development: Create OER for instruction
Cataloging and Metadata: Make OER more
retrievable
Discovery: Assist in locating appropriate OER
Funding: Assist with funding to support OER
Information Literacy: Help assess quality of OER
Licensing: Assist with understanding OER licenses
Policy Development: Help advance OER policies
Professional Development: Lead workshops on
OER
Publishing: Publish materials under open licenses
Recognition: Provide awards for contributions to
OER
Team Members: Serve as experts in OER
development
None of the above
Other

Visited
Only
(n=10)
(%)

Used
Resources
(n=60)
(%)

6.3

0.0

26.7

Interacted
with
Librarian
(n=73)
(%)
27.4

25.0
31.3
12.5
31.3

60.0
60.0
20.0
20.0

51.7
53.3
33.3
58.3

49.3
60.3
24.7
58.9

56.3
6.3
31.3
37.5
12.5
31.3

70.0
0.0
40.0
40.0
10.0
30.0

48.3
6.7
50.0
30.0
13.3
15.0

60.3
6.8
52.1
28.8
13.7
13.7

6.3
6.3

10.0
0.0

6.7
3.3

5.5
1.4

12.5

30.0

11.7

24.7

18.8
0.0

10.0
0.0

10.0
5.0

2.7
5.5

RQ6. Does a greater level of engagement with OER by faculty correspond with attitudes
regarding the librarian role in supporting OER? To address this question, two comparisons were
conducted. The first was based on level of faculty OER engagement based on three combined
categories: low engagement through awareness activities (such as joining a listserv, participating
in professional development activities, or requesting access to review an existing OER text)

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

43

(N=18, 12.0%), moderate engagement through adoption or adapting existing OER resources for
primary or supplemental use (N=65, 42.0%), or high engagement through building/sharing new
OER (N=71, 46.0%). The second was based on faculty responses to their plans for using OER in
the upcoming year. These responses were grouped into two categories: one for those faculty who
said they were very or extremely likely to use OER in their courses for the upcoming year
(N=123, 78.0%), and those who said they were not at all, slightly, or somewhat likely to be using
OER (N=35, 22.0%). These two groups were then compared across the response items receiving
the five highest ranking response items for survey questions relating to whether the faculty
thought librarian OER activities were valuable or appropriate.
Overall, five activities were rated most highly as valuable (Table 9):
1. Discovery: moderate engagement (66.2%), high engagement (57.7%), and low
engagement (50.0%);
2. Information literacy: high engagement (50.7%), moderate engagement (49.2%), and
low engagement (27.8%);
3. Cataloging and metadata: moderate engagement (49.2%), high engagement (50.7%),
and low engagement (27.8%);
4. Curation: high engagement (52.1%), moderate engagement (46.2%), and low
engagement (16.7%); and
5. Content development: low engagement (50.0%), high engagement (33.8%), and
moderate engagement (29.2%).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

44

Table 9
OER Engagement by Valuableness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Low*
(n=18) (%)
Adoption: Use OER in presentations and
27.8
instruction
Advocacy: Raise awareness of OER among
22.2
faculty
Curation: Add OER to library collections
16.7
Content Development: Create OER for instruction
50.0
Cataloging and Metadata: Make OER more
27.8
retrievable
Discovery: Assist in locating appropriate OER
50.0
Funding: Assist with funding to support OER
16.7
Information Literacy: Help assess quality of OER
27.8
Licensing: Assist with understanding OER
22.2
licenses
Policy Development: Help advance OER policies
16.7
Professional Development: Lead workshops on
22.2
OER
Publishing: Publish materials under open licenses
16.7
Recognition: Provide awards for contributions to
0.0
OER
Team Members: Serve as experts in OER
16.7
development
None of the above
11.1
Other
0.0

Moderate**
(n=65) (%)
20.0

High***
(n=71) (%)
14.1

38.5

26.8

46.2
29.2
49.2

52.1
33.8
50.7

66.2
7.7
49.2
38.5

57.7
12.7
50.7
32.4

13.8
38.5

12.7
31.0

7.7
4.6

8.5
5.6

12.3

22.5

4.6
3.1

7.0
1.4

* Low Engagement = Joined email list/online forum, participated in workshop/conference, or considered
textbook/materials
** Moderate Engagement = Adopted or adapted OER as primary/supplementary materials for a course you teach
*** High Engagement = Created new OER for a course you teach or shared OER you created or adapted under an
open license

Regarding the appropriate activities, the top four placements were similarly rated (Table
10). The exception in this instance is that “advocacy” placed higher than “content development,”
landing in the fifth position.
1. Discovery: moderate engagement (63.1%), high engagement (56.3%), and low
engagement (44.4%);
2. Curation: moderate engagement (60.0%), high engagement (57.7%), and low
engagement (38.9%);
3. Cataloging and metadata: high engagement (63.4%), moderate engagement (50.8%),
and low engagement (50.0%);
4. Information literacy: high engagement (53.5%), moderate engagement (52.3%), and
low engagement (33.3%); and

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

45

5. Advocacy: low engagement (33.3%), high engagement (47.9%), and moderate
engagement (55.4%).
Table 10
OER Engagement by Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Low*
(n=18) (%)
Adoption: Use OER in presentations and
27.8
instruction
Advocacy: Raise awareness of OER among
33.3
faculty
Curation: Add OER to library collections
38.9
Content Development: Create OER for instruction
33.3
Cataloging and Metadata: Make OER more
50.0
retrievable
Discovery: Assist in locating appropriate OER
44.4
Funding: Assist with funding to support OER
11.1
Information Literacy: Help assess quality of OER
33.3
Licensing: Assist with understanding OER
22.2
licenses
Policy Development: Help advance OER policies
5.6
Professional Development: Lead workshops on
11.1
OER
Publishing: Publish materials under open licenses
16.7
Recognition: Provide awards for contributions to
5.6
OER
Team Members: Serve as experts in OER
27.8
development
None of the above
16.7
Other
0.0

Moderate**
(n=65) (%)
18.5

High***
(n=71) (%)
28.2

55.4

47.9

60.0
29.2
50.8

57.7
23.9
63.4

63.1
7.7
52.3
35.4

56.3
4.2
53.5
31.0

15.4
18.5

14.1
16.9

4.6
3.1

5.6
2.8

12.3

21.1

1.5
6.2

5.6
2.8

* Low Engagement = Joined email list/online forum, participated in workshop/conference, or considered
textbook/materials
** Moderate Engagement = Adopted or adapted OER as primary/supplementary materials for a course you teach
*** High Engagement = Created new OER for a course you teach or shared OER you created or adapted under an
open license

In the following comparison, faculty who say they are more likely to engage with OER
consistently rated each of the five highest. However, the lower prior engagement group
(joined/participated), generally rated all valuable and appropriate items lower than their peers,
with the exception of collection development (valuable) and cataloging/retrieval (appropriate).

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

46

Likewise, the “less likely” lower future engagement group rated content development (valuable)
and professional development (valuable) higher than other items.
When viewed through the lens of faculty’s future plans regarding OER, again looking at
the five activities rated most highly as valuable (Table 11), these were the results for faculty who
declared they were “very” or “extremely” likely to employ OER in the upcoming year (labeled
below as “more likely”) or those who were “not at all,” “slightly,” or “somewhat” likely to
employ OER in the upcoming year (labeled below “less likely”):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Discovery: less likely OER (48.6%), more likely OER (62.6%);
Information literacy: more likely OER (50.4%), less likely OER (31.4%);
Cataloging and metadata: more likely (48.8%), less likely (34.3%);
Curation: more likely (49.6%), less likely (22.9%); and
Content development: less likely (40.0%), more likely (31.7%)

Table 11
Future OER Use by Valuableness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
None of the above
Other

Less Likely More Likely
to Use*
to Use**
(n=35) (%) (n=123) (%)
17.1
17.9
17.1
34.1
22.9
49.6
40.0
31.7
34.3
48.8
48.6
62.6
14.3
9.8
31.4
50.4
22.9
36.6
5.7
15.4
34.3
33.3
8.6
9.8
0.0
5.7
11.4
19.5
17.1
6.5
2.9
1.6

* Less Likely to Use = Not at all, slightly, or somewhat likely to use OER in a course in upcoming academic year
** More Likely to Use = Very or extremely likely to use OER in a course in upcoming academic year

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

47

For the ratings for the appropriate category (Table 12), again for the top five categories:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Discovery: more likely (61.8%), less likely (42.9%);
Curation: more likely (61.8%), less likely (34.3%);
Cataloging and metadata: more likely (58.5%), less likely (42.9%);
Information literacy: more likely (52.0%), less likely (40.0%); and
Advocacy: more likely (55.3%), less likely (25.7%).

Table 12
Future OER Use by Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
None of the above
Other

Less Likely
to Use*
(n=35) (%)
20.0
25.7
34.3
37.1
42.9
42.9
11.4
40.0
25.7
5.7
17.1
5.7
0.0
17.1
22.9
2.9

More Likely
to Use**
(n=123) (%)
24.4
55.3
61.8
24.4
58.5
61.8
5.7
52.0
33.3
15.4
17.1
6.5
4.1
19.5
3.3
4.9

* Less Likely to Use = Not at all, slightly, or somewhat likely to use OER in a course in upcoming academic year
** More Likely to Use = Very or extremely likely to use OER in a course in upcoming academic year

Across these four sets of comparisons above, only one has an unequivocally consistent
pattern: the final comparison where faculty who are “more likely” to plan to employ OER in the
upcoming year are weighing in on the “appropriateness” of librarian activities.
RQ7. Does engagement in online or hybrid learning by faculty correspond with attitudes
regarding the librarians’ role in supporting OER? To explore this question, the relationship
between faculty who only taught face-to-face (N=27, 15.0%) and those who also taught in
hybrid/blended and fully online modalities (N=135, 85.0%) were then matched against the top

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

48

response items for the survey questions addressing whether the faculty considered librarian OER
activities either valuable (Table 13) or appropriate (Table 14).
The results for this question were mixed. When looking at whether activities were
considered valuable by blended/online faculty, curation (46.7% vs. 25.9%) was the only role
rated more than 5 percentage points higher; adoption (16.3% vs 22.2%), content development
(31.1% vs. 44.4%) and professional development (30.4% vs. 44.4%) were rated lower. All others
(cataloging and metadata, discovery, information literacy, licensing) were within five percentage
points in their respective valuable ratings. When looking at the appropriateness category, the
blended/online teaching faculty rated discovery (58.5%) higher than face-to-face faculty did
(44.4%). However, they gave lower ratings to advocacy (46.7% vs. 51.9%) and cataloging and
metadata (51.9% vs. 63.0%). Both groups rated curation and information literacy roughly
equivalently, within fewer than five percentage points.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

49

Table 13
Taught F2F Only vs Online/Blended Courses by Valuableness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
F2F Only
Online
(n=27) (%)
and/or
Blended
(n=135) (%)
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
22.2
16.3
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
29.6
29.6
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
25.9
46.7
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
44.4
31.1
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
48.1
44.4
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
59.3
57.8
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
7.4
11.9
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
44.4
45.9
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
29.6
33.3
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
11.1
13.3
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
44.4
30.4
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
7.4
9.6
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
3.7
4.4
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
18.5
17.0
None of the above
7.4
8.9
Other
0.0
2.2

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

50

Table 14
Taught F2F Only vs Online/Blended Courses by Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
F2F Only
Online
(n=27) (%)
and/or
Blended
(n=135) (%)
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
29.6
21.5
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
51.9
46.7
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
59.3
53.3
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
40.7
23.7
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
63.0
51.9
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
44.4
58.5
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
3.7
7.4
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
48.1
48.1
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
29.6
31.1
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
7.4
14.1
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
14.8
17.0
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
3.7
6.7
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
0.0
3.7
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
18.5
18.5
None of the above
11.1
6.7
Other
0.0
5.2

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

51

Discussion
The Zx23 project participants who were respondents in this study are an exceptionally
engaged and confident group with respect to OER. They reported high levels of awareness, high
levels of understanding of licensing and copyright related to OER, high levels of adoption of
open resources, and a high level of certainty that they will continue to use OER moving forward.
In comparison to the broader, national population of faculty in the Babson OER survey
(Allen & Seaman, 2016) a number of notable differences were observed. In the Babson report,
only 26.0% reported being “very aware” or “aware” of open textbooks (Allen & Seaman, 2016,
p. 12). For the Zx23 group, fully 93.0% reported being “highly aware” or “moderately aware” of
OER. Given that Zx23 faculty had already self-selected into an OER project, and that 76.0% had
participated in some form of OER-related professional development in the past year, this level of
awareness is understandable. However, it is important to consider this sample as unique in the
broader general population of faculty.
Similarly, when comparing the Zx23 group with faculty in the Babson study, the
researcher saw that the VCCS faculty reported being much more knowledgeable regarding
course materials licensing (public domain, copyright, and CC licensing), with 72.0% saying they
were either “moderately knowledgeable” or “highly knowledgeable” regarding CC, whereas for
the Babson respondents, a total of 50.0% reported being “very aware” or “aware” (Allen &
Seaman, 2016). In addition, the Zx23 respondents perceived significantly fewer barriers
compared to the Babson study group, e.g., “there are not enough resources for my subject”
(23.0% vs. 49.0%), “too hard to find what I need” (16.0% vs. 48.0%), and “there is no
comprehensive catalog of resources” (18.0% vs. 45.0%) (Allen & Seaman, 2016, p. 3). Again,

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

52

while this was not a response option in the Babson study, for the Zx23 participants, 35.0%
selected that “there are no deterrents for me.”
In contrast, concern regarding the quality of OER was roughly similar across groups,
with the Zx23 group reporting at 27.0% and the subset of the Babson group (who said they were
“aware” regarding OER) reporting at 32.0% (Allen & Seaman, 2016, p. 32). This could indicate
that faculty who have a degree of awareness of OER remain concerned about the quality of
materials, even if that familiarity reduces concerns regarding simple availability.
Notably, the Zx23 group are enthusiastic OER adopters, dramatically higher than the
general population surveyed in the Babson study. Fifty-five percent of the Zx23 respondents had
already adopted an existing OER textbook, and 40% adopted OER materials as supplementary.
They also appeared to be committed to ongoing use, where 77.0% indicated they were “very
likely” or “extremely likely” to use OER in the coming year. For the Babson group, the number
of faculty claiming that they would use OER in the unspecified future was only (6.9%), on the
same order of magnitude as those currently using open resources (5.3%) (Allen & Seaman, 2016,
p. 3).
RQ1 & RQ2. While the most frequently cited role in support of OER was advocacy,
Zx23 faculty respondents generally had a traditional perception of their librarian colleagues,
reporting having awareness of them most prominently in roles related to discovery, curation,
adoption, and information literacy. This finding supports that of the international survey
conducted by Bueno-de-la-Fuente et al. (2012) where librarian roles in OER projects included:
description/classification, management, preservation, dissemination and promotion of OER,
metadata and classification, discovery, information literacy, and repositories (but also some
alternative skills such as search engine optimization and intellectual property and licensing

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

53

standards). Perhaps because of their overall high level of awareness regarding OER and
knowledge of open licensing, or perhaps because librarians in the VCCS do not yet have the
level of background and expertise in this area, less than 30.0% of respondents had awareness of
the role librarians might play regarding OER licensing. More disconcertingly, 30.0% of faculty
had no awareness of any of the 15 librarian/OER roles listed, and only 24.0% of faculty were
aware of librarians as potential partners in OER development teams.
This indicates several possible areas for attention: still more awareness-raising by
librarians seeking to support OER initiatives, educating faculty on the roles they can play
regarding licensing and OER, and professional development for librarians on OER.
RQ3. In response to the question of which librarian/OER roles they thought were
appropriate for librarians to play in supporting OER, the roles faculty rated highest were
generally consistent with traditional librarianship and those highlighted by Bueno-de-la-Fuente et
al. (2012): advocacy, discovery, adoption (by librarians), information literacy, and curation. Of
this list, the advocacy role was ranked highest, making it stand out in contrast to the other roles,
perhaps because the Zx23 faculty are such committed advocates in their own right regarding
OER that they welcome the advocacy from their librarian colleagues.
However, when looking at some of the less traditional roles, including those suggested by
Kleymeer et al. (2010) and Okamoto (2013), it is seen much less faculty enthusiasm:
professional development, policy development, funding, publishing, and reward/recognition
ranked at the bottom of the ratings. The good news in this picture is that while faculty may not
see librarians as mentors (professional development, licensing) or in leadership or institutional
roles such as policy development, publishing, funding, reward, and recognition, only a small
minority ruled out librarian OER support roles across the board.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

54

The open question is whether such lower ranking of non-traditional roles is due to an
engrained perception of the appropriate role of librarians within the two-year higher education
context, whether it’s due to a lack of familiarity with the roles within the context of a faculty’s
OER experience, or because faculty lack experience with librarians in these roles because few
have stepped forward and sought to assume them.
RQ4. Here there are some shifts in how Zx23 respondents perceived the role of librarians
when asked specifically what is valuable to their professional role as faculty. Notably, advocacy
drops from its top place ranking under the awareness and appropriate questions to the middle of
the field, with 32% listing it on their top five valuable roles. Discovery, information literacy,
cataloging and metadata, curation, and content development placed in the top five. Interpretation
of these ranking indicated that while the majority Zx23 faculty were already adopters, were
committed to ongoing use of OER, and claimed familiarity with adapting or improving
resources, these librarian roles that were rated as valuable align with the top deterrents faculty
may struggle with: “locating resources in their discipline,” challenges to discovery (“too hard to
find what I need” and “no comprehensive catalog”), and concerns expressed regarding the
quality of OER.
While there was some movement in the top choices seen as valuable, in contrast to
awareness and appropriateness, the traditional librarian role once again prevailed in the roles
seen as least valuable by faculty. Faculty did not see (rated by 20.0% or fewer as a “top five”
choice) librarian as team members for OER development, policy development, funding,
publishing, or reward and recognition. However, the project faculty respondents very rarely
rejected the value of the librarian role in OER support across the board, placing “none of the
above” nearly at bottom of the ranking list.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

55

In light of this, when engaging with faculty who have existing experience with OER,
librarians may most easily serve as facilitators of access to high quality resources, curated with
the interests and needs of faculty within their disciplines, and in supporting the discovery of OER
in response to specific faculty needs. It remains to be seen whether these faculty would be open
to librarians in less traditional roles, should librarians seek to assume them and/or advocate for
standing in policy, sustainability, and strategy conversations at the institutional level.
RQ5. The Zx23 participants reported high levels of library engagement, with more than
half assigning work to students involving the library or library resources or having visited their
library and used library resources for their teaching and research. As touched on in the previous
section, for purposes of analysis, the different library engagement behaviors identified in the
survey question were joined and recoded as follows: no engagement, visited only, used
resources, and interacted with librarian. When responding about appropriateness, faculty who
had some, but limited contact with the library (visited only) expressed a preference for discovery,
curation, and advocacy, perhaps indicating an interest in librarians raising the profile of OER at
their campuses and making OER more accessible. However, for highly engaged faculty there
was not a single factor or pattern that stood out uniformly or resoundingly in the analysis,
perhaps indicating there was no clear consensus of opinion for them regarding this focus.
When respondents were asked to respond through the focus of value, the researcher saw
that the most highly engaged faculty—those who consulted with a librarian on instructional or
research activities or who worked with a librarian on library instruction for their students—a
clearer pattern emerged. These highly engaged faculty expressed their preference for librarian
OER engagement in the discovery, information literacy, cataloging and metadata, and content
development roles. As mentioned above, this points to faculty valuing support around making

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

56

visible quality OER resources for their use. Unfortunately, there is little extant literature
regarding library use and faculty engagement with librarians that provides a good platform for
comparison. While Feldman and Sciammarella (2000) emphasized the need for librarians to
advocate for their professional role and highlight the gap in understanding between community
college faculty and librarians regarding role and skillset, they do not tie their findings to level of
faculty engagement around the library, library resources, or librarians. Without asking more
questions of faculty in this area, within the context of the available data, it is challenging to make
further conclusions.
RQ6. There were two sets of relationships of note in the data pertaining to this question.
The first was for faculty who expressed a higher level of confidence regarding their plans for
OER adoption for the upcoming academic year, choosing “very” or “extremely” likely. For each
of the top five categories, discovery, curation, cataloging and metadata, information literacy, and
advocacy, these faculty expressed a clear preference regarding the appropriateness of librarians
in each of these OER engagement roles across all of the categories.
Second, this same group deemed as valuable only the information literacy, cataloging and
curation, and content development roles, ranking discovery and advocacy lower than their less
committed peers. In responses to other items in the survey, the researcher has seen discovery
closely linked with cataloging and metadata and curation, which makes this exception
interesting.
It may be that the highly engaged, future-committed faculty support advocacy by
librarians to support OER, but do not feel a need for it themselves, given they are already
adopters and may have resources in-hand that are currently meeting their needs. Also, faculty
who are less confident of their future OER use may rate discovery and advocacy higher, as this is

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

57

perceived as a match to an unmet need. If this is an accurate conclusion, it could indicate
opportunities for librarians to foster adoption by focusing on making high-quality OER visible
and discoverable.
RQ7. In looking at this question, it is important to first observe that the strong majority of
faculty respondents were already engaged in some form of hybrid/blended or fully online
instruction; just 15.0% of respondents reported teaching only in face-to-face classrooms.
However, they were notably less engaged with OER than their colleagues—14.0% more of the
face-to-face only were in the lowest level of OER engagement than faculty who taught online,
and they lagged in adoption/adaptation by 10.0%. Looking at future OER plans, only 56.0% of
face-to-face-only faculty said they were “very” or “extremely” likely to use OER in a course in
the upcoming year, as compared to 82.0% of faculty who taught online or hybrid courses.
Again, while the number of respondents in the face-to-face-only category is few, the indicators
that they have lower engagement with OER are strong and consistent across categories.
When looking at their orientation to librarian roles in supporting OER, there were only a
handful on indicators of difference in attitudes between the two groups. Most notably, this was
one of the few cases where faculty rated librarian engagement in OER and professional
development as valuable in the top-five category. Under appropriate, they rated advocacy,
curation, and cataloging and metadata at least 5% more often than their peers, but curiously,
discovery was rated 14.0% lower.
In looking at these results, it is possible to determine that the face-to-face faculty may
simply be less inclined towards innovativeness, and therefore slower to adopt online, digital
course materials. However, they did not reject them altogether, nor did they reject support from

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

58

librarians, as evidenced by the value they placed on professional development and acceptance of
librarians in other OER-related roles, excepting discovery.
Who are the “persuadables?”
One of the concerns driving the current research has been to better understand how
librarians may contribute to OER’s ‘crossing the chasm’—the aforementioned gap between
innovators and early adopters that needs to be transcended in order for adoptions to become
institutionalized and broadly accepted. The data collected in this project offers some insight
regarding the roles librarians might contribute to OER adoption by the as-yet uncommitted,.
A challenge in this analysis is the overall enthusiasm of the respondents regarding OER.
Recall that 55.0% of respondents reported already adopting OER materials as primary to a
course they taught, 40.0% as having already adopted OER as supplementary materials, and
78.0% as being either “very” or “highly” likely to use OER in a course in the upcoming year.
Therefore, the subset of respondents who could be considered “pre-adoption” for OER is limited
in the dataset. However, by selecting respondents who reported lower levels of engagement for
OER activities (the “none of the above,” “joined email list,” “participated in professional
development,” or “considered and OER textbook” options), there is a group of 25 respondents
who have expressed interest in OER, but have not yet adopted and could be considered
“persuadables.”
When looking at the persuadables respondents’ expressed deterrents to OER adoption,
only 8.0% (N=2) reported “having no interest in OER” as a concern; alternatively, 24.0% (N=6)
reported they perceived no deterrents (see Table 15). In several categories, they reported a lower
perception of deterrence than did adopters: Not enough resources in my subject, resources not
high quality or up to date, and too difficult to change or edit were all rated lower than by

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

59

adopters. What they did perceive as obstacles were: “don’t know if I have permission to change
or use materials” and “too difficult or time consuming.”
Table 15
Adopters and Persuadables by Perceived Deterrents to OER Adoption
Item
Adopters
(n=137) (%)
Too hard to find what I need
16.1
Not enough resources for my subject
24.1
No comprehensive catalog of resources
18.2
Resources are not high-quality or up-to-date
27.7
Don’t know if I have permission to use or change materials
8.0
Too difficult to change or edit
16.8
Too difficult or time consuming to integrate into courses
16.8
Lack of support from my institution
6.6
Not used by other faculty I know
6.6
I do not currently have an interest in using OER
0.0
I am unaware of OER and have no opinion about deterrents
0.0
None of the above- There are no deterrents for me
37.2
Other
8.8

Persuadables
(n=25) (%)
16.0
16.0
16.0
20.0
16.0
0.0
28.0
4.0
8.0
8.0
4.0
24.0
16.0

Despite listing material permissions (licensing and copyright) as obstacles, when it came
to librarian roles, persuadables rated “librarians assist with understanding OER licenses” lower
in value than the already relatively low ratings of adopters (20.0% to 35.0%), along with
information literacy (24.0% to 49.6%) or professional development (24.0% to 34.3%). They did
not seem to place a high value on librarians engaging in OER advocacy, with only 16.0% (vs.
32.1% of adopters) selecting this role as one of their top five. Perhaps most notably, they were
four times more likely to say “no librarian OER activities are valuable” than adopters, by 24.0%
to 5.8%. They were also less likely to choose the traditional librarian roles of discovery,
curation, and cataloging and metadata as valuable when compared to adopters (see Table 16).
The exception is content development, with 44.0% to 31.4%.
In a similar manner, when reviewing appropriateness (Table 17), persuadables again
rated most librarian roles lower than did adopters. Much of the difference is explained by two

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

60

options which are somewhat inconsistent – first, that no librarian OER activities are appropriate
(28.0% vs 3.6%) but also that librarians might serve as team members (28.0% vs 16.7%). As was
the case with value, content development was ranked higher by persadables, but only slightly
(28.0% vs 26.3%).
Table 16
Adopters and Persuadables by Valuableness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Adopters
(n=137) (%)
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
16.8
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
32.1
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
48.9
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
31.4
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
49.6
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
61.3
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
10.2
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
49.6
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
35.0
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
13.1
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
34.3
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
8.0
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
5.1
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
17.5
None of the above
5.8
Other
2.2

Persuadables
(n=25) (%)
20.0
16.0
12.0
44.0
20.0
40.0
16.0
24.0
20.0
12.0
24.0
16.0
0.0
16.0
24.0
0.0

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

61

Table 17
Adopters and Persuadables by Appropriateness of Librarian OER Roles
Item
Adopters
(n=137) (%)
Adoption: Librarians use OER in presentations and instruction
23.4
Advocacy: Librarians raise awareness of OER among faculty
51.1
Curation: Librarians add OER to library collections
58.4
Content Development: Librarians create OER for instruction
26.3
Cataloging and Metadata: Librarians make OER more retrievable
56.9
Discovery: Librarians assist in locating appropriate OER
59.1
Funding: Librarians assist with funding to support OER
5.8
Information Literacy: Librarians help assess quality of OER
52.6
Licensing: Librarians assist with understanding OER licenses
32.8
Policy Development: Librarians help advance OER policies
14.6
Professional Development: Librarians lead workshops on OER
17.5
Publishing: Librarians publish materials under open licenses
5.1
Recognition: Librarians provide awards for contributions to OER
2.9
Team Members: Librarians serve as experts in OER development
16.8
None of the above
3.6
Other
4.4

Persuadables
(n=25) (%)
20.0
28.0
32.0
28.0
36.0
40.0
12.0
24.0
20.0
4.0
12.0
12.0
4.0
28.0
28.0
4.0

In short, while this group does not appear opposed to OER adoption, and while some of
their concerns could be addressed by librarian expertise, they are consistently less inclined than
their peer adopter colleagues to either value or see as appropriate librarians providing assistance
in OER-related roles. However, given their small numbers, both within the sample and relative to
the larger population, it is possible they do not accurately represent the broader population of
faculty.
Limitations of data. There are some issues related to data collection for this study that
warrant discussion, most notable the timing of data collection for the study and concerns
regarding selection bias.
Timing of study. Because of the timeline for approvals to be secured for prior to fielding
the survey, the survey was released to respondents shortly after the end of the academic year,
post-commencement. While VCCS faculty were technically still on teaching contracts, many had

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

62

left campus. It is possible that this had an influence both on the overall response rate and selfselection by faculty within the sample who completed the survey.
In training materials provided online by SurveyMonkey, they reported the average
response rate to one of their surveys sent by email is 24.8% (excluding outliers at both ends of
the distribution curve and employee surveys), in line with the response rate obtained in this
survey (28.7%). The completion rate for this survey (98.0%) is notably higher than the average
reported completion rate reported by SurveyMonkey (79.0%), indicative of a high level of
engagement with the survey.
Selection bias. While the Zx23 faculty participants could be assumed to have a higher
than average level of awareness and engagement regarding OER, each having expressed some
degree of interest by establishing a connection with the project, the level of OER awareness and
adoption is exceptionally high, especially when compared with the general population of faculty
in higher education (Allen & Seaman, 2016). This raises concerns that there may be a selfselection bias within the respondent pool, in which the most engaged and enthusiastic members
of the Zx23 cohort chose to respond to the survey.
Countering these concerns, the broad demographics of the respondents correspond in
general outline with the VCCS faculty population at large. At the time of the survey there were
3,277 full-time (31.0%) and 7,292 part-time faculty employed across the system (Catherine
Finnegan, Personal Communication, July 27, 2017); respondents to this survey therefore
represent 3.0% of the full-time faculty and .075% of the part-time faculty. The distribution
across institutional sizes corresponds with the overall distribution of VCCS faculty among
institutional sizes. Also, both the age of faculty and the time in position correspond with
averages obtained from the VCCS.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

63

Conclusions
“When faculty use OER, we aren’t just saving a student money on textbooks: we are
directly impacting that student’s ability to enroll in, persist through, and successfully
complete a course. In other words, we are directly impacting that student’s ability to
attend, succeed in, and graduate from college. When we talk about OER, we bring two
things into focus: that access is critically important to conversations about academic
success, and that faculty and other instructional staff can play a critical role in the process
of making learning accessible.” (Jhangiani & DeRosa, 2017)
In the course of this project, the importance of OER in increasing the accessibility and
affordability of higher education and the potential for OER to contribute to the success of
community college students has been the foreground of the conversation. It was demonstrated
through the literature that OER can contribute to these desirable outcomes, and that faculty play
a critical role in the decision to adopt open, free, or more affordable course materials. It was also
shown that through open licensing, repositories, and other sharing mechanisms, it is possible to
contribute to or benefit from a virtuous circle that supports the overall sustainability of higher
education.
We also defined a critical issue—that of the adoption gap. In reviewing the literature and
evidence regarding adoption of OER, the balance points to OER continuing to be a niche
phenomenon, the province of innovators and early adopters. From diffusion of innovation
research, the researcher also understands that for OER to scale, to become a key component of
higher education strategy, and to truly disrupt the “broken market” for course materials, it must
reach beyond the fault-tolerant and self-confident segment of the faculty population. OER needs
to become a mainstay for the majority who have not, as yet, found it a compelling alternative to
the materials they currently use.
The Zx23 faculty respondents in this survey are predominantly from the innovator and
early adopter population. They are comfortable with open licensing, have already explored and

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

64

adopted OER as either primary or secondary course materials, perceive fewer deterrents to
adoption, and have a higher level of ongoing commitment to OER adoption than their peers in
the general faculty population. They also report having a high degree of control over their choice
of course materials, and when they do not have total control, they are frequently influencers.
They are the converted.
They are also library enthusiasts with high levels of library engagement with materials,
assigning work that requires their students to engage with librarians or library materials, and
interacting with librarians on instructional projects or their personal scholarship. From this, given
their pro-innovation disposition (at least with respect to OER) and their high engagement with
OER, one might presume they are natural allies in redefining librarians’ professional roles or
reimagining the role of the library in support of student success.
However, from this study, the researcher saw this is not necessarily the case. While these
innovative faculty are pioneers regarding their own work, overall they take a largely traditional
perspective to the librarians’ work and where they feel library support is either appropriate or
valuable in supporting OER adoption. They downplayed a range of non-traditional roles for
librarians that have been suggested or documented (Okamoto, 2013) in the library/OER
literature. Roles such as policy development, funding OER creation, reward and recognition
programs, and creating OER publishing enterprises were deprecated in favor of librarians
supporting discovery, curation, cataloging, information literacy, and perhaps the most
encouraging: advocacy. Disconcertingly, in contrast with earlier studies (Bueno-de-la-Fuente et
al., 2012) faculty did not report valuing librarians as team members in OER development groups.
They also rejected librarians as a resource for providing OER professional development for
faculty.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

65

Where they do value librarians is in roles supporting OER adoption, roles around
organizing and making resources visible and useful, and in assisting faculty in identifying
resources. In those areas there is alignment with their perceived challenges—locating good
quality resources, resources appropriate to their disciplines, and frustration over the challenges in
finding and effectively using OER repositories. Thus, there is indication that these faculty want
assistance and support from librarians, but in keeping with a traditional vision of the library as a
useful warehouse of information, and of librarians as minders of the inventory.
It remains an open question whether this lack of enthusiasm (for even the highest rated
roles were selected by fewer than two-thirds of respondents) is because of a foundational absence
of interest or due to lack of experience with the value of librarians in less traditional roles. While
it is clear these faculty did not place a high value on non-traditional OER support roles, they also
expressed low current awareness of these roles. One interesting point of contrast to this
generalization was that of librarians engaging in OER advocacy. This ranked highest in the list of
OER-supporting activities that faculty reported being aware of, and was in the middle (7 out of
15) in terms of what was rated as valuable, and in fifth place regarding appropriate roles.
Clearly, these respondents are aware of the engagement of librarians around OER in an
advocacy role. While they do not personally value librarians highly in this role (perhaps because
they are already adopters), they are clearly not opposed to having librarians as allies in OER
advocacy. It remains to be seen if some of the more innovative and less typical librarian roles are
simply unwelcome or may require awareness building and outreach from the library,
accompanied by careful questioning and listening by library leadership to the response from
faculty to these initiatives.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

66

When it comes to faculty as yet uncommitted to OER, and the prospect for librarians
holding the keys to closing the adoption gap, the findings of this study are not auspicious. On
nearly every librarian role in supporting OER, these respondents were less enthusiastic than their
peers. This is especially notable in the higher percentage ruling out librarians supporting OER
altogether, serving as members of teams, or in providing professional development. Even in
instances where librarian roles were clearly aligned with their stated challenges, they rated the
value of librarians lower than their adopter colleagues; such was the case regarding licensing and
information literacy.
When considering taking on new roles for libraries and librarians, the question of
resource constraints looms large. Even in community colleges, where OER should be considered
analogous to OA in research institutions, there are typically longstanding unmet needs for
instruction, assessment, programming and outreach, and other activities also known to have
benefits. For most community college libraries the idea that new staffing and resources are
going to be made available simply to support OER roles is naïve. If resources are to be
allocated, they will typically need to be carved out of existing staff and existing budgets, or
funded through grants and other soft-money sources that pose challenges for long-term
sustainability.
Where then, based on these findings, is the daylight for libraries who feel they can and
should be supporting OER adoption? First is in continued advocacy. Talk is literally cheap. If
librarians are enthusiastic and sincerely believe OER are of value, even without becoming
experts, they can familiarize themselves with the nuts and bolts of OER, with resources and
repositories, fundamental principles of OER, the basics of CC licensing, and with key facts and
research around the impact OER can have on access, affordability, and student success.

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

67

Second, adopter faculty expressed valuing assistance from librarians in finding high
quality resources appropriate to their discipline. Even if libraries cannot afford to hire
specialized in-house expertise, they can leverage the OER-librarian community for resources
(i.e., libguides, repositories), direction to the work of others from their local college websites,
and featuring and marketing those links. They can leverage expertise across their professional
networks to gather information and connect to external expertise. The OER community is
literally defined by sharing, and with only rare exceptions will reasonable requests for outreach
and assistance to those who are in need be declined.
Third, regarding the range of OER support possibilities that are less traditional for
libraries be prepared to take advantage of opportunities, even if policy development around OER
is not a role that the Zx23 faculty saw as appropriate or valuable, there may be an opportunity to
capture hearts and minds when it comes time to undertake the heavy lifting needed to develop
policy and move it through the institutional decision-making process. Having a conversation
within the library regarding the possible ROI from investing 1% of local collection development
funds in OER development in areas of critical institutional need might be heretical, but it might
also lead to an opportunity to help faculty envision the library in a new and interesting way.
The data in this study open interesting questions for future research. In general, the
survey data do a better job of describing the “what” over the “why.” There are opportunities for
qualitative research, such as individual interviews and focus groups with faculty to understand
the reasoning behind these findings. Qualitative studies could explore the degree to which
faculty acceptance and value of the librarians’ role in supporting OER may be constrained by
assumptions that are due to a simple lack of awareness or familiarity and which are open to

SUPPORT ROLES FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGE LIBRARIANS

68

change, or perhaps where there is deep resistance that would require effort beyond that which
can be marshaled to overcome objections.
In addition, there is need for additional survey work. This study is simply an initial probe
into the questions that have been posed. The findings presented make clear there is need for
additional work to survey faculty outside of those who already have an expressed and existing
interest in OER. A survey of the general faculty population beyond the VCCS Zx23 participants
would do much to shed light on whether the small number of “persuadables” identified in this
group of respondents speak to the interests and concerns of the broader faculty population.
If librarians are committed to supporting student success, improving access, and reducing
the cost of education, and believe that OER are appropriate to the needs of their local institutions,
it is up to them to continue to serve as advocates within their academic communities for the
changes that are needed. Change is hard work and requires ongoing effort and overcoming
obstacles that at times may seem insurmountable. However, if librarians are information
professionals with expertise in areas critical to OER adoption and can bring that expertise to the
table in support of students and learning, then it is incumbent upon librarians to continue to do
so. By seeking out friends and allies along the way, what may well be a difficult journey can at
least be a rewarding and fulfilling one.