The Effect of Elaborative Interrogation on the Synthesis of Ideas from
Multiple Sources of Information

Chapter I
Introduction
As the information landscape has expanded in the last few decades, students face the ever
challenging tasks of navigating a complex, disorderly landscape as well as synthesizing ideas
from multiple sources of information. Academic libraries support the institutional goals by
providing information literacy instruction to students on how to find and use information to
fulfill their academic goals. The current predominant model of information literacy instruction in
academic libraries, however, mainly focuses on how to find relevant information sources for
their academic information needs but overlooks how students use gathered information sources
to synthesize ideas. The Association of College and Research Libraries’ (ACRL) Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education (ACRL, 2016) highlights the ability to synthesize
ideas from multiple sources of information as one of the key knowledge practices through which
students show their development. The purpose of this experimental study is to examine the
effectiveness of elaborative interrogation instructional strategy on students’ ability to integrate
and transform ideas gathered from multiple sources of information.
Background of the Problem
Academic libraries have a long, rich history in supporting the educational goals of the
university. Terms such as library orientation, library instruction, bibliographic instruction, and
user education have all been part of professional vocabulary (Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009). The
term “information literacy” was first used in 1974 in a report written on behalf of the National
Commission on Libraries and Information Science by Paul Zurkowski (ALA, 1989). According
to Zurkowski, an information literate individual is someone who has learned to use a wide range
of information sources in order to solve problems at work and in his or her daily life (ALA,

2
1989). The modern information literacy movement of the 1980’s and 1990’s acknowledged and
built upon the rich history of bibliographic instruction.
The American Library Association (ALA) presidential committee described the
information literate individual as someone who has the ability to recognize the information need
and the ability to locate, evaluate, and use information effectively (ALA, 1989). An information
literate individual is one who has learned how to learn. Reviewing the numerous definitions
throughout the last few decades, Grassian and Kaplowitz (2009) argue that information literacy
has been described in a variety of ways—as a process, a skill set, a competence, an attitudinal or
personality trait, a set of abilities, a way to help people contribute positively to the learning
community and to society, and a construct that is created by the ways in which a person interacts
with information. Critical thinking and evaluation as well as the ethical use of information have
all been cited as integral to conceptualizing information literacy. Later, scholars such as Swanson
(2004) and Elmborg (2006) stressed that to be information literate in the 21st century, one must
understand how information works as social, political, and cultural force and that our interactions
with information contribute to these forces—giving the concept a critical outlook (Grassian &
Kaplowitz, 2009).
Emphasizing the significance of instruction in academic libraries, Wang (2013) argues
that the digital revolution had a strong impact on the evolution of library instruction. Instruction
became an integral part of academic libraries with the focus on competencies in information and
communication technologies, user-centered approaches to teaching and learning, outreach, and
learning outcomes assessment (Wang, 2013). With the information age, academic libraries saw
tremendous growth in reliance on electronic information sources for teaching, learning, and

3
research (Wang, 2013). This reliance prompted formalized instruction and assessment of
students’ ability to locate and use information effectively.
Instruction in Academic Libraries
The Association of Colleges and Research Libraries (ACRL) Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education was the first document that guided information
literacy instruction and assessment in higher education. Since its implementation, the ACRL
standards were widely adopted by academic librarians to guide information literacy instruction
and assessment (Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009). Information literacy in the ACRL standards is
defined as a set of abilities requiring individuals to recognize when information is needed and
have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use the needed information effectively (ACRL, 2000).
Additionally, the standards codify performance indicators for outcomes for information literacy
as 1) determining the nature and extent of the information needed; 2) accessing needed
information effectively; 3) evaluating information critically; 4) using information to accomplish
a specific purpose; and 5) understanding the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the
use of information and using information ethically and legally (ACRL, 2000).
Even though the standards explicitly stated performance indicators and indicative
outcomes that could be used to design information literacy instruction, they were critiqued by
many practitioners and scholars as having a narrow, skill-based, and mechanistic view of
information literacy. Foasberg (2015) argues that the standards, which define information
literacy as a set of abilities and enumerate in some detail what the information literate student
should be able to accomplish, advance a positivistic understanding of the nature of information—
imagining it as a commodity external to the student. The standards portray students as
individuals who acquire these skills through practice. In the language of the standards,

4
information usually refers to artifacts rather than their contents. Thus, the standards present
information sources as goods that can be acquired and that the student acquires a commodity,
rather than participating in a conversation or integrating information sources with her existing
knowledge base (Foasberg, 2015).
Another critique of this decontextualized, skill-based information literacy instruction
(Elmborg, 2006; Foasberg, 2015; Swanson, 2004; 2005) originate from the standpoint of rhetoric
and composition, both of which consider context, conversation, and active participation in
literacy of all kinds. When a student engages in research, she does not simply extract and record
information, as the second standard suggests, but rather wrestles with the content, draws
connection with what she already knows, and generates more questions (Foasberg, 2015).
In response to these critiques of the standards, the latest conceptualization of information
literacy came in the form of ACRL Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education
(ACRL, 2016). The framework includes interconnected information literacy threshold concepts
(Meyer & Land, 2005) as well as the notion of metaliteracy proposed by Mackey and Jacobson
(2011) and offers a renewed vision of information literacy as an overarching set of abilities that
unifies such concepts as media literacy, visual literacy, digital literacy, and information literacy
in which students are both consumers and creators of information and are active participants in
collaborative spaces (ACRL, 2016). The notion of metaliteracy demands behavioral, affective,
cognitive, and metacognitive engagement with the constantly evolving information ecosystem.
The framework also includes knowledge practices which are demonstrations of ways in which
learners can increase their understanding of these information literacy concepts and dispositions
which describe ways in which to address the affective, attitudinal, or valuing dimensions of
learning (ACRL, 2016).

5
This new and expanded conceptualization of information literacy in the framework
emphasizes dynamism, flexibility, individual growth, and metacognitive engagement with
information (Foasberg, 2015). The student in the framework is replaced by the learner who is on
a continuum—growing from a novice into an expert. The framework, thus, not only
acknowledges but underscores that even novice learners are capable of evaluating information
sources and integrating ideas derived from a variety of sources.
The new framework of information literacy for higher education (ACRL, 2016) depends
on these core ideas of metaliteracy, with special focus on metacognition, or critical selfreflection, as crucial to becoming more self-directed in a rapidly changing information
ecosystem. Information literacy, in the new framework, is defined as a “set of integrated abilities
encompassing the reflective discovery of information, the understanding of how information is
produced and valued, and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating
ethically in communities of learning” (ACRL, 2016, p. 3).
In addition, six frames guide the understanding of information literacy threshold
concepts. Table 1 on the following page describes the individual frames.

6
Table 1
Information Literacy Frames
Frame

Description

Authority is constructed and
contextual

Information resources reflect their creators’ expertise
and credibility, and are evaluated based on the
information need and the context in which the
information will be used. Authority is constructed in
that various communities may recognize different types
of authority. It is contextual in that the information need
may help to determine the level of authority required.

Information creation as a
process

Information in any format is produced to convey a
message and is shared via a selected delivery method.
The iterative processes of researching, creating,
revising, and disseminating information vary, and the
resulting product reflects these differences.

Information has value

Information possesses several dimensions of value,
including as a commodity, as a means of education, as a
means to influence, and as a means of negotiating and
understanding the world. Legal and socio-economic
interests influence information production and
dissemination.

Research as inquiry

Research is iterative and depends upon asking
increasingly complex and new questions whose answers
in turn develop additional questions or lines of inquiry
in any field.

Scholarship as conversation

Communities of scholars, researchers, and professionals
engage in sustained discourse with new insights and
discoveries occurring over time as a result of varied
perspectives and interpretations.

Searching as strategic
exploration

Searching for information is often nonlinear and
iterative, requiring the evaluation of a range of
information sources and the mental flexibility to pursue
alternate avenues as new understanding develops.

Note: Adapted from ACRL (2016).

7
The key characteristic of the new framework, as evident in the descriptions above, is how
students move along the continuum and experience these information literacy threshold concepts
or frames. Each frame has its associated knowledge practices through which students
demonstrate their growth continuum from novice to expert as well as dispositions that point to
the cognitive and behavioral dimensions of their learning. Detailed descriptions of each
individual frame along with their associated knowledge practices and dispositions are included in
Appendix A. Despite the accompanying knowledge practices, the nebulous nature of the
framework presents a challenge and a departure from the prescriptive, universal set of outcomes
that practitioners used as a guiding document in the previous ACRL Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Higher Education (ACRL, 2000).
Statement of the Problem
Academic librarians identify instructional work as integral to their professional identity,
but few feel confident in their pedagogical expertise (Julien & Genuis, 2011). Academic
librarians have master’s level education but few have significant formal instructional training.
Others have called for a closer examination of the connection between information literacy
instruction and theoretical assumptions about learning (Diekema, Holliday, & Leary, 2011;
Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009). Furthermore, research in domain knowledge use suggests that
instructional training can aid professionals make use of their extensive domain knowledge and
studies show a significant effect of explicit training for teachers in their underlying theory on
student performance (Alexander, White, Haensly, & Crimmins-Jeanes, 1987; Alexander, 1992).
Therefore, detailed articulation of how students acquire these skills based on cognitive and
learning science and how these instructional strategies can be employed in the context of

8
information literacy instruction to promote successful instructional outcomes is strongly needed
in the profession.
For both practitioner and researcher, the new framework of information literacy for
higher education presents itself as a progressive document, one that invites and encourages
careful thinking of information literacy pedagogy and critical assumptions about the theories
underlying the information literacy instruction practice (Foasberg, 2015). As the official
document notes:
The Framework opens the way for librarians, faculty, and other institutional partners to
redesign instruction sessions, assignments, courses, and even curricula; to connect
information literacy with student success initiatives; to collaborate on pedagogical
research and involve students themselves in that research; and to create wider
conversations about student learning, the scholarship of teaching and learning, and the
assessment of learning on local campuses and beyond. (ACRL, 2016, p. 3)
Since its formal introduction to the practitioner librarians, the new framework has
presented unique challenges not only in terms of creating local learning outcomes based on the
individual knowledge practices within the frames, but also in creating, delivering, and assessing
instruction. As evident in many scholarly communication venues, this is a turning point filled
with both excitement and anxiety in the profession. Academic librarians are a willing audience
who desperately desire the help to deliver information literacy instruction based on this new
progressive yet abstract framework.

9
The body of literature on information literacy instruction is vast. However, generalizable
empirical research on information literacy instruction built on the theoretical foundations of
cognitive science is very limited. As the review of the literature in Chapter II points out, an
integral missing segment in this body of literature is the connection between what cognitive and
learning science research tells us about how students acquire these skills and in turn, how
instructional librarians can best adopt findings from cognitive science regarding learning to
create effective instructional techniques (Dunlosky, Rawson, Marsh, Nathan, & Willingham,
2013), which improve comprehension, and synthesis of ideas from multiple documents into their
practice (Perfetti, Rouet, & Britt, 1999; Wiley & Voss, 1999).
Educational psychologists have developed and evaluated several effective instructional
strategies that help students achieve their learning goals in a variety of different educational
contexts (Dunlosky et al., 2013; Ormrod, 2013). Some of these strategies include elaborative
interrogation, self-explanation, summarization, practice testing, distributed practice, and
interleaved practice (Dunlosky et al., 2013). There are many benefits to approaching instruction
based on cognitive principles that facilitate learning. For example, prompting students to activate
their prior knowledge and make connections with the to-be-learned material can facilitate
comprehension as well as organize and structure newly acquired knowledge. Similarly,
providing targeted feedback along with distributed practice can strengthen the performance on
the application of procedural skills (Hattie & Yates, 2013; Ormrod, 2013). The extent to which
these individual strategies are effective depends on factors such as learning tasks (memorization,
problem-solving, comprehension), learning conditions (whether students work alone or in
groups, online, blended, or face-to-face), materials (mathematical problems, text

10
comprehension), and student characteristics (age, ability, and level of prior knowledge)
(Dunlosky et al., 2013).
Elaborative interrogation strategy involves prompting learners to generate an explanation
for an explicitly stated fact. The primary cognitive mechanism that accounts for the effect of
elaborative questioning is that it enhances learning by facilitating the integration of new
information with learners’ existing prior knowledge (Dunlosky et al., 2013). The cognitive
benefits of explanations extend beyond integration of new material and help learners with
organization and retrieval—making this instructional strategy particularly beneficial for the
higher order cognitive learning tasks such as integration and transformation of ideas gathered
from multiple information sources. A review of relevant literature highlights how elaborative
interrogation strategy has been employed and deemed effective in a variety of different contexts.
For example, generating explanations, analogies, or examples embedded in a text with cognitive
prompts such as “Which examples can you think of that illustrate, confirm your interpretations?”
have significantly improved learning outcomes. Elaborations as personal examples or
restatements of important features of concepts have similarly been effective (Hannon, 2012).
Prior research strongly suggests that cognitive benefits of explanatory questioning can facilitate
learning and is effective across different contexts (Dunlosky et al., 2013).

11
Research Questions
The purpose of this study is to test the effectiveness of the elaborative interrogation
instructional strategy on the synthesis of ideas from multiple sources of information. The primary
research questions guiding this study are:
RQ1: Do elaborative interrogation prompts improve transformation of ideas gathered
from multiple sources of information?
H1: Participants who receive elaborative prompts would perform better on
transformation measure.
RQ2: Do elaborative interrogation prompts improve integration of ideas gathered from
multiple sources of information?
H2: Participants who receive elaborative prompts would perform better on integration
measure.
Significance of the Study
This study is important for multiple reasons. First, the study will contribute to the new
ACRL Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education (ACRL, 2016) by linking
much needed evidence-based guidance for instruction of the nebulous frames. As noted
previously, there is little generalizable empirical research based on cognitive science to guide
information literacy instruction practice. This study addresses this gap. Even though the focus of
this study is on the “Research as Inquiry” frame which includes “the ability to synthesize ideas
gathered from multiple sources” as one of its associated knowledge practices, it provides a
promising long-term, cross-disciplinary research partnership in terms of linking evidence-based
guidance for instruction based on cognitive science principles to other frames and their
associated knowledge practices (ACRL, 2016). Second, it contributes to the existing body of

12
literature on elaborative interrogation—expanding the scope of utility and effectiveness of this
particular instructional strategy. One of the significant aspects of the study is testing elaborative
interrogation on more abstract knowledge as well as higher cognitive tasks such as integration
and transformation of ideas. And finally, it contributes to the existing body of literature on
multiple documents comprehension (Perfetti et al., 1999; Wiley & Voss, 1999).
Summary
The new Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education (ACRL, 2016) with
its nebulous frames and knowledge practices calls for evidence-based guidance for information
literacy instruction. Examining one of the frames entitled “Research as Inquiry,” which includes
the “ability to synthesize ideas gathered from multiple sources” as one of its associated
knowledge practices, this study tests the effectiveness of elaborative interrogation instructional
strategy on the measures of integration and transformation of ideas from multiple sources of
information.

13
Chapter II
Review of Related Literature
This study examined the effectiveness of elaborative interrogation instructional strategy
on integration and transformation of ideas from multiple sources of information. The review of
related literature covers three main areas. First, studies highlighting the use of elaborative
interrogation instructional strategy are discussed in the context of present study. Second, activeconstructive-interactive framework (Chi, 2009) provides a theoretical foundation for identifying
a hierarchy of different learning activities, their associated cognitive processes, and how these
mechanisms relate to elaborative interrogation prompts being investigated in the present study.
Third, research in multiple document comprehension is discussed in light of active-constructiveinteractive framework and elaborative interrogation literature to scaffold the hypotheses that
multiple source presentation along with elaborative interrogation prompts will significantly
improve the integration and transformation of ideas.
Elaborative Interrogation
Research in cognitive science has identified different learning techniques that help
students achieve learning outcomes (Dunlosky et al., 2013). Techniques such as elaborative
interrogation, self-explanation, summarization, highlighting, underlining, keyword mnemonic,
imagery use of text, rereading, practice testing, distributed practice, and interleaved practice have
been found useful in different learning contexts (Dunlosky et al., 2013).
Elaborative interrogation is a learning strategy that highlights the cognitive benefits of
explanation and involves prompting learners to generate an explanation for an explicitly stated
fact. The explanatory prompts differ in terms of specificity across studies—for example, the
prompts include questions such as “Why is this true?” “Why does it make sense,” to simply

14
“Why?” (Dunlosky et al., 2013). Hannon (2012) defines elaborations as “any type of
enhancements that clarify the original to-be-remembered information with respect to other
information” (p. 299). Elaborations can be instructor-generated explanations, analogies, or
examples embedded in a text with cognitive prompts such as “Which examples can you think of
that illustrate, confirm your interpretations?” Elaborations are also learner-generated personal
examples or restatements of important features of concepts (Hannon, 2012). An instructional
strategy similar to elaborative interrogation is self-explanation. The prompts used in selfexplanation studies, however, differ in specificity and are typically more specific. Selfexplanation prompts can easily be confused with elaborative interrogations, but both strategies
essentially involve having students explain some aspect of their processing during learning.
Dunlosky et al. (2013) argue that the literature on elaborative interrogation and self-explanation
overlaps with respect to implementation and cognitive mechanisms through which these
strategies work.
There is considerable evidence for the cognitive benefits of explanations. Research
suggests that explanatory questioning can facilitate learning and is effective across different
contexts. For example, elaborative interrogation effects can be seen in learning conditions such
as incidental or intentional learning instructions (Woloshyn, Willoughby, Wood, & Pressley,
1990), and among students working individually, in dyads, and in small groups (Woloshyn &
Stockley, 1995). Students’ characteristics such as high and low knowledge domains are explored
in examining the effects of elaborative interrogation on learning outcomes as well. Woloshyn,
Pressley, & Schneider (1992) presented Canadian and German students with facts about
Canadian provinces and German states. The facts were facilitated by answering the questions
such as “Why does that make sense given what you know about that particular province?”

15
tapping into the prior knowledge. Students in the study showed larger effects of elaborative
interrogation in their high-knowledge domain than in their low-knowledge domain (Woloshyn et
al., 1992).
Although most of the studies applied elaborative interrogation to discrete units of factual
information, effects have also been shown in longer connected discourse (Dunlosky et al., 2013).
Seifert (1994) found that elaborative interrogation significantly improved students’ memory of
facts contained in prose paragraphs. McDaniel and Donnelly (1996) examined the effectiveness
of a variety of techniques—analogy, analogy with keyword highlighting, labeled pictorial
schematics, and elaborative interrogation for enhancing newly acquired scientific concepts
directly contrasting their relative effectiveness. The results showed that elaborative interrogation
produced substantial learning gains both factual-level and inference-level performance. Table 2
outlines how elaborative interrogation prompts have been implemented in research studies.
Table 2
Implementation of Elaborative Interrogation Prompts
Learning Context

Example of Prompts Used

Declarative knowledge about circulatory
system (Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, & Lavancher,
1994)

Why would the distribution of oxygen (a system wide
function) be less efficient if there is a hole in the
septum (a structure of the septum)?

Definitions of psychology terms (Hannon,
2012)

Identify the differences between the concepts. Generate
an example.

Declarative knowledge about history of Japan
(King, 1991)

In what ways is Japan related to other civilizations we
learned?

Declarative knowledge of science concepts
(McDaniel & Donnelly, 1996)

Why does an object speed up as its radius gets smaller?

Declarative knowledge of biology concepts
(Seifert, 1994)

Why does the Richardson’s ground squirrel live in
underground tunnels?

Declarative knowledge of biology concepts
(Willoughby & Wood, 1994)

Why would that animal do/have that?

16
An important cognitive factor associated with the use of elaborative interrogation is that
learners activate what Willoughby and Wood (1994) call “schemata” that help to organize new
information that facilitates retrieval. The literature also points to learners being able to
discriminate among related facts when identifying or retrieving newly learned information. This
aspect is highlighted in Hannon’s (2012) study, which distinguishes between integrative and
comparative elaborations and argues that these variations seem to have different cognitive
mechanisms. In integrative elaborations, for example, asking learners to generate how new
themes or ideas in the text relate to one another may help activate and structure their conceptual
knowledge. Similarly, in comparative elaborations, asking learners to compare pairs of examples
which vary in quality facilitates the activation level of “critical distinctive” features in the
memory trace of each concept making each memory trace more unique and complex (Hannon,
2012).
To summarize, there is a clear link between the cognitive mechanisms that promote
learning based on prompting learners to explain their understanding and learning goals in a
variety of different contexts. The strategy helps learners activate their cognitive processes of
understanding by activating their prior knowledge, checking for gaps in their understanding,
focusing on information that is new or unclear to them, and relating, organizing, and
restructuring newly learned information (King, 1991; Palincsar & Brown, 1984; Willoughby &
Wood, 1994; Willoughby, Wood, & Khan, 1994; Woloshyn et al., 1992). In the context of the
present study, these mechanisms associated with the elaborative interrogation prompts are likely
to promote synthesis of ideas in a number of ways—engaging their prior knowledge about the
topic, noting gaps in their understanding, linking new ideas and themes from multiple sources,
and structuring their conceptual understanding of the topic.

17
Active-Constructive-Interactive Framework
In the context of the present study, active-constructive-interactive framework provides a
theoretical understanding and taxonomy of learners’ activities and their corresponding cognitive
processes (Chi, 2009). According to the framework, learners’ activities may be divided in the
three broad categories of active, constructive, and interactive. Active activities engage learners’
attention at the most basic level (Chi, 2009). These activities include focusing on the learning
material, repeating, or manipulating the learning material (Chi, 2009). Constructive activities
involve learners producing outputs that generate new ideas through self-explaining, concept
mapping, or hypothesis induction (Chi, 2009). Elaborative interrogation prompts being examined
in this study fall under both active and constructive activities which drive the cognitive
mechanisms that help learners map their prior knowledge, track their understanding, generate
repair, and restructure new knowledge as they encounter multiple sources of information on a
topic. Interactive activities, on the other hand, tend to engage learners through two kinds of
dialogues: instructional dialogues and joint dialogues. Instructional dialogues may involve
instructor guided activities such as scaffolding, adding revisions, and corrective feedback. Joint
dialogues provide learners the opportunity to participate, build, and elaborate on a partner's
contribution, argue and defend position (Chi, 2009). Table 3 on the following page summarizes
the characteristics, overt activities, and cognitive processes in active, constructive, and
interactive activities.

18
Table 3
Active-Constructive-Interactive Framework with Characteristics, Overt Activities, and Cognitive
Processes
Active

Constructive

Interactive

Characteristics Doing
something

Producing outputs that
contain ideas that go beyond
the presented information

Dialoguing
acknowledging
partner’s contribution

Overt
activities

Look, gaze,
underline,
paraphrase,
select, repeat

Self-explain or elaborate,
provide reasons, construct a
concept map, self-monitor,
connect, predict outcomes,
generate hypothesis

Respond to scaffolding,
revise errors, argue,
defend, confront

Cognitive
processes

Attending
Processes

Creating
Processes

Jointly Creating
Processes

Activate
existing
knowledge
assimilate,
encode, or store
new
information,
search existing
knowledge

Infer new knowledge,
integrate new information
with existing knowledge,
organize own knowledge for
coherence,
repair own faulty knowledge,
restructure own knowledge

Creating processes that
incorporate a partner’s
contributions

Note: Adapted from Chi (2009).
Chi (2009) argues that activities such as self-explaining and elaborating engage learners
to construct new ideas that go beyond the information presented in the learning material
providing support for the hypothesis in this study that elaborative interrogation will improve not
only integration but transformation of ideas in terms of elaborating on key themes presented in
each source and adding other themes within and/or across sources. These activities, in turn, aid
learners in inferring newly presented information, integrating it with their existing knowledge,
and organizing and restructuring their knowledge. In other words, constructive activities such as

19
elaborations facilitate learners to not only analyze the content but also generate unique ideas.
Another layer such as a dialogue, either with an expert or a peer, further facilitates learning,
especially when dialogues contain substantive contributions from all partners in the conversation
(Chi, 2009).
Based on the literature supporting the active-constructive-interactive framework, Chi
(2009) claims that the set of activities that are active are more likely to engage learners than
passive, activities that are constructive are more likely to enable the generation of new ideas than
activities that are active, and activities that are interactive, i.e. involve instructional and joint
dialogues, make more substantive contributions to learning than constructive activities (Chi,
2009). As Table 3 illustrates, the activities that activate learners’ existing knowledge and help
organize and structure new information, have the potential to significantly improve integration of
information gathered from multiple sources of information. The next section reviews relevant
literature in multiple document comprehension studies (Perfetti et al., 1999) to highlight how
presentation of multiple documents along with writing prompts can aid comprehension and
integration.
Multiple Documents Comprehension
Multiple documents comprehension studies focus on reading and comprehension of
different text-based sources on the same topic or situation (Bråten & Strømsø, 2010). Research in
multiple documents studies, which initially focused on summary and argument writing based on
history tasks, indicates that argument writing tasks promote transformed, integrated, and causal
constructions in student essays (Rouet et al., 1996; Wiley & Voss, 1999). Wiley and Voss (1999)
presented students with multiple sources of information and asking why you think an event
happened, as in argument condition, in contrast to asking how an event happened as in

20
explanation and summary condition produced more transformed and integrated constructions of
the historical event. They concluded that multiple-source presentation facilitates building of
mental models (Wiley & Voss, 1999).
The previous section on active-constructive-interactive framework and the multiple
document studies reviewed for this section suggest that asking students to write arguments based
on multiple sources of information facilitates constructive activity of integration of information
that leads to better understanding. Furthermore, Wiley and Voss (1999) propose the possibility
that argumentative writing prompts aid students in relating more pieces of information for the
purpose of justification of their point of view. Gil, Bråten, Vidal-Abarca, & Strømsø (2010)
found that students instructed to construct arguments from selected documents showed better
comprehension and integration in their writing. Similarly, Le Bigot and Rouet (2007) found that
students asked to write arguments based on texts about different aspects of social influence
produced essays with more transformed information than students instructed to write summaries.
It is, therefore, logical to assume that providing guided elaborative prompts to students as they
encounter a variety of different sources of information on a topic may potentially increase
integration and transformation of ideas.
The documents model proposed by Perfetti and colleagues (1999) highlights the mental
representation that captures connections between and within documents as learners integrate and
create their mental models about a topic. In addition, processes such as navigation, evaluation,
reevaluation, and monitoring of how ideas connect within a text and across texts increases the
need for employing metacognitive strategies and self-regulation skills (Goldman, Braasch,
Wiley, Graesser, & Brodowinska, 2012). In comparing the performance of better versus poorer
learners, Goldman et al. (2012) found that better learners engaged in more sense-making, self-

21
explanation, and comprehension-monitoring processes than poorer learners and in turn
performed better on measures such as inter-text connections, information evaluation, and
produced essays that showed better integration of concepts. These findings accentuate the
cognitive benefits that elaborative prompts provide in the context of integrating ideas from
multiple documents.
Cognitive monitoring, therefore, brings processes of comprehension and integration of
ideas to the surface and to the explicit attention of the learner. Employing strategies such as
elaborative questioning and self-explaining are not only critical factors in text comprehension but
also in terms of learning from multiple sources and constructing coherent and complete
conceptual models about topics (Goldman et al., 2012; Graesser et al., 2007; Stadtler & Bromme,
2007; 2008). Based on these findings, Goldman et al. (2012) stress that there is a need to
implement instructional models and design principles that include the use of metacognitive
strategies to help learners develop an understanding of the complex interrelationships between
multiple sources of information.
In another study, Stadtler and Bromme (2007) underscored the need for cognitive
monitoring in comprehension of multiple documents as well as formation of document models
(Perfetti et al., 1999). Comparing students who received evaluation prompts outperformed
control group students in terms of knowledge about sources and produced more arguments
relating to information sources. Previously, Stadtler and Bromme (2004) found that the use of
metacognitive strategies correlated significantly with knowledge acquisition, suggesting that as
learners acquire factual knowledge, the use of these strategies, in turn, facilitates more learning.
These findings further emphasize that learners may generally be capable of executing these

22
strategies but as they encounter a new topic or encounter multiple sources of information, may
not apply these strategies spontaneously (Stadtler & Bromme, 2007).
As evident from the focused review of these non-overlapping bodies of literature,
including elaborative interrogation studies, active-constructive-interactive framework, and
multiple documents comprehension studies, research evidence suggests that elaborative
interrogation strategy offers significant cognitive benefits and provides metacognitive
engagement with the learning material. A sizable body of research shows that prompting learners
through elaborative interrogation has the potential to increase both integration and
transformation of ideas (Dunlosky et al., 2013). However, most of the research has investigated
the effect of elaborative interrogation in the context of procedural skills and factual statements.
There has been limited research examining the effectiveness of the strategy on complex
cognitive tasks. This study extends the literature by investigating whether complex, higher-order
cognitive tasks such as integration and transformation of ideas can be enhanced by incorporating
elaborative interrogation prompts in multiple sources of information.

23
Chapter III
Methodology
The goal of this study was to test the effectiveness of elaborative interrogation prompts
on integration and transformation of ideas gathered from multiple sources of information on a
topic. Consistent with the prior research using elaborative prompts (Dunlosky et al., 2013), the
theoretical assumption guiding this study is that students responding to elaborative interrogation
prompts will have increased awareness of their understanding of texts as they encounter new
information about the topic and will connect their prior knowledge to new information during
this process. Therefore, it was hypothesized that participants who receive embedded elaborative
prompts would perform significantly better on both integration and transformation measures.
Participants
The participants were recruited using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (AMT). Started in
2005, AMT provides a crowdsourcing web service platform that allows businesses to distribute
tasks to an anonymous workforce (Schulze, Seedorf, Geiger, Kaufmann, & Schader, 2011). The
service can also be used to recruit participants for research studies involving surveys and
experiments in exchange for small wages. The platform allows researchers to set predefined
criteria to recruit subjects (workers) to perform these Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs)
(Paolacci, Chandler, & et al., 2010). One hundred and twenty slots were created for the
experiment—40 for each condition of the experiment. The researcher set the recruitment criteria
to include participants from the United States only along with a prior task approval rating of at
least 70%. The prior approval rate allows requesters to recruit workers who have successfully
completed HITs in the past. For example, if a worker has completed 100 HITs and had their
work rejected 5 times, their approval rate is 95%.

24
Bartneck, Duenser, Moltchanova, & Zawieska (2015) address the concerns regarding the
representativeness of AMT samples and data quality stating that samples drawn from population
of U.S. workers which constitutes a majority of AMT workers, are comparable to samples drawn
from other research pools. In evaluating the potential for psychology and other social science
research, Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling (2011) suggest that the results may be often more
generalizable than results from samples recruited through traditional methods.
As with any human participant research, participants were informed of the nature and
complexity of the task, researcher’s expectations, compensation, privacy rights, an easy to read
consent statement, as well as notification of academic not-for-profit research study. In addition,
the researcher notified participants of limitations regarding use of data other than research
associated with using AMT as a platform for data collection (Kent State University, 2018). The
experimental task was designed in Qualtrics as three surveys representing each experimental
condition. Qualtrics is an online software that enables researchers to design, distribute, and
analyze survey data (Qualtrics, 2017)—and implanted in AMT as a URL link. Each survey link
was embedded in AMT as a task representing each condition of the experiment. The participants
completed only one of the three embedded tasks in AMT. Once a participant completed the
required task, an AMT code was generated and sent to the AMT platform to notify the researcher
that the participant had completed the assigned task.
Conditions
Participants were given instructions in each of the three conditions about the topic and
were instructed to read the five texts (see Appendix B for surveys for each experimental
condition), respond to elaborative prompts (treatment conditions only), and then write a
paragraph that synthesizes the information (all three conditions). Three conditions were as
follows:

25
1. Elaborative interrogation prompts (EP-treatment group): Participants in this condition
typed their responses to elaborative interrogation prompts that are embedded after
each individual text.
2. Elaborative interrogation prompts with reverse order of texts (EP-RO-treatment
group): Participants in this condition typed their responses to elaborative interrogation
prompts that are embedded after each individual text presented in reverse order to
minimize order effects bias (Whitley & Kite, 2013).
3. No elaborative interrogation prompts (C-control group): Participants in this group
read the provided texts with no prompts.
Selection of Topic and Information Sources
For the purpose of achieving ecological validity (Whitley & Kite, 2013) in
operationalizing the design of the study, it was important to choose a topic at the comprehension
level of freshmen undergraduate students, and is not domain specific. The choice of topic and
scenario also needed to take into account that the provided texts represented a variety of formats
(e.g., article, industry report, research report) so as to not privilege one type of information
source, and each contributing unique ideas to the topic. Presenting a finite set of pre-selected
materials allowed for experimental control over the content as well as facilitated identifying idea
units in the synthesis paragraph. Similarly, for ensuring content validity (Whitley & Kite, 2013),
participants needed to understand the nature and scope of the topic before they read the provided
texts. Therefore, the description and instructions (Appendix B) were constructed to guide
students in synthesizing their ideas from the sources.
Information sources on the topic of climate change were used with permission from a
multiple documents comprehension study conducted by Strømsø, Bråten, & Britt (2010). The

26
topic was chosen because it lent itself to constructing an argument. The sources were chosen to
develop an understanding of the topic. Similarly, short descriptions of these sources were written
summarizing key ideas. To minimize fatigue effects (Gil et al., 2010; Whitley & Kite, 2013), the
length of the summaries for each source was kept to a minimum. The readability (Björnsson
1968) of these summarized sources was another methodological concern (Gil et al., 2010).
Strømsø et al. (2010) addressed this concern by ensuring that the summarized sources were at the
level of a standard college text in terms of readability. Table 4 briefly describes each source.
Table 4
Description of Information Sources on Climate Change
Word
Count

Text Source

Description

Text 1: Textbook

Explains the natural greenhouse effect and the manmade
greenhouse effect in relatively neutral, academic terms

362

Text 2: Center for International
Climate and Environmental
Research at the University of
Oslo

Focuses on the causes of the manmade greenhouse effect,
that is, on the manmade discharges of climate gases into the
atmosphere and their contribution to observed climate
changes

251

Text 3: Popular science article

Argues that climate changes to a large extent are steered by
astronomical conditions and therefore due to natural causes
rather than mankind’s activities

Text 4: Newspaper article

Describes the negative consequences of global warming in
terms of a potential weakening of ocean currents in the
North Atlantic and a melting of ice around the poles

302

Text 5: Newspaper article

Describes the positive consequences of a warmer climate in
northerly regions in terms of an ice-free sea route through
the Northwest Passage and the access to natural resources
now concealed under the Arctic ice

231

Note: Adapted from Strømsø et al. (2010).

277

27
Procedure
The task was made available to the participants in AMT as “learning about climate
change” for each of the experimental conditions. The researcher provided the description,
keywords, compensation, and maximum number of assignments (participants) in each of the
conditions. Once the task was accepted, the participants clicked on the embedded Qualtrics
survey link in AMT. The experimental procedure in Qualtrics is described in Table 5 below,
highlighting the cognitive functions associated with each step.
Table 5
Description of Steps in the Procedure
Steps

Description

Function

1. Topic
Introduction

Introduction to the task and topic description
(Appendix B)

Introduces the topic and task to the
participants

2. First Set of
Elaborative
Interrogation
Prompts (1.1
and 1.2
Treatment
Group)

1.1 “What do you already know about the topic?”
1.2 “What questions come to your mind after you
have read the topic description?”
1.3 “On a scale of 1-10, (1 representing least
interest, and 10 representing most interest), how
interested are you in the topic of climate change?”
(1.1 and 1.2 for treatment group only and 1.3 for
both groups)

Engages prior knowledge of the
topic. Level of interest serves as a
covariate

3. Presentation
of Texts

The five texts were introduced as “Text 1” “Text
2” etc. without any descriptors.

Develops participants’
understanding of the key issues and
concepts associated with climate
change

4. Second Set of
Elaborative
Interrogation
Prompts
(Treatment
Group)

2.1 “As you examine this source, what new
themes emerge about the topic?” “How are these
themes related to what you read in other sources?”
(Second prompt embedded in second and
subsequent texts)

Drives paraphrase, elaboration, and
addition cognitive mechanisms

5. Synthesis
Essay

Participants in all groups composed their
synthesis paragraphs after reading the texts.

Synthesis essay coded for measures
of transformation and integration
measures (Table 6)

28
On successful completion of the task, an AMT code was generated in Qualtrics that
participants copied in their AMT workers’ account, prompting the researcher to compensate the
participants.
Independent and Dependent Measures
The methodology of this study is in line with previous studies that followed similar
procedures using idea units, argumentative units, and core arguments as tools for measuring
comprehension (Chi et al., 1994; Coté, Goldman, & Saul, 1998; Rouet et al., 1996; Wiley &
Voss, 1999; Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). The researcher adapted the coding scheme for the various
dependent measures based on Gil et al. (2010) which examined summary and argumentative
tasks in the context of working with multiple documents. The coding scheme consists of two
main categories: transformation and integration. Transformation includes the sub-categories
paraphrase, elaboration, addition, and misconception; and integration includes the sub-category
number of texts and number of switches between sources. Operational definitions of these
categories are described in Table 6 on the following page.

29
Table 6
Operational Definitions of the Writing Measures
Main Category

Sub-category

Description

Transformation
(P + E + A - M)

Paraphrase (P)

Student states text content in their own
words without changing meanings
expressed in the source material

Elaboration (E)

Student uses source material in
combination with information from
prior knowledge or combines two or
more pieces of information within or
across texts

Addition (A)

Student includes related information
from prior knowledge or states personal
opinion about the topic

Misconception (M)

Student includes statements indicating
misunderstanding of the content of the
source material

Number of texts (T)

Number of different sources used

Number of switches (S)

Number of switches between sources

Integration (T + S)

Note: Adapted from Gil et al. (2010).
Exclusion Criteria
The results from treatment conditions that did not include responses to the elaborative
prompts after each text were excluded from the analysis. Similarly, results that contained
meaningless words and symbols in either replies to elaborative prompts or the synthesis task
were excluded from analysis. As per task instructions, the participants were asked to write their
report based on the provided texts; therefore, the responses that contained irrelevant content not
related to climate change were also excluded.

30
Coding Synthesis Paragraphs
In tasks that require learners to write arguments or summaries from multiple sources (Chi
et al., 1994; Coté et al., 1998; Rouet et al., 1996; Wiley & Voss, 1999; Wolfe & Goldman,
2005), student essays are segmented into idea units, often at the sentence level, containing one or
more related items of information. As prescribed by the original coding scheme (Gil et al., 2010),
each idea unit was coded as representing one of four types of transformation of the original
text—either paraphrase, elaboration, addition, or misconception to calculate the overall
transformation score.
Idea units were coded as paraphrases if the respondents used their own words without
changing the meaning expressed in the text. For example, “The increase in the release of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere has caused an increase in the temperature of the earth.” Idea units
were coded as elaborations if they contained information from the text in combination with some
information from prior knowledge or if they combined two or more pieces of information either
within or across texts, which were not connected in the source. For example, “The warming of
the climate causes farming and forestry to become affected, as extreme warming can lead to
extreme cold spells causing crop damages that hurt local populations and wildlife.” Idea units
were coded as additions if they contained only related information from prior knowledge or
personal opinions about climate change. For example, “The increasing use of fossil fuels has to
be stopped, as if we don't, we will continue to experience harsh consequences (these hurricanes,
Harvey and Irma) as a result of our continued ignorance and unwillingness to refute fossil
fuels.” Idea units were coded as misconceptions if they contained false statements or
misunderstanding in relation to the information in the original texts. For example, “The global

31
average temperature today is about 15C, though geological evidence suggests it has been much
higher and lower in the past.”
In terms of integration, the goal was to identify the text with each idea unit in the
synthesis paragraphs and count the number of different texts that the respondent used in their
writing. For example, a score of five suggests that the response included all five texts and a score
of zero suggests a lack of coverage of original texts. In addition, the number of switches between
texts were counted. For example, if a response contained ten idea units and the first three idea
units came from text 1, the next five came from text 2, and the last two came from text 3, it was
counted as two switches. The aggregate score for the integration measure was calculated by
adding the number of texts used and number of switches between texts.
A random subset of 20 responses, which accounted for over 20% of the total after
excluding responses based on the exclusion criteria described previously, were coded
independently by the researcher and one experienced writing instructor using the coding scheme
described in Table 6, resulting in the overall interrater agreement of 74% for the transformation
measure and 89% for the integration measure. All disagreements in coding were discussed
between the two rates to gain more insight into interpretation of the coding scheme. Once
agreement was established, the researcher coded the entire remaining data set.
The number for each sub-category measure such as paraphrases, elaborations, additions,
and misconceptions were calculated along with the number of total words and sentences in the
synthesis paragraphs. After the synthesis essays were coded, an aggregate score for each
condition for both transformation and integration measures were calculated and the resulting data
set was used to perform descriptive and inferential analysis presented in the following chapter
using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (IBM, 2017).

32
Chapter IV
Results
The purpose of the present research investigation was to evaluate the effect of elaborative
interrogation instructional strategy on the synthesis of ideas from multiple sources of
information. To this aim, 86 participants, recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, were asked
to read five texts on climate change and write a paragraph that synthesized the information.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions. The first condition involved the
presentation of elaborative interrogation prompts after each individual text (EP-treatment group),
while the second condition included the incorporation of elaborative interrogation prompts after
each individual text presented in reverse order (EP-RO-treatment group). Finally, the third
condition involved only the presentation of texts, without any elaborative interrogation prompts
(C-control group).
Participants were assessed on two categories, namely transformation and integration.
Transformation included the sub-categories paraphrase, elaboration, addition, and
misconception, while integration involved the subcategories, number of texts used, and number
of switches between sources. Two aggregate scores were calculated for each category, with
higher values being indicative of higher performance in transformation and integration measures.
The number of words and sentences produced in each condition was also measured and the prior
interest of participants in climate change was assessed to account for potential confounders.
Lastly, demographic information about the age, gender, and educational level of participants was
collected.
Two directional hypotheses were formulated and appropriate inferential analyses were
employed for their empirical examination. First, it was hypothesized that the presentation of

33
elaborative interrogation prompts will have a statistically significant effect on the transformation
performance of participants. Particularly, it was assumed that individuals who received
elaborative interrogation prompts would report higher transformation scores, as compared to
participants who did not (Hypothesis 1). The second hypothesis postulated that the presentation
of elaborative interrogation prompts would exert a statistically significant influence on the
integration performance of participants. Specifically, it was expected that individuals who
received elaborative interrogation prompts would report higher integration scores, in comparison
to participants who did not (Hypothesis 2). It was also speculated that the prior interest of
participants in climate change, as well as their educational level, would impact their
transformation and integration performance. In order to address a potential confounding effect,
prior interest in climate change and educational level were treated as covariates in the relevant
statistical model. Taking into consideration the above hypotheses, the researcher employed 2
one-way analyses of covariance (ANCOVAs) to assess the effect of elaborative interrogation
prompts on transformation and integration outcomes, while controlling for a potential
confounding effect of pre-existing interest in climate change and educational level.
A comprehensive examination of the available data was conducted to ensure the accuracy
of subsequent conclusions. Initially, a descriptive analysis was performed to identify the
demographic characteristics of the sample, assess the number of participants and distribution of
demographics among conditions, and gain a preliminary insight into the performance of
participants, independently of condition. Afterwards, the assumptions of one-way ANCOVA
were evaluated. Finally, the findings of the respective inferential analyses were presented indetail.

34
Sample Characteristics
Prior to the assessment of research hypotheses, it is essential to identify the
characteristics of the sample, in order to evaluate the representativeness and quality of data.
Regarding the demographic characteristics of the sample, an almost equal distribution of men
(52%) and women (46%) was observed, while half of the participants (51%) were aged between
25-34 years. In reference to education, almost half of the respondents held a Bachelor’s degree
(45%), followed by those earned some college credit (28%) (Table 7).
Table 7
Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
Gender

%

Women

46%

Men

52%

Other

2%

Age
18-24 years

7%

25-34 years

51%

35-44 years

28%

45+ years

14%

Education
High school graduate, diploma or the
equivalent

6%

Some college credit, no degree

28%

Associate degree

12%

Bachelor’s degree

45%

Master’s/doctorate degree

9%

35
The second step involved the evaluation of the number of participants and distribution of
demographics among conditions. A frequency analysis indicated an almost equal distribution of
participants among conditions (Figure 1).

Number of Participants per Group
35
31

30

30
25

25
20
15
10
5
0

Control group

EP treatment group

EP-RO treatment group

Figure 1. Number of participants per group.
Furthermore, a satisfactory distribution of age cohorts and educational levels among
conditions was observed, although it should be noted that the EP treatment group did not include
any individuals aged 45 years or older (Tables 8 and 9).
Table 8
Distribution (n) of Age Cohorts Among Conditions
Age Cohort (years)
Condition

18-24

25-34

35-44

45+

Control

2

16

8

5

EP-treatment

3

16

6

0

EP-RO treatment

1

12

10

7

36
Table 9
Distribution (n) of Educational Levels Among Conditions

However, a highly unequal distribution of men and women among conditions was
revealed, as the control group involved an overrepresentation of men and the EP-RO treatment
group an overrepresentation of women (Table 10).
Table 10
Distribution (n) of Gender Among Conditions

The last step of preliminary analyses included the calculation of descriptive statistics for
the performance of participants, independent of condition, as assessed by 10 variables. The
objective of this analysis was twofold. First, the identification of minimum and maximum values
for each variable facilitated the interpretation of subsequent descriptive and inferential analyses.
Secondly, and most importantly, the calculation of means and standard deviations allowed the
researcher to assess the variation of scores, which is especially desirable in experimental research
designs (Pallant, 2016). As shown in the following table, high standard deviations were observed

37
in all variables, suggesting that mean values are dependent on certain factors; hopefully on the
introduction of elaborative interrogation prompts (Table 11).
Table 11
Descriptive Analysis on Variables Assessing Transformation and Integration Performance

Assumption Testing
The next analytical stage involved the assessment of the 10 assumptions required for oneway ANCOVA. One-way ANCOVA is a parametric test and thus, compliance with certain
assumptions is critical to the accuracy of findings (Field, 2013). The first four assumptions relate
to the research design of the study and require a continuous dependent variable, categorical
independent variable, continuous covariate(s), as well as independence of observations. The
other six prerequisites evaluate the quality of data and assume linearity, homogeneity of

38
regression slopes, normally distributed residuals, homoscedasticity, homogeneity of variances,
and absence of outliers (Field, 2013).
However, prior to the assessment of the above prerequisites, an assumption pertinent to
the specific research design should be examined. The two covariates were included in the
selected statistical model and therefore, the relationship between them should be inspected for
issues of multicollinearity (Pallant, 2016). A Pearson’s correlation analysis between prior interest
in climate change and educational level indicated a non-statistically significant very weak
relationship, r (84) = .051, p = .64 (two-tailed). Therefore, multicollinearity was not a concern
and the researcher proceeded with the investigation of the assumptions. Results are presented
separately for hypothesis 1 and hypothesis 2 to ensure the legibility of the section.
Hypothesis 1. Hypothesis 1 assessed the effect of elaborative interrogation prompts on
the transformation performance of participants, while controlling for a potential effect of interest
in climate change and educational level. Transformation, the dependent variable, was measured
at a continuous level (value range, 2-17) and so were the covariates, interest in climate change
(value range, 1-10), and educational level (value range, 1-6). In contrast, the independent
variable was measured at a nominal level and included three groups, namely control group, EPtreatment group, and EP-RO treatment group. The experimental manipulation of the independent
variable also ensured independence of observations, as participants were assigned to only one of
three conditions.
Regarding data quality, the visual inspection of grouped scatterplots indicated a linear
relationship between interest in climate change and transformation, as well as between
educational level and transformation, for each condition. An analysis of variance also suggested
homogeneity of regression slopes, as a non-statistically significant interaction term between

39
condition and interest in climate change, F (2, 77) = .22, p = .81, as well as between condition
and educational level, F (2, 77) = 1.06, p = .35, was observed. Furthermore, homoscedasticity
and homogeneity of variances was present, as evaluated by a scatterplot of standardized residuals
against predicted values and Levene’s test of equality of error variances (p = .40), respectively.
Finally, a normal Q-Q plot displayed approximately normally distributed residuals and an
absence of outliers was indicated, as all standardized residuals were less than ± 3 standard
deviations (Field, 2013).
Hypothesis 2. Hypothesis 2 investigated the effect of elaborative interrogation prompts
on the integration performance of participants, while controlling for a potential effect of interest
in climate change and educational level. Integration, the dependent variable, was measured at a
continuous level (value range, 0-12) and so were the covariates, interest in climate change (value
range, 1-10) and educational level (value range, 1-6). On the contrary, the independent variable
was measured at a nominal level and included three groups: the control group, the EP-treatment
group, and the EP-RO treatment group. The experimental manipulation of the independent
variable also ensured independence of observations, as participants were assigned to only one of
three conditions.
In reference to data quality, the visual inspection of grouped scatterplots indicated a
linear relationship between interest in climate change and integration, as well as between
educational level and integration, for each condition. An analysis of variance also suggested
homogeneity of regression slopes, as a non-statistically significant interaction between condition
and interest in climate change, F (2, 77) = .82, p = .44, as well as between condition and
educational level, F (2, 77) = .60, p = .55, was observed. Furthermore, Levene’s test of equality
of error variances indicated homogeneity of variances (p = .75), but a scatterplot of standardized

40
residuals against predicted values was suggestive of a slight ‘funnel’ pattern. However,
ANCOVA is fairly robust to violations of assumptions and therefore, there was no reason for
serious concern (Field, 2013). Lastly, a normal Q-Q plot displayed normally distributed residuals
and an absence of outliers was indicated, as all standardized residuals were less than ± 3 standard
deviations (Field, 2013).
Assessment of Hypotheses
Taking into account that the examination of the one-way ANCOVA assumptions
revealed a satisfactory data quality, the assessment of research hypotheses followed. A
combination of descriptive and inferential analyses was employed to thoroughly evaluate the
hypotheses under investigation and differences among conditions were highlighted by the
incorporation of visual aids. The findings for each hypothesis are presented in separate sections
to enhance readability.
Hypothesis 1. In order to explore if there is a statistically significant effect of elaborative
interrogation prompts on transformation performance, while controlling for a potential effect of
prior interest in climate change and educational level, a one-way ANCOVA was conducted.
Contrary to the expectations of the researcher, an initial descriptive analysis showed that control
group performed slightly better than treatment groups, whereas EP-RO treatment group reported
the lowest mean transformation scores (Figure 2 on the following page).

41

Transformation Performance per Group
7.6

7.55

7.5

Mean performace

7.4
7.3

7.24

7.2
7.1
6.97

7
6.9
6.8
6.7
6.6

Control group

EP treatment group

EP-RO treatment group

Figure 2. Mean differences in transformation performance among groups.
After adjusting for interest in climate change and educational level, a one-way ANCOVA
indicated a non-statistically significant effect of condition on transformation outcomes, F (2, 81)
= .39, p = .67, ηp2 = .010, with the same pattern of mean differences being observed (Table 12).
Table 12
Unadjusted Condition Means (M) and Standard Deviations (SD) and Adjusted Condition Means
(M) and Standard Errors (SE) for Transformation Performance with Interest in Climate Change
and Educational Level as Covariates

42
In reference to the relationship of covariates with transformation performance, results
revealed a statistically significant relationship between interest in climate change and
transformation, F (1, 81) = 5.27, p = .024, ηp2 = .061, suggesting that higher levels of interest in
climate change are related to higher transformation performance. Nevertheless, the small effect
size reported is indicative of a rather weak relationship. Lastly, a non-statistically significant
relationship between educational level and transformation, F (1, 81) = 1.78, p = .19, ηp2 = .021,
was observed.
To summarize the primary findings, a descriptive analysis showed that participants in
control group achieved a slightly better performance in transformation, as compared to
participants in treatment groups. In addition, a one-way ANCOVA indicated that the presentation
of elaborative interrogation prompts did not exert a significant amount of influence on
transformation measure. Therefore, hypothesis 1 is not supported.
Hypothesis 2. In order to explore if there is a statistically significant effect of elaborative
interrogation prompts on integration performance, while accounting for a potential effect of
interest in climate change and educational level, a one-way ANCOVA was conducted. In
accordance with the expectations of the researcher, a preliminary descriptive analysis showed
that treatment groups performed better than control group and EP-RO treatment group reported
the highest integration scores (Figure 3 on the following page).

43

Integration Performance per Group
6

5.43

5.12
5
Mean performance

4.16
4
3
2
1
0

Control group

EP treatment group

EP-RO treatment group

Figure 3. Mean differences in integration performance among groups.
After adjusting for interest in climate change and educational level, a one-way ANCOVA
indicated a non-statistically significant effect of condition on integration outcomes, F (2, 81) =
1.43, p = .25, ηp2 = .034, with the same pattern of mean differences being observed (Table 13).
Table 13
Unadjusted Condition Means (M) and Standard Deviations (SD) and Adjusted Condition Means
(M) and Standard Errors (SE) for Integration Performance with Interest in Climate Change and
Educational Level as Covariates

44
Concerning the relationship of covariates with integration performance, a non-statistically
significant relationship between pre-existing interest in climate change and integration, F (1, 81)
= .027, p = .87, ηp2 < .001, was observed. However, results revealed a statistically significant
relationship between educational level and integration, F (1, 81) = 4.31, p = .041, ηp2 = .051,
denoting that higher levels of education are related to higher integration performance.
Nevertheless, a small effect size was reported, which is indicative of a rather weak relationship.
Conclusively, a descriptive analysis showed that participants in treatment conditions
achieved a better performance in integration than participants in control group. Nevertheless, a
one-way ANCOVA revealed that the presentation of elaborative interrogation prompts did not
significantly impact integration measure. Therefore, hypothesis 2 is not supported. The results
are discussed in the following chapter.

45
Chapter V
Discussion
Summary
This study examined the effectiveness of elaborative interrogation prompts on integration
and transformation of ideas from multiple sources of information on the topic of climate change.
Acknowledging the need for evidence-based information literacy instruction for the new
Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education, the researcher examined the frame
“Research as Inquiry” which includes the “ability to synthesize ideas gathered from multiple
sources” as one of its associated knowledge practices.
The focused review of the literature included elaborative interrogation studies and
multiple documents comprehension studies which suggested that elaborative interrogation
strategy offers significant cognitive benefits and provides metacognitive engagement with the
learning material. Most of the prior research investigated the effect of elaborative interrogation in
the context of procedural skills and factual statements. Acknowledging this gap in the literature
and using active-constructive-interactive framework as a theoretical grounding for the study, it
was hypothesized that prompting learners through elaborative interrogation will significantly
improve integration and transformation measures in terms of synthesis of ideas from multiple
sources of information on the topic of climate change.
To this end, the researcher recruited 86 participants using Amazon Mechanical Turk
platform and embedded experimental task using an online survey platform. Contrary to the
research hypothesis, the results of the descriptive analysis showed that participants in the control
group achieved a slightly better performance in the transformation measure, as compared to
participants in treatment groups. For the integration measure, a preliminary descriptive analysis

46
showed that the treatment groups performed better than the control group. However, two oneway ANCOVAs were employed to test the hypotheses which indicated that elaborative
interrogation prompts did not exert a significant amount of influence on transformation and
integration measures. Therefore, hypotheses 1 and 2 were not supported.
Contrary to what was hypothesized, the results from the descriptive analysis showed that
the participants’ performance was slightly better on transformation measure in the control group.
A logical explanation of this could be the extra time and cognitive effort spent in both treatment
groups (EI and EI-RO) to respond to the prompts after each text compared to no prompts in the
control group, thereby giving participants more time to write the synthesis paragraphs.
Responding to prompts after each text could have been perceived as cognitively taxing. In light
of prior work in multiple documents literacy (Gil et al., 2010), this may also reflect that the
cognitive mechanisms that scaffold learners’ ability to study multiple information sources to
construct and present arguments on a topic are complex and require a more sustained and
distributed effort. The following section acknowledges this and other limitations of the research.
Limitations
With respect to developing a conceptual understanding of a topic from multiple
documents (Perfetti et al., 1999), one of the limitations of this design is that it represents only
one of many ways of presenting multiple texts to gather information and synthesize ideas, thus
limiting the ecological validity of the study (Whitley & Kite, 2013). There are a variety of
platforms and manifestations, both print and digital, that participants may have been more used
to when using multiple sources of information on a given topic.
As Dunlosky et al. (2013) point out, the majority of studies examining the effectiveness
of elaborative interrogation strategy have focused on measures such as recall, memory for facts,

47
memory for main ideas, and free-recall tests. Few studies have examined the use of the strategy
in the context of comprehension or the application of the factual information. The higher-level
transformation and integration tasks using multiple sources are more cognitively demanding than
the array of fact recall tests from a single document that have previously been the focus of
research.
Another limitation associated with using AMT for participant recruitment is low financial
reward (Goldman et al., 2012). The primary motivation of the participants is to complete the
required task in order to get compensated. It is difficult to pay sustained attention to a task
involving a variety of increasingly cognitively demanding steps that include reading, reflecting,
and writing based on the provided content—embedded in an online survey platform in a short
period of time as noted in the discussion of results in the previous section. Higher-order
cognitive tasks such as integration and transformation of ideas investigated in this study demand
considerably higher level of sustained engagement, focus, and concentration compared to other
tasks such as taking part in short surveys and questionnaires.
Similarly, Buhrmester et al. (2011) note that another limitation to AMT is the lack of
opportunity to exert control over participants’ environment compared to lab studies. Controlling
for time taken to complete the assigned sub-tasks such as time spent on each text and time
allocated for writing the synthesis paragraph were beyond the researcher’s control in the present
study.
The topic of climate change was well-suited for the study as it lends itself to writing a
short synthesis piece. The presentation of scientific information has been demonstrated to
facilitate conceptual change (Ranney & Clark, 2015). However, climate change is also a
politically charged topic and despite the researcher’s attempt to select the texts from a previous

48
research study, the possibility that participants may have selectively focused on texts that
contained information that they considered most important or reflected their prior understanding
or stance on the topic is still a concern.
Implications for Practice and Future Research
The present study contributes to the growing body of literature on the new Framework,
its associated knowledge practices, and ways to develop pedagogical and assessment approaches.
In addition, the study contributes to the literature on multiple documents literacy, effective
learning techniques, and application of active-constructive-interactive framework. As noted
previously in the limitations section, the study focused on short sources of information on the
topic of climate change, further research is needed to examine the effect of elaborative prompts
under different tasks and topics that involve comprehension, integration, and transformation
other than climate change. Using texts and coding scheme from prior research studies in multiple
documents comprehension helped provide experimental control in terms of research design.
However, starting from scratch with another topic would involve selecting texts, reading and
identifying key idea units within each text, and creating similar coding schemas might prove to
be daunting tasks from the practitioners’ standpoint. Conversely, developing an assessment
based on a similar coding scheme might provide a more robust measure of synthesis than a
generalized rubric-based assessment (Oakleaf, 2008).
Second, the individual amount of time spent on each text was not measured in this study.
The research assumes that participants spent roughly the same amount of time on each text.
Future research needs to examine and control for this important variable in assessing overall
integration and transformation. The researcher believes that triangulating the assessment of

49
synthesis with other methods such as think-aloud, screencasts, eye-tracking, and other log data
measures would further develop this line of research.
Lastly, as prior research on multiple documents comprehension illustrates, the cognitive
processes that scaffold the synthesis of ideas are not well understood (Rouet, 2006). It presents
unique challenges for researchers especially in terms of acknowledging the familiarity with the
platform, format, medium of presentation of documents, prior knowledge, level of interest, as
well as imposed vs. self-generated inquiry. The degree to which the effect of elaborative
interrogation technique generalizes to these variables and their interactions need to be further
examined. Assessment of a shape-shifting ghost such as synthesis of ideas from multiple
documents is full of contextual factors that determine how learners interact with and gather
information from an increasingly complex information landscape. Considering these limitations,
the researcher believes that future research needs to draw from other non-overlapping bodies of
literature that provide both theoretical grounding and refine research methods to examine this
problem more holistically.
Conclusion
The primary motivation for the researcher to embark on this project was to examine and
align one of the key knowledge practices in the new Framework—the ability to synthesize ideas
gathered from multiple sources of information with an appropriate learning technique—
elaborative interrogation. As stated in the rationale for the study and brief overview of the
Framework, these individual frames highlight the threshold concepts learners experience as they
navigate a complex, uncertain, and evolving information ecosystem. The shift from previous
skill-based, mechanistic standards has amplified the need to draw tangential connections with
cognitive and learning science principles and advance new ways to effectively develop

50
curriculum for information literacy and assess learners’ performance as they improve their
understanding of these knowledge practices and navigate these threshold concepts. The
interconnected threshold concepts in the Framework represent a move away from prescriptive
outcomes and skills, and the nebulous and abstract nature of these concepts presents challenges
for both practitioners and researchers. The synergy between research and practice is what is
urgently needed in the profession—a long-term research-practice collaboration that provides
practitioners a theoretical grounding for the praxis of information literacy instruction.
Just as the Framework represents a renewed approach to conceptualizing information
literacy, this line of research represents a new focus on aligning effective learning and
assessment techniques, acknowledging behavioral, affective, cognitive, and metacognitive
dimensions of learning. The introduction of the Framework has prompted the much needed
dialogue between research and practice to examine the theoretical assumptions of teaching and
learning and it is the researcher’s hope that this work will further engage colleagues from both
sides to develop evidence-based recommendations for information literacy instruction.