Exploring the Impact of Feedback on Learning Transfer in the Liminal Space for
Information Literacy

By
Natalie Edwards Bishop

Abstract
Exploring the Impact of Feedback on Learning Transfer in the Liminal Space for
Information Literacy. Bishop, Natalie Edwards, 2018: Dissertation, Gardner-Webb
University, Feedback/Learning Transfer/Liminal Space/Threshold Concepts/Information
Literacy/Adult Learning
Mastering new knowledge is a transformative process, but what happens between initial
confrontation with new knowledge and the moment it is mastered? This qualitative case
study investigated perceptions on how feedback loops influenced student growth and
learning transfer in the liminal space. Myer and Land (2005) described the liminal space
as a stuck place where learners are wrestling with their conceptual understanding of
knowledge that is troublesome.
Students were adult undergraduates in an online information literacy course. Librarians
teaching the course were early adopters of ACRL’s The Framework for Information
Literacy in Higher Education (the Framework) and participated in on-site professional
development for effective feedback practices and Framework implementation. The
Framework, based on Meyer and Land’s threshold concept theory, represents a
pedagogical shift in how librarians teach and assess information literacy. Previous
practice focused on skills-based standards; the Framework focuses on development
students’ conceptual understanding of information creation, acquisition, and use.
Findings of the study indicated that instructors and students have divergent perceptions
regarding student entry points into the liminal space. Identifying liminal spaces can
influence which feedback strategies are used to support learning transfer. Findings
further indicated that instructors are also within a liminal space with Framework
implementation as the pedagogy adoption is still new for Library Science.
Conclusions identified effective feedback strategies to support learning transfer for
students in the liminal space. The study offers a pathway for qualitative assessment of the
Framework and suggests support strategies for librarians as learners as they continue to
teach and assess the Framework.

Chapter 1: Introduction
Introduction
Transferable learning is often derived from messy, unstructured, problem-solving
encounters (Meyer & Land, 2005). These messy encounters pose as stuck places for
students in the learning process; a liminal space in which the student confronts and
wrestles with troublesome, or conceptually difficult, knowledge (Meyer & Land, 2006).
Instructors are challenged with facilitating these learning experiences in the online
learning environment in higher education. The challenge is further extended with adult
learners, whose demand for online courses may be in contrast to their ability to integrate
technology and information literacy (Rapchak, Lewis, Mtyka, & Balmart, 2015). With
the recent boom in online education, the National Center for Education Statistics
estimated an increase from 28 to 33% in adult learners over the age of 25 between 2006
and 2016 (U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2018).
With the increasing transition from the traditional classroom to the online environment,
the question arises: How do instructors in higher education design curriculum and
assessments to support and measure learning transfer for this growing student
population? This study explored the impact formative assessment and the feedback loop
have on adult learner growth and learning transfer in the liminal space.
Statement of Problem
Information literacy instruction is a significant portion of the outreach work
conducted by academic libraries in higher education institutions. The importance of
information literacy in the framework of critical thinking, learning outcomes, and
assessment in higher education is evidenced by the Southern Association on Colleges and
Schools Commission on Colleges (SACS-COC, 2017) comprehensive standard 11.3:

2
“The institution provides (a) student and faculty access and user privileges to its library
services and (b) access to regular and timely instruction in the use of the library and other
learning/information resources” (p. 26). Providing information literacy instruction to
distance and adult students has presented a continuous challenge for librarians, and the
result is a limited number of studies that focus on examining information literacy
assessment for this population of students (Catalano, 2015; Rapchak & Behary, 2013;
Rapchak et al., 2015).
With the adoption of the new Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL, 2015a) Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education (the
Framework) in 2016, an additional layer of complexity was added to the landscape of
information literacy acquisition. ACRL sets the professional and information literacy
standards practiced by librarians in higher education institutions. The Framework
represents a pedagogical departure from the 2000 Information Literacy Competency
Standards for Higher Education (the Standards), in which the primary focus of the
competency standards was on the mechanics and skills of research; however, the
Framework, rooted in Meyer and Land’s threshold concept theory (ACRL, 2015a),
focuses on critical thinking through the applied conceptual understanding of the research
process. Current literature has offered limited study on teaching threshold concepts or
assessing adult students’ ability to transfer concepts.
Threshold concept theory was developed by educators Jan Meyer and Ray Land
as part of the Enhancing Teaching and Learning in Undergraduate Courses research
project (Hofer, Townsend, & Brunetti, 2012; Meyer & Land, 2003). The project
expanded on David Perkin’s theory of troublesome knowledge and explored how ways of
thinking could be practiced within academic disciplines (Meyer & Land, 2003). By

3
definition, threshold concepts are troublesome, challenge prior knowledge (Meyer &
Land, 2005; Perkins, 1999), and are transformative or irreversible (Meyer & Land, 2005).
Transfer, the degree to which learning is applied from one context to another,
“occurs when prior-learned knowledge and skills affect the way in which new knowledge
and skills are learned and performed” (Leberman, McDonald, & Doyle, 2006, p. 2). As
students apply the process of transfer, they enter a liminal space where they begin to
wrestle with understanding a concept or skill prior to crossing the threshold of concept
mastery (Entwistle, 2008; Meyer & Land, 2005). While students exist in this liminal
space oscillating between stages of growth, stagnation, and mimicry of concept mastery,
instructors can provide support through formative assessment (Canter, 2016; Entwistle,
2008; Felten, 2016; McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005; Savin-Baden,
McFarland, Savin-Baden, 2008). Formative assessment allows repeated practice of a
learning concept supported by guiding feedback. Through the lens of threshold concepts,
this study explores how the process of formative assessment and feedback impacts adult
student growth in the liminal space and their ability to transfer learning.
A review of the literature reveals the challenge instructors face in designing
transferable learning experiences in the face-to-face classroom environment (Foley &
Kaiser, 2013; Saloman & Perkins, 1989). This challenge is further extended in the online
environment where learning is largely asynchronous. Ainsworth (2010) noted that
engaged learning experiences challenge students in creating their own connections
between understanding and applying knowledge. Instructional strategies that provide
opportunities to actively learn by applying concepts and skills to new situations support
the likelihood of transfer.
Learning for understanding is defined by Earl (2013) as demonstrating that a

4
concept has been understood through application rather than recitation, with learners
increasing in competence and confidence as they develop more critical processes that
allow them to problem solve in new settings. Online instructors often struggle in creating
these experiences as they work within the “direct instruction” framework of applying a
face-to-face instruction model to an online environment (Fulgham & Shaughnessy, 2010,
p. 20). A benefit to the online environment in context to teaching threshold concepts,
however, is the agent relativity of threshold entry (Baillie, Bowden, & Meyer, 2013;
Land, Rattray, & Vivian, 2014). Online education offers the opportunity to differentiate
instruction through direct feedback portals, thus accommodating varying entry points into
the threshold. The unknown factor is assessing degrees of growth and occurrences of
transfer once students have entered the liminal space.
Purpose of the Study
Using a qualitative case study approach, this study investigates the extent to
which formative feedback impacts the liminal growth of adult undergraduates enrolled in
an asynchronous, online information literacy course. The breadth of conceptual
knowledge in the discipline of information literacy cannot be successfully covered in a
single study; thus, the focus of this study is on instructor and student perceptions of how
the feedback-loop impacts growth and transfer of learning in the liminal space. Data
were collected from a series of mid-stake assessments in which students were asked to
combine and apply multiple information literacy concepts. The researcher defined midstake assessments as assessments still rooted in formative design that carry more weight
and require the application of multiple concepts, as opposed to low-stakes assessment
which focuses on the practice of a single concept.
Previous studies. Rapchak et al. (2015) assessed potential gaps in student

5
understanding post-information literacy instruction and concluded that adult
undergraduate students demonstrated weaknesses in their abilities to evaluate information
sources. This study expanded on Rapchak et al.’s by exploring how feedback provided
through scaffolded, “formative assessment AS learning” (Earl, 2013, p. 28) impacted
student perceptions of their growth and ability to transfer learning in the liminal space.
Furthermore, a quantitative study conducted by Catalano (2015) measured the
degree to which situated learning increased student abilities to achieve far transfer, or the
ability to apply previously acquired knowledge in new learning situations (Foley &
Kaiser, 2013), in an online information literacy course. Brown, Roediger, and McDaniel
(2014) and Perkins (2008) noted that students must understand and elaborate on the
process of transferring knowledge in order to ensure transfer to future learning situations.
Instructors help facilitate student negotiation of the transfer process by providing
“cognitive hooks” to aid the learner in recognizing relevant applications for knowledge
more easily (Catalano, 2015; Perkins, 2008). This study also qualitatively expands on
Catalano’s work by studying student and instructor perceptions of threshold entry points,
influence of feedback, and opportunities for transfer in an online information literacy
course.
A study by Canter (2016) explored how students responded to experiences within
the liminal space. Canter’s study, which used adult learners in a postbaccalaureate
program, explored student feelings and responses to encountering stuckness in their
course of study (Canter, 2016). Findings of the study indicated that stuckness is a
common experience to students in higher education with students experiencing a widerange of responses to stuck places. Canter (2016) suggests that instructors should
embrace their role as an active participant in the liminal growth process by developing a

6
more holistic approach to understanding student stuckness.
A study conducted by Scott (2017) was one of the first to investigate student
voice as it pertained to threshold concepts in information literacy instruction. Scott’s
study, which used traditional, honors undergraduate students, gathered student reflections
on the transformative, iterative, and troublesome aspects of threshold concepts as they
pertained to the Framework (Scott, 2017). Scott’s study focused on incorporating student
voice to identify stuck places as entry points into conceptual gateways and identify how
feedback influenced growth within the liminal space. While previous research on student
voice pertaining to threshold concepts has focused on undergraduate and graduate
learners, Scott’s study is unique in adding the adult undergraduate voice to the
conversation (Felten, 2016; Scott, 2017).
Background
This study focused on adult learners enrolled in the online information literacy
course, LIB 301, in a Degree Completion Program (DCP) at a private, doctoral
university. Students observed in this study are classified as at risk as defined by Radford,
Cominole, and Skomsvold (2015). Factors determining at risk classification are
technological illiteracy, gap in higher education experience, delayed enrollment, regular
full- or part-time employment, and dependents under the care of the student. These
participants are considered nontraditional students, defined in the literature as students
who meet more than one of the following criteria: employed, financially independent,
responsible for dependents, and enrolled as a full- or part-time student (Choy, 2002). It
should be noted that there are several overlaps in the criteria for classifying both at-risk
and nontraditional students. Prior to this study, a program evaluation of the LIB 301
course was conducted. Relevant results from the evaluation are detailed in the next

7
sections.
Description of LIB 301. LIB 301 is an online information literacy course
required for all first-year DCP students. DCP was designed to accommodate the needs of
nontraditional adult learners seeking a baccalaureate degree from a choice of 12 majors.
LIB 301 was developed to provide equitable information literacy instruction to DCP
online students as traditional undergraduates received face to face. The curriculum and
course are designed by the instruction librarian liaison to DCP and is taught by faculty
librarians at the institution using the Blackboard learning management system. Students
participate in a series of seven learning modules, each designed with learning outcomes
and assignments aligned to one or multiple frames from ACRL’s (2015a) Information
Literacy Framework for Higher Education (Appendix A).
As students progress through the course, content, skills, and exercises from the
modules are applied to Practice Segment (PS) assessments. PSs are a series of problembased learning assessments embedded throughout LIB 301. The purpose of the PS
assessments is to introduce students to the metacognitive process of using “prior
knowledge to plan a strategy for approaching a learning task, take necessary steps to
problem solve, reflect on and evaluate results, and modify one’s approach as needed”
(U.S. Department of Education, Office of Vocational and Adult Education, 2011, p. 32).
Development of PS assessments. To evaluate a student’s ability to critically
apply the concepts and skills learned through the course modules, students must complete
an annotated bibliography meeting specific source type and evaluation requirements. By
completing this project, students are demonstrating their ability to identify, evaluate, and
analyze the characteristics, qualities, and differences between particular source types and
how they can support research. Students evaluate sources by focusing on the timeliness,

8
reliability, relevance, audience, and purpose (TRAP) of a source in relation to student
research inquiry.
Prior to the program evaluation, instructors from this university reported that
students consistently struggled with the annotated bibliography. Trends in student
feedback revealed that many students were unfamiliar with annotated bibliographies and
felt overwhelmed by or did not understand the assignment. Recognizing this finding as a
significant barrier to learning, a series of smaller PS assessments were developed to
scaffold students through the annotated bibliography process.
PS assessments were designed using a formative structure in order to facilitate
student movement through thresholds of understanding with instructive support. For
example, the PS3 assessment focuses on locating, evaluating, and citing a scholarly
article. Students must demonstrate the ability to identify a scholarly article, explain why
that article is scholarly, evaluate the content of the article in context to their research
inquiry, and provide an accurate citation. While implementing the PS assessments
initially helped students understand how to create an annotated bibliography, students
continued to struggle with correctly identifying and evaluating sources. Instructors
agreed that an inability to correctly identify and evaluate sources was a significant
priority concern, with students failing to apply the far transfer of knowledge. In
response, the course and curriculum designer applied Stufflebeam’s (2007) CIPP
(Context, Input, Process, Product) program evaluation model to identify disconnects in
the course and create modifications to better support student learning.
CIPP program evaluation. The program evaluation of the PS assessments,
conducted using the decision-oriented CIPP evaluation model developed by Stufflebeam
(2007), determined the strengths, weaknesses, and potential areas of improvement in the

9
PS assessment structure and curriculum design. The CIPP model evaluates programs in
four stages: context to needs, inputs, processes, and products. The cyclical design of this
model fosters continual improvement through assessment of outcomes in context to
stakeholder needs, environment, resources, and overall program impact. Evaluators of
the PS assessments engaged in a multi-semester evaluation cycle focusing on improving
students’ critical evaluation of sources, modifying the feedback process, and adding
reflective writing to reinforce transfer.
The CIPP model’s cyclical design incorporates both formative and summative
assessment and shares commonalities with Wiggins and McTighe’s (2005)
Understanding by Design (UbD) model which maps curriculum backwards from intended
learning outcomes. The CIPP model, like the UbD model, emphasizes identifying and
evaluating needs and working backwards through the evaluation of outcomes and goals.
Conducting a CIPP evaluation revealed that timing, instructor training, and
reflective writing were critical components to a successful feedback loop in LIB 301
(Appendix B). Specifically, results indicated PS assessments should be scaffolded far
enough apart to allow instructors to provide feedback to support repeated practice. It also
revealed that instructors needed additional support in providing feedback that would help
students gain a growth mindset. Last, reflective journaling was needed to provide
students with an opportunity to elaborate on their thinking when evaluating sources and
applying instructor feedback.
Research Questions
The researcher used the findings of the CIPP evaluation to influence the research
questions of this study. It is important to investigate the perceptions students and
instructors hold regarding the influence of feedback on student entry into the liminal

10
space and their ability to transfer learning. As research has demonstrated (Brown et al.,
2014), student perceptions of growth and transfer are crucial to their ability to master a
concept and apply learning to disparate situations; therefore, the following research
questions were developed in order to more fully examine the role feedback plays in
regard to adult learner and instructor perceptions of information literacy growth and
transfer of learning at the site under study.
1. What types of feedback occur in an online information literacy course for
adult undergraduate students?
2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students hold regarding how
feedback influences their growth in the liminal space?
3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and beliefs regarding the role
of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth in the liminal space?
Significance of the Study
The significance of this study has implications for how information literacy
education for adult learners is assessed. The body of literature on how learning transfer
and threshold concept mastery can be measured in information literacy instruction is
limited. National accreditation bodies for higher education, such as SACS-COC, are
requiring libraries to provide evidence of information literacy program effectiveness.
This study provides a methodological pathway that libraries could follow for collecting
and analyzing qualitative data. A focus of this study is on how formative feedback
contributes to the liminal growth in information literacy understanding and transferability
of learning. Meyer and Land’s (2003, 2005) research shows that threshold concept
mastery, or even entry into the threshold or liminal space, cannot be achieved in a single
learning experience. Instead, students need opportunities for repeated practice and

11
exposure to a learning concept which can be facilitated in an information literacy course.
This study explores the need for higher education institutions to support libraries in
offering for-credit information literacy instruction for distance education and/or at-risk
students.
Definitions
Andragogy. The facilitation of adult learning through educational strategies that
incorporate life experience, support self-directed learning, and immediate application of
knowledge (Knowles, 1978).
Formative assessment. An assessment designed to improve student
understanding of a concept or skill by allowing repeated, practiced attempts at an
assessment supported by targeted instructor feedback. Typically, formative assessments
are ungraded; for the purpose of this study, formative assessments are graded exercises
conducted in an asynchronous, online setting (Ambrose, Bridges, DiPietro, Lovett, &
Norman, 2010).
Information literacy. The ACRL and American Library Association (ALA)
define information literacy as a person’s ability to “recognize when information is needed
and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information”
(ALA Presidential Committee, 1989, para. 3).
Liminal space. A transformative stage in the learning process in which the
learner begins to reframe or experience a shift in their understanding of a subject (Land et
al., 2014).
Learning transfer. The process of the effective and continued application of
learned skills and concepts to new and/or different experiences from the context of the
original learning experience (Foley & Kaiser, 2013).

12
Stuckness. Anecdotally used to describe the state of being in the stuck place, or
liminal space, where students wrestle with troublesome knowledge (Canter, 2016; SavinBaden et al., 2008). Meyer and Land’s (2005) definition of liminality as a place where
students get stuck in their learning informed the development of the term stuckness.
Threshold concept. Foundational concepts that once understood by the learner
are irreversible and transformative in how the learner understands a discipline of study.
Threshold concepts are thought of as liminal spaces, or portals of understanding, through
which a student must pass in order to achieve mastery in disciplinary understanding
(Baillie et al., 2013).
Scope of the Study
The scope of this study was limited to adult undergraduate students enrolled in a
for-credit information literacy course in a DCP at a private, doctoral university. The
focus of the study was to explore instructor and student perceptions of how different
types of feedback influence growth and learning transfer in the liminal space. The ability
to transfer learning is comparative to student growth within the liminal space as they
develop conceptual understandings that lead them towards concept mastery.
Qualitative data were collected from student reflection journals, assignment
feedback samples, and an online, open-ended questionnaire. Reflection journal posts
provided data on student perceptions on the impact of instructor feedback. An online,
open-ended questionnaire was taken by instructors of the course and provided data on
instructor perceptions of how feedback impacts student learning. Instructor feedback
samples from PS assignment submissions were collected to provide evidence of the type
of feedback provided to students. A document analysis was conducted on all collected
data and was triangulated to demonstrate relationships between occurrences of feedback

13
and perceptions of feedback as they relate to the processes of liminal growth and transfer.
Delimitations
The researcher implemented four delimitations in this case study. Data were
collected from students who completed all PS assignments and reflection journals. By
delimiting to students who completed these assessments, the researcher was able to align
feedback samples collected from the PS with student responses to the reflection journal
prompts. Data were collected from sections of the course taught by instructors who
elected to participate in the study for the fall 2017 semester. To ensure reliability in
instructor responses in the data collection process, the researcher used voluntary
participants. As a case study is an in-depth analysis of a selected iteration of an event,
the researcher chose to delimit the study to the fall 2017 academic semester. Instructors
selected to participate in the study taught the 16-week version of the course. The
researcher chose this delimitation as the 16-week version of the course represents the
most typical iteration of the course.
Limitations
A limitation of this study is the researcher’s dual role as an insider researcher and
as an instructor and the curriculum designer of the course. The researcher has exercised
reflexivity to describe these roles and addressed steps taken to address the reliability and
validity within this study. These steps are discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
Organization of the Study
This case study is organized into five chapters. Chapter 1 introduces the problem
under study, the theoretical framework through which data were analyzed, the research
questions driving the study, and limitations of the study. Chapter 2 focuses on literature
related to the development of information literacy, threshold concepts, the feedback loop,

14
and adult learning. Chapter 3 addresses the methodology of the study and procedures for
data collection and analysis. Chapter 4 analyzes, triangulates, and draws conclusions
from collected data. Chapter 5 reflects on the application of the research study on
curriculum development and investigates potential pathways for extending the research
further.

15
Chapter 2: Literature Review
Adult undergraduate students struggle with the acquisition of information literacy
(Rapchak et al., 2015). Although the teaching and learning of information literacy as a
discipline has been reframed by the theoretical underpinnings of threshold concepts, the
study of how adults are acquiring and transferring this knowledge has remained limited.
The purpose of this study was to examine the impact formative feedback in course design
has in supporting adult learners participating in an online information literacy course.
This chapter examines the literature related to the history of information literacy,
threshold concepts, transfer of learning, the nature of adult learning, and the formative
feedback assessment process.
Information Literacy
Information literacy is defined by the ALA as a set of abilities pertaining to the
creation, acquisition, evaluation, and ethical use of information and information sources
(ACRL, 2000; 2015a). The term information literacy was first introduced in 1974 by
Paul Zurkowski, president of the American Information Industry Society, relating to
students entering the field of information science without the ability to locate and use
information effectively (Kapitzke, 2003). As professional organizations took note of
decreased skills among early career professionals, the burden of teaching information
literacy fell upon higher education institutions (Breivik, 2005). In the late 1980s, Patricia
Breivik stated that information literacy skills were essential to lifelong learning – a key
mission for libraries.
Librarianship at this time was undergoing a major evolution with the advent of
multimedia technology and the Internet. Up to this point, a librarian’s institutional role
was considered a fact finder (Cooke, 2010; Kapitzke, 2003). As technology altered the

16
format and interface of information sources, librarians recognized alarming trends in how
patrons accessed information. Breivik, in her 2005 expository article reflecting on the
evolution of information literacy in Library Science, noted that 21st century students
demonstrated increased satisfaction with whatever information a quick search could
provide, regardless of whether or not that information source best met their needs.
Across the profession, librarians were slow to embrace the role of information literacy
advocate; however, the concept had taken root among librarians active in professional
organizations such as the ALA and ACRL (Marcum, 2002).
The Standards. In 1987, ALA President Margaret Chisholm appointed ALA’s
first Presidential Committee on Information Literacy. The committee was charged with
defining information literacy, designing a model of information literacy, and determining
implications for continuing education for library professionals (ALA Presidential
Committee, 1989). A result of the report was the formation of the National Forum on
Information Literacy, which by 1998, determined that a set of teacher and librarian
education and performance expectations related to information literacy should be
established. In January 2000, the Standards were formally adopted by the ACRL Board
of Directors.
By the early 2000s, the Standards had gained traction within librarianship.
Librarians, in a significant shift from the reluctance seen throughout the 1980s and early
1990s, fully embraced the role of information literacy professional, viewing information
literacy as a crucial mission of the discipline (Veach, 2012). Veach (2012) attributed this
shift to a realization that the Internet had blurred the lines between how information
sources are formatted and accessed. In this new age of access where the Internet has
exposed users to an overabundance of information, there is greater pressure on librarians

17
to prove their worth. Arguably, the role of the librarian in this Googlized environment
has not changed, the responsibility for facilitating access to information still rests upon
the shoulders of the profession (Cahill, 2009). Librarians have transitioned from the
gatekeeper of information to educating constituents on how to successfully navigate
information systems independently.
The Standards, a set of five information literacy competencies supported by 22
performance indicators, represent a shift from information acquisition to include the
concept of source evaluation (ACLR, 2000; Johnston & Webber, 2003). The purpose of
the Standards was to foster lifelong learning in students by challenging their critical
thinking in how they acquire and engage with information (ACLR, 2000). Performance
indicators represent a range of higher and lower order thinking skills based on Bloom’s
Revised Taxonomy, allowing students to demonstrate growth within the bounds of the
Standards (ACLR, 2000). While the Standards represent a significant paradigm shift in
how libraries and librarians function within the educational community, they received
criticism for their mechanistic, “tick the box” skills-based approach to information
literacy (Johnston & Webber, 2003). Marcum (2002) criticized the Standards for
ignoring the iterative nature of information literacy acquisition, stating that the
implementation model for the Standards assumes mastery through completed progression
of understanding which is contradictory to the Standards iterative, constructivist roots.
By their definition, the five competency standards describe conceptual learning;
however, they are underpinned by 22 skills-based performance standards. Mastering or
completing a skill does not necessarily equate to a conceptual understanding of a
standard. If libraries rely on the performance standards as a measurement for
competency standard mastery, assessment of the Standards is skewed. Johnston and

18
Webber (2003), like Marcum (2002), challenge the assumption that information literacy
is mastered through skills completion. This practice precludes longitudinal assessment of
student learning on the individual or program level (Johnston & Webber, 2003).
Advocates of information literacy emphasize the importance of student-centered
instruction that takes place at the point of need. Despite this accepted knowledge, the
practice of library instruction is often limited to the context of ill-timed, isolated or oneshot instruction events. Breivik (2005) posited the enduring acceptance of the one-shot
model to classroom faculty’s assumption that students have already acquired information
literacy skills in their prior educational experiences. The continued practice of the oneshot model leaves students stuck in a cycle of surface learning measured with low-level
assessments. The juxtaposition between theory and practice is that it is difficult to
measure or assess standard mastery, as assessment opportunities are mostly rote and short
term.
A solution to the one-shot model has been to embed librarians within disciplinary
studies, allowing for integrated, experiential teaching and assessment of information
literacy skills. Embedded librarianship “is an innovation that moves the librarians out of
the libraries…and emphasizes the importance of forming a strong working relationship
between the librarian and a group of people who need the librarian’s expertise”
(Shumaker, 2012, p. 4). The practice of embedding librarians requires a significant level
of collaboration between teaching faculty and librarians, which can be time consuming
beyond what is manageable for both collaborative partners. Many faculty and librarians
have implemented a hybrid model of embedding by planning several scaffolded
instruction sessions that are co-taught, drawing on the unique skill set of both the faculty
and librarian. An alternate model is offering a for-credit information literacy course.

19
Both the embedded and for-credit model affords librarians and faculty with more robust
opportunities to assess student critical thinking in their application of information literacy
skills. Despite the implementation of other instruction models, librarians have been
challenged with how to demonstrate standard mastery in a skills-based curriculum and
assessment environment (Pinkley & Hoffmann, 2017).
Higher education is an assessment-driven environment, largely attributed to the
demands of accrediting bodies. The demand for assessment data has placed librarians at
a distinct disadvantage as many are leaving master’s programs of Library and
Information Science (LIS) without any education or experience in the assessment of
student learning (Askew & Theodore-Shusta, 2013). While very little literature exists on
assessment education, “what is available illustrates a notable dissonance between LIS
educators and library practitioners’ views on the importance of integrating assessment
(and research methods) more fully into LIS program curricula” (Askew & TheodoreShusta, 2013, p. 5). This gap in LIS education has led to an increase in the number of
library professionals who are pursuing additional degrees in Instructional and curriculum
design rather than a subject matter expertise (Johnston & Webber, 2003). These degree
programs provide librarians with both a practical and pedagogical foundation for
assessing information literacy learning.
The Framework. After a decade of Standards implementation, librarians
recognized the fatal flaw in an information literacy initiative so heavily grounded in
teaching skills without addressing the deeper concepts of learning. In the same way,
librarians left behind the identity of information gatekeeper to become instructors of
research skills; librarians are on the cusp of another significant shift as the profession
seeks to unlock critical understanding of information seeking in their constituents. As

20
part of the 2011 5-year Standards review, ACRL formed a taskforce to heavily revise the
Standards. The taskforce, recognizing the altered landscape of higher education,
teaching, and the new role of students as information creators, lobbied to move beyond a
revision of the Standards in favor of creating a new set of information literacy guidelines
(Berkman, 2016). The focus turned towards simplifying information literacy standards
for ease of understanding, stripping away library-centric jargon, and including affective
learning outcomes, metaliteracy, and focusing on conceptual understandings of
information that recognize modern issues of source formatting and the needs of the 21st
century learner (ACRL, 2015b).
In the process of revising the Standards, the taskforce chose to ground newly
developed or modified standards in established learning theories. The Standards, while
loosely based on constructivist concepts, were developed largely without any theoretical
underpinnings (O’Connor, 2009). The revised standards, the Framework, are a series of
conceptual understandings grounded in two complimentary educational theories: Wiggins
and McTighe’s UbD and Meyer and Land’s Threshold Concepts (ACRL, 2015a). Both
theories and their role in framework development are addressed later in this chapter.
Individual standards, or frames, within the Framework were developed through
the work of an ongoing Delphi Study in which qualitative data are anonymously collected
from a small group of experts (Townsend, Hofer, Hanick, & Brunetti, 2016). The
mission of the Delphi Study is to establish the theoretical underpinnings of the
framework, address the usefulness of threshold concepts in information literacy, and
articulate the threshold concepts in information literacy (Townsend et al., 2016).
The Framework differs from the Standards in its holistic approach to information
literacy, a departure from the check-the-box model. Information literacy has been

21
redefined as a “set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective discovery of
information, the understanding of how information is produced and valued, and the use of
information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in communities of
learning” (ACRL, 2015a, para. 6). With the elimination of the term “skills,” the
framework clearly articulates that the focus of information literacy instruction is
understanding the conceptual nature of information sources rather than how to function
within information aggregators. The Framework, formally adopted by ACRL in January
2016, is called such because it is a series of interconnected concepts with flexible options
for implementation, lacking the prescriptive nature of the Standards (ACRL, 2015a;
Foasberg, 2015).
The Frames. The Framework consists of six Frames, or threshold concepts, of
information literacy. The six Frames of the Framework (ACRL, 2015a) are
1. Scholarship as Conversation.
2. Research as Inquiry.
3. Authority is Constructed and Contextual.
4. Information Creation as a Process.
5. Searching as Strategic Exploration.
6. Information has Value.
A threshold concept, as defined by Meyer and Land (2003), is a “portal, opening
up a new and previously inaccessible way of thinking about something. It represents a
transformed way of understanding, or interpreting, or viewing something without which
the learner cannot progress” (p. 1). In the context of the Framework, the six Frames
represent portals that transform how students view and interpret information, “enabling
students to have a true understanding of the information landscape that extends beyond

22
the structure and jargon of a particular time and place” (Bravender, McClure, & Schaub,
2015, p. 3). Each Frame is supported by a series of knowledge practices and dispositions
meant to provide potential pathways for how concept mastery can be achieved.
Knowledge practices are the abilities learners might develop in mastering the threshold
concept, while dispositions are “habits of mind” that learners perform in order to develop
routine knowledge practices (ACRL, 2015a; Berkman, 2016; Burkhardt, 2016).
Shifting pedagogy. The shift from the Standards to the Framework challenges
librarians’ pedagogical approach to Instructional design. As stated previously, librarians
receive little to no formal education or training in Instructional design, resulting in
librarians relying largely on skills-based Instructional practices that do not support
conceptual understanding (Berkman, 2016; Bravender et al., 2015). In an effort to
address the pedagogical gap left in the wake of the transition to the Framework, many
librarians have attempted to map a pathway from the Standards to the Framework
(Foasberg, 2015) – largely ignoring the theoretical disconnect between the two
documents. The result is a slight retooling of existing Instructional practices, essentially
teaching the Standards under the new label of the Framework. This practice is contrary
to the intent of the Framework, as the taskforce clearly stated that the Standards were
beyond revision – thus the creation of an entirely new document (Foasberg, 2015). Since
the adoption of the Framework, ACRL has published two instruction-driven texts aligned
with the Framework standards. These texts (Bravender et al., 2015; Burkhardt, 2016) are
librarian produced and offer a variety of pathways for understanding both the theoretical
and practical applications of the Framework.
The Framework carries significant implications for the future of information
literacy instruction as it represents a theoretical shift in pedagogy and understanding of

23
information. It has been argued that the prescriptive nature of the Standards contributed
to the modern decontextualization of information, allowing people to forget that
information cannot stand alone – it is always produced within a social context (Beilin,
2015; Foasberg, 2015; Pawley, 2003). The Framework seeks to correct this shortfall by
contextualizing information, pushing students to recognize that information is made in
different ways and circumstances which has bearing on how that information is perceived
and used (Foasberg, 2015; Seeber, 2015). This shift in focus from information access to
information context has turned the notion of authority on its head. It challenges longheld beliefs that praise scholarly research and publication above alternative information
sources (Seeber, 2015). Librarians and faculty, as a result, are pushed into an
uncomfortable place where they either excitedly or reluctantly are faced with reframing
their own construct of information authority (Seeber, 2015). A unique feature of the
Framework is that it pushes students beyond the role of information consumer,
encouraging students to creatively recognize their own role in the process of information
creation and voice in scholarly conversation (Fister, 2015; Foasberg, 2015). Foasberg
(2015) noted that the Standards treats information as a commodity, while the Framework
approaches information as a social community in which the student has a participatory
seat at the metaphorical table.
As Instructional practices are reevaluated in light of the Framework, pressing
challenges, criticism, and support have risen to the forefront of Framework
implementation. While offering expansive creative freedom in implementation, the
Frames are not inherently self-explanatory – “they are theoretical in nature and they don’t
offer much to the instructor” (Bravender et al., 2015, p. 3). While each Frame is
supported by knowledge practices and dispositions, they are only potential pathways for

24
mastery. Beilin (2015) and Burkhardt (2016) suggested that these pathways are more
characteristic of the discipline of library science, describing what a library professional is
able to demonstrate without detailing the process they took to get there. Librarians are
increasingly aware of the time and resource burden generated by creating new
Instructional pathways to guide students through these thresholds of understanding
(Burkhardt, 2016; Cowan & Eva, 2016). Current literature is ambiguous on assessing
threshold growth and mastery. It is clear, however, that these thresholds are mastered
over time with supported practice and are largely unachievable in typical one-shot
instruction sessions (Meyer & Land, 2006; Pinkley & Hoffmann, 2017). Conversations
around Framework implementation have led to the reemergence of the embedded
instruction model and a reframing of faculty/librarian collaboration. Rather than
embedding librarians across a curriculum, this new conversation focuses on embedding
the concepts across the curriculum with librarians and teaching faculty iteratively coteaching and reinforcing concepts in a variety of contexts.
The journey through a threshold of understanding is largely individualistic and
unique to each learner. Once through the threshold, learners have an altered perception
and understanding of information – their thinking has changed irreversibly.
Irreversibility is problematic for librarians teaching threshold concepts to new learners.
Librarians have essentially crossed the threshold, and it is difficult to remember back to a
time when they did not “know” (Burkhardt, 2016). The process of crossing the threshold
is gradual, and librarians struggle to create ah-ha moments for students. The focus on
individualized growth is contrary to modern assessment and accreditation culture in
higher education, which focuses on institutional, program, or department level standard
mastery rather than standard mastery for individual students (SACS-COC, 2017). This

25
problem intersects the increased challenge in assessing student learning and growth.
Libraries have struggled with assessment, even with the prescriptive Standards. The
Framework increases this struggle as threshold concepts are not easily measured in a
standardized way. By losing the tangible evidence of success with the skills-based
Standards, librarians have expressed growing concerns regarding on-boarding faculty and
administration to the Framework (Beilin, 2015; Pinkley & Hoffmann, 2017).
Debate. Critics of the Framework have expressed concern that the theoretical
underpinnings of the Framework have been adopted from a discipline outside of library
science. This foreign adoption has created division in the library community as many
librarians feel no sense of ownership of threshold concepts, questioning whether or not
they have sold out on their discipline (Beilin, 2015). Wilkenson (2014) has argued that
threshold concept theory has not been scientifically validated and damages librarian
credibility with other academic disciplines.
Bravender et al. (2015) countered that while threshold concepts are a newer
theory, they have been implemented in computer science, engineering, biology, and
economics for over a decade. Early adopters of the Framework view the use of a nonlibrary science theory as an opportunity to demonstrate the interdisciplinary nature of
information literacy. The Framework provides a greater degree of flexibility in
demonstrating how the conceptual understandings of information literacy are congruent
with the learning outcomes of the disciplines within the academic institution; thus,
allowing librarians to collaborate with faculty on equal footing and establish common
goals for student learning, moving the library role away from point-and-click to learning
mentor (Cooke, 2010; Cowan & Eva, 2016).

26
Threshold Concepts and Liminal Space
Meyer and Land (2005) defined threshold concepts as conceptual gateways or
portals that lead to previously inaccessible ways of thinking. The metaphor is cemented
with the image of a doorway signifying a learner’s transition between old and new
understandings of knowledge. Threshold concepts emerged as part of the 2003 ETL
Project, an investigation Meyer and Land conducted into the teaching and learning
practices utilized in undergraduate courses. These conceptual gateways are places where
students get stuck as they interact with knowledge that is troublesome, difficult to learn,
and challenges existing assumptions (Land et al., 2014; Perkins, 1999). Using Perkins’s
theory as a jumping off point, Meyer and Land imbued Troublesome Knowledge as a
defining feature of threshold concept theory (Barradell, 2013; Felten, 2016; O’Donnell,
2010; Rowbottom, 2007). Threshold concepts emphasize the “epistemological
transitions” (Meyer & Land, 2005, p. 386) of the learner, profound changes that
irreversibly transform how learners know, understand, and apply knowledge (Fister,
2015; Timmermans, 2010). At this point, knowledge ceases to be surface level and rote,
instead knowledge can be deeply understood and applied.
Meyer and Land (2005) have identified five defining characteristics used to
classify threshold concepts. These characteristics continue to be discussed and modified
as the scholarly conversation on this topic continues to expand (Entwistle, 2008).
Threshold concepts are listed in Table 1 (Meyer & Land, 2005, 2006):

27
Table 1
Five Threshold Concepts and Descriptions
Threshold Concept
Troublesome

Description
Counterintuitive, representative of a place where students
struggle or get stuck.

Transformative

Changes how something is understood; a paradigm shift.

Irreversible

Once learned are most likely not to be unlearned; lasting impact
of thought and process.

Bounded

May be unique to a discipline or may help define the discipline
to the student.

Integrative

Leads to an expanded understanding allowing students to make
connections between separate concepts.

Meyer and Land identified three additional characteristics that have been
alternately included and removed from scholarship on threshold concept theory (Baillie et
al., 2013). Library Science, for instance, only employs the original five characteristics.
Additionally, the liminal space is treated as a stage in the learning process rather than a
defining characteristic of a threshold. Threshold concepts can be discursive,
reconstitutive, or liminal (Meyer & Land, 2006). Table 2 provides Meyer and Land’s
(2006) description for each additional threshold concept.
Table 2
Additional Threshold Concepts Identified by Meyer and Land
Threshold Concept
Discursive

Description
Enhanced or extended use of disciplinary language.

Reconstitutive

Involving a shift in learner subjectivity.

Liminal

The stuck place where students wrestle with conceptual
understanding.

28
Criticisms of threshold concepts. While threshold concept theory is growing in
application across many disciplines, it has garnered criticism from scholars who question
its open approach to conceptual understandings. Critics have noted the lack of
prescriptiveness of the five defining characteristics of the theory, and question how many
of the characteristics must a concept have to be a threshold concept (Barradell, 2013;
O’Donnell, 2010; Rowbottom, 2007; Wilkenson, 2014). This question is not addressed
or explored by Meyer and Land (2003, 2005, 2006). Barradell (2013), however, citing a
2009 study by Irvine and Carmichael, noted that very few identified threshold concepts
possess all five characteristics, leaving the process of defining thresholds within a
discipline up to researchers who may understand thresholds in different and disparate
ways (Rowbottom, 2007). As stated previously, many researchers use troublesomeness
as the most important defining characteristic. Considering that a concept could display
an unknown number of the defining characteristics to be labeled as a threshold concept,
using troublesomeness as the primary measure becomes problematic as it implies that
anything conceptually difficult is a threshold concept (Barradell, 2013).
The language with which the five defining characteristics have been written poses
another problem. In their original and subsequent texts, Meyer and Land (2003, 2005,
2006) repeatedly referred to threshold characteristics as probable, likely to be, often but
not necessarily, and possibly in nature. O’Donnell (2010) begs the question, can
probable characteristics be defining? Scholars studying threshold concepts are prone to
modify characteristic definitions, often eliminating all or most of the nebulous qualifiers
– thus possibilities have been converted into definitive statements (O’Donnell, 2010).
This practice seems to be supported by Meyer and Land (O’Donnell, 2010). Critics also
call into question the empirical nature by which thresholds have been identified, stating

29
that methodologies are informal and do not take into account that thresholds can be agent
relative (O’Donnell, 2010; Rowbottom, 2007). Methodologies for identifying thresholds
within a variety of disciplines have focused on data collection from small-scale
interviews, surveys, and document analysis. Left unanswered is how many learners have
to undergo a conceptual transformation for it to qualify as a threshold (O’Donnell, 2010;
Wilkenson, 2014). Rowbottom (2007) expressed concern that agent relativity, what is
transformative for one may not be transformative to all, does not factor into many
methodologies. Barradell (2013) entreated for more agreement on defining
characteristics and methodological standards within the professional community.
Another area of concern for critics is threshold concept’s tendency to reduce
disciplinary concepts into a core set of beliefs (O’Donnell, 2010). While this researcher
calls into question this critique, based on the previously stated lack of definitive qualifiers
for what constitutes a threshold concept, the counter-argument for this critique is worth
exploration. This reduction to a core set of disciplinary beliefs suggests that only a single
reputable school of thought within each academic discipline exists (O’Donnell, 2010). In
reality, there are many schools of thought that hold scholarly merit, and it should be
acknowledged that each school may have complimentary and disparate threshold
understandings. It is also suggested that threshold concepts teach students to think and
operate within a particular framework, thus locking future scholars into disciplinary silos
(O’Donnell, 2010). While this criticism expresses concern that the theory does not foster
creative and innovative thinking, it should be noted that a goal of threshold concept
mastery is making integrative critical connections that expose relationships between
seemingly unrelated conceptual understandings (Meyer & Land, 2005).
Troublesome knowledge and liminal space. Troublesome knowledge

30
represents Stuck Places where learners are challenged by conceptually difficult
knowledge (Meyer & Land, 2005, 2006; Perkins, 1999, 2008). As students confront
these Stuck Places, the unfamiliarity of the terrain proves to be off putting as students
wrestle with knowledge that may contradict previous learning (Davies & Managan, 2008;
Felten, 2016; Perkins, 2008). For example, with the information literacy frame
“Authority is Constructed and Contextual,” students are introduced to the concept that
authority is not necessarily defined by scholarly expertise; authority could be influenced
by experience, current popularity, or prestige (Bravender et al., 2015). Students are
encouraged to be critical of the source, recognizing that authority is complex and holds
multiple meanings. As students wrestle with this new definition of authority, it
challenges previous teachings that define authoritativeness by scholarly expertise, leaving
the student in a liminal space experiencing stuckness as they wrestle with troublesome
knowledge (Meyer & Land, 2005; Savin-Baden et al., 2008).
In context to Meyer and Land’s (2005) doorway metaphor, the liminal space is
where students have entered the threshold but are not yet able to cross it. Understanding
has irreversibly been transformed, but the concept is not yet mastered (Meyer & Land,
2005). In the liminal space, students display three defining features: oscillation between
growth, stagnation, and regression; strong emotions; and mimicry of concept mastery
(Entwistle, 2008; McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005; Savin-Baden et al.,
2008). As students enter the threshold and begin to struggle with new concepts,
regression or stagnation is likely to occur. This phase of regression and stagnation does
not mean the student has abandoned learning the concept; they are merely in a stuck
place where they are reforming their own framework for understanding. This phase of
transformation is often riddled with anxiety and intense emotion (Felten, 2016;

31
McCartney et al., 2009). In his 2016 research study, Felten’s students described this
process as upsetting, shocking, helpless, frustrating, and debilitating. Much of the
literature has ignored the role of the instructor in moving students through this liminal
space. Instructors could support and maximize student growth in the liminal space
through the process of formative feedback. Proven valuable in increasing student
confidence in other applications, the formative process could increase confidence in the
liminal space, a crucial component to growth within the threshold (Felten, 2016).
Depending upon the learner and the concept, a student could remain in the liminal
space for an extended period of time. As students move past the initial phases of
regression and stagnation, they will often mimic concept mastery (McCartney et al.,
2009; Meyer & Land 2005). In this stage of mimicry, students are demonstrating skills
associated with mastery but are unable to demonstrate deep understanding of the concept.
For example, with the ACRL frame “Research as Inquiry,” an instructor may ask students
to develop a research question to guide their research. With assistance, students are able
to craft an exploratory, cause and effect question. Within the same course, students may
be able to craft a second research question without assistance, mimicking their previous
experience. When required to explain why the research question should be exploratory or
transfer the experience to another course, students are often unable to complete the
transfer or make the deeper connections, illustrating that the concept has been mimicked
but not mastered. Mimicry is largely viewed in a negative light, but McCartney et al.
(2009) offered a different perspective, suggesting that mimicry offers students
opportunities for repeated practice. Repeated practice supported by formative feedback
allows students to improve their confidence and form deeper understandings of the
concept (Earl, 2013; Felten, 2016; McCartney et al., 2009).

32
The liminal space is described as a holding place where students are “betwixt and
between established categories, such as novice or expert” (Felten, 2016, p. 5). In
considering the pathway from novice and expert, it must be asked what a library’s goal in
information literacy instruction is. Hofer et al. (2012) and Hofer, Brunetti, and
Townsend (2013), all on the framework development committee, suggested that students
be approached as potential practitioners who would benefit from understanding the
threshold concepts of librarianship. Other librarians are countering this school of
thought, questioning the practice of crafting students into practitioners of library science.
They wonder if librarians, instead should be fostering curious, critical thinkers who
understand how information works broadly and within their chosen academic discipline
(Fister, 2015).
Another question librarians must consider is whether it is appropriate to take
students into the liminal space and leave them there. Leaving students in the liminal
space is a philosophical and pedagogical quandary that has not been fully fleshed out in
the literature. As stated previously, many librarians are limited to one-shot style
instruction sessions. A one-shot session, or even a series of one-shot sessions, does not
afford librarians enough time to overcome social barriers and bring students to full
concept mastery. The best hope is that librarians can bring students into the liminal space
leaving students in the hands of faculty colleagues to assist students into mastery, which
can sometimes span across several semesters of study (Cowan & Eva, 2016; Meyer &
Land, 2006). This possibly undefined collaboration between faculty and librarians poses
additional concerns for assessing growth, transferability, and concept mastery. These
topics are discussed later in this chapter.

33
Threshold Concepts and Transfer of Learning
In dealing with threshold concepts, instructors cannot ignore the role of
troublesome knowledge in Instructional design. Tackling these Stuck Places is essential
for students transitioning from the liminal space to concept mastery. This section focuses
on the intersection between threshold concepts, UbD, and Transfer of Learning as it
impacts Instructional design. The ACRL Framework incorporates Wiggins and
McTighe’s (2005) theory of UbD, also referred to in the literature as backwards design.
This design model begins with framing instruction and assessment around core concepts
(Wiggins & McTighe, 2005), learning outcomes in most disciplines or the ACRL frames
in library science. By building curriculum around these Stuck Places, the learning of
essential concepts becomes more rich, meaningful, and effective (Baillie et al., 2013;
Perkins, 2008; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). A challenge, as noted by Perkins (2008) in a
1989 study by Bransford, Franks, Vye, and Sherwood, is getting students to transfer their
learning and knowledge to other applications where it holds relevance. This inability to
transfer learning indicates a lack of concept mastery and that the student is still in the
liminal space.
The concept of transfer is ingrained in the underpinnings of higher education, as
evidenced by prerequisite requirements, liberal arts programs, and general education core
curricula (Moore, 2012). Transfer of learning, also referred to in the literature as
knowledge transfer, is the ability to transfer learning/knowledge from the original
learning context and apply it to a new and structurally dissimilar learning context
(Haskell, 2001; Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Moore, 2012; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). The
goal of transfer is not merely application of knowledge and skills, but to extend
understanding (Wiggins & McTighe, 2005) – indicative of moving through the threshold.

34
Within transfer of learning, there are multiple accepted taxonomies as described in Table
3.
Table 3
Taxonomies of Learning Transfer
Taxonomy of
Learning Transfer
Near/Far Transfer

Description

High-/Low-Road
Transfer

Low-Road transfer involves applying practiced skills that can
be easily replicated in any given learning situation. High-Road
transfer involves reflective recall in applying learning to a new
context (Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Moore, 2012; Saloman &
Perkins, 1989).

Positive/Negative
Transfer

Positive transfer happens when previous learning compliments
current learning contexts. Negative transfer occurs when a
learner is unable or unwilling to see how learning could be
applied in a new learning context (Foley & Kaiser, 2013).

Near transfer is the application of knowledge/understanding to
contexts similar to the original learning situation. Far transfer is
the ability to adapt and apply previously learned knowledge/
understandings to a dissimilar context to the original learning
situation (Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Moore, 2012).

Haskell’s Taxonomy Haskell’s taxonomy identifies six progressive stages of transfer:
of Learning Transfer non-specific, application, context, near, far, and displacement/
creative. Within the progressive stages, the rate of transfer is
influenced by five types of knowledge and 14 types of transfer
which represent a secondary taxonomy within the greater
framework. Haskell’s taxonomy posits as its own theoretical
framework (Calais, 2006; Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Haskell,
2001).
The solution to enabling students to transfer learning lies in Instructional design.
Meyer and Land (2006) recommended instructors use a combination of scaffolding,
recursiveness, and supplemental material to support students as they traverse the
threshold. These strategies, particularly scaffolding and practice, appear throughout
scholarship as effective methods for teaching and learning (Brown et al., 2014; Foley &

35
Kaiser, 2013; Hung, 2013; Thomas, 2007; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). Meyer and Land
(2003, 2005, 2006), however, left out the role of the instructor, instead focusing on
design structure and materials. Other researchers (Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall, &
Wiliam, 2003; Brown et al., 2014; Earl, 2013; Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Hung, 2013) stress
the importance of the instructor’s role as facilitator and mentor. Students are not
inherently self-directed and need support as skills of self-direction are developed.
Entwistle (2008) and Thomas (2007) acknowledged that transfer and concept mastery do
not occur by happenstance for the student; instructors must take an active facilitation role
that goes beyond Instructional design.
Instructional design and transfer. Developing Instructional design that
supports transfer and concept mastery is conceptually difficult, making it a threshold
concept for faculty (Moore, 2012). Faculty are often challenged by the long-term
implications of designing for transfer, which involves supporting concept mastery and
transfer beyond the boundedness of a particular course or discipline (Moore, 2012;
O’Donnell, 2010). Perhaps the greatest struggle for faculty Instructional designers is
turning threshold concepts into transferable principles of teaching and learning (Davies &
Managan, 2008). While conceptually simple, translating concepts into transferable
principles of teaching and learning is complicated because the faculty member has long
since crossed disciplinary thresholds. Faculty are then placed in an opposite position to
the student, needing to reach back through the threshold peeling back the layers of their
own knowledge and expertise to a time before they “knew” (Land et al., 2014; Hofer et
al., 2012, 2013). Faculty must also consider the agent relativeness of threshold mastery
and prepare to support learners with differentiated experiences (Baillie et al., 2013; Land
et al., 2014). The balance between agent relativity and differentiation of instruction

36
leaves faculty facing the looming quandary: How can students be facilitated in the liminal
struggle?
Assessment and Feedback
Faculty seeking to transform their teaching practice to support transfer and
concept mastery should prepare for a slow-change process (Black et al., 2003). While
scholarship denotes the positive impact of scaffolding, reflective practice, and formative
feedback, incorporating these assessment activities into Instructional practice involves a
shift in how faculty view assessment culture (Black et al., 2003; Land et al., 2014).
Changes in Instructional practice support students in learning to do rather than learning
about, providing “cognitive hooks” that allow students to begin recognizing relevant
applications for learning outside of the original learning situation (Palloff & Pratt, 2009;
Perkins, 2008, p. 13). This section addresses shifting perceptions in assessment culture
that affect change through the use of reflective practice and formative feedback in the
higher education setting.
Educational culture is dominated by testing and assessment. Focus and priority is
placed on standardization and drilling down to the common denominator that proves
learning has occurred. Assessment can be retooled as a mechanism to support learning
and development, demonstrating that understanding has gained priority over
memorization of material (Black et al., 2003; Earl, 2013). While both formative and
summative assessments have their role in the educational landscape, formative
assessment supports learning for understanding (Earl, 2013). Through formative,
reflective practice, students begin to tackle Stuck Places by making mistakes and
correcting them (Brown et al., 2014; Earl, 2013). While the Instructional design of a
course may be carefully crafted, Earl (2013) noted that students often felt as though these

37
scaffolded assessments felt random. Students failed to make the connection between
individual assessments and the overarching learning outcomes of the course. For
scaffolded lessons and assessments to hold relevance and meaning, instructors need to
introduce students to the framework of their intended learning (Ainsworth, 2010; Black et
al., 2003; Entwistle, 2008; Thomas, 2007).
Earl (2013) presented a framework of three categories for understanding the role
of assessment: assessment of learning, assessment for learning, and assessment as
learning. This framework is explored in Table 4.
Table 4
Earl’s Framework of Assessment Of, For, and As Learning
Assessment Type
Assessment OF
Learning

Description
Intended to certify that learning has occurred. This form of
assessment is summative and is most often employed.

Assessment FOR
Learning

A diagnostic process of formative learning that provides
instructors with information that will aid them in modifying
teaching and learning.

Assessment AS
Learning

Emphasizes assessment as a process of learning, supporting
metacognition.

The assessment for and as learning categories are formative processes, focusing
on learning through feedback and improvement. Using a pyramid schemata, Earl (2013)
demonstrated the ratio at which each level is most often employed as compared to the
inverted pyramid demonstrating the ideal ratio each level should be employed. Figure 1
depicts the traditional assessment pyramid with Assessment OF Learning representing the
most common mode of classroom assessment.

38

Figure 1. Traditional Assessment Pyramid (Earl, 2013, p. 31).

Figure 2 depicts Earl’s (2013) suggested assessment pyramid with Assessment AS
Learning as the base of the pyramid as the most common form of classroom assessment.

Figure 2. Reconfigured Assessment Pyramid (Earl, 2013, p. 32).

Psychologist Carol Dweck (2006) introduced the idea of growth and fixed
mindsets in her text Mindsets: The New Psychology of Success. The fixed mindset is
characterized by the fear of being perceived as not smart (Dweck, 2006). Dweck (2006)
noted that students with a fixed mindset often resist challenging educational
circumstances, seeming to only show interest in learning when they are confident they
will do well. These students may never cross the threshold or only experience minimal
learning transfer as they are resistant to entering or wrestling with the liminal space. The

39
growth mindset is characterized by a willingness to work through challenges as they are
viewed as opportunities to stretch and deepen understanding (Dweck, 2006). Students
demonstrating a growth mindset are more likely to develop self-direction in their
learning. A self-directed learner, with Instructional support, will be more likely to enter
the threshold and achieve transfer and mastery (Dweck, 2006; Entwistle, 2008; Felten,
2016; Perkins, 2008).
Assessments for and as learning can be used to cultivate the growth mindset and
break down a fixed mindset in students. For example, students participating in a
formative writing assignment are asked to evaluate an information source based on the
source’s timeliness and relevance to their research question. By pointing out the year the
source was published without evaluating the publication date’s relationship to the present
assignment, the student has missed a critical evaluative component. The following is an
example for how an instructor can support this student by providing feedback that
provides a pathway for improvement.
[Student Name], I like how you have included the publication date of the
source. As you make corrections to the assignment, I would like for you
to consider the timeliness of the source in more depth. Address how the
date of publication may have implications for how you use the source. Do
you consider the information dated or is it still relevant and accurate?
In this sample taken from LIB 301, the instructor has taken a moment that a fixed
mindset student could perceive as failure and redefined it by providing guidelines for
successfully meeting assessment expectations (Dweck, 2006). The formative feedback
process makes evident to the student that learning is a process that involves growth rather
than a single event or measure of ability (Ainsworth, 2010; Black et al., 2003; Earl,

40
2013). Feedback can also be used as a tool to support students already demonstrating
command of a concept. By providing specific feedback detailing how their
understanding is on target provides positive reinforcement to the student to continue
fostering their current habits. The instructor’s role is to scaffold this process, providing a
framework of learning outcomes and supporting tasks that help students attain them
(Black et al., 2003; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). Instructors should be cognizant of tone
in providing feedback as it influences student attitudes towards their learning (Danielson,
2006). In a research study, instructors reported that the tone of feedback with adult
students was particularly important, with one instructor advocating for using gentle
language and avoiding the “scolding effect” (Richardson, Besser, Koehler, Lim, & Strait,
2016, p. 90).
Feedback loops. The formative assessment and feedback loop provides an
opportunity for students to practice applying their knowledge and skills. While part of
this process could be the mimicry stage (McCartney et al., 2009), students slowly gain
confidence and competence which leads to increased problem-solving in new settings
(Earl, 2013). As instructors and students engage in the feedback loop, students begin to
reveal how they think and understand (McCartney et al., 2009; Wiggins & McTighe,
2005). Instructors are able to account for agent relativity, providing tailored support that
can increase a student’s effort and motivation as they move through the threshold (Earl,
2013). While the impact of specific instructor feedback on learning has been deemed
negligible by critics, students report positive reactions to personal feedback because it is
encouraging and leads to improvement (Gibbs & Taylor, 2016; Richardson et al., 2016).
Some studies purport that self and peer feedback have a stronger influence on student
learning than instructor feedback (Black et al., 2003; Gibbs & Taylor, 2016); however, it

41
should be noted that students may lack the expertise of the instructor and may be unable
to provide the depth and specificity needed to improve understanding (Merriam,
Caffarella, & Baumgartner, 2007). Black et al. (2003) noted that including students in
the feedback writing process pushes them into a more active, self-directed role in their
own learning; however, students reported feeling frustrated with this method, as it left
them struggling to teach themselves, perhaps reducing the learning of a concept (Gibbs &
Taylor, 2016). Research suggests that students may benefit from both models of
feedback (Black et al., 2003; Gibbs & Taylor, 2016), but instructors should model and
make explicit feedback expectations prior to asking students to self or peer assess.
Studies on the impact the feedback process has on instructors and course design
are limited. A recent study by Richardson et al. (2016) investigated instructor
perceptions on the feedback process in online courses. In this study, instructors largely
viewed feedback as a means of developing online presence and communicating with
students (Richardson et al., 2016). Black et al. (2003) reported that the feedback loop has
a direct impact on course and assessment design. As student conceptual understandings
are made clear through the formative process, teachers become more dissatisfied with
their teaching practices as they become more specific and thoughtful in the feedback
process; to this point, instructors recognize trends in their feedback leading to
strengthening and modification of their assessments (Black et al., 2003). This slow
change process aided instructors in crossing their own threshold in designing assessments
that promote transfer (Moore, 2012).
Adult Learning
The focus of this study was to assess the transfer of information literacy learning
in adult undergraduate students at a higher education institution. Current literature on

42
information literacy acquisition and assessment largely ignores undergraduate adult
learners. In researching this topic, the following searches were conducted in multiple
discovery search engines: (“information literacy”) AND (“undergraduate adult” OR
“undergraduate adults”), (“information literacy” AND “adult Learn*”), (library
instruction AND adult learn*). Three research studies by Cooke (2010), Rapchak and
Behary (2013), and Rapchak et al. (2015), conducted prior to the implementation of the
ACRL Framework, focused on undergraduate adults and information literacy acquisition
and assessment. Currently, no research studies have been published focusing on
undergraduate adults and information literacy acquisition or assessment pertaining to the
ACRL Framework. This section focuses on the defining characteristics of adult learners
and theories of adult learning.
Characteristics of adult learners. Adult learners in higher education are
identified by several defining characteristics setting them apart from their undergraduate
peers. An adult undergraduate is typically 25 years or older and has a varied ratio of fullto part-time employment versus college enrollment (Bash, 2003; Zhang, Lui, &
Hagedorn, 2013). Many adult learners are extrinsically motivated to attain a
postsecondary degree by changes or opportunities in employment or to avoid being
“financially or socially marginalized” (Illeris, 2004, p. 85; Kasworm, 2008a, 2008b). As
students, adult learners experience a greater degree of emotional conflict, due to
balancing the complexities of life that may not end with college enrollment as it does for
most traditional age students (Bash, 2003; Kasworm, 2008a).
Emotional conflict often leads adult learners to feel doubt and insecurity,
reflecting on past negative learning experiences which subjugates confidence in their
ability to perform well in a college setting (Brookfield, 2006; Kasworm, 2008a). Studies

43
have shown that adult learners at all levels of postsecondary learning are susceptible to
this sense of impostership at some point in their academic career (Brookfield, 2006;
McDowell, Grubb, & Geho, 2015). Impostership is defined by McDowell et al. (2015) as
the distance between a student’s current state and the idealized version of the academic
self. In a 2016 study by Coberly-Holt and Braun, students exhibiting symptoms of
impostership doubted their intelligence and ability to succeed, resulting in limited
development as learners and critical thinkers. This diminished perception of intelligence
is indicative of Dweck’s (2006) fixed mindset, with students believing their intelligence
and talents are fixed traits incapable of improvement. Students exhibiting imposter
syndrome are at risk of becoming resistant learners as “students who believe their
intelligence is fixed have no reason to put in the time and effort to improve” (Ambrose et
al., 2010, p. 200).
Resistance, in the form of learning ambivalence related to student confidence in
their experimental knowledge and technical literacy, is rarely addressed in the literature
(Illeris, 2004; Kasworm, 2008b). Students in these categories tend to enroll in
professional degree programs, such as business, accounting, education, ministry, and
human services (Kasworm, 2008b). Students showing ambivalence to learning often feel
marginalized and undervalued by the university and classroom faculty (Kasworm, 2008b;
Sissel, 2001). Resistant learners, interviewed in a 2003 study by Kasworm (2008b),
reported feeling as though their professional experience was viewed with little
importance by classroom faculty. These learners exhibited compliant behavior motivated
by “good grades,” minimal classroom participation, and short-term learning of course
content for the purpose of completing an assessment, “jettisoning” the knowledge
afterwards (Illeris, 2004; Kasworm, 2008b, p. 29). This moment-to-moment decision-

44
making strategy for learning impacted what content students retained long term versus
short term. Concern is warranted as long-term learning was most often reserved for
knowledge that was congruent with established experiences and beliefs (Cooke, 2010;
Illeris, 2004; Kasworm, 2008b), demonstrating that the student resisted entering a
conceptual threshold.
Theories of adult learning. Numerous theories and models for adult learning
exist in the literature, with many of the theories philosophically grounded in Dewey’s
research on the impact of experiential learning over rote memorization (Spalding, 2014).
Two theories that have gained traction as foundational models of adult learning are
Knowles’s (1978) Andragogy and Mezirow’s Transformative Learning, which was
developed in 1978 (Mezirow, 1997). For the purpose of this study, adult learning will be
viewed through the lens of Mezirow’s Transformative Learning.
Knowles: Andragogy. Andragogy was developed by Malcolm Knowles in the
1970s to counter pedagogy; asserting that adults learn differently than children. Knowles
(1978) described andragogy as a model of assumptions built around the conceptual image
of the adult learner (Hiemstra, 1993; Knowles, 1978; Merriam et al., 2007; Pratt, 1993).
Knowles (1978) assumptions of the adult learner include
1. Changes in self-concept – as a person ages they move from a state of
dependence to a state of self-direction.
2. Life experience – the learner is defined by their collective experience.
3. Readiness to learn – the learner’s readiness to learn is a product of evolving
social roles that influence personal development.
4. Problem-centered orientation to learning – applying what you have learned to
new and different situations.

45
5. Motivation – the learner is intrinsically motivated to learn.
While strikingly popular, criticisms of andragogy focus on its debated
prescriptiveness and models of self-direction. Knowles (1978) referred to the tenets of
andragogy as a set of assumptions, leaving practitioners of the model uncertain whether
or not these characteristics are meant to be prescriptive statements describing who adult
learners are or dispositions describing what adult learners should be (Merriam et al.,
2007). A problematic component of this uncertainty is how the concept of self-direction,
of which Knowles (1978) stated that adult learners have a deep need to engage in, is
addressed in scholarly literature. Self-directed learning has gained an “almost cult-like
quality to the extent that [it] is viewed as the essence of what adult learning is all about”
(Caffarella, 1993, p. 25).
Self-directedness in learning is defined as students who are actively involved in
the planning, constructing, and evaluation of their learning experience (Merriam, 1993;
Merriam et al., 2007). This process of self-directed learning accounts for student
experience to factor into the creation of learning experiences and assessments.
Brookfield (1986), an early critic of self-direction, countered that just because an adult
student was longer lived than a child, it does not mean that their life experience translates
to the type of quality experiences that support meaningful learning. Several studies
(Rachal, 2002; Rosenblum & Darkenwald, 1983) have investigated the use of selfdirection as students participated in the planning and evaluation of their learning
experiences. Of the 18 studies conducted, researchers noted inconclusiveness or no
difference in self-directed learning’s impact on student satisfaction in the learning
process. Merriam et al. (2007) suggested that “perhaps the nature of andragogy, with its
assumptions for adult learner-focused practice makes it difficult to validate” (p. 91). This

46
difficulty in validation resonates with criticisms of Meyer and Land’s (2003, 2005, 2006)
threshold concepts theory.
Merriam et al. (2007) offered the only iteration of self-directed learning that
acknowledges that not all adult learners are inherently self-directed. As previously
stated, Knowles (1978) described his theory of andragogy as a set of assumptions
regarding adult learners. In assuming that self-direction is a process of learning rather
than an inherent trait of adult learners, students can be transformed into self-directed
learners. Merriam et al. (2007) recommended instruction in the formal academic setting
should be inclusive of self-directed methods of learning in order to foster this trait in
adult learners. Previous research (Ambrose et al., 2010; Dweck, 2006; Earl, 2013)
purports that students exist on a metacognitive spectrum, exhibiting a range of growth
and fixed mindsets that are dependent on the learning situation. In existing on a spectrum
ranging from fixed mindset/resistance to growth mindset/self-direction, students can be
cultivated into self-direction with the assistance of their instructors and metacognitive
scaffolding (Ambrose et al., 2010; Dweck, 2006; Illeris, 2004). This instructive approach
allows students who may have underlying self-directed tendencies but lack sufficient
content knowledge to gradually develop into a fully self-directed learner (Merriam et al.,
2007).
Mezirow: Transformative Learning. Transformative Learning was developed as
a constructivist adult learning theory by adult education sociologist Jack Mezirow in
1978. The core of the theory states that learning is a “rational, critical, cognitive process
that requires thinking, reflection, questioning, and examination of one’s assumptions”
(Merriam & Bierma, 2014, p. 86). Mezirow (1997) described it as the “process of
[a]ffecting change in a frame of reference” (p. 5). The concept can be further refined as a

47
transformation of the learner’s lens of understanding and habits of mind as they move
through the learning process (Illeris, 2014). The resulting learner is a reflective,
autonomous thinker who critically navigates and applies knowledge to new events and
situations that are incompatible with their previous experience (Merriam, 1993; Mezirow,
1997; Quinn & Sinclair, 2016; Stansberry & Kymes, 2007). This process can be likened
to Meyer and Land’s (2003, 2005, 2006) threshold concepts theory in that once the
transference has occurred, it is often permanent.
Adult learners often focus their attention on short-term goals, as they have
immediate, visible application to daily life experience (Mezirow, 1997). In order to
support transformation through learning, instructors need to be transparent and
purposeful in making connections between immediate objectives and the long-term
benefits of concept mastery (Ainsworth, 2010; Mezirow, 1997). Mezirow’s (1978)
model of transformative learning involves 10 phases in the transformation process. This
model was developed based on his research of adult women reentering higher education
after a significant gap in their educational trajectory. While initially Mezirow’s (1978)
model was limited to the study of adult women, he theorized that this same model could
be applied to all adult learners reentering the educational system (Nohl, 2015). The 10
phases for transformative learning are (Mezirow, 2000, p. 22)
1. A disorienting dilemma.
2. Self-examination of feelings of fear, anger, guilt, or shame.
3. A critical assessment of assumptions.
4. Recognition that one’s discontent and the process of transformation are
shared.
5. Exploration of options for new roles, relationships, and actions.

48
6. Planning a course of action.
7. Acquiring knowledge and skills for implementing one’s plans.
8. Provisional trying on of new roles.
9. Building competence and self-confidence in new roles and relationships.
10. A reintegration into one’s life on the basis of conditions dictated by one’s
new perspective.
Mezirow’s (1978) process of transformative learning shares similar tenets to
Meyer and Land’s (2003, 2005, 2006) tenets of threshold concept theory. Though Meyer
and Land (2003, 2005, 2006) do not reference Mezirow or transformative learning in
their writings, a parallel between the two theories can be clearly drawn. Threshold
concept theory is based on the premise that as students encounter troublesome places
where they get stuck in their learning, comparable to Mezirow’s (1997) disorienting
dilemma, they cross a threshold into a liminal space where they must confront the
juxtaposition between old and new knowledge. Within this liminal space, students
experience a reconstitutive shift in perspective, comparable to Mezirow’s (1997)
reframing one’s own assumptions, which is transformative in nature. As students grow
into mastery of the concept, they mimic mastery and build self-confidence through
repeated, reflective practice (Earl, 2013; Felten, 2016; McCartney et al., 2009). The
process is culminated not only by mastery but by integration and application of learning
to new and altered situations (Meyer & Land, 2005; Mezirow, 2000).
Adult learning in the online environment. Adult learners are attracted to online
learning due to the convenience and flexibility it offers. Studies have shown that intrinsic
self-efficacy has no bearing on a student choosing online education, but that technology
literacy and ability to self-regulate learning has a significant impact on student perception

49
of self-confidence within a course (Kuo & Belland, 2016). As more students enter online
programs, instructors need to consider learner-focused Instructional practices, a hallmark
of both Knowles (1978) and Mezirow’s (1978) learning theories, in course design for
adult learners. Learner-focused instruction includes developing learning processes and
experiences that allow students to make active and reflective connections between prior
and new learning (Illeris, 2004; Knowles, 1978; Palloff & Pratt, 2007). Instructional
designers need to consider that adult learners often enter the online classroom with
preconceived, and possibly negative, notions about online learning, which can lead to
resistance cycles among learners. To combat potential resistance, instructors should
reconsider poor design practices such as misaligned assessments and inadequate feedback
that hinder learning transfer (Kauffman, 2015; Palloff & Pratt, 2007).
Course design should provide students with a transparent framework for how
learning is structured, how it will be delivered, and how it will be assessed (Entwistle,
2008). Design structure should provide a clear and structured path to Instructional
content allowing students to wrestle with course content rather than the course’s design.
Kauffman (2015) noted that learning management systems notoriously set instructors up
for poor course design due to their drag and drop interface. These poor design habits lack
consideration for content placement and structure.
Online learning can be a potentially isolating experience for both students and
instructors. Course design should provide opportunities for interactions that allow
members of the community to establish social presence and build rapport (Kuo &
Belland, 2016). Social norms, presence, and report are easily and often unconsciously
established in face-to-face courses. Judging understanding of content can be detected
through nonverbal cues, allowing for on-the-fly instruction delivery modifications as

50
needed. In the online environment, instructors need to intentionally build community
engagement to fill the gap. In establishing presence online, students were less invested in
peer-to-peer contact but felt that instructor presence in the classroom was crucial to their
success (Kauffman, 2015; Richardson et al., 2016). Presence can be established through
a variety of written and video communications, delivered informationally, or through the
feedback process. In this capacity, instructor presence assumes a vital role in the process
of learning transfer (Kauffman, 2015; Richardson et al., 2016).
Effective online learning that supports transfer is not possible when assessments
are inauthentic or misaligned. In designing authentic assessment that supports transfer,
instructors need to be cognizant of the alignment between learning outcomes, content,
delivery, and assessment (Ainsworth, 2010; Kauffmann, 2015). Authentic assessments
encourage learners to actively apply learning in a way that supports connecting prior
experience to new learning (Palloff & Pratt, 2007; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). Adult
learners who have a fixed mindset or low confidence are often resistant to authentic
assessment, preferring the comfort of instructor-driven, passive learning (Kasworm,
2008a, 2008b). The delivery of authentic, instructive assessment should include
transparent expectations that outline the intended pathway for student growth. This
process challenges fixed mindsets by providing tangible value in how the assessment will
contribute to student success. Authentic assessment, supported by reflective practice and
instructor feedback, is viewed by adult learners as critical to the quality, success, and
learning in an online course (Kauffman, 2015).
Conclusion
In conducting this literature review, several parallels emerged in educational
theory. Gaps in the literature regarding adult learning and information literacy became

51
prevalent. By investigating the foundations of threshold concepts, transfer as learning,
and transformative learning, distinct connections emerge between these theories
concerning how the learning process is conducted and applied. Each theory posits a
liminal or stuck place where students first engage with concepts that challenge their
understandings (Meyer & Land, 2005; Mezirow, 1997; Perkins, 1999). By engaging in a
recursive process, students practice and reflect on their learning which leads to deeper
conceptual understandings (Meyer & Land, 2005; Perkins, 2008; Wiggins & McTighe,
2005). Mastery or transference is achieved when students can apply previous learning to
new, yet different, situations where the concept or skill holds relevance (Foley & Kaiser,
2013; Meyer & Land, 2005; Perkins, 2008). Information literacy acquisition and
assessment for adult learners, particularly undergraduates, are largely ignored in the
literature. This is problematic as trends in higher education suggest that this is an
increasing student population with unique experiences, perceptions, and needs
(Kasworm, 2008a, 2008b; U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, 2018). The subject of adults participating in online education has not been
widely covered. Considering the newness of the Framework and the gap in the literature
regarding undergraduate adult learner information literacy, this study seeks to fill a
noticeable gap in the scholarship of information literacy research. The next chapter
reviews the planned methodologies for analyzing and exploring the research questions for
this study.

52
Chapter 3: Methodology
Researchers (Black et al., 2003; Dweck, 2006; Earl, 2013) have investigated the
relationship between engaging students in a positive feedback loop and growth. Often,
instructors execute a variety of feedback models to find a model that works best (Wiliam,
2012). As student participation in the feedback loop is voluntary, Wiliam (2012)
suggested that instructors begin analyzing the uncontrolled variable: “the response the
feedback triggers in the recipient” (p. 32). This qualitative case study explored instructor
and student perceptions on the feedback loop and its influence on transferability across
assessments. Qualitative, exploratory design is “best used when an issue is not well
understood in the literature or [is] previously unexamined” (Butin, 2010, p. 80). By
triangulating data on instructor perceptions, types of feedback provided, and student
responses to that feedback, this study sought to construct a contextual framework for how
the feedback loop influences adult undergraduates. Data collection and analysis were
guided by the following research questions.
1. What types of feedback occur in an online information literacy course for
adult undergraduate students?
2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students hold regarding how
feedback influences their growth in the liminal space?
3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and beliefs regarding the role
of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth in the liminal space?
This chapter examines the underpinnings of qualitative case study design,
identifies the role of the researcher in the study, addresses issues of validity and
reliability, and outlines the study’s method of data collection and analysis.

53
Qualitative Research
Qualitative research seeks to holistically understand a problem in context to the
environment in which the problem occurs (Butin, 2010; Creswell, 1998; Merriam, 1998).
Researchers seek to construct meaning by identifying themes and constructs from the
perceptions of study participants (Butin, 2010; Merriam, 1998). Qualitative design has
been criticized for its reliance on perceptual data and researcher bias in data collection
and analysis (Creswell, 2014). Validity and reliability measures, such as triangulation of
data, reflexivity, external audits, and cross checking, are often used to combat researcher
bias and positionality (Creswell, 2014).
Research design for qualitative studies occurs in several recognized orientations:
positivist, interpretive, and critical research (Merriam, 1998). Positivist study views
reality as fixed with knowledge gained through experimentation (Merriam, 1998).
Interpretive study focuses on understanding the processes and lived experience of the
phenomenon through inductive inquiry (Merriam, 1998). Critical research views the
environment as a cultural institution through which knowledge is gained as an ideological
critique of power structures (Merriam, 1998). Research for this study takes an
interpretive orientation as the study investigates the phenomenon through the perceptions
of stakeholders. The study follows a process of inductive inquiry as it is also the final,
product evaluation stage of an ongoing CIPP evaluation of the phenomenon.
Case Study
Qualitative research can be conducted with a variety of approaches, the most
common being case studies, biographies, phenomenological research, grounded theory
research, and ethnographic research (Creswell, 1998; Merriam, 1998). Case studies
provide researchers with the opportunity to gain an in-depth understanding of a

54
phenomenon or problem by focusing on process, context, and discovery rather than
confirming a predetermined outcome (Merriam, 1998; Stake, 1995). The case study
approach was selected as the most appropriate design for this study as it stems from a
CIPP evaluation, where process and context are critical points of inquiry. Case studies
are the recommended design for researchers who are investigating processes as part of a
larger program evaluation, as they provide deeper understanding of program dynamics
and ways to improve practice (Merriam, 1998).
Case studies, as defined by Creswell (1998), are an exploration of a bounded
system or case “through in-depth data collection involving multiple sources of
information rich in context” (p. 61). Stake (1995) identified three types of case study:
intrinsic, instrumental, and collective. Intrinsic case studies focus on the unique insights
of a particular case (Creswell, 1998; Stake, 1995). Instrumental case studies focus on a
phenomenon that manifests repeatedly in a case or multiple cases (Creswell, 1998; Stake,
1995). Collective case studies, which can be instrumental, investigate a phenomenon
across multiple cases (Creswell, 1998; Stake, 1995). This case study is instrumental, as it
focused on the issue, or phenomenon, of how feedback might impact transferability.
While the case study approach is widely implemented in qualitative research, the
design does pose certain limitations. Case studies are descriptive, and the final product is
often lengthy; this can be an obstacle when sharing the study with stakeholders or
policymakers (Yin, 2014). Case studies as a form of empirical inquiry have been
criticized over possible lack of rigor, generalizability, reliability, and validity (Merriam,
1998; Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). Perceived lack of rigor, Yin (2014) argued, stems from a
lack of procedures assigned to case study design. The strength of a lack of procedure,
however, allows the case study researcher to investigate complex social issues with

55
multiple variables and lens of understanding – situations that exist outside the bounds of
procedural data collection and analysis (Merriam, 1998). As case studies typically focus
on unique cases or occurrences of a phenomenon, generalizability is limited to providing
perspective and theoretical application of study findings (Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014).
Issues with reliability and validity are of significant concern and researchers must take
intentional measures to combat this limitation. The following section investigates
reliability and validity measures in more depth.
Reliability and Validity
Merriam (1998) stated that “all research is concerned with producing valid and
reliable knowledge in an ethical manner” (p. 198). Reliability and validity measures
instill confidence in how an investigative inquiry is conducted and provides enough detail
to support the results or conclusions of the study (Merriam, 1998). This section addresses
how validity and reliability can be achieved in a case study and addresses specific
measures taken in this case study to ensure validity and reliability.
Validity. Validity is the process by which researchers ensure that conclusions
drawn from a study accurately depict reality (Creswell, 2014; Merriam, 1998). Strategies
for achieving validity are triangulation of data, member-checking results, long-term
observation, peer debriefing, external audit, and clarification of researcher bias (Merriam,
1998; Stake, 1995; Yin, 2014). This study used triangulation, peer debriefing, and
clarification of researcher bias to ensure validity.
Data triangulation is the use of multiple data sets to justify or confirm emerging
themes (Creswell, 2014; Merriam, 1998). The researcher collected data from instructors
and students on the perceived impact of feedback and samples of instructor feedback
from each course.

56
Peer debriefing is the process of involving a peer to review findings and ask
questions about the study “so that the account will resonate with people other than the
researcher” (Creswell, 2014, p. 202). This study incorporates two peer reviewers, one
who is a stakeholder in the library community and one who is external to the library
community. Including both an insider and outsider peer reviewer ensures that the
findings of the study are relatable to those within the discipline of library science or
education.
Clarification of researcher bias is a reflexive process in which the researcher
states perceptions, biases, and assumptions that might influence the analysis and
interpretation of data (Creswell, 1998; Merriam, 1998). The bias and role of the
researcher in this study is addressed later in this chapter.
Reliability. Reliability refers to the ability to which a researcher’s approach to a
study and findings can be replicated (Creswell, 2014; Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014). In
qualitative research, reliability can be problematic as human behavior and perceptions,
neither of which is static, are under study (Merriam, 1998). According to Merriam
(1998), the term reliability is misapplied in qualitative research as the aim is not to
produce results that can be replicated, but rather results that make sense. She suggested
reliability would be better termed dependability or consistency, meaning that the process
by which the findings were achieved can be reasonably repeated (Merriam, 1998).
Strategies to ensure the reliability of a study include triangulation of data, external
auditing, intercoder agreement, and researcher positionality. Intercoder agreement, also
referred to as cross-checking codes, is the process by which “two or more coders agree on
codes used for the same passages in the text” (Creswell, 2014, p. 203). Cross-checking
was used in this study in the analysis of questionnaire and reflection journal responses as

57
well as instructor feedback samples. Researcher positionality is the process by which the
researcher explains how their position in the case impacts the selection of participants,
assumptions, and the understanding of the social context of the case (Merriam, 1998).
The position of the researcher for this study is further described in the next section.
Insider Research
The researcher of this study holds a unique role in the qualitative research
process, as the researcher is “involved in a sustained and intensive experience with the
participants” (Creswell, 2014, p. 187). Qualitative researchers must identify their bias,
position, and background as they “may shape interpretations formed in a study”
(Creswell, 2014, p. 187). The role of the researcher in this study is that of an insider
researcher, characterized as a member of the community being studied with intimate
knowledge of the community (Greene, 2014). In this study, the researcher is the
curriculum and course designer as well as an instructor for the course under study. As a
degreed librarian at the institution for over 10 years, the researcher has primarily worked
with adult learners and has led professional development and training on Instructional
strategy for other instructors of the course. The researcher is a Quality Matters certified
peer reviewer. Quality Matters is a nonprofit, faculty-driven program that promotes
improvement of online education through accessible course design and curriculum
alignment. This certification has influenced the design and instruction practices of the
course.
Insider research poses a variety of risks and advantages in a qualitative study but
provides no particular advantage over outsider research in terms of objectivity (Greene,
2014; Unluer; 2012). The advantages afforded to the insider researcher include authentic
knowledge of the interactions and language of the community under study, increased

58
access to data, and natural interactions with study participants (Greene, 2014; Unluer;
2012). The researcher in this study shares disciplinary language and knowledge of
institutional culture and holds a shared understanding of the role of information literacy
in higher education. As the curriculum and course designer, the researcher has increased
access to data from the course and is responsible for collecting and reporting statistics
from the course for institutional and accreditation reports. Instructors of the course have
demonstrated prior willingness to participate and contribute to the context, input, and
process evaluation cycles of the course.
Critics and proponents of insider research have identified a variety of
disadvantages, of which the researcher should be aware as the methodological design
occurs. Critics perceive insider research as overly subjective, stating that the researcher
has become normalized to the environment and risks making assumptions based on prior
knowledge (Greene, 2014; Unluer, 2012). Insider researchers may also have increased
access to sensitive information that may impact anonymity and confidentiality in the
study. Strategies to ensure anonymity and confidentiality for participants are addressed
later in the chapter.
Insider researchers need to be reflexive, taking a preventative stance in addressing
bias and other factors that might influence data collection and analysis (Creswell, 2014;
Unluer, 2012). Reflexivity is the process by which the researcher reflects “about how
their bias, values, and personal background shape[s] their interpretations formed during
the study” (Creswell, 2014, p. 247). This process involves the researcher actively selfquestioning their own perceptions and exposing their conceptualized view of the
phenomenon (Greene, 2014). Insider researchers must be aware of projecting bias or
personal views onto participants or data analysis. While awareness of bias is critical,

59
researchers should not fear bias, as it can also be a source of additional insight into the
phenomenon from which outsider researchers are excluded (Greene, 2014). The insider
researcher must take into account personal and professional relationships with and
between study participants. Scholarly conversation on reflexivity notes that the
positionality of both the researcher and participants may impact the authenticity of and
emotional response to the data being analyzed (Greene, 2014; Unluer, 2012). Greene
(2014) recommended that the researcher set a degree of emotional distance as part of the
research design process.
Anonymity and confidentiality. The researcher in this study, as an insider, holds
a close working relationship with participating instructors. These relationships may have
influenced responses and analysis of data. Student participants in the study have no
direct relationship or interaction with the researcher as data were not collected from the
researcher’s section of the course. In order to garner authentic, critical responses from
participants and equitable analysis of data, measures were taken in the data collection
process to ensure anonymity and/or confidentiality. Anonymity measures in data
collection are taken to protect authenticity of responses and minimize researcher bias,
while confidentiality measures are taken to protect participant privacy (Merriam, 1998;
Yin, 2014). Protocols established by the researcher to protect anonymity and/or
confidentiality are discussed further in the section on data collection.
Securing permission and informed consent. Data collection in an educational
setting almost always “involves at least a small invasion of personal privacy” (Stake,
1995, p. 57). Researchers must gain informed consent from participants in an effort of
transparency regarding the nature, design, and intent of the case study (Yin, 2014). In
this study, instructors were provided an informed consent letter which included a brief

60
description of the study and plan for data collection and use and outlined measures to
ensure anonymity and confidentiality when appropriate (Stake, 1995; Appendix C).
Upon request, participating instructors were provided with the extended plans for the
study.
Bounding the Study
Case studies are defined, or bounded, by parameters that guide and direct data
collection and analysis (Merriam, 1998). Studies can be bounded by setting, participant
samples, and length of data collection (Merriam, 1998). This study was bounded by
sample size, setting, and participant selection.
Sampling. Purposive sampling, also referred to in the literature as purposeful
sampling, was used to determine the sample sizes that bound the study (Creswell, 2014;
Merriam, 1998). Purposive sampling is a nonprobability sample where a researcher
selects cases, sites, and participants based on the premise that the chosen sample will
provide insight and understanding of the phenomenon (Merriam, 1998). In case studies,
it is expected that researchers will employ two levels of sample selection. Types of
purposive sampling include typical, unique, maximum variation, convenience, and
snowball sampling (Merriam, 1998). For this case study, the researcher used typical and
maximum variation sampling techniques.
Typical sampling is a strategy used to collect data that “reflects the average
person, situation, or instance of the phenomenon of interest” (Merriam, 1998, p. 67). In
this case, typical sampling was used to identify the semester, sections of the course, and
instructors included in the study. The researcher collected data from instructors and their
corresponding courses during the fall 2017 semester. This sample included five 16-week
sections of the course, which reflects an average occurrence of the phenomenon. The

61
researcher’s section of the course and the 8-week mini-mester section were excluded
from the study.
Maximum variation sampling is a strategy that involves collecting diverse
variations in the data sets, which allows the researcher to identify themes, patterns, and
multiple perspectives (Creswell, 1998). In this case, maximum variation sampling was
used to select samples of instructor feedback and student responses to feedback from
each participating section of the course. The process of maximum variation sampling is
discussed further in this chapter.
Setting. The setting for this study was an online information literacy course
taught at a private, doctoral university. The course, LIB 301, is taught in fall/spring 16week semesters and fall/summer/spring 8-week semesters; the accelerated 8-week
semesters are referred to as mini-mesters. Enrollment in the course is limited to adult
undergraduate students in the university’s DCP. A more in-depth analysis of student
participants is provided later in the chapter. The course is a one credit hour, required
general education course and has been taught consecutively each semester by faculty
librarians since 2012. LIB 301 is Quality Matters certified. Quality Matters is a
nonprofit organization that promotes the improvement of online education through
accessible course design and alignment of learning outcomes and assessments. Certified
courses participate in an external peer review process following the Quality Matters
rubric. Courses must meet certain course design criteria and alignment standards,
including but not limited to the following: timeline for providing feedback to students,
response time from instructors, and alignment of each assignment to measurable student
learning outcomes.
LIB 301 uses a formative curriculum design that purposefully engages students

62
and instructors in a series of feedback loops throughout the semester. Modules and
assignments are scaffolded and paced to allow students time to engage in the feedback
process without falling behind in the course. Content modules introduce students to new
information literacy concepts and skills. Assessments include a variety of reflection,
practice, and application assignments. Reflection journals allow students to practice
elaboration and provide an opportunity for instructors to proactively identify potential
barriers to learning. Reflective journaling is also an opportunity for students to provide
their own feedback on the feedback they receive from instructors; this experience allows
instructors to identify weaknesses and strengths in their feedback style and make
improvements accordingly.
PS assignments are designed for students to transfer concepts and skills learned
across multiple modules. Students are tasked with locating an assigned information
source type that assists them with answering their research question. They, then must
create an APA citation and evaluate the source according to a source evaluation guideline
(Appendix D). Students complete five formative PS assignments that eventually lead to
the summative annotated bibliography assessment. Instructors provide formative
feedback for each student, but students are allowed to choose their level of participation
in the formative process. Feedback is provided both through a rubric and instructor
comments. Students are allowed to resubmit PS assignments as many times as needed in
order to master concepts and skills.
Participants. Participants in the study are assigned into two categories:
instructors and students. Instructors are librarians with faculty status and rank of assistant
professor at the institution where LIB 301 is taught. LIB 301 instructors must hold a
master’s in LIS from an ALA accredited institution. Prior to teaching LIB 301, all

63
instructors must be certified to use the learning management system by the institution’s
Department of Digital Learning. Instructors invited to participate in the study have
experience teaching the course for two or more semesters. Prior to the beginning of each
semester, instructors participate in a course management workshop where changes to the
course, Instructional strategies, and course management strategies are reviewed and
discussed. Instructors also participated in a site-hosted community of professional
learning focusing on the new ACRL Framework, formative assessment practices, and
Dweck’s (2006) theory of the Growth Mindset prior to the study.
Student participants in the study are undergraduate adult students enrolled in the
fall 2017 semester of the institution’s DCP. Students enrolled in DCP are nontraditional,
adult learners. The institution’s 2016 analysis of students enrolled in DCP reported that
73% of DCP students are women and 29% of the total DCP population are classified as
minorities. The average age for DCP students is 35 with a range of 19 to 68 years of age.
The University’s 2016 administration of the National Survey for Student Engagement
revealed that 84% of DCP student respondents reported that neither parent completed a
bachelor’s degree, making the majority of students in the program first generation college
students.
Data Collection
Qualitative research is emergent by design; therefore, collection of data should be
flexible and “responsive to change” (Merriam, 1998, p. 8). Data collected in a case study
should be triangulated to the point of saturation in order to support conclusions derived
from the case (Creswell, 2014; Merriam, 1998). Triangulation is “the convergence of
data collected from different sources, to determine the consistency of a finding” (Yin,
2014, p. 241). Saturation is collecting data to the extent that “gathering fresh data no

64
longer sparks new insights or reveals new properties” (Creswell, 2014, p. 189). Collected
data can be organized in arrays, broad categories of collected data, and data sets, smaller
units of analyzed data (Yin, 2014). This study collected the following arrays of data:
student reflection journals, open-ended instructor questionnaire, and samples of instructor
feedback.
Document analysis is the data collection procedure used in this case study. This
process primarily consists of collecting documents that were produced for a purpose other
than the study being conducted (Merriam, 1998). Researchers have variant definitions
for what constitutes document analysis in qualitative research. Yin (2014) limited
document analysis to the collection and study of specific forms of documents, while
Merriam (1998) used documentation as a blanket term for any form of documented data
other than interviews or observation. This study uses Merriam’s (1998) definition of
document analysis to cover each of the three data arrays collected.
Strengths of document analysis include the lack of influence on participants by
any intrusion posed by the researcher at the study site (Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014). Since
researcher influence is negated, documents produced at the site under study remain stable
and consistent (Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014). This stability impacts the reliability of the
study as documentation can be replicated and collected for future study. Disadvantages
of this method include issues of bias and authenticity (Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014).
Researchers must be transparent about the conditions under which the documents have
been produced and collected, addressing how those conditions could reveal or hide
perceptual bias (Merriam, 1998).
Data Array 1: Feedback samples. Feedback samples were collected to gain
insight into the types of feedback that occur within the course. The purpose of instructor

65
feedback is to assist students in growing in the liminal space and making transfer
connections. Two weeks before the start of the semester under study, instructors
participated in a workshop on providing feedback that fosters a growth mindset rather
than Ability Praise (Dweck, 2006). The researcher anticipated that feedback would
contain some bias, as it is a reflection of each instructor’s interpretation of improvement
in context to the assignment’s grading rubric (Appendix E). Feedback samples were
collected from the Practice Segment 1 (PS1) and Practice Segment 3 (PS3) assignments.
PS1 is the first mid-stakes formative assessment students complete where they are
required to combine information literacy concepts and skills. PS1 also represents most
students’ first experience writing an evaluative annotation and creating an APA citation
for a source. By PS3, it is expected that students will have gained a certain degree of
comfort with the process of writing an evaluative annotation but may still be challenged
with locating and evaluating a more advanced and nuanced source type. In collecting
feedback samples from both PS1 and PS3, the researcher worked to determine whether or
not the type of feedback given to students changes as the semester progresses or remains
the same.
Instructor feedback samples were collected from the 30 selected student
participants from Data Array 1. Sample collection included both initial feedback on the
assignment as well as follow-up feedback as a student voluntarily engaged in the
feedback loop. The researcher collected a total of 63 feedback samples from PS1 and 57
feedback samples from PS3. Thirty feedback samples represent the initial feedback
provided to the student, while 33 and 27 samples, from PS1 and PS3 respectively
represent subsequent iterations of feedback provided to the student. An emergent
limitation of this data set is the unanticipated use of PDF documents to provide more

66
detailed feedback to students; these PDF documents are not accessible to the researcher
due to the functionality of the learning management system. Since the pool of student
participants was anonymized, the researcher was unable to request access to the PDF
documents without compromising student anonymity. Anonymity of the student
candidates to participating instructors was a critical validity measure of the study as it
protected the authenticity of the feedback samples. Analysis of this data array and
emerging data sets are discussed in the Data Analysis section.
Data Array 2: Student reflection journals. Student reflection journals were
collected to gain insight to student perceptions on their Feedback Reaction, where
stuckness occurs in their learning, and what influences their growth in the liminal space.
Students in the LIB 301 course are assigned reflection journals to begin the process of
engaging them in the feedback loop through reflective writing. This reflexivity is
designed to push students to process their experiences when engaging with and applying
content to new or modified learning situations. Students are asked to process forward
and elaborate on how feedback on the current assignment might be applied to future
assignments, thus laying the initial groundwork for transfer to occur. Through reflection
journals, students are asked to provide feedback to instructors on the feedback process.
This student-generated feedback is designed to assist instructors in differentiating
feedback and completing the feedback loop. The researcher anticipated that a degree of
bias may exist in the reflection journals as the assignment is graded and not anonymous.
Students are asked to share perceptual beliefs that may not be rooted in facts.
Data were collected from the Module 5 and Final Reflection Journals (Appendix
F). The Module 5 Reflection Journal occurs after PS1 feedback, the first mid-stake
assessment in the course, has been provided. Students reflect on the feedback process

67
allowing instructors an opportunity to audit their feedback style at an optimal point in the
semester. The Final Reflection Journal assignment is a summative reflection of the
feedback process at the conclusion of the semester. This reflection is a reflexive exercise
designed to anchor the liminal growth the student may have made and process transfer
connections made during the course.
Permission to collect Module 5 and Final Reflection journal entries was secured
from each instructor participating in the study. Samples were collected from six
randomly selected students who met eligibility requirements in participating sections of
the course. Eligible students are defined as students who completed the following
assignments in the course: PS1, Module 5 Reflection Journal, PS3, and the Final
Reflection Journal. Eligible students were listed by course section and numbered in a
spreadsheet with six participants selected from each section using a random number
generator. This provided a saturation point of 30 students and 60 total reflection journal
entries. Analysis of this data array and the resulting data sets are discussed in Data
Analysis.
Data Array 3: Online, open-ended questionnaire. Participating instructors
completed an online, open-ended questionnaire (Appendix G). The questionnaire was
designed to collect perceptual data from instructors on feedback style, purpose of
feedback, perceptions of stuck places, and relationship between feedback and transfer of
learning as it relates to information literacy. The questionnaire was used to investigate
instructor perceptions regarding whether the feedback process has an impact on transfer.
The decision to use the online, open-ended questionnaire is derived from the researcher’s
prior data collection experiences with the participant population in an unrelated study.
As an insider, the researcher was aware that participating instructors preferred to have

68
adequate time to reflect on questions and process responses. This practice, conducted
through the online questionnaire, aligns with Black et al.’s (2003) research on providing
wait time to respondents in order to generate confident, rich, and explanatory responses.
Personal bias is expected in the questionnaire responses with the understanding that
responses may be influenced by the participants’ relationship with the researcher. To
protect participant anonymity and to mitigate relational influence, the questionnaire was
administered anonymously through a Google Form.
Questionnaire design consisted of eight required, open-ended items designed to
yield insight on how the stakeholder community perceives the process and impact of
feedback (Yin, 2014). Items one through four were modified, with permission, from
Bennett’s (2016) questionnaire on teacher perceptions of the impact of feedback in an
Academically Gifted and Intellectually Gifted education setting (Appendix H). Items
five through eight were created by the researcher and were validated through peer
debriefing to ensure that questions were not leading and avoided assumption and bias
(Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014).
Data Analysis
Qualitative research requires triangulated data collection from a variety of sources
to assure consistency and reliability in data findings. Perceptual data collected for this
study were triangulated with samples of instructor feedback in order to analyze
perceptions against what actually occurred in the course. The researcher used these data
to confirm the type of feedback taking place in order to adequately understand instructor
and student perceptions of the feedback process and how they might impact transfer and
growth in the liminal space. A combination of a priori and open coding was used to
analyze the three Data Arrays. This process assigned categories and themes to data

69
aiding in interpretation of the constructs that emerged in the data (Creswell, 1998;
Merriam, 1998). In qualitative analysis, a researcher creates or adopts a set of codes with
the understanding that new codes may emerge or existing codes may be eliminated as
data are codified and meaningful patterns identified (Merriam, 1998; Yin, 2014). The
researcher collaborated with an internal and external code-checker to review code
applications in each data array for inter-coder agreement. Data sets generated from each
array were used to analyze the collective feedback provided by the participant group as a
whole and separated by assignment. The following sections outline how the research
questions of this study were answered through data analysis. Table 5 demonstrates the
alignment between each research question, instrumentation, and theoretical framework.
Triangulated data analysis for each research question is described in detail in the next
section.

70
Table 5
Research Question, Instrumentation, Theoretical Framework Alignment
Instrumentation
RQ1 Instructor
feedback
samples
Student
Reflection
Journals
Open-ended,
online
questionnaire
RQ2 Student
Reflection
Journals
Instructor
feedback
samples
RQ3 Open-ended,
online
questionnaire
Instructor
feedback
samples
Student
Reflection
Journals

Analysis
Identify the types of feedback
occurring in the course. Observe
the frequency of feedback types
that align with supporting a
growth mindset and transfer of
learning.

Theoretical Framework
Alignment
Evaluation of the
frequency of feedback
types provides
additional insight into
instructor and student
perceptions of growth in
the liminal space.

Compare feedback types to
instructors’ self-reported
feedback styles and studentidentified stuck places.
Analyze reflection journal in
context to instructor feedback
samples.
Compare with the type of
feedback that occurs within the
course and look for correlations
and disconnects.
Analyze questionnaire responses
in context to instructor feedback
samples. Triangulation provides
insight to how instructors
perceive the type and influence
of the feedback they provide as it
relates to actual feedback
occurrences in the course.

Triangulation provides
insight to how instructor
feedback meets or does
not meet the needs of
students as they process
through the liminal
space.
Evaluation of these
perceptions reveal
micro-philosophies that
instructors hold toward
growth in the liminal
space and concept
mastery.

Compare instructor perception to
student perception of stuck
places.

Research Question 1: What types of feedback occur in an online information
literacy course for adult undergraduate students? Research Question 1 was answered
using the first data array, Instructor Feedback Samples. Samples were coded using an

71
adapted set of codes adopted from Bennett’s (2016) study on the impact of written
feedback in an advanced placement classroom setting. The researcher modified code
descriptions to meet the needs of the site and participants under study (Appendix H).
These a priori codes served as the codebook used in the inter-coder agreement and crosschecking process (Creswell, 2014). Feedback samples were organized in a spreadsheet
by course section and student participant with the names of each withdrawn and replaced
with a randomized alpha-numeric system. Samples were hand coded with the code
applied for each iteration of a code within the sample.
Research Question 2: What perceptions do adult undergraduate students hold
regarding how feedback impacts their growth in the liminal space? Research Question
2 was answered using data collected from student reflection journals triangulated with
instructor feedback samples. Reflection journals were organized in a spreadsheet using
the same alpha-numeric schematic as the instructor feedback samples. Open coding was
used to identify themes pertaining to student beliefs on what influences growth in the
liminal space. While the role of feedback on liminal growth was an established theme,
other themes emerged to create a richer landscape of what influences growth. Student
perceptions were analyzed contextually to the data sets generated from instructor
feedback.
Research Question 3: How do instructors describe their feedback style and
beliefs regarding the role of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth in
the liminal space? Research Question 3 was answered using data collected from the
instructor questionnaire triangulated with instructor feedback samples. Responses to the
questionnaire are anonymous, which prevents an alignment between responses and
specific feedback samples. Questionnaire responses were analyzed contextually against

72
data sets of the combined feedback samples and PS1/PS3 specific samples to determine if
perceptions and occurrences of feedback are congruent. Open coding was used to
identify emerging themes regarding instructor perceptions of feedback. The codebook
generated through open coding and code applications was evaluated by the internal and
external code checker.
Summary
The purpose of this chapter was to describe the methodology used by the
researcher to collect and analyze data. The role of the researcher as an insider researcher,
the measures taken to ensure validity and reliability of the study, and the steps taken for
data collection and analysis were outlined. An in-depth analysis of the collected data is
described in Chapter 4. Responses to triangulated data are described in Chapter 5.

73
Chapter 4: Findings
Introduction
Many factors influence student growth in the liminal space. This qualitative case
study investigated how the feedback process might influence liminal growth. Growth in
the liminal space is perceptual; therefore, data collected in this study focused on
perceptions of growth, learning, and ability to transfer. Student participants were adult
undergraduates enrolled in an online information literacy course in DCP. Participants in
the study were purposefully selected faculty librarians teaching sections of an online
information literacy course and 30 randomly selected student participants from these
sections.
Research Questions
The research questions for this study were designed to gain insight into student
and instructor perceptions of growth in the liminal space and the degree to which transfer
of learning is influenced by the feedback loop. The following research questions were
explored.
1. What types of feedback occur in an online information literacy course for
adult undergraduate students?
2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students hold regarding how
feedback influences their growth in the liminal space?
3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and beliefs regarding the role
of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth in the liminal space?
Research questions were answered through a triangulation of data collected through three
data arrays. Each data array is reported below as a unique data point leading up to the
triangulated data as it aligns to each research question. Table 6 summarizes the analysis

74
of data in context to the research questions of the study.
Table 6
Research Question, Instrumentation, Theoretical Framework Alignment
Instrumentation
RQ1 Instructor
feedback samples
Student
Reflection
Journals
Open-ended,
online
questionnaire
RQ2 Student
Reflection
Journals
Instructor
feedback samples
RQ3 Open-ended,
online
questionnaire
Instructor
feedback samples
Student
Reflection
Journals

Analysis
Identify the types of feedback
occurring in the course. Observe the
frequency of feedback types that
align with supporting a growth
mindset and transfer of learning.
Compare feedback types to
instructors’ self-reported feedback
styles and student-identified stuck
places.
Analyze reflection journal in context
to instructor feedback samples.
Compare with the type of feedback
that occurs within the course and look
for correlations and disconnects.
Analyze questionnaire responses in
context to instructor feedback
samples. Triangulation provides
insight to how instructors perceive
the type and influence of the feedback
they provide as it relates to actual
feedback occurrences in the course.

Theoretical Framework
Alignment
Evaluation of the
frequency of feedback
types provides additional
insight into instructor and
student perceptions of
growth in the liminal
space.

Triangulation provides
insight to how instructor
feedback meets or does not
meet the needs of students
as they process through the
liminal space.
Evaluation of these
perceptions reveal microphilosophies that
instructors hold toward
growth in the liminal space
and concept mastery.

Compare instructor perception to
student perception of stuck places.

Chapter Organization
This chapter first summarizes each data array in order to provide a broad picture
of the information collected and then reports triangulated data aligned to each research
question. Descriptive statistics of assignments, resubmission rates, and grade distribution
provides generalized data on student improvement throughout the course. Data arrays
provide a snapshot of each data point as independent units. Data Array 1 summarizes

75
perceptual data collected from student reflection journals; Data Array 2 identifies
occurrences of feedback types collected from feedback samples; and Data Array 3
summarizes perceptual data collected from an instructor questionnaire.
Descriptive Statistics
Data were collected from 30 randomly selected students enrolled in multiple
sections of an online, information literacy course during the fall 2017 semester.
Feedback samples, student reflection journals, resubmission rates, and initial/final grades
were collected from the course for each student participant. It is important to note that
numerical grade data were not used as a measure of liminal growth in this study; it does,
however, provide an indication that the student made an improvement to submitted
assignments based on the feedback given them by their instructor.
PS1. PS1 was a mid-stake assessment requiring students to combine and apply
multiple concepts and skills from the first four learning modules in the course. For the
assignment, students had to locate a reference source pertaining to their research
question, write an evaluative annotation, and create an APA citation for the source. PS1
assignments were evaluated using a standard rubric and graded using a points-based
system with 50 points as the highest attainable score. Instructors encouraged students to
participate in the feedback loop by making improvements to and resubmitting the
assignments. It was a student’s choice to engage in the process. Table 7 shows the
collected data from PS1.

76
Table 7
Initial and Final Grades for Students on PS1
Student

PS1 Initial Grade

Resubmit

1.a
1.b
1.c
1.d
1.e
2.a
2.b
2.c
2.d
2.e
3.a
3.b
3.c
3.d
3.e
4.a
4.b
4.c
4.d
4.e
5.a
5.b
5.c
5.d
5.e
6.a
6.b
6.c
6.d
6.e

35
22
47
45
0
49
50
29
49
49
50
19
0
27
0
45
48
47
47
0
43
25
0
49
10
38
43
0
50
45

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No

PS1 Final
Grade
42
22
50
49
46
49
50
29
50
49
50
19
46
50
46
45
48
50
50
45
50
48
0
50
45
38
43
50
50
45

Change
+7
NA
+3
+4
+46
NA
NA
NA
+1
NA
NA
NA
+46
+23
+46
NA
NA
+3
+3
+45
+7
+23
NA
+1
+35
NA
NA
+50
NA
NA

Sixty percent of student participants engaged in the feedback loop, while 10% of
initial submissions met assignment standards. Comparing initial and final scores for the
60% who engaged in the feedback loop, 89% of those students made an improvement to
their submission. Six students, 20%, scored a zero on their initial attempt. Five of the six
submitted the assignment with an incorrect source type, and one student had a submission

77
error.
PS3. PS3 occurred 4 weeks after PS1 and required students to locate a scholarly
article pertaining to their research question, to write an evaluative annotation, and to
create an APA citation for that source. Table 8 outlines data collected from PS3.
Table 8
Initial and Final Grades for Students on PS3
Student
1.a
1.b
1.c
1.d
1.e
2.a
2.b
2.c
2.d
2.e
3.a
3.b
3.c
3.d
3.e
4.a
4.b
4.c
4.d
4.e
5.a
5.b
5.c
5.d
5.e
6.a
6.b
6.c
6.d
6.e

PS3 Initial
Grade
0
0
48
39
49
50
50
38
48
0
44
0
0
47
47
46
0
46
45
49
48
0
38
48
0
35
48
0
42
47

Resubmit
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No

PS3 Final
Grade
46
25
49
50
49
50
50
38
48
50
50
40
48
50
47
46
50
50
49
49
50
48
38
48
50
35
48
50
42
47

Change
+46
+25
+1
+11
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
+50
+6
+40
+48
+3
NA
NA
+50
+4
+4
NA
+2
+48
NA
+0
+50
NA
NA
+50
NA
NA

Fifty-seven percent of student participants engaged in the feedback loop, while

78
6% of initial submissions met assignment standards. Comparing initial and final scores
for the 57% who engaged in the feedback loop, 94% of those students made an
improvement to their submission. Six students, 20%, scored a zero on their initial
attempt; three students, 10%, submitted with an incorrect source type; five students, 17%,
had a submission error; and one student, 3%, plagiarized.
Data Array 1: Feedback Samples
In assessing the potential impact of feedback on student learning, Hattie and
Timperley (2007) encouraged collecting feedback over an extended period to capture
how students respond to feedback as their stage of learning changes. Instructor feedback
samples were collected at two strategic points in the semester. PS1 samples represent the
first feedback loop iteration that students and instructors engaged in on a mid-stake
assessment. PS3 feedback samples represent established trends in feedback/response
between instructors and students on mid-stake assessments. Sixty-one feedback samples
from instructors for PS1 and 54 feedback samples for PS3 were collected during the
course of this study. Limitations of this data array include lack of access to some
feedback provided in embedded PDF files, through email, by phone, or through face-toface appointments.
Analysis of feedback samples was conducted with two codebooks: a Feedback
Type Codebook and a Feedback Content Codebook. The Feedback Type Codebook was
a set of a priori codes adapted from Bennett’s (2016) feedback codebook and described
the type of feedback given by instructors. The Feedback Content Codebook used open
coding to develop thematic codes to identify and analyze the content upon which students
needed to improve.
Feedback codebook. The Feedback Codebook contained 10 codes that described

79
the type of feedback provided to students. Types of feedback were broadly categorized
into two root codes: Specific and General. Specific feedback described instances when
instructors indicated what was done correctly or needed improvement, provided praise or
additional instruction, or asked probing questions. General feedback provided a grade or
evaluation with no clear action steps for improvement. This type of feedback focused on
evaluation, praise, and indication of errors. Table 9 displays the codes categorized under
the Specific and General root codes.
Table 9
Codes in the Specific and General Feedback Categories
Feedback Categories
Specific Codes
General Codes
Descriptive
Ability Praise
Effort Praise
Error Indication
Instructional
Evaluation
Question
Notation
Correction
Non-Comment
Codes were applied to each unique iteration of a theme within a feedback sample.
For example, one instructor stated, “Italicize the source title and place in sentence case.
Then use TRAP to evaluate this source. How is this source useful for your research?”
For this sample, the Instructional and Error Indication codes were applied. A specific
pathway was provided to improve source evaluation, yet no pathway was offered to
improve grammatical errors. Table 10 defines each feedback code and provides a
description and example of specific and general feedback codes used in the study.

80
Table 10
Description and Examples for Specific and General Feedback Codes
Feedback
Code
Ability
Praise

Description

Example

Instructor praised student for ability (may
or may not be related to the task).

“Good;” “Great job!”

Correction

Instructor made a correction to grammar,
mechanics, citations, or formatting in the
student work.

Correcting capitalization in an APA
citation, grammatical errors in the
annotation, and incorrect document
formatting.

Descriptive

Instructor give specific feedback about
what the student did well, what the student
needed to work on, and/or what steps the
student may need to take in order to
improve.

“Good concise summary of the article;”
“When addressing the timeliness of the
source, you must evaluate the date of the
publication rather than simply stating the
date. Is the source too old or does it have
historical significance?”

Effort Praise

Instructor praised student work while
providing context to why praise was given.

“I like how you have identified the bias in
this article and determined how that bias
can be used to answer your research
question.”

Error
Indication

Instructor pointed out an error without
providing Instructional/corrective pathway
for improvement.

“APA citation is not correct;” “You have
not addressed the reliability of the source.”

Evaluation

Instructor evaluated student work based on
a perceived level of performance on the
task; indicating that student work meets
the standard.

“Excellent evaluation of the source!”

Instructional

Instructor provided specific feedback
intended to guide/instruct the student (may
or may not be related to the task.)

“Use the APA Citation Guide and follow
the checklist to correct the capitalization in
your citation;” “Provide examples for why
this source is reliable to support your
evaluation.”

Notation

Instructor requests or encourages the
student to resubmit the assignment or to
schedule a one-on-one meeting for deeper
instruction.

“Please make changes and resubmit.”

NonComment

Feedback was not provided to the student.

Question

Instructor asked student a question related
to the task.

“What evidence do you have to support
this claim?”

Feedback samples contained a mix of specific and general feedback, with Specific
Feedback making up the majority of the feedback provided. PS1, with 287-Root Code

81
applications, contains 57% Specific Feedback code applications; and PS 3, with 251-Root
Code applications, contains 63% Specific Feedback code applications. This information
is displayed in Figure 3.

Specific and General Feedback Root Code Applications
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
PS1

PS3
Specific

General

Figure 3. Specific and General Feedback Root Code Applications.

Specific feedback. Specific codes described feedback with instruction and
context that supported student learning. Codes applied under this root code were
Descriptive, Effort Praise, Instructional, Question, and Correction. Codes were applied to
each unique iteration within a feedback sample.
Descriptive feedback. Descriptive feedback “[gives] students [the] information
they need so they can understand where they are in their learning and what to do next”
(Brookhart, 2008, p. 2). Applications of the Descriptive code co-occurred with Effort
Praise, Instructional, Correction, and Question codes. Instances of co-occurrence
provided students with deeper contextual understanding for why a task was done

82
correctly or needed improvement. For example, the Description and Effort Praise codes
were applied to the feedback given by Instructor E:
I would shorten this annotation before using it in the annotated bibliography. You
do not need to include the warning signs of alcohol abuse except in a short,
general way. Keep the parts where you addressed the evaluation questions from
TRAP. You did that very well. I especially liked the way you acknowledged that
the article had been written for this specific audience.
Effort praise. Effort Praise was applied when the instructor praised student work,
providing specific context for why the praise was given. This style of praise indicated to
students what they did correctly and why. One instructor stated, “Your annotation was
well written and you included many of the TRAP evaluation questions. I especially liked
how you explained how this particular article met your research needs.” The focus of the
praise shifts from intelligence or ability to process and growth (Dweck, 2007; Hattie &
Timperley, 2007).
Instructional feedback. Instructional feedback incorporated instructional aides
that assist students in understanding and executing an improvement. This type of
feedback offered an improvement strategy rather than an exact correction to the mistake
(Brookhart, 2008). For example, one instructor stated, “Your hanging indent is opposite
of what it should be. Take a look at the video on how to do hanging indents in Microsoft
Word under the ‘Video Tutorials’ link.” Videos, infographics, and guides are openaccess resources created by the library to scaffold students through levels of
understanding a concept or applying a skill.
Correction feedback. Correction feedback focused on supplying exact correction
on grammar, mechanics, citations, and formatting. For example, one instructor stated,

83
“Citation: In the article title, only capitalize Knowledge and U.S. (Only capitalize the first
word and proper nouns). Be sure to italicize the journal title and the volume number,
37.” Although Bennett (2016) categorized the correction code under the General root
code, this study categorized Correction as a Specific code, since instructor corrective
feedback was highly detailed and offered students a pathway to improvement. Corrective
feedback represented 30% of the feedback provided to students as opposed to
Instructional which represented 20% of the total. The relationship between the
Correction and Instructional codes in context to the liminal space is addressed in the
section reporting data as they relate to Research Question 1.
Question feedback. Question-focused feedback occurred when instructors
prompted critical thinking by asking probing questions about the task. This style of
feedback prompted students to consider a concept further or an alternative point of view
in an effort to deepen their understanding. For example, one instructor stated, “Good job,
[student name]. Tell me a little more about the author. Who is this person and what are
his/her credentials in this field?” Question code applications increased by 18 iterations
between PS1 and PS3; however, seven iterations occurred in a single feedback sample
where the instructor used questioning feedback to address seven separate areas of needed
improvement in the submission. As an outlier sample, this data point skewed the data for
this code and should not be misinterpreted as a broad increase of questioning feedback in
the course. Table 11 displays the number of times a particular type of Specific feedback
was recorded.

84
Table 11
Code Applications Within the Specific Feedback Root Code
Code
Descriptive

Description
PS1
Instructor gave specific feedback about what the 37
student did well, what the student needed to
work on, and/or what steps the student may
need to take in order to improve.

PS3
33

Effort Praise

Instructor praised student work while providing
context to why praise was given.

34

22

Instructional

Instructor provided specific feedback intended
to guide/instruct the student (may or may not be
related to the task.)

38

28

Correction

Instructor made a correction to grammar,
mechanics, citations, or formatting in the
student work.

46

46

Question

Instructor asked student a question related to the 9
task.

Total

164

27
156

General feedback. General codes described feedback that did not provide clear
action steps for improvement. Codes applied under this root code included Ability
Praise, Error Indication, Evaluation, Notation, and Non-Comment. Codes were applied
to each unique iteration within a feedback sample.
Ability praise. Ability Praise was applied when instructors offered generic praise
to students without identifying why praise was provided. For example, an instructor
might have stated, “Good job on your annotation,” without supportive context. There
was a high rate of co-occurrence between Ability Praise and Evaluation as a summative
indication that student work had met the standard for the assignment.
Error indication. Error Indication feedback called attention to errors in student

85
work without offering a specific pathway to improvement. For example, one instructor
stated, “Make sure you proof one more time to get out any grammatical errors.”
Evaluation. Evaluation feedback indicated that the student met the standard and
no longer needed to participate in the feedback process for the assignment. For example,
one instructor stated, “Excellent job, [student name]” as a final comment on the student’s
third resubmission. Application of this code occurred as a summative statement once
students met assignment standards. In cases where students engaged in the feedback
loop, evaluation statements preceded or followed descriptive feedback at the conclusion
of a series of feedback interactions. By combining evaluative statements with descriptive
content within or prior to an evaluation, instructors participating in the study were
utilizing evaluation as an indicator of success and achievement.
Notation. Notation indicated a request or encouragement to resubmit an
assignment with improvements or to contact the instructor for one-on-one instruction to
discuss improvements. For example, one instructor stated, “Feel free to resubmit and I’ll
keep giving feedback until its perfect.” Bennett’s (2016) study utilized this code to
indicate symbolic Notations, such as a check mark or smiley face, on hard copies of
assignments in a face-to-face environment. For this fully online environment, symbolic
notations were substituted with request statements from the instructors. Notations were
categorized as General feedback statements as they did not include content specific
instruction statements. Some Notation applications concluded a series of specific
feedback statements. Requests for one-on-one appointments often indicated a serious
error in the student work or a lack of understanding the assignment. For example, one
instructor stated, “Please call me [phone number] or the Reference Desk [phone number]
and we will walk you through the process.” These iterations of Notation often lacked

86
specific detail as the instructor had chosen to explain the errors and provide context in an
environment where the student could ask questions and clarify their understanding in real
time. Table 12 displays the number of times a particular type of General feedback was
recorded.
Table 12
Code Applications Within the General Feedback Root Code
Code
Ability Praise

Description
Instructor praised student for ability (may or
may not be related to the task).

PS1
23

PS3
19

Error Indication

Instructor pointed out an error without
providing Instructional/corrective pathway
for improvement.

41

19

Evaluation

Instructor evaluated student work based on a
perceived level of performance on the task;
indicating that student work meets the
standard.

15

15

Notation

Instructor requested or encouraged the
student to resubmit the assignment or to
schedule a one-on-one meeting for deeper
instruction.

24

22

103

75

Total

Feedback Content Codebook. The feedback Content Codebook contained eight
codes that identified the content of the feedback provided as opposed to how the feedback
was delivered. Open coding was used to identify common themes relating to errors and
areas of improvement. Content code applications represented each single occurrence of a
theme within a sample. For example, if an instructor indicated multiple errors with a
single APA citation, the Citation code would only be applied once for the sample.
Content codes were broadly categorized as skills-based or concept-based errors.

87
Skills-based content identified concrete tasks where the task could be executed correctly
or incorrectly. Examples included creating an APA citation and using correct grammar.
Concept-based content identified tasks where students were asked to demonstrate their
knowledge and ability by combining ideas through practice and/or writing. Examples
included researching a topic, locating a particular source type, evaluating a source, and
writing an annotation. Table 13 displays the codes categorized under the Skills-based
and Concept-based root codes.
Table 13
Codes in the Feedback Content Categories
Content Categories
Skills-based
Concept-based
Citation
Evaluation
Grammar/Formatting
Source Type
Missing Element
Annotation
Submission Error
Plagiarism
Although it might be considered skills based, for this study, Source Type was
categorized as concept based. In locating an assigned source type, students had to
develop a research strategy, select relevant keywords, and locate a specified source type
to help answer their research question. By selecting an incorrect type of source, students
demonstrated a gap in their conceptual understanding or an inability to apply multiple
concepts outside of the original learning experience. Table 14 displays the number of
applications for skills-based and concept-based codes in PS1 and PS3.

88
Table 14
Description and Number of Applications for Skills-based and Concept-based Content
Codes
Code
Citation

Description
Instructor indicated improvement was
needed with the student’s APA Citation.

PS1
42

PS3
41

Grammar/Formatting

Instructor indicated improvement was
needed with the student’s grammar and/or
formatting.

23

15

Evaluation

Instructor indicated improvement was
needed with the student’s TRAP
evaluation of the source.

14

32

Source Type

Instructor indicated that the student
submitted the incorrect source type for the
assignment.

9

7

Annotation

Instructor indicated that the student
provided too much summary with little, to
no evaluation of the source in the
annotation.

5

8

Missing Element

Instructor indicated that the student was
missing a required element of the
assignment.

5

2

Submission Error

Instructor indicated that an error in student
submission of the assignment.

4

6

Plagiarism

Instructor indicated that the student
plagiarized part or all of their annotation.

1

2

103

113

Total

Feedback samples contained a mixture of skills-based and concept-based
feedback, with skills-based feedback making up 64% of total feedback provided.
Citation focused feedback made up 38% of the total content code applications, ranking
highest in application in both PS1 and PS3. Source evaluation made up 21% of the total

89
content code applications. The rate of application increased between PS1 and PS3.
Triangulated analysis of content code applications, as related to specific research
questions, is addressed later in this chapter.
Data Array 2: Student Reflection Journals
Providing effective feedback is a powerful mechanism to support learning, but
often students are uncertain how to apply feedback constructively (Brookhart, 2008;
Shafi, Hatley, Middleton, Millican, & Templeton, 2017). Students with a fixed mindset
may interpret the meaning of feedback as judgment or confirmation that they lack the
ability to succeed (Dweck, 2007). To combat this mindset, instructors should engineer
opportunities for students to use and apply feedback, fostering a mindset of practice,
growth, and improvement (Brookhart, 2008; Dweck, 2007). In LIB 301, students
participated in reflective journaling, processing their reaction to the feedback and how
they planned to utilize the feedback going forward.
Reflection journals were collected at two strategic points in the semester: Module
5 and the Final. Module 5 occurred after PS1. This reflection was focused on initial
feedback and “feed forward” strategies. The Final occurred after the summative
annotated bibliography, and this reflection focused on the semester’s feedback
experience. Evaluating data collected from these strategic points allowed for a
comparison of student initial impressions to their overall experience.
Reflection journals were an established reflexive assessment. For this study, two
questions were added to gather perceptual data on conceptual threshold entry points and
the role of feedback in the liminal space. The first question focused on entryways into
the liminal space, identifying when students stepped into a conceptual gateway and
engaged with troublesome knowledge. Students were also asked to identify potential

90
influences on growth and transfer of learning in this space. The two questions added to
the reflection were
Module 5: While working through PS1, did you ever feel stuck in the process of
working on the assignment? If so, where did you get stuck and what helped you
get unstuck?
Final: Were there times during the semester where you felt stuck? If so, what
helped you get unstuck?
To translate the concept of liminality to students, the researcher used the term
“stuck” to indicate moments of challenge and anxiety. The second question added to the
reflection journals focused on student perceptions of feedback received from instructors.
Module 5 previously contained a feed forward question that asked students to describe
how they would use instructor feedback to improve on future assignments. To create an
alignment to data collected in Module 5, the same question was added to the Final
reflection journal with modifications.
Module 5: In what ways was the feedback you received on PS1 supportive and/or
challenging as you worked on PS1?
Final: In what ways was the feedback you received this semester supportive
and/or challenging?
Reflection journals were analyzed using open coding. Codes were applied once
per theme occurrence. For example, if a student referenced source evaluation as a place
of stuckness twice, the code for Evaluation was only applied once. In some instances,
codes were applied twice in a journal entry if the student specified a unique and different
iteration of the theme. Thematic root codes were Stuck Places, Getting Unstuck,
Feedback Reaction, and Transfer of Learning. Table 15 describes each root code and

91
description.
Table 15
Reflection Journal Codebook Root Code Descriptions
Root Code
Stuck Places

Description
Instances where students
report that they struggled
with a concept or task. This
could mean that the concept
or task was new or more
advanced than their previous
experience

Example
“I got stuck a lot while
working through the practice
segments. It took me awhile to
evaluate the sources. To make
that happen I had to read it
over several times and then
mentally summarize what I
understood.”

Getting Unstuck

Students’ self-identify
sources, strategies, or people
helped them emerge from
their previous stuck place.

“The APA Citation Guide
helped me get the hang of
doing citations. I have printed
it out so I can use it for future
reference.”

Feedback Reaction

Students describe their
reaction to the feedback
provided by their instructor.

“The feedback was very
helpful and encouraged me to
learn what I needed to
correct.”

Transfer of Learning

Students self-report engaging
in the process of practice and
identifying current or future
applications of knowledge.

“Up until this class I struggled
with APA citations, but
throughout the semester I have
finally mastered it. I will use
this knowledge in my other
classes.”

Stuck Places. Stuck Places represent conceptual gateways or thresholds where
students encounter concepts that are difficult to learn and challenge previous assumptions
(Land et al., 2014; Perkins, 1999). Stuck Places described instances where students
reported struggling with a specific concept or task, meaning that the concept was new or
more advanced than previous experience. For this code to be applied, students had to
specifically express that they found a certain concept confusing, difficult, or that they

92
struggled or got stuck. To prevent assumptions regarding stuck places, the code was not
applied to a statement indicating a concept or task was new or to statements when the
student referenced getting a concept wrong. Newness or incorrect application of a
concept did not necessarily mean a student struggled or felt stuck when confronted with
the concept. Codes applied under this root code were Research Process, Source
Evaluation, Understanding Assignment, Annotation Writing, APA Citation, Non-Specific
Stuckness, Formatting, Online Learning, and Not Stuck. Table 16 displays code
descriptions and number of applications.
Table 16
Code Applications Within the Stuck Places Root Code
Code
Research Process

Description
Student got stuck with the process of
researching their topic in the online
databases.

Module 5
10

Final
9

Source Evaluation

Student got stuck with the process of
evaluating their source.

2

6

Understanding Assignment

Student got stuck in the process of
understanding the requirements of the
assignment.

3

4

Annotation Writing

Student got stuck with the process of
writing an annotation and incorporating the
source evaluation into their writing.

6

3

APA Citation

Student got stuck with the process of
creating or editing an APA citation for their
source.

7

3

Non-Specific Stuckness

Student expressed feeling stuck but did not
specify the cause of their stuckness.

0

4

Not Stuck

Student reported not getting stuck with any
component of the assignment. Student
reported feeling confident due to
reading/watching module content, videos,
and assignment instructions.

5

2

Non-Comment

Student did not comment on the issue of
stuckness in the journal entry.

2

1

93
Module 5 code applications reflected students’ initial struggle, while Final
applications were representative of their summative experience.
Research process. The Research code was applied when students referenced
struggling with elements of the research process, such as navigating the database
interface, keyword selection, and keyword pairing, narrowing a result list, and locating a
particular source type. While students engaged in multiple feedback-driven assessments
focused on keyword development, they were required to use three of five assigned library
databases. The learning curve of accessing new content through different database
interfaces could explain why the number of applications remained high.
Source Evaluation. The Source Evaluation code was applied when students
referenced struggling with the process of evaluating sources. The number of applications
increased by four from Module 5 to the Final. This increase was anticipated as students
were asked to evaluate increasingly complex source types as the semester progressed.
PS1, occurring just prior to the Module 5 reflection journal, had students evaluating a
reference source, while PS3 had students evaluating scholarly articles.
Understanding Assignment. The Understanding Assignment code was applied
when students referenced struggling with the assignment in general but did not elaborate
on what aspect of the assignment was troublesome. PS assignments incorporate research,
evaluation, citations, and writing. Reference to struggling with the assignment could
indicate that the student struggled with the process of combining concepts or with more
than one individual component. As with the Non-Specific code, assumptions could not
be made as to the exact source of the struggle.
Annotation Writing. The Annotation Writing code was applied when students
referenced getting stuck with the process of the annotation, which is largely focused on

94
source evaluation. Reference to struggling with the annotation could represent a variety
of stuck places as the annotation writing process incorporates several concepts. These
concepts included summarizing the source, evaluating the source, and the mechanics and
style of writing. While some students clarified which parts of the annotation writing
caused stuckness, some referenced it in generalized terms. Student 4.E stated,
“Completing the annotations was a challenge for me.”
A 50% decrease occurred in the Annotation code from Module 5 to the Final.
This decrease was anticipated as those processes were practiced repeatedly throughout
the semester. Students who reflected on the liminal struggle with annotations referenced
issues with the writing process. Student 6.E stated, “I got stuck when writing my
annotations. I would refer back to my keywords and feedback from my instructor to help
me get back on track.” While the majority of students reported struggling in the liminal
space, some students stated they did not feel a sense of stuckness.
APA Citation. The APA Citation code was applied when students referenced
struggling with the process of constructing a citation in APA style. While students were
provided with aids in the course and through the online database to assist them in this
process, it proved to be the second highest area of stuckness. Student 4.C stated, “When
working on the practice segments I felt stuck when citing the sources. I referred back to
the APA Citation Guide to help me get unstuck and cite my source.” Like the Annotation
writing code, there was a significant decrease in code applications from Module 5 to the
Final.
Not Stuck. The Not Stuck code was applied when students specified that they
were challenged by new or advanced concepts but did not “get stuck.” These students,
when confronted with a challenge, exhibited a growth mindset by strategizing and

95
utilizing course materials to develop a new approach to solving a conceptual problem
(Dweck, 2006, 2007). In the Module 5 reflection, Student 2.A stated, “I did not feel
stuck at all while working through PS1. The instructions provided by my instructor were
precise and I made sure to follow them. I also watched the videos posted about the
assignment from my instructor.” The Not Stuck code should not be misconstrued as a
lack of entry into the liminal space; these students still entered and worked through a
conceptual threshold. Not Stuck students found the feedback process reaffirming of their
successes in navigating new or advanced challenges.
Getting unstuck. Previous studies have explored student emotions or oscillation
between new and old habits as conceptual gateways are entered (Felten, 2016), but the
contributing factors to transitioning past stuckness seem to remain unidentified. The root
code Unstuck described times when students self-identified sources, strategies, or
individuals who helped them work through their stuck places. Thematically, this root
code did not suggest that the student had mastered a particular concept or had fully
overcome stuckness; it only indicated an assistive tool aiding in the process of learning
transfer. Codes applied under this root code were Feedback, Course Materials, Strategy
Adaptation, Library Assistance, Still Stuck, and Non-Comment.
Codes were applied once per journal entry, with the exception of the course
materials code. For example, if a student mentioned instructor feedback as a means of
getting unstuck multiple times, it only received one code application. If the student
mentioned multiple course materials as a means of getting unstuck, each type of course
material was counted. For the purpose of Table 17, the lump sum of course material
application was counted once per journal entry; and for the purpose of Table 18, each
application was counted individually. Table 17 describes each code and notes code

96
occurrences in the journal entries.
Table 17
Code Applications Within the Getting Unstuck Root Code
Code
Feedback

Description
Student reported that the feedback
provided by their instructor helped them
get unstuck.

Module 5 Final
6
27

Course Materials

Student reported that materials provided in
the course helped them get unstuck. These
materials include guides, course content,
videos, and assignment instructions.

10

23

Strategy Adaptation Student reported that they altered their own 7
research strategy through trial and error
prior to getting feedback to get unstuck.

8

Non-Comment

Student did not provide a comment
describing a stuck place.

9

2

Still Stuck

Student reported that they were still stuck
within a conceptual gateway, failing to
move past the initial state of stuckness.

3

1

35

61

Total

Feedback. The Feedback code applications occurred when students indicated that
feedback from their instructor helped them get unstuck. Of note is the significant
increase in student perceptions of the role of feedback as an assistive tool in the liminal
space from Module 5 to the Final. The increase could be attributed to the Module 5
prompt which asked students to feed forward by describing how they intended to use
instructor feedback in the future. Another possible influence was instructor
encouragement for students to use the feedback to make improvements and resubmit the
assignment. This data point, as it relates to specific research questions, is discussed in
more detail later in this chapter.

97
Course materials. The Course Material code applications described the use of
tools and resources provided in the course to help students get unstuck. These sources
included an APA Citation Guide, learning module content, TRAP evaluation guide,
instructor created videos, and assignment instructions. Not all students reported course
materials as a means of getting unstuck, and some referenced multiple course materials
which were used in tandem. Code applications for course materials were applied for each
course material iteration mentioned in the journal entries; some students referenced
course materials in a general sense, while others referenced specific tools. Table 18
counts course material iterations to rank which tools had the greatest impact.
Table 18
Occurrences of Specific Course Materials Referenced by Students
Course Material Referenced
APA Citation guide
Instructor Videos
TRAP Evaluation Guide
Learning Module Content
Assignment Instructions

Module 5
4
2
2
0
1

Final
4
6
5
4
3

The APA Citation Guide was a checklist style tool that walked students through
the process of creating an APA citation for each type of source covered in the course.
The TRAP Evaluation Guide walked students through the process of source evaluation
with guiding questions for the timeliness, reliability, relevance, audience, and purpose of
the source. The unexpectedly low numbers for the guides are triangulated with instructor
feedback samples and analyzed later in the chapter. Instructor videos were created by
instructors to frame student learning in each module beyond the written content. Video
content was unique to each section as instructors tailored it to the needs and
understandings of the student group.

98
Strategy adaptation. The Strategy Adaptation code occurred when students
reported they altered their own research strategy through trial and error prior to receiving
feedback. Examples of strategy adaptions included changing keywords, experimenting
with Boolean Operators and database limiters, and narrowing or broadening a search.
For example, Student 4.D stated, “Sometimes, when doing database search, I could not
find the information desired. Changing my keywords and using Boolean operators and
limiters was the answer to easily finding what I was searching for.” Strategy Adaptation
was also applied when students referenced handling confusion by rereading assignment
instructions or utilizing a course materials tool; therefore, there are code co-occurrences
with the course materials code.
Non-Comment. The Non-Comment code was applied when students did not
comment on the process of getting unstuck in their journal entry.
Still Stuck. The Still Stuck code was applied when students specifically stated
they were still stuck within a conceptual gateway, failing to move past the initial state of
stuckness. Student 1.D stated, “The videos helped me with the hanging indents, although
I don’t feel like I have mastered it.” While it could be presumed that Non-Comment
indicated that students were still stuck within the entry point of the threshold, this
assumption cannot be made in the absence of perceptual input from participants. Of note
is the overall decrease of the Non-Comment code from Module 5 to Final.
Feedback Reaction. To understand the potential impact of feedback on student
learning, student perceptions of feedback were investigated. The root code Feedback
Reaction was applied to student descriptive reactions to their instructor’s feedback. As
students were asked to share their reaction to feedback, responses were thematically
different and did not correlate to code applications for feedback with the Getting Unstuck

99
root code. Codes developed for this root code were Supportive, Pathway to
Improvement, Error Indication, Meaningful Interaction, Non-Comment, and Negative.
Codes were applied once per iteration of a theme within a journal entry. For example, if
the student described the feedback as meaningful and supportive both codes would be
applied. Table 19 describes each code and notes code occurrences in the journal entries.
Table 19
Code Applications Within the Feedback Reaction Root Code
Code
Supportive Feedback

Description
Student reported that they believed the
instructor feedback was helpful,
supportive, or encouraging.

Module 5
21

Final
22

Pathway to
Improvement

Student reported that the feedback
assisted them by offering a solution or
pathway to make corrections and
improvements to their assignment.

10

11

Error Indication

Student reported that the feedback
helped them see what was incorrect
with their assignment submission.

12

8

Meaningful Interaction

Student reported that the feedback had
a profound and personal impact on
student learning, motivation,
confidence, and/or persistence.

0

9

Negative

Student reported having a negative
experience with the feedback process.

0

1

Non-Comment

Student did not report a Feedback
Reaction provided by the instructor.

7

0

Supportive Feedback. Students described Supportive Feedback as helpful and
encouraging. Of the 30 participants, 70% indicated the feedback was supportive. There
was a high rate of code co-occurrence between Supportive/Pathway to Improvement and
Supportive/Error Indication. These co-occurrences indicated that while the feedback

100
addressed a weakness in the student’s work, students perceived the tone and intention of
the feedback in a positive way. In the Module 5 reflection journal, Student 2.D stated,
“[the feedback] was very supportive and I liked the feedback you gave on every
assignment not just this one. I feel like if I have done something wrong, I need to fix it
the next time around.” In the Final reflection journal, Student 2.D stated, “I love the
feedback you give to me, it was very supportive and even when I messed up you always
had something great to point out as well. Thank you for that!”
Pathway to Improvement. The Pathway to Improvement code was applied when
students expressed that feedback helped them find a solution or strategy to help improve
their work. Thirty-three percent of students in Module 5, and 37% in the Final reported
feedback as a pathway for improvement.
Error Indication. The Error Indication code was applied when students described
the feedback as helping them identify what was done incorrectly in their assignments.
Most students expressed appreciation at being made aware of what was wrong and being
provided an opportunity to make corrections. Some students noted that feedback made
them aware of mistakes and indicated that they could self-correct using this knowledge in
the future.
Meaningful Interaction. The Meaningful Interaction code was applied to
statements that described feedback as having a profound, personal impact on student
learning, motivation, confidence, and/or persistence. This code unexpectedly emerged
during the open coding process of the Final reflection journals. The code was never
applied in Module 5 and demonstrated a shift in tone. Students 6.A and 6.C represent
this shift as they had Non-Comment applied in Module 5 and shifted to Meaningful
Interaction in the Final. Student 6.A stated,

101
Some instructors tend to belittle students instead of helping them with their
criticism. Never once did I feel that this semester. [The feedback was] very
informative and helpful. It made me understand what I had done wrong and how
to fix it.
Student 6.C stated,
The feedback made a huge difference in the outcome of my grade in this class. I
used the information from my instructor to learn and improve on each assignment.
I was able to see exactly what I did right/wrong and was able to make corrections
on the assignments.
Negative. The Negative code was applied when students reported having a
negative reaction to the feedback process. Student 5.B reported a negative impression of
feedback, stating, “The feedback given was necessary; however, at times it could be a bit
harsh and sort of judgmental.”
Non-Comment. The Non-Comment code was also applied when students failed
to indicate a reaction to the feedback. In the Module 5 reflection journals, seven students
failed to comment on the feedback process. In the Final reflection journal, all students
commented on the feedback process. This indicated that by the end of the course, all
students had developed an opinion on having been given feedback.
Transfer of Learning. The Transfer of Learning root code described instances
where students reflect on engaging in the liminal space or the transfer of learning.
Transfer of Learning only occurred in the Final reflection journal. Codes applied under
this root code were Liminal Space, Course Design, Current Application, Future
Application, and Concept Mastery. Codes were only applied once per journal entry.
Table 20 describes each code and notes code occurrences in the journal entries.

102
Table 20
Code Applications Within the Transfer of Learning Root Code
Code

Description

Final Reflection
Journal
14

Liminal Space

Student describes the process of
practice, resubmitting, and reviewing
work for correction. Indicates a
willingness to try again and seeking to
understand how to improve.

Course Design

Student describes that the scaffolding in
the course design helped them process
forward in the liminal space.

6

Current
Application

Student describes instances where they
have applied concepts and skills from
LIB 301 in their other course work or
nonacademic situation.

3

Future Application

Student describes how they plan to
apply concepts and skills from LIB 301
in future coursework or nonacademic
situations.

11

Liminal Space. The Liminal Space code was applied to student descriptions of
the process of practice and resubmission of their work. Students who engaged in the
feedback loop indicated a willingness to try and improve. Student 4.D stated, “The
structure and positive tone of the feedback helped me the most to feel motivated and
improve.” Distinct liminal struggles were not defined or used to determine code
application, as entry points into the threshold are unique to each learner. Instead, the
researcher noted descriptions of the struggle students experienced as they wrestled with
concepts in the course. In the Final reflection, Student 2.A stated, “The supportive
feedback helped me reach the end. I had to redo a practice segment because I did not do
it right the first time, I made sure not to repeat the mistakes as I proceeded through the

103
course.”
Course Design. The Course Design code, while not describing a liminal struggle
or instance of transfer, indicated that some students perceived the design of the course as
playing a vital role in their ability to process through the liminal space. Student 3.B
stated, “I learned a lot in this course by the feedback and how organized and straight
forward the course was. It really helped me remember the material that I was learning.”
Student 3.C stated, “I think the progression of the course was well-planned, making it
easy to build on prior understanding.” There was a significant rate of co-occurrence
between the course design and the liminal space or current application codes.
Current Application. The Current Application code was applied to students
indicating they applied knowledge from LIB 301 in their other course work or a
nonacademic situation. While students were encouraged to develop a research question
centered on a research need from another course, data indicated that students were not
simultaneously applying knowledge from LIB 301 beyond the course. Low application
of this code could be attributed to students not specifically asked to indicate current
application of knowledge from the course.
Future Application. The Future Application code was applied when students
reported the intent to use concepts and skills used from LIB 301 in future courses and
nonacademic situations. While statements were concrete, like mentioning the use of
APA citation style, most statements were generic and nonspecific. Student 4.B stated,
“The TRAP evaluation method we learned is an easy acronym for me to remember, and
I’m sure I will continue to use it for future research in other classes.”
Data Array 3: Instructor Questionnaire
Instructors participating in the study were surveyed regarding their perceptions on

104
the impact, purpose, and opinion of formative feedback on transfer of learning in the
liminal space. Five instructors teaching the 16-week version of the course completed an
anonymous questionnaire describing their personal feedback style, beliefs on the
feedback process, and perceptions of students transferring their learning (Appendix G).
Though questionnaire items were designed to address individual themes, respondents
frequently blended themes across items. As a result, themes were analyzed across
responses rather than by item.
The questionnaire Question Codebook was developed using open coding,
identifying themes related to beliefs on the impact of feedback, feedback style, and
students in the liminal space. Thematic root codes were Students in Stuck Places,
Feedback Style, and Transfer and the Liminal Space. Table 21 describes the root code
and code descriptions.
Table 21
Instructor Open-ended Questionnaire Codebook Root Code Descriptions
Root Code
Students in Stuck Places

Description
Assumptions and perceptions that
instructors have regarding when and why
students get stuck in their learning.

Feedback Style

Instructors describe the purpose and type
of feedback they provide to students.

Transfer and the Liminal Space

Instructor describes situations where they
believe feedback influences growth in the
liminal space and the degree to which
feedback influences learning transfer.

Each root code contained codes that further defined root code categories. Two
lines of inquiry were used to analyze questionnaire responses. Code applications were
counted as a collective total and by thematic occurrence by instructor. For example, one

105
analysis point identified the number of instructors who addressed student confidence in
the questionnaire. The other analysis point identified the total number of times the theme
of student confidence occurred across all responses.
Descriptions of feedback practices made up 56% of root code applications with 62
code occurrences. Instructors seemed to feel most comfortable reflecting on their own
practice. Statements describing the relationship between feedback and transfer and the
liminal space made up 34% of root code applications with 37 code occurrences.
Instructors seemed largely divided with a range of responses from uncertainty to
confirmation that a relationship exists. Identifying moments where students are stuck in
their learning made up 10% of root code applications with 11 code applications.
Instructors expressed discomfort in or chose not to identify these moments, with one
instructor stating, “It is somewhat difficult for me to judge this.”
Students in Stuck Places. Stuck places represented conceptual thresholds or
gateways where students are stuck in the process of learning. The Students in Stuck
Places identified instructor assumptions regarding when and why students are stuck in
their learning. Three instructors addressed the theme of stuckness 11 times throughout
the questionnaire. Where students identified obstacles from the course as stuck places,
instructors identified external obstacles as stuck places. Codes applied under this root
code were College Readiness, Student Confidence, and Student Investment. Table 22
displays code descriptions and number of applications.

106
Table 22
Instructor Perceptions of Why Students Get Stuck in Their Learning
Code
College
Readiness

Description
Weak academic habits, lack of experience in
applying critical thinking in an academic setting,
some students may never “get it,” hand holding.

Total Applications
6

Student
Students are overwhelmed and experience self-doubt 2
Confidence as they enter new conceptual thresholds. This
includes being new to online learning.
Student
Investment

Students experience stuckness as a result of not
engaging with the course materials provided, any
invested student can improve.

3

College readiness. Three of five instructors indicated that the preparedness of
students as it related to success in the course was of concern and addressed college
readiness thematically. Instructors described students having weak academic habits and
lacking academic critical-thinking skills as barriers to tackling new conceptual
information. One instructor stated, “Most of the time when students seem stuck in their
understanding of a particular concept, it is due to a weak academic background. They
lack critical thinking skills because they weren’t regularly challenged to use those skills.”
The College Readiness code had a single code co-occurrence with Student Confidence.
Student Confidence. The Student Confidence code was applied when instructors
described an assumption that student feelings of self-doubt or being overwhelmed
impacted growth in the liminal space. Studies by Felten (2016) and McCartney et al.
(2009) supported instructor assumptions that self-doubt and confidence impacts student
behavior and growth in the liminal space. This code was applied statements from two
instructors where student confidence was addressed in the context of being stuck. One
instructor stated,

107
Many students are starting or going back to school after many years or even
decades, and many of them do need formative feedback and even a little handholding in order to succeed. Many lack confidence, and the online learning
experience is something brand new to them.
Student Investment. The Student Investment code was applied when instructors
cited student lack of engagement with the course content and feedback as a cause for
stuckness. These instructors believed that any student invested in his/her own learning
could improve. One instructor stated, “Feedback works for the students who are invested
in learning. I don’t think anything can help the ones who are not.”
Feedback style. Instructors were asked to describe their feedback style and the
purpose of the feedback they provided. Descriptions of purpose and feedback style made
up 56% of code applications from the questionnaire responses. Codes applied under this
root code were Extending Feedback, Concern for Impact, Mistake Identification,
Constructive Critique, Praise, Specific/Robust, and Use of Tools. Table 23 describes
codes and code descriptions.

108
Table 23
Instructor Descriptions of Feedback Style
Code
Extending Feedback

Description
Instructor indicates that they provide
extended feedback that offers deeper
explanation of a concept at the
student’s point of need that could be
written, verbal, or video based. This
includes extending an offer to the
student for a one-on-one meeting.

Example
“I try to explain the problem in
different words and always ask if my
explanations makes sense so they have
another opportunity to talk with me.”

Concern for Impact

Instructor expresses concern about
how feedback could potentially
impact student confidence and
learning. This includes having an
awareness of using an encouraging
tone.

“Feedback lets the student know that
you believe in them. That you care
about their learning. It helps establish
a safe learning environment and that
helps students feel free to ask
questions.”

Mistake Identification

Instructor indicates that their style
includes mistake identification and
corrective/instructive feedback is
provided. This includes addressing
grammatical and writing weaknesses.

“Your citation is not in APA style.”

Constructive Critique

Instructor indicates that their style
includes descriptive and constructive
suggestions for improvement.
Student is encouraged to practice and
resubmit.

“When a student feels stuck I try to
explain a concept in different ways,
providing examples from a different
area of life to see if something clicks.”

Praise

Instructor indicates that their style
includes praise to provide
encouragement. Praise can range
from “Good job!” to identifying what
the student does correctly.

“For a discussion post, I might say
“Great job!” or “Exactly what I was
looking for.” In terms of actual
assignments, I try to give them more
substance in my feedback.”

Specific/Robust

Instructor indicates that their style of
feedback identifies specific areas for
improvement and offers pathways to
improvement.

“I try to spell everything out so they
have information that will help them
the next time. I am very specific
about what they miss in citations or
TRAP evaluation and offer
suggestions for grammatical
improvement.”

Use of Tools

Instructor indicates that they
incorporate and consider the use of
technology tools and/or instructive
guides to aid in the feedback and
learning process. (Zoom, Videos,
LibGuides, APA Citation Guide,
TRAP guide)

“Rather than just telling them what
they did wrong or showing them the
correct format, it is more useful to
point them to towards the tools and
encourage them to try to figure it out
on their own first.”

109
In describing feedback practices, all of the instructors cited a concern for how
feedback could impact student confidence and learning. This concern led instructors to
use a positive tone in their written feedback even when addressing a weakness in student
work. The lowest number of code applications was applied to providing Praise, although
all five instructors addressed it. Applications of the other codes were consistently
mentioned by at least 80% of instructors. Occurrences of feedback style are described in
Figure 4.

Occurrence of Feedback Style
Use of Tools
Specific/Robust
Praise
Constructive Critique
Mistake Identification
Concern for Impact
Extending Feedback
0

2

4

Professor Mentions

6

8

10

12

14

Occurrence of Theme

Figure 4. Occurrence of Feedback Style.

With 11 applications, Constructive Critique, meant to encourage practice through
suggestions for improvement without providing exact corrections, was cited as the most
frequent type of feedback provided. Of note were the co-occurrences of mistake
identification and specific/robust codes. Student 1.D received the following feedback,
“The capitalization in your citation is incorrect. Take a look at the APA Citation Guide

110
and follow the example on page 3.” These codes co-occurred in feedback style
descriptions for 60% of instructors. This co-occurrence indicated that while an instructor
may have pointed out something that was incorrect, they were providing a pathway for
improvement. This pathway often included the use of tools, both within the course and
for those used to extend feedback.
Transfer and the Liminal Space. Code applications for Transfer and the
Liminal Space made up 34% of root code applications with 37 code occurrences. Codes
focused on identifying statements that addressed the potential relationship between
feedback and growth in the liminal space, application of knowledge beyond the course,
and descriptions of transfer within the course. Codes applied under this root code were
Process Learning, Confidence, Application Beyond Course, Relationship Exists,
Relationship Uncertain, and Relationship Dependent. Table 24 displays code
descriptions and number of applications pertaining to the relationship between feedback
and liminal growth.

111
Table 24
Instructor Perceptions of the Relationship Between Feedback and Liminal Growth
Code

Description

Code
Applications
12

Process
Learning

Instructor believes that students learn new concepts
and hone them through repeated practice and
application. Students learn from their mistakes
which leads to future improvement.

Confidence

Instructor believes that feedback impacts how
students interpret assignment criticism leading to a
decreased sense of failure and willingness to
improve and try again.

7

Application
beyond Course

Instructor believes that students will use learning
beyond the course or students have expressed that
they intend to use learning beyond the course.

5

Relationship
Exists

Instructors believe that there is a connection between 6
feedback and transfer of learning.

Relationship
Uncertain

Instructors are uncertain about the impact of
feedback on students’ transfer of learning.

4

Relationship
Dependent.

Instructors believe a relationship exists between
feedback and transfer of learning, but it is dependent
upon the willingness of the learner to engage in the
process. It may not work for all students.

3

All five instructors expressed the belief that students learn and improve through
the process of repeated practice. Descriptions of process learning referenced feedback as
part of the cycle of practice and improvement. One instructor stated, “As students move
through a learning process, it is important to build a strong foundation. You must start at
the beginning and move forward and upward.” While the collective group repeatedly
described feedback as influencing growth and improvement, only three instructors
affirmed that a relationship exists between feedback and the ability to transfer learning.
Three instructors described the essential role of student investment in the process as key

112
to growth and improvement, and four instructors expressed uncertainty about the
relationship between feedback and student ability to transfer learning. Instructors
appeared to oscillate in their beliefs on the influence of feedback in the process of liminal
growth and transfer of learning in their responses. Data indicated that instructors might
be experiencing their own back and forth, or oscillation, in confronting the newly entered
threshold of understanding liminal space as a concept.
Instructors frequently reported the belief that feedback plays a role in increasing
student confidence, in turn influencing their persistence in practicing challenging
concepts. While only 60% of instructors addressed the connection explicitly, all of the
instructors cited a concern for how their feedback might impact student learning. One
instructor stated, “Feedback lets the student know you believe in them – that you care
about their learning. It helps establish a safe learning environment and that helps
students feel free to ask questions.” As part of the feedback loop, students were provided
an opportunity to respond to instructor feedback through reflection journal prompts,
allowing instructors the opportunity to adapt feedback styles or make early interventions.
Four of five instructors indicated they believed students applied learning from LIB 301 in
a new or different situation. These beliefs were based on students self-reporting the
application or demonstration of transfer within the course.
Triangulation of Data in Regard to Research Questions
The previous data were included in order to understand the broad scope of this
study. In order to fully answer the research questions from the study, data from each data
array were triangulated. The triangulation of data allowed the researcher to look at each
question in context to student perception, instructor perception, and actual feedback
occurrence.

113
Research Question 1. What types of feedback occur in an online information
literacy course for adult undergraduate students? Data Array 1 analyzed feedback
samples to determine the type of feedback provided to students in LIB 301. Samples
generated 499 code applications that were organized into specific and general feedback
categories. Code applications identifying feedback types are depicted in figure 5.

Number of Feedback Type Codes
Non-Comment
Notation
Evaluation
Error Indication
Ability Praise
Correction
Question
Instructional
Effort Praise
Descriptive
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 5. Number of Feedback Code Types.

Specific feedback made up 64% of feedback provided. Iterations of general
feedback were accompanied with specific feedback. Seventy-six iterations of feedback
did not provide specific feedback and were evaluative, indicating the student met the
standard, or a notation, indicating that the student needed to contact the instructor for
detailed instruction. While 3 of 5 instructors indicated having a specific and robust style
of feedback, all instructors provided specific feedback consistently throughout the course.
As indicated in Data Array 1, the researcher chose to reassign corrective feedback

114
as a form of Specific rather than General feedback; although in Bennett’s (2016) study
(from which the feedback codebook was derived), corrective feedback was categorized as
a form of general feedback. In LIB 301 corrective feedback was highly detailed and
offered students a pathway towards improvement. Corrective feedback, 18% of the total
feedback, focused on grammar, mechanics, citations, and formatting and provided
students with exact corrections to errors. Instructive feedback, 13% of the total feedback,
indicated an error and provided guidance on how improvements could be made through
the use of a tool or questioning.
In both PS1 and PS3, seven co-occurrences of Instructional and Correction
feedback were noted. These instances showed the instructor provided guidance using a
tool or question while following up with the exact correction to the error; thus, the
correction negated the instruction. Corrective feedback was indicative of Brown et al.’s
(2014) “trial and correction” rather than instructive feedback’s “trial and error” (p. 40).
In providing exact correction, the student was not required to think through the correction
but instead fixed the error without understanding the correction. This practice has the
potential to lead the student to become dependent on the correction being provided by the
instructor (Brown et al., 2014). Instructive feedback, however, encouraged recursive
practice. The instructor took on the role of facilitator, supporting self-direction by
explaining the error and providing a tool to assist the student in making improvements
(Black et al., 2003; Brown et al., 2014; Earl, 2013; Foley & Kaiser, 2014; Meyer & Land,
2006).
Feedback supporting self-direction was descriptive, clearly conveying to the
student what and why something had been done well, what needed improvement, and a
pathway for making improvements (Black et al., 2003). While corrective feedback was

115
descriptive, meaning it provided a pathway to improvement, it did not foster critical
thinking. Instructive and questioning feedback employed several cognitive functions by
challenging students to problem solve and to consider how they would employ earlier
training to newer experiences (Brown et al., 2014). Table 25 indicates the co-occurrence
of descriptive codes with instructive, corrective, and questioning feedback.
Table 25
Co-occurrences of Descriptive Feedback with Instructional, Correction, and Question
Codes
Co-occurrences
Description/Question
Description/Instruction
Description/Correction

PS1
2
12
1

PS3
14
10
5

Total
16
22
6

As stated in Data Array 1, the co-occurrence of description and question for PS3
represented a skew in the data, as seven iterations were derived from a single sample.
While this indicated an increased use of this feedback style by a single instructor, it could
not be interpreted as broad implementation of this style by all instructors.
Effective feedback continually brings students back to the learning goals of the
task at hand (Earl, 2013; Hattie & Timperley, 2007; Shafi et al., 2017). Too often,
feedback focuses on minor errors that distract from the central learning objective (Hattie
& Timperley, 2007). In LIB 301, the central learning objective of the PS assignments
was acquisition and critical evaluation of an assigned source type, both conceptual tasks.
Instructors indicated that their feedback focused primarily on errors relating to skillsbased tasks. Instructor feedback styles are depicted in Figure 6.

116

Instructor Feedback Style
Missing Element

Annotation

Source Type

Evaluation

Grammar/Format

Citation
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Figure 6. Feedback Styles from Instructor Questionnaire.

The focus on skills-based feedback correlated with the consistently high
occurrence of corrective codes applied to the feedback samples. Corrective feedback,
when compared to instructional and question-based feedback, represented 47% of the
improvement-based feedback provided to students. Citation and grammar/formatting
correction represented 56% of the total feedback content, indicating that a large portion
of the feedback provided to students did not bring students back to the critical learning
objects. Corrective, skills-based feedback weakens self-regulation and hinders a growth
mindset. Brookhart (2008) suggested that instructors “identify errors or types of errors,
but avoid correcting every one (e.g. copyediting or supplying right answers), which
doesn’t leave the students anything to do” (p. 6).
Research Question 1 indicated a disconnect between instructor and student
perceptions of stuckness. Feedback samples from instructors indicated the belief that

117
students were experiencing a state of stuckness pertaining to citations and the
grammatical mechanics of writing; however, student reflection journals indicated that
students were experiencing stuckness primarily with the research process and source
evaluation. Student reported stuck places are indicated in Figure 7.

Student Stuckness
APA Citation

Annotation Writing

Source Evaluation

Research Process

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 7. Stuck Places Reported by Students in Reflection Journals.

The majority of students indicated struggling with the research process, yet
feedback to students from instructors on the research process was nonexistent beyond the
selection of an incorrect source type. Students were not asked to describe their research
process in the PS; therefore, the assessment design left instructors largely unaware of
student struggles.
In addition, APA citations represented 17% of students’ stuck places, yet
represented 38% of the total feedback content. Source evaluation and the process of
writing annotations represented 29% of student reported stuck places, and yet represented

118
26% of the total feedback content. As stated previously, instructors utilized skills-based,
corrective feedback most frequently.
Students within a liminal space often mimic concept mastery prior to complete
understanding and mastery of the concept (Entwistle, 2008; Felten, 2016; McCartney et
al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005; Savin-Baden et al., 2008). By indicating why something
had been done correctly and reinforcing critical thinking, instructors began “closing the
gap” between students’ current state of understanding and solidified learning (Earl, 2013,
p. 100). Student 5.C stated, “The feedback I received helped tremendously, especially
when I felt that I had still not grasped the concepts. The constructive feedback helped me
know what I had done right and what I still needed to work on.” Feedback and course
materials represented 80% of the reasons students were able to get unstuck, indicating
effective feedback strategies could have a positive impact on growth in the liminal space.
Research Question 2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students
hold regarding how feedback influences their growth in the liminal space?
Providing effective feedback required instructors to “[address] both the cognitive and
motivational” influence of feedback (Brookhart, 2008, p. 2). Understanding student
perceptions of feedback may change feedback tone and delivery to solidify connections
between learning experiences and applications. Students in LIB 301 reported a positive
reaction to instructor feedback. Student reactions to feedback are depicted in Figure 8.

119

Student Feedback Reaction
Non-Comment

Error Indication

Negative

Pathway to Improvement

Meaningful Interaction

Supportive/Encouraging
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 8. Student Reactions to Feedback Collected from Reflection Journals.

Student Feedback Reaction coincided with instructor conscientiousness that the
tone of feedback should build confidence and be supportive. Correlation of these data
points indicated that students recognized this intentionality of delivering feedback in
order to encourage improvement. Brookhart (2008) emphasized that feedback tone
communicates “underlying assumptions” about students as learners (p. 34). This tone can
“inspire or discourage” learning (Brookhart, 2008, p. 34). As students were confronted
with troublesome knowledge and oscillated in the liminal space, they experienced intense
anxiety, self-doubt, and frustration (Felten, 2016; McCartney et al., 2009). If feedback
tone implied a belief that students could improve and provided a pathway towards
improvement, those instructors leveraged feedback to support growth mindsets. As
Student 4.D stated, “The structure and positive tone of the feedback was what helped me
the most to feel motivated and improve myself in the class.”

120
In the Final reflection, 14 of 30 student participants described the process of
feedback-supported practice as essential to their learning. The opportunity to continually
practice, review, and resubmit helped them begin to self-identify errors or develop their
own strategy for making future improvements. Student 2.C stated, “Feedback this
semester allowed me to go back and see what I did wrong and also how I could improve.
Feedback I received also allowed me to become better at other assignments in my other
classes.” This feedback reinforced the use of assessment as a vehicle for learning
through the long-term development of conceptual understandings (Brookhart, 2008; Earl,
2013). Questionnaire data indicated that both instructors and students recognized the
value of process learning. Figure 9 depicts the percentage of students and instructors
who expressed value in process learning.

Percent of students and instructors who value process
learning

Professor

Student

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Figure 9. Percent of Students and Instructors Who Value Process Learning.

Dweck (2007) stated that “praise is intricately connected to how students view

121
their intelligence” (p. 34). Praise can play a positive role in the feedback process but only
if praise has high “information value” tied to the learning objective (Hattie & Timperley,
2007, p. 96). Praise represented 20% of the total feedback provided to students in LIB
301. In the study, Effort Praise made up 57% of the praise provided. This contextually
situated praise to the learning goal by giving students an explanation for why a task was
done well or met the standard. In the study, Ability Praise made up 42% of the praise
provided. The student often misinterprets this praise as focusing on praising natural
intelligence rather than growth or critical thinking. Parkes, Abercrombie, and McCarty
(2013) referred to this practice as “non-substantive positive comments” (p. 398).
Instructors often utilized the “feedback sandwich” technique where praise was
used to soften the blow of a critique (Parkes et al., 2013). An instructor from the study
noted,
[my feedback] is not derogatory in nature, even if a student has made several
errors or submitted something other than what was assigned. I typically indicate
that the student did a good job overall or at least in part – but just needs to correct
a few mistakes he/she made.
Praise preceding an error often distracted from instructive feedback and left students
confused about what needed to be improved (Hattie & Timperley, 2007; Parkes et al.,
2013). Feedback to Student 6.B stated, “Excellent job, [student name]. You just need to
add the TRAP evaluation.” In the assignment, the evaluation of the source was the
anchor learning goal for the assignment. Student 6.B did not include an evaluation of the
source; therefore, they could not have done an excellent job on the assignment. The
positive feedback provided was in opposition to the critical error in the student’s work.
Previous studies indicated that while students might have had a positive response

122
to praise-based feedback, it does not enhance their subsequent performance on future
tasks (Parkes et al., 2013). In this vein, praised-focused feedback void of substance did
not impact liminal growth and move students past stuck places. Students in this study
reported that feedback did influence them in the liminal space. For some, this concept
was perceived as growth and for others just an increase in confidence. In identifying
what aided them in getting unstuck, 17% of students reported feedback as the catalyst in
the Module 5 reflection and 44% in the Final reflection. Students and instructors
participating in the study expressed the belief that learning occurred through repeated
practice. As practice was facilitated through feedback, effective feedback was a vital
component to student ability to learn.
Research Question 3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and
beliefs regarding the role of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth
in the liminal space? Instructors surveyed in the study were asked to describe their
perceptions on student stuckness. This descriptive term represented student entry into a
conceptual threshold where they cycle through liminal growth patterns prior to mastery of
a concept (McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005); however, when asked “when”
students got stuck, instructors responded with perceptions of “why” students got stuck in
their learning. Table 26 depicts student and instructor responses to identifying student
stuckness.

123
Table 26
Instructor and Student Responses to Identifying Student Stuckness
Instructor Responses
College Readiness
Student Confidence
Student Investment

Student Responses
Research Process
Source Evaluation
Understanding Assignment
Annotation Writing
APA Citations

Three of five instructors addressed the concept of stuckness. Of note is the lack
of overlap in the type of responses given by the two groups. Responses indicated that
instructors may still be cycling through their own conceptual gateway in understanding
liminal space and recent pedagogical shifts in the field of library science. As instructors
either did not address stuckness or identify moments when they believed students got
stuck in their learning, instructors could be wrestling with their understanding of entry
into learning thresholds.
Data collected in the study indicated that instructors are also learners experiencing
their own journey through a threshold of learning; and once a learner has entered a
conceptual threshold, they experience periods of growth and regression as they wrestle
with mastering a concept – this is the liminal space (McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer &
Land, 2005). Instructors responding to the potential for feedback to impact growth and
transfer often expressed contradictory beliefs ranging from certainty, uncertainty, and
dependent upon student investment in the process. Table 27 depicts instructor responses
to the potential for feedback to impact growth and transfer.

124
Table 27
Asterisk Indicates Reference to the Relationship Between Feedback and Growth
Instructor
A
B
C
D
E

Relationship
Exists
*
*
*
*

Relationship
Uncertain
*
*
*
*

Relationship
Dependent
*
*
*

Process
Learning
*
*
*
*
*

While all instructors provided rich descriptions for believing that learning occurs
as a process of practice, there was a wide range of shifting beliefs regarding the role of
feedback. Three of five instructors expressed shifting beliefs that the relationship
between feedback and growth exists, is uncertain, and is dependent upon the learner. Of
note is that four of five instructors expressly stated that the relationship exists, while then
later stating that the relationship is uncertain. This oscillation indicated that instructors
were still developing their own framework for understanding the theoretical constructs
and practical application of threshold concepts, liminal space, and transfer.
With a framework that was still under construction, instructor feedback focused
on corrective, skills-based feedback. This regression back to a stylistic comfort zone is
indicative of the oscillation that occurs as a learner in the liminal space (McCartney et al.,
2009; Meyer & Land, 2005). As instructors continued to provide skills-based and
corrective feedback, students remained handicapped by relying on the correction rather
than tackling the improvement critically (Hattie & Timperley, 2007). This is
demonstrated by the high rate of feedback provided on APA citations as compared to the
lower rate of feedback provided on improving source evaluations. Figure 10 depicts
occurrences of feedback for citation and evaluation focused feedback compared to

125
student indication of stuck places.

Percent of feedback compared to Inidcation of Stuck Place

Source Evaluation

APA Citation

0

5

10

15

Rate of Stuckness

20

25

30

35

40

Feedback Provided

Figure 10. Percent of Feedback Compared to Indication of Stuck Places by Students.

Much of the feedback, 31%, provided to students for APA citations focused on
correcting or indicating a mistake. While corrective feedback offers a pathway to
improvement, it is not rich in growth potential to help students overcome stuckness as
students are merely repeating the correction without contextually understanding the
correction. APA citation errors occurred with the same rate of frequency between PS1
and PS3 with 46 occurrences each. This indicated that corrective feedback did not
improve student ability to craft correct APA citations throughout the course.
A potential impediment to instructor growth in the liminal space is a criticism of
the theory itself: the agent relativity of growth, transfer, and mastery in the liminal space
(O’Donnell, 2010; Rowbottom, 2007). Students’ threshold entry point was unique to
each learner, as was their growth in the liminal space. Some students may have mastered

126
concepts within the framework of the course, while others may still be cycling through
the liminal space. Some students may have demonstrated near transfer of learning within
the course but were unable to demonstrate the potential for far transfer beyond the course.
As this study relied upon students self-reporting application of information literacy
learning beyond the course and student reporting was low, it was difficult to measure the
potential for transfer of learning beyond the course; therefore, instructors did not have
concrete assurance of liminal growth, leading to an uncertainty of the impact of feedback
in the learning transfer process (Moore, 2012; O’Donnell, 2010).
Summary
The purpose of this qualitative case study was to investigate the role feedback
plays on student growth in the liminal space and transfer of learning. Findings indicated
that feedback played a significant role in student confidence, which is important as
students struggle in the liminal space (Felten, 2016). Student data indicated that stuck
places occur most with the conceptual components of the course, such as the research
process and source evaluation. The majority of feedback provided was skills-based with
a focus on corrective styling. Instructors consistently provided descriptive feedback with
a high concern that feedback tone should support student confidence. Implications for
these conclusions, recommendations for change in practice, and future study are
discussed in Chapter 5.

127
Chapter 5: Discussions, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Summary of the Study
Mastering new knowledge is a transformative process, but what happens between
initial confrontation with new knowledge and the moment it is mastered? This study
investigated perceptions of how feedback loops impacted student growth and learning
transfer in the liminal space. Adult undergraduate learners represented the student voice
in the study, a unique lens that has been underrepresented in information literacy
assessment (Catalano, 2015; Rapchak & Behary, 2013; Rapchak et al., 2015). Previous
study has recognized that entry into the threshold is agent relative and results may not be
reproducible (O’Donnell, 2010; Rowbottom, 2007; Scott, 2017). While results from this
study may not be replicable, the conclusions reveal broader understandings regarding
growth in the liminal space for adult learners.
Threshold concepts gained traction in library science with ACRL’s adoption of
the Framework in 2015. The Framework, based on Meyer and Land’s (2003, 2005,
2006) threshold concept theory and Wiggins and McTighe’s (2005) UbD, approached
information literacy as a core set of conceptual thresholds through which students must
traverse and develop their understanding and ability to research within their discipline of
study (ACRL, 2015a). As students enter a conceptual threshold, they are confronted with
troublesome knowledge or something that they find conceptually difficult to grasp
(Meyer & Land, 2003; Perkins 1999). Savin-Baden (2006) likened these liminal spaces
of stuckness as a “disjunction…hitting a brick wall in learning” (p. 162).
The liminal space, while seemingly negative, provides opportunities for students
to process through several stages of learning. As students encounter conceptually
difficult material, they cycle through stages of regression and mimicking mastery

128
(Entwistle, 2008; Felten 2016; McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005). Students
experience frustration, anxiety, and success as they flex their ability to understand and
apply new learning (Canter, 2016; Felten, 2016). While some students may reject new
knowledge and exit the threshold, other students are able to capitalize on development
opportunities in the liminal space and make inroads in the transfer of learning.
Research has investigated the degree of impact instructors have on student growth
in these stuck places (Canter, 2016; Dweck, 2006; Earl, 2013). This study focused on the
role of instructor as feedback provider. Using a qualitative case study approach, the
following research questions were addressed.
1. What types of feedback occur in an online information literacy course for
adult undergraduate students?
2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students hold regarding how
feedback influences their growth in the liminal space?
3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and beliefs regarding the role
of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth in the liminal space?
Data collection. Data were collected from two sets of participants during the fall
2017 academic semester. Instructors were purposively selected for the study based on
teaching assignments. Instructors teaching the course LIB 301 Information Literacy were
faculty librarians with 2 or more years of online teaching experience. Prior to the study,
instructors participated in a year-long, on-site professional learning community (PLC)
study of the Framework, formative feedback strategies, and Dweck’s (2006) Growth
Mindset theory. Students in the study were randomly selected based on completion of
the following assignments: PS1, PS3, Module 5 Reflection Journal, and Final Reflection
Journal. Students enrolled in LIB 301 were nontraditional, adult undergraduates in DCP.

129
Eighty-four percent of the University’s degree completion candidates are first-generation
college students.
Data were collected and categorized into three data arrays. Data Array 1 were
samples of feedback provided by instructors to students on the PS1 and PS3 assessments.
Feedback samples were collected to determine the type of feedback that occurred in the
course. Data Array 2 were student reflection journals from Module 5 and the Final.
Reflection journal posts were collected to gain insight into student perceptions of where
they get stuck in learning, what helps them to get unstuck, and their impressions from the
feedback process. Module 5 and the Final reflection journals were selected to provide
insight into student initial and cumulative perceptions of the feedback process. Data
Array 3 was an open-ended questionnaire completed by instructors. The questionnaire
asked instructors to share their perceptions on student entry to the liminal space, their
feedback style, and the relationship between feedback and learning transfer.
Data analysis. Data collected in the study were analyzed using document
analysis and coding. Coding was utilized to identify overarching trends and themes in
feedback style, stuck places, and the feedback process. Each data array was coded using
a combination of a priori and open coding with code checkers to ensure reliability of code
application. Data arrays were analyzed as individual data sets to reveal larger trends in
feedback style and perception. Data sets from each array were triangulated to answer the
three research questions of the study. Table 28 demonstrates the alignment between
research questions, instrumentation, analysis, and theoretical framework.

130
Table 28
Research Question, Instrumentation, Theoretical Framework Alignment
Instrumentation
RQ1

Instructor feedback
samples
Student Reflection
Journals
Open-ended, online
questionnaire

RQ2

Student Reflection
Journals
Instructor feedback
samples

RQ3

Open-ended, online
questionnaire
Instructor feedback
samples
Student Reflection
Journals

Analysis
Identify the types of feedback
occurring in the course.
Observe the frequency of
feedback types that align with
supporting a growth mindset
and transfer of learning.

Theoretical Framework
Alignment
Evaluation of the frequency
of feedback types provides
additional insight into
instructor and student
perceptions of growth in the
liminal space.

Compare feedback types to
instructors’ self-reported
feedback styles and studentidentified stuck places.
Analyze reflection journal in
context to instructor feedback
samples.
Compare with the type of
feedback that occurs within
the course and look for
correlations and disconnects.
Analyze questionnaire
responses in context to
instructor feedback samples.
Triangulation provides insight
to how instructors perceive the
type and influence of the
feedback they provide as it
relates to actual feedback
occurrences in the course.

Triangulation provides
insight to how instructor
feedback meets or does not
meet the needs of students
as they process through the
liminal space.

Evaluation of these
perceptions reveal microphilosophies that instructors
hold toward growth in the
liminal space and concept
mastery.

Compare instructor perception
to student perception of stuck
places.

Implications of the findings and changes to practice are addressed in the next
section.

131
Research Question 1
Research Question 1. What types of feedback occur in an online information
literacy course for adult undergraduate students? The following sections address
implications and recommended changes to practice based on findings from Research
Question 1.
Implications. Entries into conceptual thresholds are unique to each learner
(Rowbottom, 2007). Reflection journal data indicated students experienced a range of
threshold entry points including the research process, evaluation of sources, crafting
citations, and annotation writing. Feedback can be used to facilitate learning within the
threshold, but not all types of feedback are effective in promoting learning transfer and
mastery (Brookhart, 2008). Effective feedback is targeted and specific and provides
pathways for improvement (Ambrose et al., 2010). Feedback collected in the study
indicated that 64% of feedback provided to students was specific, while 36% was
general.
General feedback is defined as feedback that does not provide a pathway towards
improvement. Figure 11 depicts the number of general feedback code occurrences.

132

Number of General Feedback Type Codes
Notation

Evaluation

Error Indication

Ability Praise
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Figure 11. Number of Occurrences of General Feedback Codes.
Error Indication made up 34% of the General feedback code occurrences. Error
Indication was applied when instructors pointed out an error in student work without
providing a pathway to improvement. When occurring early in the feedback process,
Error Indication left students adrift and uncertain of how to correct mistakes. Void of
context, the student did not know why their work was evaluated as incorrect or bad;
research indicated that Error Indication fed fixed mindsets as students doubted their
ability to perform well (Dweck, 2007). Evaluation feedback, with a high rate of cooccurrence with Ability Praise, was the least frequent form of feedback in the study.
Evaluative feedback indicated that the student had met the standard on the assessment.
Non-summative use of evaluative feedback “affects [students’] sense of themselves and
their position in relation to their learning, but it offers very little direction for moving
their learning on” (Earl, 2013, p. 99). Instructors in the study demonstrated an awareness
of only providing evaluative feedback as a conclusion to a series of feedback iterations.
Ability Praise, making up 24% of the General feedback, was applied when instructors

133
indicated the student did a good job without specifying why. The implications of Ability
Praise are discussed in Research Question 2.
Instructors in the study excelled at providing rich, detailed specific feedback to
students. Figure 12 depicts the number of occurrences of Specific feedback codes.

Number of Specific Feedback Code Applications
Correction

Question

Instructional

Effort Praise

Descriptive
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 12. Number of Specific Feedback Codes.

Thirty percent of all feedback provided was corrective, meaning that instructors
provided an exact correction to an error in student work. Corrective feedback provided a
pathway towards improvement but did not necessarily support growth in the liminal
space. Research studies differentiate between feedback styles that support or stifle
cognitive processes (Brookhart, 2008; Hattie & Timperley, 2007). By providing exact
correction, instructors eliminated the students’ need to problem solve. For example, one
instructor stated, “Italicize the source title and place in sentence case. Each citation
should have a hanging indent for the second and following lines. Highlight the citation,

134
right click, then select Paragraph. Under Special select hanging indent, the click OK.”
Instructors should consider altering the feedback strategy by substituting corrective
feedback with instructive feedback. The student who receives the corrective feedback
mimics the correction, perhaps without understanding the error or the solution. This
action results in students being dependent on the correction rather than developing selfregulation (Brown et al., 2014; Earl, 2013; Dweck, 2007; Meyer & Land, 2006).
PS assessments were designed to incorporate application and practice of multiple
skills and concepts. Assessment content priorities, based on Wiggins and McTighe’s
(2005) UbD framework, are described in Table 29.
Table 29
PSs Aligned to UbD
Content Priority
Big Ideas & Core Tasks

PS Component
Source Type – Student selects the
correct source type during the research
process to use for the assignment.

Percent of Grade
60%

Annotation – Student writes a brief
summary of the source and provides a
robust evaluation of the source using
the TRAP evaluation model.
Important to Know and Do

APA Citation - Student constructs a
correct APA citation for the source.

30%

Worth Being Familiar With

Formatting & Grammar – Student
formats their submission following the
assignment formatting guidelines and
uses correct grammar and mechanics
in their writing.

10%

Corrective feedback focused on skills-based in content, with 56% of the total
feedback addressing citation and grammatical errors. Instructor questionnaire responses
consistently described the feedback focus as citation and grammatical errors; this
perception is consistent with feedback occurrences within the course. Instructors

135
demonstrated a feedback comfort zone with addressing concrete errors with concrete
solutions. The focus on citation and grammatical errors coupled with corrective feedback
style was of concern as it shifted the learning away from the big ideas and core tasks of
the assessment. This action sent mixed messages to students regarding the goals and
objectives for the course (Ambrose et al., 2010). If feedback conveyed to students that
the priority was citation style and grammar, students were likely to shift their focus away
from the research process and evaluating sources.
Several factors contribute to instructor focus on corrective, skills-based feedback.
Concrete errors are easy to identify and to provide specific feedback on, engineering
confidence that a correct pathway to improve is provided. Feedback on conceptual
errors, such as a weak evaluation of the source, is more subjective. Instructor
questionnaire responses demonstrated a high concern for impacting student confidence
leading to a reservation to respond to weaknesses with feedback that seemed abstract.
Instructors demonstrated oscillation in feedback style and beliefs about the role of
feedback in the liminal space. Oscillation is consistent with growth patterns exhibited by
learners within the liminal space, indicating that instructors may be processing through
their own conceptual threshold. This conclusion is discussed further in Research
Question 3. Third, while student reflection and feed forward prompts had been utilized in
the class before, this study is the first time the students were asked to identify where they
got stuck in their learning. Figure 13 shows the results.

136

Student Stuckness
APA Citation

Annotation Writing

Source Evaluation

Research Process

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 13. Stuck Places Reported by Students in the Reflection Journals.

While the number of occurrences of stuckness with APA Citations and source
evaluation was expected, student stuckness with the research process was unexpected.
This finding is addressed further in the next section.
Though occurrence of corrective feedback was high, each instructor in the course
incorporated instruction and questioning techniques into the feedback style. This
demonstrated that instructors were expanding the range of their feedback comfort zone.
Instructive feedback guides students towards improvement, incorporating instructive
tools and content, without providing an exact correction. Students are engaged in a
“process of learning that fills the gap between what is understood and what is aimed to be
understood” (Hattie & Timperley, 2007, p. 82). Instruction promotes practice and selfchecking as students consider the error and utilize content to develop a solution. The
process of practice and struggle can be frustrating for students and can cause a

137
questioning of inherent ability or intelligence (Dweck, 2006; Felten, 2016). Instructive
feedback aids in building conceptual understandings when students exhibit weakness
with complex assessments such as source evaluation and annotation writing. Canter
(2016) suggested telling students that the process of challenge and practice are normal,
encouraging the use of materials to help them solve problems. Instructive feedback
supports the challenge and encourages practice, fostering a growth mindset and selfregulation (Ambrose et al., 2010; Brookhart, 2008; Dweck, 2006).
Questioning, the least occurring specific feedback style, is the most challenging
type of feedback to provide (Black et al., 2003). Questioning generates conversation,
shifting student thinking from the task to the process of learning, ultimately leading to
transfer (Black et al., 2003; Brookhart, 2008). Task-oriented feedback limits the scope of
learning to the assessment; questioning shifts the feedback to how processes associated
with the task are approached. For example, the following feedback statement was
provided to a student in the course: “When using TRAP to evaluate the timeliness of the
source consider the age of the source (11 years) – what does this mean for this
information? Is this still useful to your research?” The student was asked to consider
questions pertaining to the evaluation of sources that can be applied to evaluative settings
(Black et al., 2003; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). Black et al. (2003) stated, “Questions
are often devised to challenge misconceptions, to create some conflict that requires
discussion, or to explore ambiguity that needs clarification” (p. 39). While questioning
feedback challenged students, the style also challenged instructors. More effort is
required to craft an effective question that supports developmental understanding than
providing a corrective statement to a problem (Black et al., 2003). Feedback provided to
students in LIB 301 was highly descriptive and indicated that instructors devoted effort to

138
providing feedback. The lack of questioning feedback may be due to less experience and
practice with this feedback delivery.
Recommended change to practice. PLCs are conducted at the site of the study
to facilitate in-house professional development and improvement of instruction. PLCs
provide teaming opportunities to generate shared ownership of decision-making,
increased understanding of change, and commitment to follow through (Drago-Severson,
2009). The researcher recommends sharing the following data during PLC meetings:
analysis of stuck places, occurrence of feedback style, and feedback content focus.
Through the PLC, instructors can participate in group-reads, discussion, and practice
workshops focused on feedback strategies. Instructors in the study have mastered
providing descriptive feedback but need to practice shifting from corrective to
instructional/questioning feedback.
Data indicated that feedback content primarily dealt with citation and grammatical
errors. The ratio of feedback content should be aligned to the primary learning
objectives, the Big Ideas, of the assessment. PS assessments were designed using the
UbD framework and instructors were not part of the assessment development process.
The researcher recommends the UbD framework and design be a focused PLC meeting,
as UbD was a contributing framework to the Framework. The PLC would allocate time
for workshopping so instructors can develop UbD-based assessments to implement in
their face-to-face courses. This step would allow instructors an opportunity to understand
and implement the design practices used in LIB 301 and the Framework in their own
teaching.
Wiggins and McTighe (2005) stated that instruction should be built around
learning problems. An unexpected discovery of the study was that while students

139
consistently selected the correct source type for a PS, students reported experiencing the
greatest struggle with the research process. Student misunderstandings of the research
process were hidden by the existing assessment practices within the course (Wiggins &
McTighe, 2005). As a result of the finding, the researcher recommends a review and
retooling of course content and assessment practices to support students engaged in the
research process. PSs were used as evidence of understanding the research process; this
idea is an incorrect assumption of the curriculum design as students are not reflecting or
receiving feedback on their research practices. The researcher recommends the
development of several low-stake assessment opportunities to gauge understanding of
and provide feedback on the research process.
Research Question 2
Research Question 2. What perceptions do adult undergraduate students
hold regarding how feedback influences their growth in the liminal space? The
following sections address implications and recommended changes to practice based on
findings from Research Question 2.
Implications. Feedback reception by the student is significant in determining the
potential for feedback to influence growth and learning. Figure 14 indicates that students
had an overwhelmingly positive reaction to feedback from their instructors.

140

Student Feedback Reaction
Non-Comment

Error Indication

Negative

Pathway to Improvement

Meaningful Interaction

Supportive/Encouraging
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 14. Student Reaction to Feedback from Instructors.

Students reported that feedback helped them begin to recognize their own errors,
as Student 5.A stated, “I really enjoyed the feedback. I felt like it helped me learn how to
look at things more closely, to pay attention to mistakes in the future and to fix them.”
Consistently, students described feedback as encouraging and supportive, which aligned
with instructor awareness for how their feedback impacts student confidence.
Forty-seven percent of students stated that feedback was essential to their
learning, further clarifying they appreciated having an opportunity to practice and
improve. Feedback is a critical component in guiding improvement when practice
opportunities have been provided. Error indication without context leaves students
uncertain of how to make improvements and reframe conceptual understandings.
Students often interpret stuck places as a reflection of diminished intelligence, feeding
fixed mindsets that cast doubt on the ability to improve (Canter, 2016; Dweck, 2006).

141
Specific feedback can act as a catalyst, encouraging students to engage in liminal practice
rather than rejecting the threshold concept. Canter (2016) suggested that instructors
should embrace an active role as students enter thresholds, recognizing that their actions
have both positive and negative effects.
Students reported feedback as a significant motivator to try again and practice.
Effective feedback using tools and inquiry is critical to helping students solve conceptual
challenges. Instructive and questioning feedback anchors assessments as the vehicle for
learning, where the assessment is the process by which learning occurs (Earl, 2013).
Feedback facilitates the development of self-regulation and adaptation strategies that
assist students in transferring their learning (Brookhart, 2008). Successful transfer of
learning involves adaptation and application of existing knowledge to a new setting,
demonstrating understanding of a concept (Wiggins & McTighe, 2005).
Praise-based feedback is perceived as motivating and supportive of growth
mindsets but can stagnate learning if not provided with care (Dweck, 2007; Parkes et al.,
2013). Praise represented 20% of the total feedback in the study; 57% was effort based;
and 42% was ability based. Feedback categorized as Effort Praise provided context
detailing why praise was provided, while Ability Praise simply indicated that the student
did a good job. Instructors utilized Ability Praise sparingly, often as a summative
conclusion to a series of feedback transactions. Effort Praise had a wider range of
implementation from “Good evaluation of the source using TRAP” to “Your annotation
was well written and you included many of the TRAP method questions. I especially
liked how you explained ‘relevance’ and how this particular article met your research
needs.” The first example borders on Ability Praise and holds little informational value
to the student. The second example provides context to the process of evaluation and

142
annotation writing. Descriptive praise of effort can be used to identify examples of
critical thinking in student work, supporting assessment learning outcomes with feedback
content with high informational value (Hattie & Timperley, 2007).
Praise is frequently used to soften the delivery of a critical evaluation. This action
is referred to as the feedback sandwich (Baeder, 2018; Henley & DiGennaro Reed, 2015;
Parkes et al., 2013). Questionnaire responses and feedback samples indicated use of the
feedback sandwich as common practice. The sandwich model offers appeal, but
instructors should be aware of its potential for handicapping students (Parkes et al.,
2013). Leading with praise prior to a critical error distracts attention from the error, often
minimizing the significance of the conceptual misunderstanding (Baeder, 2018; Parkes et
al., 2013). The ratio of praise to criticism is unbalanced and can set recipients up for
shock in a summative evaluation (Baeder, 2018; Henley & DiGennaro Reed, 2015).
Rather than leading with praise to soften criticism, Baeder (2018) suggested stating an
observance followed by a question to promote further discussion. An example could be,
“I notice you have only stated the article’s publication date. To evaluate the timeliness of
the article, have you considered whether newer research has been published?” This style
of critical evaluation aligns with questioning feedback, which was an underutilized style
of feedback in the course.
Recommended change to practice. Student reflection journals indicated that
feedback was essential to their ability to improve. While instructors indicated awareness
that students appreciated practice and improvement opportunities, questionnaire
responses revealed oscillating beliefs on the role feedback plays in the process. The
researcher recommends a PLC focused on praise-based feedback with guided reads and
practice strategies for leveraging praise to increase transfer potential. PLCs are an

143
allocated time for teams to clarify the purpose of goals, initiate discussion, and celebrate
improvements (Drago-Severson, 2009). Instructors could read, discuss, and build
feedback strategies based on Hattie and Timperley’s (2007) The Power of Feedback;
Parkes et al.’s (2013) Feedback Sandwiches Affect Perceptions but Not Performance; and
Dweck’s (2007) The Perils and Promises of Praise. Instructors in the study are
appropriately utilizing Ability Praise but should shift Effort Praise strategies away from
the feedback sandwich in favor of Baeder’s (2018) questioning style. A PLC would
allow instructors peer-supported time to practice retooling sandwich style feedback
samples into questioning statements, strengthening the connection between feedback and
learning objectives (Black et al., 2003).
Research Question 3
Research Question 3. How do instructors describe their feedback style and
beliefs regarding the role of feedback on the ability to transfer learning and growth
in the liminal space? The following sections address implications and recommended
changes to practice based on findings from Research Question 3.
Implications. Perceptions of student stuck places differ between students and
instructors. Comparing these differences to the type of feedback provided reveals insight
regarding instructor beliefs on the relationship between feedback and transfer in the
liminal space. When asked to describe student stuck places, instructors demonstrated
characteristics indicating that they were within their own liminal space. When
questioned about stuck places in student learning, instructors identified why students got
stuck in their learning, whereas students identified specific moments when they got stuck
in their learning. Table 30 depicts instructor and student responses to identifying student
stuckness.

144
Table 30
Instructor and Student Responses to Identifying Student Stuckness
Instructor Responses
College Readiness
Student Confidence
Student Investment

Student Responses
Research Process
Source Evaluation
Understanding Assignment
Annotation Writing
APA Citations

The disparity in response could be attributed to the fact that student reports were
based on their current state of stuckness, while instructor reports were based on their
long-range teaching experience. Instructor responses to student stuckness were limited,
with only three of five addressing the prompt. Elaboration on student stuckness had the
least descriptive responses from instructors.
Questionnaire responses addressing the relationship between the feedback loop
and transfer of learning revealed oscillating beliefs on whether a connection exists. With
the advent of the Framework, these librarians entered a conceptual gateway wrestling
with troublesome knowledge in the liminal space. Though instructors participated in
Framework and feedback-based PLCs and guided reads, shifts were still occurring in
their own framework of understanding how these concepts are applied. Table 31 depicts
instructor responses to the relationship between feedback and transfer of learning.
Table 31
Asterisk Indicates Reference to the Relationship Between Feedback and Growth
Instructor
A
B
C
D
E

Relationship
Exists
*
*
*
*

Relationship
Uncertain
*
*
*
*

Relationship
Dependent
*
*
*

Process
Learning
*
*
*
*
*

145
Previous research questioning the relationship between feedback and transfer
indicates that students consistently report positive reaction to descriptive feedback from
instructors (Gibbs & Taylor, 2016). Adult learners, who experience increased self-doubt,
impostership, and insecurity, benefit from feedback as a means of increasing confidence
(Brookfield, 2006; Coberly-Holt & Braun, 2016; Kasworm, 2008a). To support a growth
mindset, feedback must extend beyond confidence building by providing substantive
instructional content (Dweck, 2007; Hattie & Timperley, 2007).
Instructors come from a skills-based teaching tradition using the Standards, which
predated the Framework. Mastery of the Standards was measured by completion of
skills, not taking into account the stages of mimicry and regression experienced in the
liminal space (Johnston & Webber, 2003; McCartney et al., 2009). By demonstrating the
completion of a skill, it is uncertain if students were achieving transfer of learning
beyond information literacy instruction. The Framework accounts for liminality, but
assessment of this stage of learning is conceptually new to librarians. Librarians are new
learners in a liminal state and “need supporting structures and rules to give them a
framework for seeing patterns” (Earl, 2013, p. 88). The feedback loop can act as the
supporting framework to aid librarians as they master formative assessment of student
growth as opposed to one-shot skills mastery.
Findings from the study revealed a disconnect between the content of instructor
feedback and the needs of the student. Instructors placed emphasis on corrective
feedback dealing with citation and grammatical errors, while students reported feeling
stuck in the research process and with source evaluation. Stuckness with the research
process was an unexpected finding of the study, revealing gaps in curriculum and
assessment design. The slanted feedback content focus on citations and grammar as

146
opposed to source evaluation revealed a flaw in the feedback loop. Figure 15 compares
the percent of feedback on source evaluation and citations compared to the indication of
stuck places.

Percent of feedback compared to Indication of Stuck Place

Source Evaluation

APA Citation

0

5

10

15

Rate of Stuckness

20

25

30

35

40

Feedback Provided

Figure 15. Percent of Feedback Compared to Indication of Stuck Place.

Findings indicate that students lacked confidence in their ability to evaluate
sources. In response, instructors should increase feedback supporting correct behaviors
recognizing student ability to apply a concept (Dweck, 2006, 2007).
The struggle for instructors is made complex due to the hidden nature of concept
mastery in student learning. Librarians come from a mastery culture where students
demonstrate mastery by completing a set of skills (Johnston & Webber, 2003).
Threshold concepts push mastery beyond the completion of a skill, instead requiring the
ability to transfer learning to a new setting (Meyer & Land, 2006). Mastery can occur
over an extended period of time, and some students will not achieve mastery in the

147
timeframe of the course (Cowan & Eva, 2016; Pinkley & Hoffmann, 2017). This lack of
mastery does not mean that the teaching or the learning has failed but that students may
exit the course without having exited the liminal space. This is an uncomfortable place
for librarians and a point of controversy in applying threshold concept theory to library
science (Wilkenson, 2014).
When transfer of learning lacks visibility, instructors are left uncertain as to the
impact of feedback on student learning (Moore, 2012; O’Donnell, 2010). Students
enrolled in LIB 301 are asked to engage with and apply multiple information literacy
concepts. This opens the door to the possibility that students could be in a layered
liminal space, wrestling with multiple points of troublesome knowledge. As students
apply concepts and engage in the feedback loop, they oscillate between mimicry and
understanding of a concept. Mistakes appear to be mastered but are then repeated,
leaving instructors confused as to student understanding of the concept. It is at this point
instructor feedback plays a critical role in moving students forward in the threshold.
Feedback in the threshold should be instructive, supporting self-direction by
identifying error and providing tools or reflective questions to make an improvement
(Black et al., 2003; Earl, 2013). Forty-seven percent of improvement-based feedback
provided to students in the study was corrective rather than instructive. Corrective
feedback weakens self-regulation and growth by providing exact corrections to errors,
leaving the students reliant on the correction without understanding the process behind it
(Brookhart, 2008). This action could account for the repetition of errors, as instructors
were not devolving the improvement process to the student. This lack of passing off to
the learner is a common misstep for those in an instructive role (Savin-Badin, 2006).
Research suggests, however, that if instructors reduce corrective feedback in favor of

148
instructive feedback, patterns of student growth and ability transfer might become more
apparent (Dweck, 2007; Earl, 2013; Hattie & Timperley, 2007).
Other factors contributing to the lack of visibility of transfer are due to course
design and assessment practices. Near transfer, the application of learning to similar
situations to the original learning, are difficult to distinguish due to repetition of student
errors (Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Wiggins & McTighe, 2005). As instructors are engaged in
the feedback loop, assessment practices have not required them to intentionally identify
and track growth from one PS to the next. While instructors can readily recognize
repeating feedback on the same error, it is more difficult to recognize when feedback on
that error has ceased. Far transfer, the adaptation of learning to different situations to the
original learning, is unknown to instructors (Foley & Kaiser, 2013; Wiggins & McTighe,
2005). Data collected in the study relied on students self-reporting the application of
learning to other settings and reporting numbers were low. Self-reporting is also
subjective and did not provide data on applications of knowledge beyond the course.
Additionally, self-reports often refer to the intention to apply knowledge rather than the
actual practice of applying knowledge beyond the course.
Recommended change to practice. Feedback is challenging to provide for those
who have already crossed the threshold for the concepts being taught (Burkhardt, 2016).
Findings indicated that librarians were further challenged as they were also within a
liminal space as the feedback provider in the feedback loop. The researcher recommends
a series of feedback-focused PLCs to support librarians in making the shift from
corrective to instructive feedback practice. Through the PLC, instructors can analyze
data from the study and practice modifying feedback style and discuss the implications of
correction versus instruction and the implications for learning transfer. The visibility of

149
transfer is shrouded by the repetitive nature of the feedback loop. Instructors would be
able to practice identifying growth and repetitive errors between PSs; discussing
feedback strategies to solidify transfer and help students overcome stuck places. As
feedback practices change, the researcher recommends repeating the study to investigate
the relationship between the types of feedback provided, student perceptions of
stuckness, and instructor perceptions of the impact of feedback in the liminal space.
Recommendations for Future Research
Based on the findings of the study, the researcher makes the following
recommendations for future study.
Conduct CIPP evaluation. This case study was initially informed by a CIPP
evaluation. CIPP evaluations are designed to implement change to improve current
practice, aid in decision making, and measure quality assurance (Fitzpatrick, Sanders, &
Worthen, 2011). The researcher recommends conducting the process and product cycles
of a CIPP evaluation to assess changes to practice based on recommendations from the
study. Conclusions from the study indicate that changes should focus on modifying
practices on feedback and assessment and support for instructors in the liminal space.
Instructors should affirm successful feedback strategies, use data to modify and
strengthen feedback practices, and discuss implications associated with change.
Repeating the study would strengthen the reliability of findings and allow for longitudinal
tracking of trends on the relationship between feedback and transfer in the liminal space.
Support for librarians in the liminal space. Findings indicated that librarians
are cycling through a liminal space as they understand, adapt, and apply the Framework
in practice. Currently, there are no studies that investigate or acknowledge that librarians
are situated within a liminal space while the Framework is processed, taught, and

150
assessed. Meyer and Land (2005) described the liminal space as a stuck place where
learners are wrestling with their conceptual understanding of knowledge that is
troublesome. Savin-Baden (2006) described this idea as a disjunction. Learners in this
space display three characteristics: oscillation between growth, stagnation, and
regression; strong emotions; and mimicry of concept mastery (Entwistle, 2008;
McCartney et al., 2009; Meyer & Land, 2005; Savin-Baden et al., 2008). Instructors in
this study exhibited these characteristics in their feedback practices and questionnaire
responses. Instructors provided highly descriptive feedback, but the content was
primarily skills based and corrective with occasional oscillation to instructive and
questioning feedback. Instructors expressed multiple and conflicting beliefs about the
impact of feedback on growth and transfer of learning in the liminal space. These
different beliefs demonstrated oscillation between the stages of growth, regression, and
mimicry of mastery.
It is important to determine how librarians cross the threshold and what structures
exist to transform how librarians know, understand, and apply. Instructors participating
in the study were highly active in professional development, participating in conference
workshops and site-hosted PLCs. While this work fostered a collegial environment rich
with exploration and discussion, it did not provide opportunities for practice with peer
feedback. Drago-Severson (2009) stated that adult learning and development hinges on
sustained mentorship. Future study should investigate the degree to which current
professional development practices support librarian growth in the liminal space and
leads to concept mastery in teaching and assessing implementation of the Framework.
Cycling through the liminal space is frustrating, emotional, and stressful (Felten,
2016). The process of providing substantive feedback with high informational value is

151
equally so, yet the emotional labor of providing this type of feedback by instructors has
not been studied (Richardson et al., 2016). Emotional labor investigates the positive and
negative emotional stressors that impact burnout and emotional exhaustion for service
providers (Bishop & Mabry, 2016; McCann & Holt, 2009). Matteson and Miller (2014)
referenced display rules, accepted expectations for actions and response, as a trigger for
emotional labor. While display rules are often applied to face-to-face interactions, virtual
transactions carry many of the same emotional burdens, as instructors must convey tone
without facial cues (Bishop & Mabry, 2016). Instructors in this study indicated a concern
for how their interactions through feedback affected student confidence and took care to
mask frustrations associated with providing feedback on repetitive mistakes. Future
study should investigate the degree of emotional labor instructors experience in providing
students with substantive feedback.
Assessment for far transfer of learning. Measuring the far transfer of learning
takes longitudinal study, which is often difficult in non-cohort student groups. This study
was limited in measuring the far transfer of learning, as it was not possible to gather data
on student learning beyond the boundedness of the course. To gather far transfer data at
the site of the study, changes would need to be made regarding the institutional practice
of data collection and analysis. Students participating in the study will complete a
quantitative exit survey upon graduation from their degree program. The researcher
recommends the development of a non-leading, qualitative question prompting students
to reflect on applying concepts learned in LIB 301 to other courses of study during their
academic careers.
Conclusion
Many factors influence growth and transfer of learning within the liminal space.

152
This study investigated the role of the feedback loop in the growth process. Substantive
feedback that is both descriptive and instructive promotes a growth mindset and student
engagement. This study indicated that instructors should modify feedback practices by
reducing corrective feedback in favor of instructive and questioning feedback. To help
instructors make this shift to instructive and questioning feedback, PLCs can be formed
to assess trends in stuck places in student learning. This study also indicated that
librarians are within their own liminal space as they develop new strategies for
implementation and assessment of the Framework. Librarians and library associations
should explore the potential for professional learning and training on Framework
instruction to help librarians through their own threshold. As librarians continue to
wrestle with the Framework, identifying liminality and patterns in growth in student
learning can inform how we assess and teach for learning transfer and concept mastery.