ABSTRACT OF DISSERTATION

THE IMPACT OF SOCIAL PRESENCE IN ONLINE AND ON-CAMPUS
COURSES ON STUDENTS’ INFORMATION LITERACY SKILL ATTAINMENT AT
GATEWAY COMMUNITY AND TECHNICAL COLLEGE
This study examined the relationship between social presence and students’ information
literacy skill attainment. Additionally, comparisons were made between those students
in face-to-face courses versus those in online courses. Whether students received
assistance from the instructor, librarian or via library tutorials was also of importance.
The first research question addressed whether there was a different level of information
literacy skill attainment by students who feel socially connected in online classes or for
those students on-campus. The second involved looking at post-test scores to
determine whether those students who sought help outperformed those who did not.
Students also specified their level of social presence and indicated if they sought
assistance from their instructor, librarian or through library tutorials. Results suggest
there is a need for a closer look at faculty involvement in establishing social presence.
There is also evidence students are using library learning objects, solidifying a need for
good quality resources. One recommendation as a result of this study includes taking a
closer look at the instructor’s role in establishing an atmosphere conducive for social
presence. This may lead to professional development for faculty. A second
recommendation is to take a mixed methods approach to include dialogue with students
and participating faculty.

Chapter 1
Introduction
Information literacy instruction is a broad, abstract concept for many outside the
field of librarianship, yet it is not unique to the profession, and is imperative for an
information literate citizenry. In today’s society, people are bombarded with information
from a multitude of sources, some reliable and others are highly suspect. Regardless of
content, many information sources are widely available via the Internet, broadcast
television, radio and through numerous publications, to name a few. Sorting through
the myriad of sources and determining a best, most reliable course of action is
especially daunting to those individuals lacking the skill set to question sources to
determine credibility and timeliness among a host of other attributes. The American
Library Association (ALA) states,
The sheer abundance of information will not in itself create a more informed
citizenry without a complementary cluster of abilities necessary to use
information effectively. Information literacy forms the basis for lifelong learning. It
is common to all disciplines, to all learning environments, and to all levels of
education. It enables learners to master content and extend their investigations,
become more self-directed, and assume greater control over their own learning.
(American Library Association, 2017, Information Literacy Defined section para.
1-2)
It is not enough to locate information, but to critically ascertain its value and use it
accordingly. These are vitally important steps to take to avoid sharing erroneous
details. The ALA defines information literacy as a set of abilities individuals can use to
determine and recognize a need for information. Once there is an established need,
individuals must be able to locate, evaluate and effectively use the information they find
(American Library Association, 2017).
Information literacy, and the role of librarians, evolve as is necessary with
advances in technology and an increasingly greater understanding of how people
interact with information. It is no longer necessary for students to step inside the library.
Students, faculty, and staff have remote access to research databases and other
resources readily available online and partly because of this, librarians’ roles are

shifting. Jacobs addresses the need for libraries to remain relevant by providing users
with the resources and services they need on their terms. “The expectation that patrons
will come to the library when they have an information need is an antiquated service
model. Changes have already taken place to make our resources and services
available 24/7” (Jacobs, 2010, p. 4). Libraries are beginning to look different, becoming
less of a book depository and more about collaborative work environments focusing on
blending technology and traditional resources. One only has to visit Grand Valley
State’s Allendale Campus Library and Information Commons to witness the transition.
The Mary Idema Pew Library Learning and Information Commons is designed to
be the intellectual heart of the Allendale Campus. It will exceed the expectations
of anyone who thinks of a library solely as a home for printed books and
whispered words…students will find a range of environments…receive coaching
from a peer consultant in research, writing, or presenting…engage easily with
each other in spaces engineered to accommodate the sounds of natural
conversation; or curl up by the fireplace in a contemplative space…Students will
do all of these things in a building that was crafted with their needs in mind—the
right lighting, the right furniture, the right resources, the right services, the right
spaces, and the right amount of flexibility. (Grand Valley State University, 2017,
para. 1)
This particular library also includes a makerspace complete with a 3-D printer, a tutoring
hub, café area, and inviting places for students, faculty, and staff to gather and
collaborate.
Librarians are moving away from sitting at reference desks waiting for questions,
and instead are actively seeking partnerships and becoming integral players in
collegiate departments. At California State University, nine faculty librarians served as
liaisons to more than 30 academic departments. The librarians and departmental
faculty worked together to navigate turbulent budgetary times to ensure students had
access to the material they needed (Jacobs, 2010). Libraries are more than buildings
and print materials; librarians are more than book-sitters. Organizations like the ALA
lead the charge in determining the library professional’s role and determining what
information literacy entails. The Association for College and Research Libraries, a
2

division of ALA, develops and disseminates best methods to teach information literacy
instruction for those working within the field, but as equally important, attempts to give
librarians the tools to instruct those outside the profession. Part of the professional
responsibility involves educating students of all ages on what information literacy is and
equipping them with the skill set to become life-long learners and information detectives.
Prior to the term information literacy, the phrase bibliographic instruction was
commonplace within the confines of education. Most recently, the library profession
sees the evolution continue with the term digital literacy. ACRL defines information
literacy as “the set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective discovery of
information, the understanding of how information is produced and valued, and the use
of information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in communities of
learning” (ACRL, 2016). Information literacy is the term I intend to use throughout this
study for three reasons. First, it is the most commonly used term in the library
profession. Secondly, it is the chosen term of the ACRL. Finally, the term digital literacy
lacks definition and clarity in many instances as it entails both concepts and skills, as in,
computer literacy and aptitude (ACRL, 2016).
Importance of Information Literacy
Information literacy and acquiring the skills associated with it is increasingly
imperative in an ever-changing world steeped in rapidly changing technology. People
face information overload. Though information is becoming more and more accessible,
there are few guarantees it is credible, accurate, current or reliable. Nationally
renowned biologist Edward O. Wilson says, “We are drowning in information, while
starving for wisdom. The world henceforth will be run by synthesizers, people able to
put together the right information at the right time, think critically about it, and make
important choices wisely” (1998, p. 301). Teaching information literacy aims to combat
the vapid, sometimes harmful slew of erroneous information readily available around the
clock by arming information consumers with essential tools. These tools are necessary
so information consumers can determine when information is needed, where to find it
and even create it when warranted. President Barack Obama, recognizing the impact
of the 24-hour news cycle and vast array of media and digital resources has on the

3

information management process, advocated for an information literate society. He
declared October, 2009, National Information Literacy Awareness month.
Our Nation's educators and institutions of learning must be aware of -- and adjust
to -- these new realities. In addition to the basic skills of reading, writing, and
arithmetic, it is equally important that our students are given the tools required to
take advantage of the information available to them. The ability to seek, find, and
decipher information can be applied to countless life decisions, whether financial,
medical, educational, or technical. (Obama, 2009, para. 3)
As President Obama recognized, information literacy is a life-long skill applicable
in countless areas of our lives. Delors states, “Today, no one can hope to amass during
his or her youth an initial fund of knowledge which will serve for a lifetime” (1998, p. 99);
rather, learning is a continuous process, it does not stop upon completion of school, it
continues over a lifetime. Shank and Bell (2011) talk about how new computing
technologies influence and transform the academic librarian’s role and the library itself
stating,
Librarians are the technologists of their day; in the past, utilizing the analog tools
(e.g., books) that allowed information to be recorded and shared. However, the
mediums for creating, recording and sharing information have exponentially
expanded in the digital information age. (p. 107)
Teaching post-secondary students information literacy skills is more than a means to an
end (in terms of conducting research for an assignment) but rather an arsenal for
successfully navigating life; it is mission critical for librarians. Knowing how to search
databases and critically evaluate information using the technology of the day makes for
perceptive students who can critically read news articles, view broadcast media with a
discerning eye and become well-informed consumer researchers.
Methods of Teaching Information Literacy
Librarians or library paraprofessionals often provide information literacy
instruction on college campuses to students both on-campus and to those online in a
variety of ways. One approach is visiting a class face-to-face (F2F) to deliver
information literacy instruction. To instruct distance-learning students librarians embed

4

in their online course as a teaching assistant and personal librarian. Librarians provide
one-on-one research assistance while the library website plays a vital role.
In the F2F classes, instruction is most often offered only once a semester and
only for a portion of the overall class time. These types of instruction sessions are so
common among academic librarians they earned their own descriptor – one-shotinstruction. Librarians have only one chance to impart what easily could be a
semester’s worth of information. Rutledge and LeMire (2017) believe there are better
ways to transcend the one-shot model arguing
…for a broader conceptualization and implementation of information literacy that
pushes outside the standard library confines of the one-shot or credit-bearing
course to encompass ad hoc, unmediated, online, train-the-trainer, and peerlearning approaches. (p. 348)
There are institutions where librarians co-teach a course; there are credit-bearing
information literacy courses at some organizations; and the ACRL mentions several
other ways of imparting information literacy education stating, “the goal of these
programs vary based on the school, student learning goals, and level of study.
Commonly, the programs aim to extend information literacy education and students’
critical information practices” (ACRL, 2016).
The embedded librarian (EL) program at Gateway Community and Technical
College (GCTC) encompasses librarians placed as teaching assistants in every online
course with a research component. Embedded librarian programs can take many forms
and be as active or inactive as organizers want, need or have the resources to
implement (McCaffrey & Leonard, 2014). Frederiksen and Phelps make the point when
embedded librarianship is defined simply as “someone who establishes a library
presence in a virtual learning space” (p. 3) that means the engagement by librarians can
greatly differ. This can include co-teaching, providing a librarian chat widget in a
research guide and/or being involved with students via a learning management system
(Frederiksen & Phelps, 2014). Lemley’s role at the University of South Alabama
College of Nursing is an example of the latter and most similar to that which is
employed at GCTC. He is a virtual embedded librarian serving 300-500 students.
Lemley views the embedded model as proactive “instead of simply responding, the
5

embedded librarian anticipates information needs and provides customized ‘bespoke’
service to the user group” (2016, p. 232).
According to Greyson, Surette, Dennett and Chatterley, “three primary models of
embeddedness have emerged” (2013, p. 287). They cite academic librarians
embedded in on-campus classes as well as online, special librarians working in a
corporate library who work not in the library, but alongside its users, and medical
librarians who “serve as clinical informationists, or information specialists in context”
(Greyson et al., 2013, p. 287). Additional roles for embedded librarians are emerging in
recent years emphasizing partnerships for things like scholarly research, helping to
secure grant funding and appointments to college governing committees (Blake,
Balance, Davies, Gaines, Mears, Shipman, Connolly-Brown & Burchfield, 2016). At the
core of embedded librarianship is a belief in building working relationships in addition to
a commitment to a group’s goals and significant contributions (Shumaker, Talley &
Miervaldis, 2009). Hamilton believes,
Embedded librarianship ultimately focuses on the human element of library, and
the use of technology to honor and privilege the relationships that libraries can
nurture through embedded librarianship provides points of transformation for
making the library more relevant and meaningful. (2012, p. 27)
At GCTC, the librarians hope to expand embedded services into the on-campus
classrooms, however current staffing does not allow for a complete roll-out at this time.
The library consists of one library director and one full-time library specialist in addition
to two part-time library specialists. The only print collection available to students is a
reference collection at each of the three campus locations and program-specific items
located within the appropriate department. GCTC library is partners with a local public
library allowing any GCTC student, staff, or faculty member, regardless of their home
address, to borrow materials from the public library. The majority of GCTC library
resources are digital and available to students via database links located on the library’s
website. This is key in how GCTC library personnel design and deliver information
literacy instruction. The methods currently in use to provide students with information
literacy instruction vary depending on course delivery method. Librarians deliver
instruction to on-campus students using the one-shot instruction technique for lack of
6

any other means available at this time. Presently, there are no other avenues available
such as co-teaching a course or a credit-bearing information literacy course in place.
For distance-learning students, the EL program ensures there is a librarian or library
paraprofessional in every course requiring research. More details on these methods
are forthcoming.
Another information literacy resource is often a college or university’s library
website, as mentioned above, this is the case with GCTC’s library. The first thing web
users see on the site are links to the most popular databases.

Figure 1. GCTC's library homepage, as pictured here, gives users immediate access to
recommended databases for research.
Also included on the website are “learning objects” (Polsani, 2003). Learning
objects are items librarians use to reinforce information literacy concepts in the form of
tutorials or web guides. GCTC offers tutorials on plagiarism, conducting an effective
search, and choosing a topic, to name a few. Many libraries create web guides, also
called research guides or in our case, we purchase and utilize LibGuides by
Springshare. Our LibGuides refer the user to books, tutorials, websites, and even
assignment calculators all in one location for students to access. Librarians and staff
customize each guide, allowing students to access information and resources most
useful for that class, including assignment-specific resources. It is a course roadmap
available in digital form. These objects are reusable, often low-cost, and available to
the student anytime via the website. They serve all students – those online and oncampus (Courtney & Wilhoite-Matthews, 2015). When embedded, those learning

7

objects most relevant to the class are placed in the Blackboard course shell and made
available to students from the library support page.
Obstacles Concerning Information Literacy Instruction
There are a number of obstacles concerning information literacy instruction,
including, but not limited to the following: communicating the importance and
implications successful information literacy instruction can have on student retention,
designing meaningful instruction with little or no faculty input or guidance, making
content more interactive and meaningful for students, and assessing its effectiveness.
According to Needham, Nurse, Parker, Scantlebury and Dick (2013), several attempts
to tie student usage of library resources to student achievement show a positive
correlation. The challenge now is to demonstrate similar results in online courses.
There are a number of assessments available, most created by university libraries.
Kent State University Libraries created Project SAILS (Standardized Assessment of
Information Literacy Skills). Designed for college students, the assessment tool costs
$5-$6 per student depending on whether you choose to test as a cohort or on an
individual level (Project SAILS, 2017). Declining library budgets make paying for
assessment less appealing than creating and customizing one’s own, specific to the
instruction given at one particular institution.
There are freely available assessments as well, ranging from multiple-choice
tests to rubrics. The Institute of Museum and Library Services’ RAILS (Rubric
Assessment of Information Literacy Skills) project specifically investigated the rubric
approach to information literacy assessment in higher education. The result is a set of
rubrics, freely available to any institution of higher education to use to assess their
programs and instruction (RAILS n.d.). College libraries tend to personalize these
assessments in order to evaluate whether students are familiar with their local
resources and to compliment that particular institution’s information literacy curriculum.
Despite the existence of conventionally agreed upon information literacy skills, there is
no one “right” way to assess them; there are, however, best practices. The study I
conducted involved a personalized pre- and post-test and accompanying survey
intended to assess students’ knowledge of local resources and information literacy
attainment in addition to determining a level of social presence. There does not
8

currently exist such an assessment tool to examine the impact of social presence on
information literacy skill attainment.
Other obstacles are the avenues students must take to locate and retrieve
information. Despite the popular notion that students in college are comfortable and
proficient with technology, librarians routinely encounter students who struggle. This is
not surprising, considering even “digital natives” those students born and raised with
technology, are not as perceptive as some might think. According to a report by the
non-profit group, Change the Equation,
Millennials spend on average 35 hours per week on digital media, yet CTEq’s
analysis finds that 58 percent have low skills in solving problems with technology.
In fact, an international comparison of millennials’ performance on PIAAC’s
technology test ranked the United States dead last out of 19 participating
countries. (2015, High Tech, Low Skills section, para. 1)
At GCTC, we have students of all ages, not just millennials, who struggle with the
hardware (computers/mobile devices), software and Microsoft Office products, the
library catalog, and the library website. Still others manage to locate library databases
but struggle with navigating them efficiently, determining credibility of the information or
recognizing proper use, and constructing correct citations. All of these scenarios are
routine for library staff. Generally speaking, convincing students to go beyond
“Googling it” is a challenge.
Information literacy spans mediums. It is a set of skills used whether working
with print or digital content. The ultimate goal for most librarians, myself included, is to
teach these skills and ensure students understand the transferability beyond the
assignment at hand. All students deserve the right to acquire this knowledge whether
on-campus or online. Incorporating information literacy instruction into distance learning
models to ensure online students are receiving effective library services is crucial.
Library, Information Literacy, and Distance Education Standards
There are a number of policies, procedures and accreditation standards to keep
in mind when discussing student access to library services and distance learning.
Gateway Community and Technical College is one of 16 colleges in the Kentucky
Community and Technical College System (KCTCS). As part of the system, there are
9

standards all colleges must adhere to when offering online courses. Those standards
pertaining to the library are minimal, but key. KCTCS policies and procedures for
libraries 4.1.3.1 mandates “the college libraries provide library services and resources to
distance education students equitable to those provided to on-campus students”
(Kentucky Community and Technical College System, 2010, Services section, para. 2).
The accrediting body for KCTCS is the Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC). SACSCOC is a regional accrediting
body and addresses both the on-campus library and library services for distance
learning students. In accordance with SACSCOC standard 3.8.1, “the institution
provides facilities and learning/information resources that are appropriate to support its
teaching, research, and service mission” (Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools Commission on Colleges, 2011, p. 31). Additionally, standard 3.8.2 mandates
“the institution ensures that users have access to regular and timely instruction in the
use of the library and other learning/information resources” (Southern Association of
Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, 2011, p. 31). This second standard
applies to information literacy instruction. It leaves room for interpretation with no
specific guidelines in place, allowing flexibility in program design and implementation
among academic libraries.
When it comes to distance learning, SACSCOC addresses the philosophy of
providing equitable services in terms of institutional effectiveness. The accrediting body
states distance education programs must be comparable to campus-based programs
(Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, 2014).
SACSCOC mentions library services along with other academic support and the
organization mandates the institution “regularly assesses the effectiveness of its
provision of library/learning resources and student support services for distance or
correspondence education students” (Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
Commission on Colleges, 2014, p. 3). Accreditation standards require “students have
access to and can effectively use appropriate library resources” (Southern Association
of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges, 2014, p. 3). Again, the standards
are open to interpretation and there are no set rules or specific guidelines for academic
libraries to follow.
10

There is a recent resource in which librarians can turn to for guidance that
considers professional standards for information literacy instruction on-campus and
online. The ACRL's Information Literacy Framework, adopted in January of 2016, and
implemented in July of 2017, fully replace the organization’s Standards. This is the
organization's latest attempt at substantiating the importance of information literacy.
There is even less information regarding assessment included in the Framework than
the Standards due to this recent philosophical shift. One thing is certain: the
organization recognizes the rapidly changing face of information and that is the reason
for creating the Framework.
Students have a greater role and responsibility in creating new knowledge, in
understanding the contours and the changing dynamics of the world of
information, and in using information, data, and scholarship ethically. Teaching
faculty have a greater responsibility in designing curricula and assignments that
foster enhanced engagement with the core ideas about information and
scholarship within their disciplines. Librarians have a greater responsibility in
identifying core ideas within their own knowledge domain that can extend
learning for students, in creating a new cohesive curriculum for information
literacy, and in collaborating more extensively with faculty. (ACRL, 2016,
Introduction section, para. 1)
In addition to the ACRL's Framework, the professional organization's Standards for
Distance Learning Library Services document offers a level of detail SACS does not,
making it a great resource for academic librarians. More importantly, it too addresses
equity of services referring to this concept as the "access entitlement principle" (ACRL,
2016). The access entitlement principle states,
All students, faculty members, administrators, staff members, or any other
members of an institution of higher education are entitled to the library services
and resources of that institution, including direct communication with the
appropriate library personnel, regardless of where they are physically located in
relation to the campus; where they attend class in relation to the institution’s main
campus; or the modality by which they take courses. Academic libraries must,

11

therefore, meet the information and research needs of all these constituents,
wherever they may be. (ACRL, 2016, Part I Foundations section, para.1)
Background of the Problem
Librarians constantly combat the belief an Internet search yielding a list of results
is equivalent to conducting research. Too often, the unskilled “researcher” fails to
question the origin or credibility of the information gathered. This is a daily occurrence
in social media with people retweeting or sharing “news” stories from sources unknown.
In fact, in Northern Kentucky alone, two events addressed this very phenomenon.
Northern Kentucky University held an event in July of 2017 titled Developing and
Teaching Information Responsibility. The day-long workshop addressed the role
librarians have in equipping students with the skills necessary to determine validity and
responsibility to combat unfounded information. Only a few months earlier, in May, the
Kenton County Public Library hosted an event they titled Combating Fake News! A
Q&A with Local Experts. The panel consisted of Greater Cincinnati journalists and
librarians (2017).
This situation calls for dedicated library services focused on information literacy
and instruction. People with proper information literacy training will question where
information originates and determine whether it is credible. Perhaps these informed
citizens will think critically and think twice before blindly sharing information via social
media and in daily conversation. Another significant reason for exploring the
effectiveness of information literacy instruction at GCTC is the fact the library is mostly
digital. The only print items the library owns are reference items to meet programmatic
needs, but they are non-circulating, for in-house use only. Students and faculty rely
heavily on the electronic resources such as databases, eBooks, and library-produced
learning objects like LibGuides and tutorials. Information literate students know how to
search for the information they seek using the school library’s databases rather than
turning to the Internet for unreliable and unproven resources.
As briefly mentioned above, GCTC has an embedded librarian program for
distance learning. Simply, what this involves is placing a librarian in every online course
with a research component. In addition to offering students direct access from their
course shell to a personal librarian, there are a number of library resources, or learning
12

objects, easily accessible from the student’s library support page. Such items include
short, topic-specific video tutorials and tips on how to best navigate library databases,
navigate and evaluate Internet resources, and more. Students can view these tutorials
and handouts at any time, on their own time. The librarian is their personal librarian for
the duration of the course and often times beyond that as well. The librarian becomes a
name they know and someone they can rely on for help. In the EL classes, the librarian
is a teaching assistant and therefore has the ability to post timely, specific
announcements regarding students’ research assignments. The librarian also answers
student questions within 24 hours. This method of instruction and guidance can be
active or passive. It is up to the librarian and works best with student participation.
Some librarians post announcements to address very specific deadlines on the
students’ course calendar, others post periodic announcements with general research
tips and advice. Serving as an embedded librarian can be time-consuming and
energizing, or disheartening at times. Sometimes there are classes with little to no
feedback from students or instructors and students call upon the librarian seldom, if
ever. When students do reach out, the librarian can easily spend as much as an hour
or more providing assistance via email, phone, or by chat. Sometimes those same
students become repeat customers, other times the librarian never hears anything in
return and is not sure whether the information was of use. The assumption is the
information was useful and the student successfully moved forward, however, there is
currently no way of knowing for sure.
Instructors teaching F2F courses requiring research are not required to invite a
librarian into class to review resources, demonstrate how to use them, and teach
information literacy skills. Those who invite a librarian to teach often allot 45 minutes to
an hour for instruction. As mentioned above, these one-shot-instruction sessions are all
we have to impart a semester’s worth of information. Because time is of the essence
and there is much to cover, I designed an instruction menu. Instructors can customize
each session to best meet the needs of their students and the research assignment.
The librarian ultimately incorporates the instructor’s request into the lesson. To more
fully engage students, the librarian incorporates at least one active learning technique.
At the conclusion of the lesson, the librarian encourages students to seek assistance via
13

several avenues: through the Information Commons, the library chat service, email,
phone, or by appointment. Based upon experiences with online students, those who
reach out often do so as often as necessary. Librarians must assume those who do not
reach out are self-sufficient and able to carry out the research with no additional
assistance. Anecdotally speaking, according to the informal feedback from instructors,
that is not the case. Some instructors express concern students are not utilizing the
library’s services to their advantage or at all and the final grade for their research
assignment reflects it.
Students both online and on-campus receive surveys, but they are very different
in content and delivery. Students on-campus receive a survey immediately following
information literacy instruction and return it to the librarian before class ends. Online
students receive a link to a survey at the end of the semester and completion is by no
means mandatory. Often the response rate is extremely low. Either way, there is no
way to determine whether students’ knowledge attainment occurred. To date, there has
not been any type of study to determine effectiveness of information literacy at GCTC
for any mode of delivery.
The review of the literature unearthed nothing regarding the potential influence of
social presence on information literacy skill attainment in online and on-campus
courses. GCTC’s methods of delivering information literacy to students vary greatly
from online to on-campus. Research indicates it is a foregone conclusion, as the
modalities require different approaches to deliver content and encourage interaction and
learning. The question is whether either, both or neither are effective and whether
social presence plays a role.
There is a concern when moving content from in-person to online that one “does
no harm.” In fact, “Do No Harm” is the title of a particular study looking at student
performance and interactions among students in a science course with online and oncampus sections. The authors cite research about the influence of electronic media on
learning and came to the conclusion “media itself does not cause differences in
learning, but does facilitate teaching methods that may affect learning” (SchoenfeldTacher, 2001, p. 257). The focus then became one of a concern about interactions in
the classroom whether virtual or tangible. Using pre- and post-tests, the authors
14

concluded no harm was done when they moved a science course online. Most
importantly, they feel rather than comparing two mediums, their study opens a new
avenue into looking at how media plays a role in interactions. This is of importance as
this study looks at the impact of information literacy skills using an embedded librarian
approach for online students and one-shot instruction for those students on-campus.
Theoretical Framework
Social presence learning theories greatly influence this study. There is much
written about the need for social presence in online classes. As cited in Sung and
Mayer, Cobb states online learning “is an inherently social endeavor, and social
interaction with the teacher and other learners is instrumental in motivating learners’
efforts to learn as well as promoting their satisfaction with online courses” (Sung &
Mayer, 2012, p. 1738). This is also true of those on campus. Establishing a connection
between instructor and students and between students can be easier when meeting
F2F.
Dunlap, Verma, and Johnson combine two methods of learning, the Community
of Inquiry model (COI) and Kolb's experiential learning cycle, to create something they
call presence + experience. The intention is to address an instructional design goal for
online courses “to protect those aspects of the on-campus course that make it an
effective learning experience (a “do no harm” perspective) while at the same time
maximize the benefits and minimize the limitations of eLearning” (Dunlap, 2016, p. 145).
The combination takes the CoI model, which is a descriptive model and combines it with
the prescriptive model of Kolb’s experiential learning cycle. Together, they give
instructors the means to design courses with best practices in order to fully engage their
students online (Dunlap, 2016). This framework allows for the development of “a
sociocultural view of learning and knowledge formation as situated in a social context”
(Dunlap, 2016, p. 146). CoI’s focus on teaching, social, and cognitive presence
combined with the four aspects of Kolb’s theory on experiential learning (concrete
experience, reflective observation, abstract conceptualization, and active
experimentation), encourage designers and instructors to take a more practical,
engaging approach to online learning. It also aims to create an effective learning
experience for distance learners.
15

In addition, sociocultural and collaborative learning theories are imperative to this
study as they relate specifically to information literacy instruction. Traditionally,
behavioral theories (think “sage on the stage”) combined with limited demonstration by
the instructor drive information literacy instruction. Vygotsky, as cited in Wang, states
“learning is embedded within social events, which are fundamental to learning” (Wang,
2007, p. 151). Incorporating information literacy into on-campus and online courses
requires a social context and some relationship building. It also must have some
significance to the students. Stand-alone sessions on information literacy have little to
no impact; whereas instruction tied to a particular assignment have more meaning.
Mayne and Wu conducted a study concerning social presence in online graduate
nursing courses. They compared two groups, one group had their current standards for
communication, the other employed “social presence strategies.”

16

Usual Online Strategy
Welcome announcement/message from
instructor posted on Blackboard

Instructor information

Course information and syllabus

Small groups formed based on individual
student information

After introductions, commence with
assignments

Social Presence Strategies
Personal email contact by instructor with
request for student information as early as
two weeks before semester begins
Early course availability with invitation and
opportunity to “look around” and ask
questions
In addition to instructor information, an
“About Me” section with biographical and
personal information/pictures from
instructor
Announcement with “Begin here”
instructions on course flow, links to
helpful tutorials, “help links”
Inclusive and complete syllabus with
timelines, due dates, course expectations,
learner’s role, instructor’s role
Contingency plans for problems and issues
Library links and direct access to library
liaison
Rubrics for evaluation of assignments, selfevaluation rubrics
Extensive Resource Section for students to
access as needed
Groups formed based on student-submitted
information about clinical interest and work
experience
Use of an instructor-designed “seating chart”
with specific and personal information about
students and groups that is used with all
asynchronous interactions
Use of ungraded “pre-lesson” with feedback
to facilitate group work
“Coffee Shop” that is “off limits” to instructor

Figure 2. Strategies for Establishing Social Presence (Mayne & Wu, 2011) *Bold,
italicized portions indicate what GCTC librarians currently do in EL classes.
Those items bolded and italicized illustrate techniques currently used in GCTC
EL classes. While there are more techniques to consider, those concerned with making
personal connections take precedence at this time.

17

Statement of the Problem
Purpose of the Study
This study compared the information literacy knowledge attainment of students in
online courses and those in F2F courses to determine whether library efforts and social
presence are effective despite method of delivery. The results stand to inform future
practices in both mediums. More specifically, the research sought to address the
following question: What impact does social presence in online and on-campus courses
have on students’ information literacy skill attainment at Gateway Community &
Technical College?
Research Questions
The above question was tested with these two research questions:
1. Is there a different level of information literacy attainment by students who feel
socially connected in online classes or for those students on-campus?
2. Are post-test scores different for those students who seek additional help than
those students who do not?
Significance of the Study
Findings will determine the future course of the library’s efforts to impart
knowledge on information literacy. It will illustrate what is or is not working and lead to
new or different ways to address information literacy no matter the course delivery
method. If there is a correlation between social presence and information literacy
attainment, then avenues to increase social interconnectedness are necessary. This
could have further implications for the other 15 colleges in KCTCS. Library directors
from across the system invest in student outcomes, therefore establishing what works
and what does not in terms of student success and information literacy skill attainment
is worth sharing.
Definition of Terms
This study makes use of the following terms:
Distance Learning/Distance Education/Online/ELearning: Academic programs or
extension services offered away from, or in the absence of, a physical academic
campus relying heavily on technology.

18

Embedded librarian: A librarian who actively participates with the course instructor in
the delivery of an online course and who is identified and made accessible in the course
management system. Depending on course design and instructor preferences, the level
of involvement for the librarian varies from a full instructional partnership to a viewing
and commenting role.
Information literacy: is a set of abilities requiring individuals to recognize when
information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the
needed information.
One-Shot Instruction: these are one-time library instruction sessions rather than
sessions spread out over the course of a semester.
Social Presence Theory (SPT): originally defined by Short, Williams, and Christie
(1976, p. 65) as the degree of salience between two or more people using a
communication medium.
Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations
It is assumed respondents will answer survey questions honestly as they are not
being graded on responses, rather participation.
Some limitations of this study involve participants’ existing knowledge or
perception of information literacy and prior skill attainment.
Delimitations of this study include a survey utilizing multiple choice in order to
collect and analyze data quickly and efficiently. The data, collected during the course of
the spring 2018 semester, involved students in three on-campus classes and three
online sections. The participants are from these courses only, rather than the entire
GCTC student population.
Conclusion
Information literacy is of great concern in today’s world where 24-hour news
cycles, social media, and the phrase “fake news” abound. At Gateway Community and
Technical College, it is imperative students are taught these skills to differentiate
between reliable and unreliable sources. This study is an attempt to more fully
understand the relationship, if any, between social presence and students’ information
literacy skill attainment in both F2F classes and online. If students’ perceived level of
social presence in online and on-campus courses impact their information literacy skill
19

attainment, GCTC has an obligation to determine what methods are most effective and
implement those methods.

20

Chapter 2
Review of the Literature
Introduction
The nature of libraries is constantly changing. From the Alexandria Library in
ancient times filled with papyrus scrolls to the modern computerized facilities you see
today or access from your home computer, change is not new. Early libraries in the
United States were collections of books and manuscripts donated and purchased by
individuals like Benjamin Franklin. In 1731, he and members of his Junto Society
pooled their resources to create this country’s first lending library, the Library Company
of Philadelphia. It was the nation’s largest public library until the 1850s, and served as
the Library of Congress until the capital moved to Washington, D.C. (The Library
Company of Philadelphia, 2017). There is no one-size-fits-all library. Besides public
libraries, there are special libraries for business, medicine, law and those for higher
education, more commonly called academic libraries.
The first academic library in the Thirteen Colonies sprang up at Harvard
University, then Harvard College, when John Harvard donated about 300 books to the
academic institution. Academic, or college libraries, were not easily accessible as the
hours of operation were limited. The operations often fell to a professor designated
“caretaker of the library” (Weiner, 2005, Colonial Libraries, para. 2). During the 19th
century, in a matter of just 60 years, the number of published periodicals increased
nearly ten-fold, from fewer than 100 to 9,000. Bibliographic instruction was developed
and libraries became the “heart of the university,” a term credited to Harvard President,
Charles Eliot in 1873 (Weiner, 2005). There was growing emphasis on collections and
making them available to students.
The twentieth century brought about reference departments intended to guide
library users and provide instruction. In 1967, the Ohio College Library Center (OCLC),
founded with a purpose to “develop a computerized system that would allow the
libraries of these [Ohio universities] academic institutions to share resources and reduce
costs” (Weiner, 2005, p. 9), eventually developed WorldCat. WorldCat is a database of
nearly everything every library in the country owns, even including some international
libraries.
21

Many components contribute to the nearly constant evolution of libraries. At the
forefront in modern times, it is technology and the Internet. It is difficult to imagine what
Franklin and Harvard would think of such vast amounts of information available virtually
all the time and at the tip of our fingers. The Internet and massive databases have
revolutionized not only library collections, but also how people conduct research, and
how academic librarians adapt and teach research techniques. Not too terribly long
ago, the term for teaching research techniques was bibliographic instruction. It evolved
to information literacy instruction and some are now considering another name change:
digital literacy instruction. This change in terminology and underlying theories occurred
over the past few decades in order to keep up with the changing nature of information.
Many of the early distance learning models focused on sending materials via mail
delivery to students in correspondence courses unable to attend traditional classes.
This began to evolve in the 1960s when instructors could use broadcast media to teach
to students at a distance. This advancement in technology and content delivery still did
not allow for much, if any, “direct communication between the teacher and learner or
communication between learners” (Courtney & Wilhoite-Matthews, 2015 p. 263). With
subsequent technologies and further studies conducted on distance education, there is
more concern with the social aspect of knowledge attainment, and online learning
provides new challenges and new avenues for ensuring students and instructors feel
connected (Anderson & Simpson, 2012).
While online learning began decades ago, the evolution of the library’s role in
online learning is relatively new ground to cover. It was in 2004 that Barbara Dewey
coined the term “embedded librarian.” Dewey wrote of the numerous manifestations of
an embedded librarian (Dewey, 2004). For the purposes of this study, embedded refers
to a librarian assigned to online courses as a teaching assistant utilizing learning objects
to help convey relevance to particular research assignments.
It was1982 when the first Off-Campus Library Services (OCLS) Conference
convened. It is now the Distance Library Services Conference (ALA, 2017). It was not
until the 1990s when off-campus/distance learning came to include Internet-based
online learning.

22

Librarians support online learning in a variety of ways, from simply ensuring there
is a link to the library’s catalog or website within the learning management system like
Blackboard or Canvas, to actually embedding librarians in the class as teaching
assistants. At some institutions, librarians are in synchronous classes and can give
information literacy instruction in real time. Often embedded librarians are in
asynchronous situations and rely on the tools within the course management system
and any additional learning objects they create or locate to impart information literacy to
students. This requires students to take more initiative in seeking out useful tools such
as library and research-related tutorials, links to websites, and research databases.
There are librarians solely dedicated to online librarianship and it is a different venue
requiring new and different techniques than those typically used in F2F settings.
Ensuring institutions of higher education provide effective services to online
students equivalent to students on campus is relevant, timely, and extremely important.
The number of students enrolling in online classes continues to increase. In fact, while
higher education deals with lower overall enrollment, enrollment in distance education
courses is on the rise (Allen, 2016). Online courses are not going away any time soon.
The latest numbers from the U.S. Department of Education’s National Center for
Education Statistics indicate, “In the fall of 2014, 5,750,417 students enrolled in a
distance education course at degree-granting postsecondary institutions” (Digest of
Education Statistics 2015, p. 557). That’s 28% of the 20.2 million enrolled that
semester, or more than one in four students. Of that number, 14% took their “college
program exclusively through distance education courses” (Digest of Education Statistics
2015, p. 478).

23

Figure 3. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (2016).
Digest of Education Statistics, 2015 depicting enrollment in distance education courses.
Search Description
Primary resources for this study came from both Gateway Community and
Technical College’s databases and Northern Kentucky University’s Steely Library
databases and print collection. Keywords used include information literacy, social
presence theory, online and distance learning, embedded librarianship, and F2F
instruction. Many searches also included “effectiveness,” “best practices,” and
“assessment.” Several websites, including that of The American Library Association,
also provided much needed information.
There are numerous studies involving the role social presence plays in student
achievement, none focused on the role social presence plays in information literacy
attainment in online and on-campus classes, and the effectiveness of current library
practices in both environments. The purpose of this study is to determine whether
social presence has an impact on students’ information literacy skill attainment and
determine if modality matters. The review attempts to answer the following questions:
What does academia know about student success in online classes versus those
provided F2F? More specifically, what do librarians know about information literacy skill
attainment in distance learning versus those students on-campus? What studies exist
on the effectiveness of the embedded librarian in distance learning?

24

Review of Research
Effectiveness of online learning vs F2F. There exist numerous studies
regarding distance (online) learning and traditional brick and mortar classes. Most
studies involving online versus on-campus look at the impact of learning styles or
student grade point averages, overall grade, and retention. Still more research focuses
on overall satisfaction in online courses (not information literacy or library-specific)
versus those brick and mortar ones. Also prevalent are studies involving similarities
and differences in student ratings of online instruction, or of the course instructor,
versus F2F (Young & Duncan, 2014), including Donald Schwartz’s comparative analysis
looking at the effectiveness of learning online versus on-campus, and still others
focusing on student perceptions of effectiveness in online and on-campus courses
(Mentzer, 2007).
There is concern as to the effectiveness of online education and differing
opinions on the matter. According to Allen, “skepticism among faculty has remained
very high” (2016, p. 26) in regards to online education, but seems proportionate to the
amount of students enrolled in distance education courses. For example, in those
institutions with more than 10,000 students enrolled in online courses, 60% of academic
leaders at the institution report their faculty accept it as a legitimate means of educating
students. Schools with fewer students enrolled see a drop in the percentage of faculty
who value it (Allen, 2016).
Nearly every study references Allen and Seaman’s report on behalf of the Sloan
Consortium. The work they provide is the authority on distance/online education with
data to fuel many studies. Overall, the research tends to be small-scale studies looking
at a wide array of variables. Most studies compare modalities with student
success/achievement as the primary factor under consideration (e.g., Aragon, Johnson,
& Shaik, 2000; Bourelle, et al., 2016; Campbell et al., 2008; Karatas & Simsek, 2009;
Kirtman, 2009; Mentzer, Cryan, & Teclehaimanot, 2007; Schwartz, 2012; ShoenfeldTacher, McConnell, & Graham, 2001; Summers, Waigandt, & Whittaker, 2005; Wolff,
Wood-Kustanowitz, & Ashkenazi, 2014; Zhan, Xu, & Ye, 2011). Other studies examine
student satisfaction (Karatas, & Simsek, 2009; Mentzer, Cryan, & Teclehaimanot, 2007;
Summers, Waigandt, & Whittaker, 2005; Young & Duncan, 2014), and a relatively small
25

number, by comparison, look at interactions between students and student/instructor
(Campbell, et al., 2008; Shoenfeld-Tacher, McConnell, & Graham, 2001).
It appears in most studies online courses are just as effective for students if not
more so than those offered F2F. Shoenfeld-Tacker, McConnell and Graham looked at
higher-level science courses using pre- and post-tests to determine what effect, if any,
distance delivery had on student performance and classroom interactions. In this case,
online students outperformed those on-campus on the post-test. Incidentally, they also
looked at interactions between students and student-instructor and utilizing Bloom’s
Taxonomy and found there was a higher level of interaction online (2001). Bourelle, et
al., looked at online students and those F2F taxed with using multiple modalities for an
assignment. Students online performed as well as or better than those students in the
F2F class. The researchers surmise this is because they self-selected to take the
online section, therefore may have higher comfort levels using the technology required
for the assignment (2016).
In terms of achievement, online students do not always fare as well or better than
their F2F counterparts. Mentzer, Cryan and Teclehaimanot observed lower grades for
students in an online section of a course compared to the F2F section. Upon further
exploration, they realized those lower grades were due largely in part to students failing
to turn in assignments. They concluded meeting F2F positively influenced students to
turn in assignments. The average grade for those in F2F classes was an A minus,
those online, a B (2007). Karatas & Simsek looked at academic achievements and
student satisfaction using pre- and post-tests. Their findings show students were more
successful in F2F than online but all students developed a higher level of “learning
permanency” (Karatas & Simsek, 2009, p. 71). Satisfaction levels were equivalent
leading the researchers to determine those students online were at least as satisfied as
those on-campus (2009.)
There are two large-scale studies concerning online versus F2F. The first looked
at grade-based student performance in courses offered in both modes across a wide
variety of subjects (Cavanaugh & Jacquemin, 2015). The catalyst for their study was a
desire to have a greater impact at the institutional level. The study involved looking at
the grades of students in online and F2F courses taught by the same instructor and
26

controlled for demographic and academic variables. It contained data from nearly
150,000 students in more than 6,000 courses in a three-year time-period. There was
little to no difference in students’ grades from one modality to another.
The second large-scale study concentrated on a performance gap among
community college students in online and F2F courses citing a need to take into
account gender, age, ethnicity, level or academic preparedness, and subject matter (Xu
& Jaggars, 2014). Overall results indicated students had more difficulty succeeding in
online courses than those F2F. The performance gaps observed among sub-groups
such as ethnicity, age, and gender mimicked already known gaps in F2F courses
among those same groups, but Xu and Jaggars found online only made those gaps
more significant (2014).
There are numerous variables to examine and countless ways to look at online
and F2F courses. Yang (2011) and Garman (2012) studied how gender played a role in
online and F2F courses. Young and Duncan (2014) looked at how students rated their
online and F2F courses and Garcia (2014) focused on the assessment aspect of
learning spaces. Wolff, Wood-Kustanowitz, and Ashkenazi raise a concern regarding
the scope and audiences of most online versus F2F studies. Like many studies before,
their study looked at student performance: however, they address the differences that
come with community college students. “Students at two-year institutions are more
likely to attend part time, be employed full time, care for a child as a single parent, enter
college courses without a high school diploma, and/or require remedial coursework”
(Wolff, Wood-Kustanowitz, & Ashkenazi, 2014, p. 167). Therefore, their study
considered many variables and found there was no significant difference in final exam
grades among those students who completed the course. What was significant was the
difference in attrition rates. Those online students who completed the course had
higher GPAs than those who withdrew (2014). The researchers do not feel there is an
equivalency in student performance between students online and F2F. They suggest
“discouraging students with poor academic skills from enrolling in online courses and,
perhaps, by providing working students with additional guidance during registration”
(2014, p. 174).

27

Embedded Librarian Role and Effectiveness
Role of the embedded librarian. Embedded librarianship (EL), inspired by the
placement of journalists in various military divisions during combat, can mean many
things and come in many forms. Historically, academic libraries were located within
academic departments until they grew too large and became independent of any one
academic area (Dewey, 2004). With the embedded librarian concept, in some ways the
academic library is reverting to that original concept. It may or may not be a physical
occupation, but is definitely a service that is proactive, rather than passive. Dewey says
the “concept of embedding implies a more comprehensive integration of one group with
another to the extent that the group seeking to integrate is experiencing and observing,
as nearly as possible, the daily life of the primary group” (2004, p. 6).
The role of the embedded librarian can be that of someone physically located
within a particular academic area or college to serve as subject-matter expert and
liaison between the college and library. In terms of online or distance education,
embedded often means a librarian is placed within the course itself. For some
institutions of higher learning, this means there is a library link within the course
management system and access to learning objects such as tutorials or research
guides. For Gateway Community and Technical College, embedded means a librarian
is in every course with a research component in addition to providing links to learning
objects. The embedded librarian is officially a teaching assistant and can post timely,
relevant messages to students when they could prove useful in the research process.
Libraries are cognizant online students in asynchronous courses miss out on the
instruction they would typically receive on-campus, instruction often tailored specifically
to their course and assignments. There is consensus for both online and on-campus
classes: library instruction must be relevant or students fail to see a connection. In
online classes specifically, Shank and Dewald address the role of the embedded
librarian and need for a close relationship with course designers and instructors so
library resources are seamlessly incorporated into course management systems.
Having a link within those pages to library information provides one-stop
shopping for students. The closer the link between course assignments and

28

library resources to help with those assignments, the greater the likelihood that
students will access library information. (2003, p. 41)
Matthew and Schroeder saw a need to replicate library services students receive oncampus for those online. One an instructor, the other a librarian, they joined forces
starting with an online, librarian-led discussion forum. The experiment was successful;
43 classes adopted the embedded librarian model initially used in two courses the
previous semester (2006). With growth they encountered some challenges, including
defining the role of the librarian within the course. Again, it is imperative the course has
a research component so the librarian can be specific in assisting students and students
see the relevance. They also stress faculty support and subsequent reminders to
students to reach out to the librarian can help drive traffic.
Chisholm and Lamond believe while Dewey’s level of embeddedness is ideal, it
is simply not practical in a time of few resources. They propose the role of the
embedded librarian be ensconced in the course in such a way the use of reusable
learning objects help sustain it. Not just reusable learning objects, but those created to
fit across disciplines, again as a means to save time and resources. They rely on
intrinsic self-motivation from students to engage in self-tests and information literacy
tasks that are ungraded. They found those courses where the instructor required
students to use library resources had a higher rate of engagement. The researchers’
goal here was to mimic an on-campus student’s reference and research behavior in the
online environment, by placing library modules and prompts at a point in the course
where they envision F2F students seeking help at the physical reference desk
(Chisholm and Lamond, 2012). They conclude their methods allow for an embedded
librarian approach that is not as time-consuming as some models calling for coteaching, but is still successful.
Effective embedded librarian services. It is not enough to be embedded, but
effectiveness is also critical. There are few studies specifically looking at the success of
the embedded librarian program in terms of student and information literacy outcomes.
As mentioned above, there is evidence to suggest librarian activity and information
literacy is more effective when students can tie it directly to an assignment. There is
great variance in what methods and assessments exist. That variance also applies to
29

the number of study participants. One study in particular had 32 participants (Kumar,
Edwards, & Ochoa, 2010) while another had 122 (Barnard & Weaver, 2011).
Bennett and Simning saw reference questions from psychology students
increase as much as 400% when they began an embedded librarian program in the
school of psychology at Capella University (2010). They determined the number of
librarian posts in online psychology courses correlated to the number of reference calls
to the library. They also looked at embedding a librarian at the macro and micro levels.
The first involves the librarian including links to learning objects and the library’s website
in students’ classes; the second involves a librarian in the virtual classroom as a coinstructor. This method allows for personal interactions between the librarian and
students. That personalization is a common theme in the literature involving embedded
librarians.
A study conducted in New Zealand examined students’ citations to determine
whether they used the library-created research guides or other library resources to
complete their assignments. The analysis showed students used library resources less
frequently than those items provided by the course instructor. This, despite the
psychology librarian using the online venue to point to these resources and encouraging
students to contact the librarian (Barnard & Weaver, 2011).
Still another study involving embedded librarian services encouraged students to
participate in an online discussion forum and view learning objects such as tutorials and
research guides. The researchers reviewed analytics gathered from the course
management system to determine what students accessed and how many times. Their
conclusion is one supported by other research: students are likely to access those
resources directly related to the research assignment only. They are less interested in
general research items (Kumar, Edwards, & Ochoa, 2010).
A case study of an information literacy course at an exclusively online proprietary
school indicated improvements were necessary. Librarians made extensive revisions to
the course in the hopes of making it more useful to students (Reichart & Elvidge, 2015).
Ensuring information literacy content is relevant to students’ lives and more specifically,
tailored to address their assignments, is essential for their attention and satisfaction.
Reichart and Elvidge (2015) noted a 5% increase in student’s exam scores with the
30

newly designed course. Possibly more important, the anecdotal comments from
students were positive whereas the comments in assessments of the former course
model were anything but positive.
There are very few studies on the perceptions of faculty, librarians, or students
(Carrico & Neff, 2012; Edwards, Kumar & Ochoa, 2010; Yousef, 2010).
There is a consensus in the literature illustrating successful embedded librarian
programs hinge on connections between faculty, librarian and students. There are no
studies, at present, investigating the impact of social presence on information literacy
skill achievement in both online and F2F classes.
In summary, the review of the literature touched upon several recurring themes,
including the ways in which the library profession continues to adapt to the various
modes of instruction over the years, particularly those involving distance-learning
students. Other topics included the efficacy of online learning when compared to F2F.
Most studies looked at various learning styles, retention, and students’ level of
satisfaction in the course. The literature shows there is much room for debate on the
effectiveness of online education, with some researchers concluding online is just as
effective, if not more so than F2F. There are a number of studies to the contrary, but no
two studies looked at the exact same variables.
The evolution of the embedded librarian (EL) role is discussed in relation to
providing equitable services to all students, including those online. There appears to be
a consensus EL programs are more successful when instruction is tied directly to
assignments and relationships between librarian, instructor and students are solid.
What was not found in the literature were any studies specifically looking at the
library or librarian’s role in online or F2F classes and the effectiveness of information
literacy instruction. Also not located was information on embedded librarian programs
specifically looking at information literacy. Social presence in relation to information
literacy skill attainment in either instructional modality was also not located in the
literature.

31

Chapter 3
Methodology
Introduction
The following chapter illustrates in detail the research design, the research
hypothesis, restates the research questions in addition to providing information about
the study’s population and recruitment methods, data collection and analysis. My
review of the research found no studies regarding social presence and library services,
nor any studies specifically regarding social presence and its impact on information
literacy attainment in online courses compared to on-campus. The need to evaluate
current practices is evident and establishing a baseline for improvement is necessary.
Research Design
This study used a correlational design requiring the researcher to use statistical
analysis to compare variables. There were no control variables and the study was
descriptive in nature. The independent variables included students’ level of social
presence and course modality (F2F or online.) The dependent variable consisted of pre
and post-test results indicating level of information literacy skill attainment.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
It was predicted those students in F2F classes who receive information literacy
instruction would fare better on the pre- and post-test analyzing information literacy
skills than those in online courses. This was surmised because students in online
courses must work a little harder to obtain the information and there is no formal
instruction. The researcher hoped to learn whether Gateway’s current services to
students pertaining to information literacy appear in any way helpful to students’
information literacy attainment as well as determine whether social presence has an
impact. The primary questions were:
1. Is there a different level of information literacy attainment by students who feel
socially connected in online classes or for those students on-campus?
2. Are scores on the test different for those students who seek additional help
than those students who do not?

32

Procedure
Each F2F class involved in this study received one 45 to 60-minute information
literacy instruction session. At GCTC, a standard information literacy session involves
teaching students how to choose a topic for research, search for that topic in the
school’s databases, use the databases effectively to narrow or broaden searches,
evaluate information, use it ethically, and properly cite their work. This is quite a lot of
information for one hour of instruction. Additional assistance was offered to students via
SKYPE, email, phone or by appointment. Students were encouraged to reach out to the
Information Commons staff as well. The Information Commons, staffed by GCTC
generalists, know enough about basic-level library reference assistance they can handle
many library-related questions. They were to refer students to library staff as
necessary, especially when questions pertained to research.
The researcher served as an embedded librarian (EL) in every online class
involved in this study. Gateway Community and Technical College uses Blackboard as
its course-management system. The EL populated the library support page in every
course shell with a personal biography and research-related resources such as tutorials
on topics as if in a F2F class, such as navigating library resources, plagiarism, how to
effectively search databases. The EL posted timely, research-related and assignmentspecific announcements to all students and offer additional assistance via SKYPE,
email, phone, or if in the area, by appointment in person.
Population and Sample
In an effort to understand whether current methods of imparting information
literacy to students at Gateway Community and Technical College (GCTC) are effective,
the study required the cooperation of several faculty members and their students.
There were a number of pre-requisites for faculty to participate. They must teach a
course online in addition to a course F2F in the spring semester of 2018. The courses
must require some level of research. Instructors must allow the researcher to spend 45
minutes to an hour in their F2F class during the semester providing students with
information literacy instruction. The researcher also served as an embedded librarian in
the online course as a teaching assistant with the ability to post announcements and

33

point students to information literacy tutorials and supplementary material to help guide
their research.
To recruit, the researcher emailed all faculty at GCTC the above pre-requisites
inviting interested parties to respond. The communication included the study’s title,
purpose and a brief description of this methodology.
The students in three online classes and three F2F classes at GCTC were asked
to participate in the study. This led to a possible pool of 147 respondents. Of the 147,
49 students fulfilled the requirements to participate in the study.
Instrumentation
This quantitative approach took form as a survey along with pre- and post-tests
for students to complete. The pre- and post-test contained the same ten questions
addressing information literacy attainment over the course of one semester. In addition,
the survey provided some demographic information, addressed comfort level with
technology, and preference as to modality of courses, online or F2F. It also encouraged
students to disclose whether they sought additional research assistance from their
instructor, librarian, or other means, to determine whether there is a correlation between
scores and level of assistance sought and provided. A Likert scale allowed students to
self-report their level of social presence.
The pre-test included ten questions meant to gauge students’ information literacy
skills. The test was administered during the first few weeks of classes in spring
semester 2018, and students were given extra credit for merely accessing the test, even
if not opting to participate. In that case, instructors gave credit for those who provided
their names, not for content. Students opted into the study by answering the questions.
Informed consent was addressed in such a way as to waive required signatures by
making it clear to students by answering the questions, they opt in, but they will not be
penalized for opting out (not supplying answers). In order to maintain students’
confidentiality, only the researcher viewed the test results and the researcher deidentified all results before reporting any data. Course instructors did not know the
results of students’ tests, only whether they supplied their names for credit.
The researcher used Qualtrics, a survey software application, to create multiple
choice pre- and post-tests along with survey questions to glean additional demographic
34

information and allow study participants to self-report whether they sought additional
research assistance. Qualtrics was used to design and deploy a survey at the end of
the semester included with the post-test to determine whether students felt socially
connected to the librarian and library services. This was measured in the form of a fivepoint Likert scale. The tests and surveys were administered via a link students
accessed via the course management system. The results were accessible to the
researcher. Instructors received a report detailing those students who completed the
test so they could give students credit for completion but not student scores. Test
instructions emphasized instructors were to grade for completion, not for the number of
correct answers.
Data Collection
I asked students in all classes to complete the pre-test and survey within the first
few weeks of the spring 2018 semester. A link to the survey was available to all
students in digital form via Blackboard. Students in F2F classes received information
literacy instruction after they took the pre-test and before they completed the post-test,
relevant to the timing of their research assignment. Students in online courses
continued to receive announcements from the librarian timed to correspond with their
course calendar and syllabus. Results of the pre-test were collected and tabulated by
the researcher within one month of administering the test. The post-test and survey
was available for all students during the last two weeks of class in the spring 2018
semester with a deadline of May 4, 2018 for completion. The post-test was available
digitally via Blackboard in the same manner as the pre-test and survey. The researcher
tabulated results immediately following the deadline for completion.
Students received the post-test during the last two weeks of classes. Instructors
and the researcher determined the best time to administer the test during those last
weeks of class so as not to overwhelm students facing final examinations and projects.
In addition to containing the same quantifiable questions as the pre-test, students
reflected on their social presence in the class. In addition, students self-reported
whether they contacted their instructor, a librarian, or relied on learning objects like
library tutorials for additional assistance with their research assignment.

35

Data Analysis
The researcher used paired observations to analyze the ten pre- and post-test
questions for each student looking at percentage of change, then compared overall
results from online students to those students on-campus using proportions, taking into
account students’ self-reporting level of social presence and assistance. This gave each
question equal value.
Students answered questions concerning social presence using a five-point
Likert scale with choices ranging from strongly agree to strongly disagree, including a
neutral position. As for analyzing the Likert scale to determine whether there is a
correlation between students’ perceived level of social presence and the percentage of
change between pre- and post-tests, a matched pair test was used. This took into
account students online versus those students F2F.
To compare students who sought help and those who didn’t a two-sample t-test
addressed the percent of change between pre- and post-test scores and the amount of
help requested and received (once, twice, more than twice, and none, a four-point Likert
scale). To compare those results among online and F2F students called for two
separate linear regressions.
Conclusion
This study addressed students’ level of self-reported social presence in online
and F2F classes at GCTC. In addition, the researcher hoped to see whether social
presence has an impact on information literacy skill attainment in both modalities.
Should this study have concluded students are more successful in obtaining those skills
in part due to a higher level of social presence and/or their willingness to ask for
research assistance, this could have had implications not just for GCTC’s library and
programming, but for the other 15 schools in KCTCS. A positive correlation would have
given credence to the impact library services can have on student success.
No correlation also has implications for GCTC and potentially the other schools
within the system. This necessitates a close look at how we currently offer library
services and support to all students, online and F2F, and may determine a new course
of action to ensure librarians are effective in their roles as embedded librarians and as
teachers in the classroom.
36

Chapter 4
Analysis of Data and Research Findings
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to ascertain whether social presence impacted
Gateway Community and Technical College (GCTC) students’ information literacy skill
attainment despite modality of course, online or face-to-face (F2F). The study also took
into account if those students who sought assistance from the instructor, librarian or by
viewing library tutorials performed better on the post-test than those who did not.
Specifically, this study compared the information literacy knowledge attainment of
students in online courses and those in F2F courses to determine whether library efforts
and social presence were a factor in performance despite method of delivery.
Research Questions
The following research questions served as the impetus for data collection and analysis:
1. Is there a different level of information literacy attainment by students who feel
socially connected in online classes or for those students on-campus?
2. Are post-test scores different for those students who seek additional help than
those students who do not?
Research Design
This study was a correlational design requiring the researcher to use statistical
analysis to compare variables. There were no control variables and the study was
descriptive in nature. The independent variables included students’ level of social
presence and course modality (F2F or online). The dependent variables were pre and
post-test results indicating level of information literacy skill attainment.
Participants and Response Rate
In an attempt to answer the above research questions, students in six classes at
GCTC had the opportunity to participate in the study by answering pre and post-test
questions with accompanying surveys. The pre and post-test contained the same 10
questions concerning various aspects of information literacy. All the covered topics,
therefore answers, could be gathered via the library’s website, tutorials, guides, and for
those students in F2F courses, the librarian (researcher) made sure all topics were
covered during instruction. Serving as the embedded librarian for online students, the
37

librarian (researcher) also made sure students could readily access all necessary
learning objects and tutorials. Students were asked questions pertaining to personal
social presence at the end of the semester using a 5-point Likert scale. The Likert scale
choices were then assigned numeric values culminating in a range of -14 to +14. The
range closer to -14, indicated students felt a lack of social presence whereas the range
closer to +14 meant the opposite was true. Three of the classes in the study were F2F
and three were online during the spring 2018 semester. All classes were 16 weeks in
length. In order to control as best as possible for any instructor knowledge and
feedback naturally given to students, the researcher required participating instructors to
teach both F2F and online classes.
Table 1
Instructor and Course Allocation Including Modality
Instructor

F2F Class

Online

Instructor A

COM 181

COM 252

Instructor B

ENG 101

ENG 102

Instructor C

SOC 101

POL 101

I visited all three participating F2F classes to introduce myself and briefly explain
the study and encourage participation. All six classes received a message from me
explaining the study. The message I posted utilizing the course management system
Blackboard, explained the extra credit students would receive for participating and the
link to the pre-test and survey. Each class had one week to complete it. This happened
within the first two weeks of the spring semester. I posted one reminder announcement.
96 students completed the pre-test and survey.
Students received an announcement regarding the post-test and survey
concerning social presence two weeks prior to the end of the semester, in April 2018.
The announcement reminded students they would receive additional extra credit for
participating. Of the 96 students who participated in the pre-test, 49 students completed
the post-test and social presence survey. While there were additional respondents to
38

the post-test, they could not be included in the study since they had not completed the
pre-test.
Throughout the spring semester, I served as the online students’ embedded
librarian (EL), occasionally posting assignment and research-related announcements to
their course in Blackboard. While I had access to the F2F students’ Blackboard
courses, I did not post as I would in online courses because that is not current practice
at GCTC. F2F students received information literacy instruction that lasted anywhere
from 45 minutes to an hour during their regularly scheduled class time. Instruction took
place after students completed the pre-test and before the post-test was available.
Demographics
Out of a possible 147 students in six classes, 49 students (33%) completed both
the pre and post-test necessary for comparison. Of those 49 students, 26 were in F2F
classes, 23 were online. 13 participants were male, 36 were female. This mirrors the
overall population of GCTC in that females outnumber males, however, this sample was
certainly more heavily weighted with females than the general student population. In
the fall of 2017, 53% of the GCTC student body was female, 47% male. 31 participants
were between the ages of 18 and 24, 6 were aged 25-31, 8 identified as 32-40, and 4
were 41 or older. In relation to GCTC’s student population, nearly half of the student
body is between the ages of 18 and 24. The study population for the same age group
was more than half. The other age categories are not too far from GCTC’s 2017 data
with those over the age of 41 at 9% in the study and at GCTC. Not taken into account
were those students under the age of 18, which made up 16% of GCTC’s population in
fall of 2017. Disproportionality in some categories may have impacted results. Had I
allowed students under 18 to participate, would I have seen as much as a 16% increase
in participation?

39

Table 2
Participant Demographics, GCTC 2017 Demographics and Modality of Course
Count

%

GCTC Fall
2017
Student
Population

Modalilty

Gender
Participants’
Age Range

F2F

26

53%

Online

23

47%

Female

36

73%

53%

Male

13

27%

47%

18-24

31

63%

48%

25-31

6

12%

17%

32-40

8

16%

10%

41 or older

4

9%

9%

Data Screening
I designed the pre and post-tests with accompanying surveys so all questions
necessary to the study must be completed. Therefore, it was not necessary to eliminate
any tests or surveys for missing values. However, it was necessary to eliminate those
participants who completed the post-test and not the pre-test.
Data Analysis
In an attempt to answer the first research question concerning whether there is a
different level of information literacy attainment by students who feel socially connected
in online classes or for those students on-campus in F2F classes the researcher
assessed the mean change score Online vs. F2F. Using Minitab 18 Statistical Software
(2010), a two-sample t-test was performed. I looked to see whether there was a
difference in the average change in score for students in the F2F classes compared to
those online. There is no evidence of a difference in the average change in score
(T=1.50, p-value=0.139). Statistical power appears to be an issue as the sample
average change in score for the two modalities are far enough apart that a larger
40

sample may show a statistically significant difference. If this were the case, the data
suggests F2F students would outperform those online.
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics: Change in Score F2F and Online
Class

N

Mean

St Dev

SE Mean

F2F

26

1.08

1.81

0.35

Online

23

0.35

1.58

0.33

SE Mean
St Dev
Mean
Online

N

F2F

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 4. Change in Score, F2F and Online. Had there been additional participants
trending the same way, the mean score could indicate students F2F would
outperform those online.
The researcher then performed a two-proportion z-test to determine if there was
a difference in the proportion of students whose score improved from the pre-test to the
post-test for students in F2F classes compared to online students. Students with a
positive change in score were counted as improving, while students with no change or a
negative change were counted as not improving. There is no evidence of a difference
in the two proportions (Z=1.26, p-value=.209). This could also be a result of small
sample size and lack of statistical power.

41

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics: Proportionate Improvement Pre and Post-test F2F and Online
Class

N

Event

Sample p

F2F

26

17

0.653846

Online

23

11

0.478261

In regards to social presence and whether it was a significant factor in predicting
the change in score, the researcher performed a regression analysis. There is no
evidence it was a significant factor (F=0.16, p-value=0.693). The modality was also
looked at in the same fashion and results indicate no evident relationship (F=0.06, pvalue=0.535).
Table 5
Analysis of Variance: Social Presence as Predictor of Score
Source

DF

Adj SS

Adj MS

F-Value

P-Value

Regression

1

0.480

0.4802

0.16

0.693

Social
Presence

1

0.480

0.4802

0.16

0.693

Error

47

143.071

3.0441

Lack-of-Fit

10

23.849

2.3849

0.74

0.683

Pure Error

37

119.222

3.2222

Total

48

143.551

In order to address the second research question to determine whether post-test
scores were different for those students who sought assistance than for those students
who did not, I determined there were three ways in which students could indicate they
sought assistance within the survey. Respondents were asked whether they sought

42

research assistance from a librarian, instructor, or whether they used learning objects to
support their research efforts (in this case, specifically, library tutorials). To determine
any significance, t-tests and z-tests were performed for each of the three methods of
assistance.
A two-sample t-test determined there is no evidence of a difference in the
average change in score for those students who sought additional help from a librarian
than those students who did not (T=.59, p-value=0.559).
Table 6
Descriptive Statistics: Change in Score with Librarian Assistance
Librarian

N

Mean

St Dev

SE Mean

Did not seek
help

34

0.82

1.85

0.32

Sought help

15

0.53

1.46

0.38

A two-proportion z-test looked at whether there was a difference in the proportion
of students whose score improved from the pre to post-test for students who sought
additional help from the librarian compared to those who did not. There is no evidence
of a difference in the two proportions (Z=0.27, p-value=.787).
Table 7
Descriptive Statistics: Improvement by Proportion with Librarian Assistance
Librarian

N

Event

Sample p

Did not seek help

34

19

0.558824

Sought help

15

9

0.600000

I employed a two-sample t-test to determine if there was a difference in the
average change in score for students who sought additional help from the instructor
compared to students who did not. There is no evidence of a difference in the average
change in score (T=0.52, p-value=0.607).

43

Table 8
Descriptive Statistics: Change in Score with Instructor Assistance
Instructor

N

Mean

St Dev

SE Mean

Did not seek
help

23

0.87

1.49

0.31

Sought help

26

0.62

1.94

0.38

As for looking at whether there was a difference in the proportion of students
whose score improved from the pre to post-test for those who sought research
assistance than for those who did not a z-test was performed. There is no evidence of
a difference in the two-proportions z-test (Z=1.09, p-value=0.276).
Table 9
Descriptive Statistics: Improvement by Proportion with Instructor Assistance
Instructor

N

Event

Sample p

Did not seek help

23

15

0.652174

Sought help

26

13

0.500000

A two-sample t-test determined there is no evidence of a difference in the
average change in score for those students who sought additional help via library
tutorials (videos) than those students who did not (T=0.10, p-value=0.921).
Table 10
Descriptive Statistics: Change in Score with Library Tutorials
Library
Tutorials

N

Mean

St Dev

SE Mean

Did not seek
help

13

0.69

1.80

0.50

Sought help

36

0.75

1.73

0.29

44

A two-proportion z-test looked at whether there was a difference in the proportion
of students whose score improved from the pre to post-test for students who sought
additional help from library tutorials (videos) compared to those who did not. There is
no evidence of a difference in the two proportions (Z=0.38, p-value=.706).
Table 11
Descriptive Statistics: Improvement by Proportion with Library Tutorials
Library Tutorials

N

Event

Sample p

Did not seek help

13

8

0.615385

Sought help

36

20

0.555556

Summary
All statistical analysis performed indicates no significant change. It is possible
sample size played a role in this outcome. This is especially true when considering the
mean change in score for students online versus those F2F and in the case of student
improvement where numbers suggest a larger sample size continuing on that statistical
trend may represent significant change. It could also be an indication current methods
of imparting information literacy to students, no matter the modality, is sufficient. Of
particular interest is the fact 36 of the 49 participants sought out library tutorials for
assistance. This may suggest a shift if how students seek assistance considering 15
indicated they asked a librarian for help, 26 said they asked the instructor for help. The
fact more participants indicated they sought assistance via tutorials could be interpreted
to mean they prefer less human interaction or perhaps it’s a more convenient way to
obtain the answers they seek.

45

Chapter 5
Discussion and Recommendations
Introduction
This study looked at whether social presence played a role in information literacy
attainment not in the broadest sense, but specifically whether it affected students in
online courses any differently than those students attending face-to-face (F2F). Also
key was whether students who sought assistance outperformed those who did not when
it comes to information literacy skill attainment. The summary provides a look at the
study in its entirety followed by conclusions, discussion and recommendations for
further research.
Summary
This study grew from the researcher’s knowledge and understanding of
information literacy. In the first chapter, information literacy is defined as recognizing
the need for information, knowing where to access credible sources, how to evaluate
and synthesize information, and use it in an ethical manner. The importance of
information literacy is also discussed as society is increasingly bombarded with
information, information resources, and questionable sources directly attributing to the
term “fake news” heard now on regular basis.
There are various ways for librarians to teach information literacy including, but
not limited to, one-shot instruction sessions in the classroom, one-on-one instruction
with students, on-demand instruction, providing embedded librarian (EL) services
online, and creating online learning objects, or tutorials and guides students can access
anytime on their own schedule.
There are obstacles to overcome when addressing information literacy and
instruction such as illustrating connections between students who utilize library
resources and retention, communicating the importance of such a large topic with
limited or no time at all with students, ensuring online students and those F2F receive
equitable academic services, especially in this case, from librarians and library staff. In
part, it is these challenges that lend credence to this very study, driven by a need to
investigate how effective/ineffective the methods employed and utilized by Gateway’s
library department are and whether or not changes need to occur.
46

Theoretical Framework
Social presence, establishing connections between students, students and
faculty; and in this case, also between students and librarian, served as the theoretical
framework for this study. Literature suggests some online instruction models fall short
of creating a sense of community similar to that found in F2F courses. When it comes
to library support, there are existing models that attempt to equitably serve students
online, such as embedded librarianship (EL). While EL can simply mean having a
library link within the course management system, it also can be even more engaging
with the librarian posting timely announcements, research tips, and research-related
resources for students throughout the course of the semester. For F2F students, often
librarians find if they are invited into a classroom, they are given about an hour to impart
information literacy wisdom while establishing connections with students. If the session
is a stand-alone, meaning it is not tied to a particular assignment, unfortunately students
retain little from it.
Purpose of the Study
This study compared the information literacy knowledge attainment of students in
online courses and those in F2F courses to determine whether library efforts and social
presence are effective despite method of delivery. To further study this issue, the
following research questions were developed and tested.
1. Is there a different level of information literacy attainment by students who feel
socially connected in online classes or for those students on-campus?
2. Are post-test scores different for those students who seek additional help than
those students who do not?
Literature Review
A review of the literature reveals the myriad of ways in which librarians continue
to adapt to the various modalities of instruction, most recently, online or distance
learning, which continues to grow, even while higher education enrollment overall is
stagnant or on the decline (Allen, 2016).
Among the subset of topics, the literature review included the effectiveness of
online learning versus F2F. The focus here tended to be on the impact of learning
styles, grade point averages, retention and overall course satisfaction. There was
47

nothing found specifically regarding information literacy or that was library-specific. A
recurring concern expressed in this particular area was the effectiveness of online
education with a number of studies covering this matter. In the end, there is conflicting
literature on this topic. It appears some studies concluded online education just as
effective, if not more in some cases, than F2F, and the opposite was true in other
studies, indicating those students online did not outperform their F2F counterparts. It
really is a matter of what variables are being compared and many of these studies do
not show a direct comparison.
Also examined in the literature was the role of the embedded librarian (EL) and
how it varies from place to place and has changed and evolved in the relatively short
time it has been utilized in higher education. The embedded librarian method is the
library profession’s answer to providing equitable services to online students. The
effectiveness of this practice was also considered, but few studies exist specifically
targeting EL programs and student and information literacy outcomes. However, one
particular study saw a 400% increase in reference questions from students when an EL
program was started within a psychology program. The researchers concluded there
was a direct correlation between librarian posts in online psychology courses and the
number of reference calls to the library (Bennett & Simning, 2010). Research as to the
effectiveness of EL in online courses also indicated it only stands a chance at success if
it is tied to research-related assignments. Also, there is general consensus the
connection between faculty, librarian, and students is vital to having a successful EL
program. That being said, there were no studies located in the review concerning the
impact of social presence on information literacy skill attainment in both online and F2F
classes.
Methodology
This study was correlational in nature. The researcher was required to use
statistical analysis to compare variables. No control variables were present and the
study itself was descriptive in nature. The independent variables included students’
level of social presence and course modality (F2F or online.) The dependent variables
were pre and post-test results indicating level of information literacy skill attainment.

48

As many as 147 students in online and F2F classes at Gateway Community and
Technical College were given the opportunity to participate in the study for extra credit
in their respective classes. Of those, 49 students completed both the pre and post-test
with accompanying surveys. The tests were the same 10 questions concerning
information literacy concepts. The survey with the pre-test yielded necessary
demographic data. The survey with the post-test concentrated on social presence
gathered in the form of a Likert scale and also asked participants whether or not they
sought research assistance from the librarian, instructor or by viewing library tutorials.
Statistical analysis of the results showed no evidence of significant results.
Analysis
While most results indicate no statistical significance, there are two aspects to
consider in questioning whether a larger sample size could have had major implications
for this study. The first concerns the mean change in score for those students in online
classes versus those F2F. The sample average change in scores for the two modalities
is far enough apart that this could be indicative of statistical power, or sample size. If
the trend continued with a larger sample size, this may indicate F2F students would
outperform those online in information literacy skill attainment. This is noteworthy!
While it looks at the mean change in scores alone, it does imply there may be some
advantage to those students F2F receiving information literacy instruction during the
course of the semester. Online students do not receive such formal instruction; rather
they are merely guided to resources and then they must take the initiative to seek out
and explore. This would be an excellent area for further investigation. The second
aspect of this study where a larger sample size could affect the outcome concerns the
proportion of students whose post-test score was an improvement in online versus F2F
courses. Again, a larger sample size with similar trending results may indicate those
students F2F would outperform those online.
Results indicated no evidence of significance when examining whether there was
a correlation between student scores and social presence, and student scores and
assistance (whether assistance was sought from the librarian, instructor or library
tutorials). In relation to the research questions, there appears to be no evidence of a
significant difference between students’ information literacy attainment and social
49

connectedness in either online or F2F classes. Post-test scores did not indicate
students who sought assistance outperformed those who did not.
Discussion
There are couple of questions that come to mind when evaluating and analyzing
the data. First, the raw data indicates only one of the 49 students felt strongly
disconnected, or lacked social presence according to how this student answered the
questions concerning social presence in the study. The remaining participants were
either close to neutral on the matter or felt highly socially connected. So this suggests
the question: if one is socially disconnected would he/she feel compelled to participate
in any extra-curricular activities such as a study concerning information literacy skill
attainment and social presence? What would results look like had more students who
indicated a lack of social presence participated considering that information literacy
instruction, tutorials and support may be of the greatest benefit to those very students?
Also, if more students had participated and the rate of participants indicating neutral to
positive social presence continued on course with that which was indicated here, then
that is certainly worth taking notice.
The library tutorials (and surprisingly high usage of them by the students
participating in this study) could have implications on whether or not students need
access to the instructor, librarian, or any people at all. Would those students feeling
most disconnected benefit the most from such impersonal, but instructional, resources?
Are such learning objects given enough credit in the role they play in library and
information literacy instruction?
Another aspect of this study deserving of further exploration is that of the
instructors involved and their possible contributions to social presence in the classroom
whether in-person or online. For example, of those students participating in the study,
there was one online class where only two students, out of a possible 17, participated.
That particular class had a 12% participation rate. Whereas the other two online
courses with different instructors had much greater participation (more than quadruple)
when looking at number or participants alone, not proportion. Participation rate for one
was 42%, the other was 39%. Those courses also had much greater interaction via
Blackboard as observed by my role as the researcher and embedded librarian. That
50

same instructor with two online participants gave the F2F students time in-class to
complete the pre-test portion immediately followed by my information literacy
instruction. This resulted in greater number of F2F students participating (45%) when
compared to the other two instructors’ F2F classes (30% and 24%). The role of
instructor and best practices in online courses and F2F in relation to social presence is
another area of opportunity for further research. This could also be an area of
professional development for faculty, especially those teaching online.
Recommendations
I recommend future study include a closer look at the instructor’s role in
encouraging and conveying social presence in the classroom whether on-campus or
online. Also, future study might broaden the scope of what is ascertained, for example,
not just examining information literacy skill attainment, but overall grades within the
class or for research-specific assignments. The idea of including as many relevant
variables as is possible to evaluate possible correlations could lead to more meaningful
relationships within the data.
Additionally, a mixed methods approach to include dialogue with students could
convey a deeper understanding of the motivation behind participating in the first place.
Such discussion could unveil outside factors influencing everything from participation to
their understanding of what information literacy is and past experience conducting
research.
There is potential for replicating this study with additional criteria and research
questions such as that involving the instructor’s role in the classroom and online. This
study could also be replicated during a fall semester where there is more opportunity to
include classes meeting the requirements of the study, therefore increasing the chances
of having a larger sample size.
This study and similar ones could impact how educators view educational
delivery methods (online and F2F). Another implication involves the raw data in this
study illustrating many participants relied on library tutorials for assistance, more so
than the instructor or librarian, although those were options as well. This could draw
more importance to the learning objects libraries spend time piecing together and
making readily available to students. In a time of decreased funding for library staff and
51

resources, this is an argument to have the necessary software and products available to
create learning objects and also the personnel trained to do so.
Implications for Gateway Community and Technical College
While these findings indicating no significant evidence of differences could mean
current practices for imparting information literacy skills to students at Gateway
Community and Technical College may be sufficient, it is the lack of participants
indicating lower social presence that concerns me. What would findings look like had
more students participated (since a couple of results could be significant with a larger
pool of participants) and what if more students indicated they felt socially disconnected?
Since all possible 147 students did not respond, I have no way of knowing whether the
lack of participation was due to a lack of social presence or a myriad of other
possibilities.
I firmly believe there is always room for improvement and it is in that spirit I feel it
necessary to continue to improve upon communication with both online and F2F
students. There is more than enough literature to suggest there is a power in
establishing relationships and encouraging social connectedness among students,
between students and instructor and students and librarian. The results solidify my
belief students not only need to receive and have the necessary information available to
them for research assignments, but perhaps just as important is the connection they
have with either their instructor and/or librarian.
Raw data from this study indicates many of the students relied on learning
objects such as library tutorials. In times of budgetary woes and an increasing need to
prioritize the library workload, this indicates library tutorials must take top priority.
Additionally, they need to be fresh, up-to-date, and in production for any and all
information literacy-related topics.
In conclusion, the researcher believes further examination on the role social
presence has to play in both F2F and virtual/online environments is worth the time and
effort. The means by which we communicate continue to evolve. It is imperative
educators determine the best method(s) to connect with students and utilize those to
the best of his/her ability. At GCTC, this means using office hours, email, phone, chat
services, SKYPE, and Blackboard Collaborate to reach students however possible.