Collaborative Learning in Online Environment: An Exploratory Study of MLIS Students’
Experiences in Group Assignments

Abstract
Learning as part of a group, or social learning, is an important way to help students gain
experience in collaboration and develop new skills. An online environment provides
opportunities for students to participate in collaborative learning. Learning activities can be
designed to support the creation of a learning community. These activities can vary from
participation in discussion boards to participating in small group activities (Koh & Hill, 2009).
This dissertation research study aimed to investigate, explore, and examine the
relationship among social presence, both performance and perception, and online collaborative
learning with Master of Library and Information Science (MLIS) students’ satisfaction and
success. A mixed methods approach with a sequential explanatory design was employed. It
involved two phases: Phase I, a descriptive quantitative study, and Phase II, a qualitative study.
Phase I featured an online survey with 457 respondents from American Library Association
(ALA)-accredited Library and Information Science (LIS) master’s programs. Phase II consisted
of follow-up interview sessions with 29 students who completed the online survey.

iii

Participants were asked to indicate their agreement level with 15 performance statements
and 13 perception statements using seven-point Likert scales. The highest-rated positive
performance statement was: “I actively exchanged my ideas with group members” (f=407). The
highest-rated positive perception statement was: “I felt comfortable expressing positive feelings
(being happy/satisfied about something) during group assignment” (f=410).
Both Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test revealed gender, age, social media
usage, number of enrolled online courses, percentage of group collaboration, group size, and
computer proficiency showed statistically significant differences among variables in
performance statements. For perception statements, gender, age, number of enrolled online
courses, percentage of group collaboration, group size, computer proficiency, and Internet
proficiency revealed statistically significant differences among variables. Spearman’s rho
revealed a strong positive correlation between satisfaction level and 13 performance statements
and satisfaction level with 10 perception statements. Additionally, Spearman’s rho correlation
test signified a positive correlation among social climate and success in online environment.
Participants’ responses indicated that Google Suite (f=430) was the collaborative tool and
platform most often used by participants. Participants discussed other related topics associated
with the online collaboration. These topics were: Benefits as “meeting new people” and
“enhanced creativity;” Challenges as “time-consuming process,” “scheduling conflict and lack of
contribution,” and “frustration and anxiety;” Success factors and Facilitators as
“communication,” “equal participation,” and “transparent flow of information.” Participants
concluded the online surveys with comments and suggestions on online collaboration and
collaborative learning.

iv

Responses from the follow-up interview sessions revealed three main themes: Group
Composition, Group Outcome, and Group Collaboration. Group Composition describes the
overall mix of characteristics among the people in the group. Several attributes for group
composition were extracted: Age-gap, Gender diversity, Group formation, and Group size.
Three major categories for Group Outcome were Independence, Interdependence, and Social
media. Interviewees reported that they performed better independently and explained their
reasons as being self-conscious and self-motivated. Some reported that being a procrastinator
was the reason they performed better in group collaboration. These individuals stated that having
multiple deadlines and being accountable to others forced them to perform better in group.
Participants were also asked about the impacts of social media on their performance. They noted
similarities between the structure of social media platforms and their online collaborative tools,
which added more comfortable interactions and ease of use to the members.
Based on the findings of this study, a model for MLIS students’ online collaborative
learning was proposed. This model includes six major stages. These stages are: instructor’s role,
group composition, group outcome, group collaboration, successful collaboration, and
satisfaction.

Chapter 1: Introduction

Introduction and Problem Statement
“If you have an apple and I have an apple and we exchange these apples, then you and I will still
each have one apple. But if you have an idea and I have an idea and we exchange these ideas,
then each of us will have two ideas.” -George Bernard Shaw
Collaboration is often desired or even necessary for solving problems that are difficult for
an individual (Denning, 2007). Even when the given task can be accomplished by an individual,
there may be other benefits of collaboration, including taking advantage of diverse skills and
promoting social engagement (Shah, 2010). This applies to more sophisticated and involved
projects, such as engineering infrastructure, but could also be relevant to more casual concerns,
such as a family planning a vacation, co-authors working on a scholarly article, an engaged
couple designing their wedding, or a recruitment committee working on a new hiring project. All
of these situations require people coming together with intention, looking for and sharing
information, and making sense out of information to reach their common goals. Group work and
collaborative activities have been widely utilized as effective instructional methods in traditional
classroom environments.
Social learning, or learning as part of a group, is an important way to help students gain
experience in collaboration and develop skills in co-construction of knowledge (Brindley, Walti,
& Blaschke, 2009). Despite some challenges, collaborative learning is increasingly becoming an
instructional approach for online courses (Lee, Bonk, Magjuka, Su, & Liu, 2006). An online
environment provides opportunities for students to participate in collaborative learning. Learning
activities can be designed to support the creation of a learning community. These activities can

1

vary from conversation on discussion boards to participating in group activities (Koh & Hill,
2009).
The rapid growth of Internet and social media, as well as the emergence of a mobile
society, have made online learning environments a very attractive option to those seeking higher
education. The Online Learning Environment (OLE) has grown in use, popularity, and power.
The OLE was defined by Dringus and Terrell (1999) as: "...a distinct, pedagogically meaningful
and comprehensive online learning environment by which learners and faculty can participate in
the learning and instructional process at any time and any place" (p.58). Several authors argue
OLEs offer many advantages over traditional classrooms. In fact, the advantages are so great that
Turoff (1999) feels traditional students without access to OLE tools are receiving an inferior
education. In spite of these advantages, there are a number of drawbacks to OLEs as currently
deployed. The loss of student interaction and friendships that would occur in a face-to-face
classroom is one of the greatest drawbacks to OLE. This loss can potentially reduce learning and
motivation (Dringus & Terrell, 1999; Hiltz, 1997).
Results of the 2014 Survey of Online Learning conducted by the Babson Survey
Research Group and co-sponsored by the Online Learning Consortium (OLC) and Pearson and
Tyton Partners revealed the number of higher education students taking at least one distance
education course in 2014 rose 3.7% from the previous year. While this represents the slowest
rate of increase in over a decade, online enrollment growth far exceeded growth of overall higher
education.
One example of the growing demand of reliable online learning environments are
Massive Open Online Courses, or MOOCs. In 2011, 160,000 students enrolled when one of the
first MOOCs appeared at Stanford University. At that time, fewer than 10 MOOCs existed
2

worldwide. According to data collected by Class Central, the total number of students who
signed up for at least one course has now crossed 35 million, up from an estimated 16 to 18
million last year (Shah, 2015). Online programs have become a common learning format in
higher education, particularly in the Library and Information Science (LIS) field. Among the 59
institutions listed in the Directory of American Library Association (ALA)-Accredited and
Candidate Programs in Library and Information Studies 1 issued on October 3, 2016, 45 schools
offer both online and face-to-face courses.
It is important to note that students do not automatically become collaborators by being
grouped into teams. Effective collaboration involves a set of essential skills, which need to be
learned and cultivated, particularly in the online learning environment. Development of social
interaction and social presence in an online community and the impacts of student interactions on
collaborative learning is an area that is less researched in the LIS field. With this in mind, this
study aims to investigate, explore, and examine the relationship among social presence, online
collaborative learning, and students’ satisfaction and success in online learning environments.
Social presence is defined as a measure of the feeling of the community that a learner, in this
case an LIS student, experiences in an online environment. Online collaborative learning, or
perceived collaborative learning, is an instructional approach in which a number of learners
interact together and share knowledge and skills to reach a specific learning goal. Students’
satisfaction and success is defined as an affective learning outcome, implying the degree of
learner reaction to values and quality of learning, as well as the motivation for learning (So &
Brush, 2008). There has been a significant amount of research on online education from different
disciplines, yet there is a gap in focusing on how LIS students’ social presence and collaborative

1

http://www.ala.org/CFApps/lisdir/directory_pdf.cfm
3

learning affect their satisfaction and success. Hence, this study obtains responses from LIS
students on their experiences and feelings about group cohesion, group interaction, group
attitude, group size, social skills, motivation, and emotions such as anxiety and frustration in
group assignments.
Data collected via online survey measured the social presence, including performance and
perception, online collaborative learning, and satisfaction among MLIS students. For further
investigation, the researcher performed in-depth semi-structured interview sessions via
GoToMeeting with selected participants who provided their contact information in the online
survey.

Statement of Purpose
This dissertation research study aims to investigate, explore, and examine the relationship among
social presence and online collaborative learning with students’ satisfaction in the LIS field. The
specific objectives of this dissertation research are: (1) understanding the impacts of
demographic variables such as age, gender, and ethnicity on online collaborative learning, both
performance and perception; (2) identifying which affective factors influence the success of
online collaboration; (3) investigating different strategies and approaches to overcome
difficulties; (4) identifying opportunities and obstacles that are associated with online
collaborative learning; and (5) understanding the affective experiences with regard to current
gaps and future development of online collaborative learning.

Definition of Terms
For this dissertation research study, the following set of key terms are defined:

4

Collaboration: The process of two or more people collectively creating emergent, shared
representations of a process or outcome that reflects the input of the total body of contributors
(Elliott, 2007, p. 31).
Online Collaborative Learning (OCL): A type of learning in which students are encouraged and
supported to work together to create knowledge by inventing and exploring ways to innovate,
and, by doing so, to seek the conceptual knowledge needed to solve problems rather than recite
what they think is the right answer. OCL encourages the learner to be active and engaged
(Bates, 2014).
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL): An emerging branch of learning science
concerned with studying how people can learn together with the help of computers (Stahl,
Koschmann, & Suthers, 2006). The CSCL field is concerned with how Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) might support learning in groups (Ludvigsen & Mørch,
2010).
Social Presence: Defined as “the ability of participants to identify with the community (e.g.,
course of study), communicate purposefully in a trusting environment, and develop interpersonal relationships by way of presenting their individual personalities” (Garrison, 2009).
Student Satisfaction: An affective learning result, indicating the degree of learner reaction to
values, quality of learning, and motivation for learning (Brush, 2008). Students’ satisfaction with
collaborative learning is an outcome of the collaboration process and can be described as the
degree to which a student feels a positive association with his or her own collaborative learning
experiences (Gunawardena, et al., 2001).

5

Social Climate of Learning Environment: Also called psychological climate and social context,
social climate is typically defined as the perceptions of a social environment that tend to be
shared by a group of people (Bennett, 2010). The social climate in educational settings is shaped
by the relationships between teachers and students as well as among students. The quality,
quantity, and directions of these relationships further affect pupils’ self-concept, motivation, and
performance (Allodi, 2010).

6

2.

Chapter 2: Literature Review
Overview

A significant body of literature exists on collaboration and collaborative learning among specific
disciplines (Brindley, Walti, & Blaschke, 2009; Koh & Hill, 2009; Shah, 2010). However, there
have been limited studies on collaborative learning with the focus on social presence in an online
environment and the impacts of student interactions on learning in the LIS field. This chapter
presents a review of related literature on collaboration, collaborative learning, satisfaction,
community of inquiry, social cognitive theory, and self-regulated learning theory as a theoretical
framework.
Social presence is a vital element that influences online interactions (Tu, 2002; Tu &
McIssac, 2002). Learner-to-learner interaction is motivating and stimulating for students, making
it a critical element to online learning (Moore & Kearsley, 2005; Richardson & Swan, 2003).
Garramore, Harris, and Anderson (1986) caution when the level of social presence is low, then
interaction is low. Gundawardena (1995) warned learning should not be expected without
interactions between learners. Collaborative learning requires social presence; social presence is
necessary to enhance and foster online social interactions, a major vehicle for collaborative
learning. Constructivists believe learning consists of constructing knowledge from one’s
experiences rather than directly receiving information from the outside world (Brown, Collins, &
Duguid, 1989). Educators have attempted to incorporate collaborative learning methods in their
distance education courses with the belief that increased interactions among students could
enhance learning outcomes and student satisfaction. Curtis and Lawson (2001) reported two
findings from their research study: first, they concluded that the use of the related jigsaw method,

7

in which the roles and responsibilities were assigned to individuals in advance by the instructor
would eliminate the time-consuming element of the online communication and interaction;
second, the medium does influence students’ interactions and that student familiarity with the
medium and the ease of use of the interface are important factors.
The primary conceptual framework for this study is social presence from Community of
Inquiry theory (CoI) and the related theories of Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) and SelfRegulated Learning (SRL) in social settings. SCT which is used in psychology, communication,
and education, holds that portions of an individual's knowledge acquisition can be directly
related to observing others within the context of social interactions, experiences, and outside
media influences. The theory states that when people observe a model performing a behavior and
witness the consequences of that behavior, then they remember the sequence of events and use
this information to guide subsequent behaviors. Observing a model can also prompt the viewer to
engage in behavior they already learned (Bandura, 1986, 2002).
SRL is the degree to which students are meta-cognitively, motivationally, and
behaviorally active participants in their own learning processes (Zimmerman, 1986). SRL
encompasses the monitoring and managing of one’s cognitive processes, as well as the
awareness of and control over one’s emotions, motivations, behaviors, and environments as
related to learning. “Behavior” includes self-discipline, effort, time management, and helpseeking from the instructor or other teammates when deemed necessary by the learner
(Karabenick & Dembo, 2011).
Other theories, such as activity theory and distributed cognition, are also somewhat
relevant to this dissertation research. These theories are mainly used in human-computer
interaction and interface design (Blumenthal, 2005; Bodker, 1995; Kaptelinin, 1995; Kuutti,
8

1995; Nardi, 1995, 1998) and focus more on measuring team knowledge and shared mental
models (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007), which are not the main foci of this research study. When
comparing activity theory and distributed cognition, Nardi (1995) noted: “Activity theory and
distributed cognition are very close in spirit, as we have seen, and it is my belief that the two
approaches will mutually inform, and even merge, over time, though activity theory will
continue to probe questions of consciousness outside the purview of distributed cognition as it is
presently formulated” (p.89). Distributed cognition provides an effective theoretical framework
for understanding what humans can achieve and how artifacts, tools, and socio-technical
environments can be designed and evaluated to empower human beings and to change tasks
(Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsch, 2001; Salomon, 1993). Distributed cognition considers how
information and information processing have moved from a centralized paradigm of “in the
head” or “on the desktop” to a decentralized and distributed model that permeates one’s
environment (Fischer, 2003).
This study adapts the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework to focus on social presence
and teaching presence elements, Social Cognitive Theory to focus on behavioral and
environmental factors, and Self-Regulated Learning Theory to utilize those aspects related to
one’s emotions and motivations in order to investigate MLIS students’ experiences and feelings
while collaborating in the online environment for group assignments.

Community of Inquiry Framework
The construction of new models often requires conceptual and terminological development.
This study adapts the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework with a focus on the social
presence element. Presence is considered a central concept in online learning and is understood
as the ability of people “to project their personal characteristics into the community, thereby
9

presenting themselves to other participants as ‘real people’” (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer,
2000, p. 89). Since the main focus of this research study is on collaborative learning and
satisfaction in the online environment, the researcher specifically concentrated on the social
presence element and its collaborative indicator and teaching presence element and its setting
climate and selecting content element from within the CoI framework.
A learning community is inclusive of individuals who collaboratively engage in critical
discourse and reflection where they construct meaning and mutual understanding (Garrison &
Arbaugh, 2007). Palloff and Pratt (2007) stated that the most important element of successful
online learning is “the formation of a learning community through which knowledge is imparted
and meaning is co-created” (p.4). Such a community develops through “the interactions among
students themselves, the interactions between faculty and students, and the collaboration in
learning that results from these interactions” (p. 4). When these interactions exist, a learning
community is built on shared intellectual pursuits as well as social interactions (Lambert &
Fisher, 2013). Early investigations of asynchronous, text-based computer conferencing in higher
education led Garrison and Arbaugh (2000) to propose the Community of Inquiry (CoI)
framework. When used as a guide for online discussions, Garrison and Arbaugh found the CoI
framework had considerable potential for creating a community of inquiry among learners. As
online learning became more prevalent, the initial framework has been used extensively over a
decade to design the online learning process and guide research and the practice of online
learning (Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, & Fung, 2010).
Because it is consistent with constructivist approaches to learning in higher education, the
genesis of this framework can be found in the work of John Dewey. The CoI framework consists
of three overlapping elements: social, teaching, and cognitive presence; as well as categories and
10

indicators to identify each presence and to guide the coding of transcripts. These elements
provide the structure to support higher levels of inquiry and meaningful collaboration. Figure 2.1
exhibits the CoI framework.

Figure 2.2: Adapted Element for Dissertation
Research Study

Figure 2.1: Community of Inquiry Framework

Table 2.1: Community of Inquiry elements, categories and indicators

Elements
Social Presence

Cognitive Presence

Teaching Presence

Categories

Indicators

Open Communication
Group Cohesion
Affective Expression
Triggering Event
Exploration
Integration
Resolution

Risk-free Expression
Encourage Collaboration
Emotions
Sense of Puzzlement
Information Exchange
Connecting Ideas
Apply New Ideas

Design & Organization
Facilitating Discourse
Direct Instruction

Setting Curriculum & Methods
Sharing Personal Meaning
Focusing Discussion

These three overlapping elements or themes were identified and structured from the content
analysis and coding of computer conference call transcripts in online learning. Social presence is
defined by Tu and McIssac (2002) as the degree of feeling, perception, and reaction of being

11

connected by Computer Mediated Collaboration (CMC) to another intellectual entity through a
text-based encounter. Picciano (2002) defined social presence as “a student’s sense of belonging
in a course and the ability to interact with other students and the instructor” (p. 22). The most
recent definition is “the ability of participants to identify with the community (e.g., course of
study), communicate purposefully in a trusting environment, and develop inter-personal
relationships by way of presenting their individual personalities” (Garrison, 2009, p.352). Recent
research on the role of student group cohesiveness and interaction on team effectiveness in
online graduate management education suggests a strong relationship between social presence
and learning outcomes (Arbaugh, 2005). Another study suggested that activities which cultivate
social presence also enhance the learner's satisfaction with the Internet as an educational delivery
medium (Arbaugh & Benbunan-Fich, 2006). Collaborative activities allow learners greater
opportunities for increased social presence and a greater sense of online community, which also
tends to improve the socio-emotional climate in online courses (Richardson & Swan, 2003). As
shown in Table 2.2, open communication, group cohesion, and affective expression are the
original categories of social presence that are used to operationalize the concept.
The original definition of cognitive presence has remained consistent. It was defined by the
Practical Inquiry Model as consisting of a four phase process: triggering event, where some issue
or problem is identified for further inquiry; exploration, where students explore the issue, both
individually and collaboratively through critical reflection and discourse; integration, where
learners construct meaning from the ideas they developed during exploration, which typically
requires enhanced teaching presence to probe and diagnose ideas in order for learners to utilize
higher level thinking when developing their understanding; and resolution, where learners apply
the newly gained knowledge to educational contexts or workplace settings (Garrison, Anderson,

12

& Archer, 2001). Garrison and Arbaugh (2007) described cognitive presence as the extent to
which learners construct meaning through sustained reflection and discourse. Research has
shown a relationship between sense of community and cognitive learning in online educational
environments (Rovai, 2002). Cognitive presence is also defined as reflective of the purposeful
nature of collaborative knowledge construction inherent in constructivist educational
experiences. Although a limited number of studies have focused on cognitive presence using the
Practical Inquiry Model, it has been successful in measuring the developmental nature of the
learning process across disciplines (Arbaugh, et al., 2008).
Interactions among participants are not solely sufficient to ensure effective online learning.
Both social and content-related interactions are necessary among participants in virtual learning
environments. These interactions need to have clearly defined parameters and be focused in a
specific direction, therefore there is a need for a teaching presence (Garrison & Archer, 2000).
Teaching presence, which establishes the course framework that makes it possible for all
members to realize the intended learning outcomes, has been found to be a significant
determinant of student satisfaction, perceived learning, and sense of community (Garrison &
Arbaugh, 2007). There are three dimensions of teaching presence: instructional design and
organization of the course structure, process, interaction, and evaluation of student learning,
including curriculum and methods; facilitating discourse in which students are engaged in their
interactions; and direct instruction, which is supplying intellectual and scholarly leadership by
sharing knowledge, promoting reflection, and offering immediate feedback. For effective
teaching presence, teachers must give explicit directions for completing assignments and
conducting discourse. With minimal or direct involvement, instructors can facilitate dialogue or
activities. Direct involvement may promote metacognitive awareness, which helps students

13

recognize their shifts in thinking while completing course activities or discussions. In either case,
a strong and active presence by instructors is related to students’ sense of community and
learning (Shea, Li, & Pickett, 2006).
CoI strategies used by Akyol and Garrison (2011) to design and organize a graduate course
investigated the development of cognitive presence in online and blended collaborative
communities of inquiry. Students were assigned peer reviews, online discussions, and a redesign
project of a blended learning course. Social presence was created through students’ home pages
and collaborative activities. Cognitive presence was created when the instructor modeled and
facilitated discussions. Research findings indicated a strong relationship between collaborative
constructivism and higher-order learning outcomes. The CoI framework offers a way to
conceptualize what it means to experience deep and meaningful learning, particularly in an
online learning environment. The framework also operationalizes what it means to build a
community of inquiry and provides explicit strategies to use in the design, development, and
assessment of online courses by ensuring the presence of three interdependent elements: social,
cognitive, and teaching presence (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007). These three overlapping elements
provide the structure to support higher levels of inquiry and meaningful collaboration (Garrison,
Cleveland-Innes, & Fung, 2010).

Social Cognitive Theory
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), which is used in psychology, communication, and education,
holds that portions of an individual's knowledge acquisition can be directly related
to observing others within the context of social interactions, experiences, and outside media
influences. The theory states that when people observe a model performing a behavior and
witness the consequences of that behavior, then they remember the sequence of events and use
14

this information to guide subsequent behaviors. Observing a model can also prompt the viewer to
engage in behavior they already learned (Bandura, 1986, 2002). People do not learn new
behaviors solely by trying them and either succeeding or failing; the survival of humanity is
dependent upon the replication of the actions of others. Depending on whether people are
rewarded or punished for their behavior and the outcome of that behavior, the observer may
choose to replicate whatever behavior was modeled. SCT explains psychological functioning in
terms of triadic reciprocal causation (Bandura, 1986). In this causal model, behavior, cognitive
and other personal factors, and environmental events all operate as interacting determinants that
influence each other bi-directionally (Bandura, 1988). SCT proposes that individuals do not
simply respond to environmental influences, but instead actively seek and interpret information
(Nevid, 2009). Individuals “function as contributors to their own motivation, behavior, and
development within a network of reciprocally interacting influences” (Bandura, 1999, p. 169).
According to Bandura (2005), SCT takes on an agent-like perspective to change, development,
and adaptation. Bandura (2005) describes an agent as someone who intentionally influences
one’s functioning and life circumstances: “In this view, people are self-organizing, proactive,
self-regulating, and self-reflecting. They are contributors to their life circumstances, not just
products of them” (p. 1).
Albert Bandura's understanding of Social Cognitive Theory emphasizes how cognitive,
behavioral, personal, and environmental factors interact to determine motivation and behavior
(Crothers, Hughes, & Morine, 2008). According to Bandura, human functioning is the result of
the interaction among all three of these factors (Crothers et al., 2008), as embodied in his Triadic
Reciprocal Determinism model (Wood & Bandura, 1989). While it may seem that one factor is
the lead reason, there are numerous factors that play a role in human behavior. Furthermore, the
15

influencing factors are not of equal strength, nor do they all occur concurrently (Wood &
Bandura, 1989).

Behavioral
Factors

Personal Factors

Environmental
Factors

Figure 2.1: Adapted Factors for this Dissertation
Research Study

Figure 2.2: Bandura's Triadic Reciprocal Determinism

The Social Cognitive Theory is composed of four processes of goal realization: selfobservation, self-evaluation, self-reaction, and self-efficacy. These components are interrelated,
with each having an effect on motivation and goal attainment (Redmond, 2016).
Self-observation is defined as observing oneself inform and motivate. It can be used to
assess one’s progress toward goal attainment as well as motivate behavioral changes. There are
two important factors with regards to self-observation: regularity and proximity. Regularity
means the behavior should be continually observed, whereas proximity means the behavior
should be observed while it occurs, or shortly after. Alone, self-observation is insufficient
because motivation depends on one’s expectations of outcomes and efficacy (Zimmerman &
Schunk, 2001). Self-evaluation compares an individual's current performance with a desired
performance or goal. It is affected by set standards and the importance of goals. Goals must be
specific and attainable; therefore, vague goals will not be motivational. Schunk and Zimmerman
(1994) mention that specific goals identify the amount of effort required for success and boost

16

self-efficacy because progress is easy to gauge. If one has little regard for their goal, they will
not evaluate their performance.
There are two types of self-evaluation standards: absolute and normative. A grading scale
would be an example of a fixed or absolute standard. A social comparison, such as evaluating
one’s behavior or performance against other individuals, is an example of a normative standard
(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2001). People gain satisfaction when they achieve goals that they value.
When individuals achieve these valued goals, they are more likely to continue to exert a high
level of effort, since sub-standard performance will no longer provide satisfaction (Wood &
Bandura, 1989). Reactions to one’s individual performance can be motivating. If the progress
made is deemed acceptable by the individual, then that person will have a feeling of self-efficacy
with regard to continuing and will be motivated towards working toward the achievement of
their goal. A negative self-evaluation might also be motivating by creating desire to work harder,
provided that the person considers their goal to be valuable. Self-reaction also allows a person to
re-evaluate their goals in conjunction with their attainments (Bandura, 1989). If a person has
achieved a goal, then they are likely to re-evaluate and raise the standard or goal, whereas if a
person has not achieved the goal, then they are likely to re-evaluate and lower the standard or
goal to an achievable standard or goal. In summary, "[s]elf-efficacy refers to people's judgements
about their capability to perform particular tasks. Task-related self-efficacy increases the effort
and persistence towards challenging tasks; therefore, increasing the likelihood that they will be
completed" (Barling & Beattie, 1983, as cited in Axtell & Parker, 2003, p. 114).

Self-Regulated Learning Framework
The nature and assumptions underlying Self-Regulation in Learning (SRL) have been widely
discussed (Winne, 1995; Zimmerman, 1989). More recent research has related SRL to
17

motivation and emotion in learning environments. The theory’s main topics concern how
learners develop learning skills and how they can effectively use their learning skills. For
example, studying effectively by self-regulating learning is itself a skill powered by will,
meaning it is directed and regulated by motivation (Järvelä & Järvenoja, 2011). Conceptualizing
self-regulation as a dual individual-social phenomenon calls for the integration of self-regulation
as an individual psychological concept within the social, shared, and interactive processes of
learning (Järvelä, Volet, & Järvenoja, 2010).
Self-regulation is essential to the learning process (Jarvela & Jarvenoja, 2011; Zimmerman,
2008). It can help students create better learning habits and strengthen their study skills (Wolters,
2011), apply learning strategies to enhance academic outcomes (Harris, Friedlander, Sadler,
Frizzelle, & Graham, 2005), monitor their performance (Harris et al., 2005), and evaluate their
academic progress (De Bruin, Thiede & Camp, 2011). In addition to self-regulation, motivation
can have a pivotal impact on students’ academic outcomes (Zimmerman, 2008). Without
motivation, SRL is much more difficult to achieve.
SRL is a process that assists students in managing their thoughts, behaviors, and emotions
in order to successfully navigate their learning experiences. This process occurs when a student’s
purposeful actions and processes are directed towards the acquisition of information or skills.
Generally, models of SRL are separated into phases. One popular cyclical model, shown in
Figure 2.5, discusses three distinct phases: forethought phase, performance phase, and selfregulation phase (Pintrich & Zusho, 2002; Zimmerman, 2000).

18

Figure 2.3: Phases and sub-processes of Self-Regulated Learning

Figure 2.4: Adapted Sub-Phase for Dissertation Research Study

19

During the forethought phase, students analyze the learning task and set specific goals
toward completing that endeavor. When students learn unfamiliar topics, however, they may not
know the best ways to approach the exercise or what goals might be the most appropriate to set
in order to achieve the objective. In these cases, teachers and more experienced peers can often
instruct students on effective approaches. In the performance phase, students employ strategies to
make progress on the learning task and monitor the effectiveness of those strategies as well as
their motivation for continuing progress toward meeting the task goals. Unfortunately, when
strategies are new, students sometimes revert to using more familiar, and perhaps ineffective,
strategies. Close monitoring by teachers and specific feedback can help students learn to use new
strategies with fluency, especially if students face frustration. In the final phase, reflection on
performance, students evaluate their performance on the learning task with respect to the
effectiveness of the strategies that they chose. During this stage, students also must manage their
emotions about the outcomes of the learning experience. These self-reflections then influence
students’ future planning and goals, restarting the cycle.
Social construction approach is critical for understanding productive engagement and
participation in real-life social learning environments. In collaborative learning, individual group
members represent interdependent self-regulating agents from a cognitive angle, while at the
same time constituting a social entity that creates affordances and constraints for group and
individual engagement from a situative angle. In group processes, a situative angle focus is
necessary to capture the social construction and enactment of motivation, but this focus needs to
be complemented by a cognitive angle, which represents the mediating role of individual
members’ cognitions, metacognitive reflections, and interpretations. This approach views social

20

and psychological processes as concurrent occurrences in need of joint consideration to further
an understanding of motivation in collaborative learning.
Motivation has also been identified as one area of the learning process that students
actively self-regulate within social cognitive models of self-regulated learning (Zimmerman,
1994). Regulation of motivation can be described as the activities through which individuals
purposefully act to initiate, maintain, or supplement their willingness to start, to provide work
toward, or to complete a particular activity or goal; this can also be described as their level of
motivation. This form of regulation is achieved by deliberately intervening in, managing, or
controlling one of the underlying processes that determine this willingness or the processes of
motivation. Regarding behavior, the regulation of motivation, or motivational regulation,
encompasses those thoughts, actions, or behaviors through which students act to influence their
choice, effort, or persistence for academic tasks (Wolters, 2003). Regulation of motivation is
conceptually distinct from motivation, though it may be difficult to differentiate empirically
between these two phenomena, especially given a mutual relation between students’ motivation
and motivation regulation (Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2005; Wolters & Rosenthal, 2000). Wolters
(2003) reviewed several strategies for regulation of motivation, identified key activities that can
be considered strategies for regulating motivation, and evaluated the evidence linking these
strategies to students’ motivation, cognitive engagement, and achievement. Wolters’s motivation
regulation strategies focus on individual motivation regulation; based on these concepts, Järvelä,
Järvenoja, and Veermans (2008) modified the framework for adaption to a socially shared
learning situation, which characterized socially shared strategies such as goal-oriented talk,
efficacy management, handicapping of group functioning, task structuring, social reinforcing,

21

and interest enhancement. Järvenoja et al. (2010) argued that in a social learning context,
motivation is an outcome, but is also generated as a co-regulated occurrence.
Two distinct characterizations of a social role in conceptualizations of motivation were
identified in a study by Nolen and Ward (2008). This study considered motivation as an
individual characteristic, which is socially influenced by the context. The study also considered
motivation as socially constructed through interactions and conceptualized individuals and
context as inseparable and mutually constitutive. For the last few decades, motivation as a
socially influenced construct has been the most prominent perspective in research on learning
(Zimmerman & Schunk, 2007). This construct assumes that motivation is a psychological
phenomenon where social context has an impact on individuals’ motivation to engage in learning
activities.
Research on social goals and social goal orientation from a socio-cognitive perspective
reflects the social influence on characterization. There is substantial evidence that students’ goals
for engaging in learning activities are not only directed at the task or their own performance, but
also reflect the student’s social context. This is highlighted in the range of social goals identified
in the literature; for example, social approval goals, social responsibility goals, social interaction
goals, social relationship goals, social status goals, contextual goals, or prosocial goals
(Boekaerts, de Koning, & Vedder, 2006; Ford, 1992; Järvelä & Salovaara, 2004; Urdan &
Maehr, 1995; Wentzel, 1991). Students’ interpretations of their interactions with peers have
revealed how their goals are shaped through those interactions (Boekaerts & Minnaert, 2006) and
how the actions of group members can have both positive and negative influences on individual
motivation (Järvenoja & Järvelä, 2005; Volet & Mansfield, 2006). The view that the social
environment exerts an influence on individual motivation led Wosnitza, Volet, Vauras, and
22

Salonen (2009) to claim that, in a collaborative learning activity, learning, performance, and
affect goals can be in the service the group as a whole rather than just for the self.
The second conceptualization of motivation that reflects its social nature is the social
construction perspective, which builds upon the idea that motivation emerges through
interactions in a social situation (Järvelä & Volet, 2004; Nolen & Ward, 2008). This situative
perspective is based on the assumption that motivation is a social phenomenon and that actual
engagement represents enacted motivation. This process-oriented perspective views engagement,
or enacted motivation, as socially created and maintained through an active and ongoing process
of co-regulation that is socially shared. The social system that individuals are part of is assumed
to provide affordances and constraints for members to either fully engage, stay at the periphery
until ready, or avoid engagement (Hickey, 2003; McCaslin & Hickey, 2001). By conceptualizing
motivation as co-constructed and negotiated among the collective, interactive, and shared
activity of group members (Järvelä & Järvenoja, 2010), the social construction perspective
distinguishes itself from reciprocal determinism. More specifically, the social construction
perspective on motivation does not postulate reciprocal sources of influence that individuals may
exert on each other, but instead assumes that groups as social entities co-construct their
collective engagement during joint activities. From a social construction perspective, social and
individual processes are conceptualized as simultaneous occurrences, which represent adaptive
processes that take place concurrently at different systemic levels (Volet et al., 2009). In the
context of collaborative learning, it is expected that participants bring their motivational beliefs,
tendencies, and goals, which play a mediating role in their engagement in the group activity.
Consistent with its focus on social interactions and participation in group activities, this social

23

conceptualization of motivation has led to research at the micro-level of learning and the use of
process data obtained from collaborative learning activities (Järvelä, Volet, & Järvenoja, 2010).
Table 2.2 represents all the conceptual frameworks, their elements and categories which are
used in this research study.
Table 2.2: Summary of adapted conceptual frameworks and their elements

Conceptual
Frameworks

Elements
Social Presence

CoI
Teaching Presence

Categories

Indicators

Open Communication
Group Cohesion
Affective Expression
Design & Organization
Facilitating Discourse
Direct Instruction

Risk-free Expression
Encourage Collaboration
Emotions
Setting Curriculum & Methods
Sharing Personal Meaning
Focusing Discussion
Self-observation
Self-evaluation
Self-efficacy

Behavioral Factors

Skills
Practice

Environmental Factors

Social Norms
Access in Community

Performance Phase

Self-Control

SCT

Task Analysis

SRL
Forethought Phase

Self-Motivation Beliefs

Self-reaction
Self-instruction
Task Strategies
Goal Setting
Strategic Planning
Self- efficacy
Outcome expectations
Goal orientation

Collaboration: Definition and Success Factors
Almost all people have an understanding of what it means to collaborate. The origin of
collaboration is from late Latin collaboratus past participle of collaborare to labor [work]
together, from Latin com- + laborare. Its first known use was 1871 (Merriam-Webster
Dictionary, 2014).
The Macquarie International English Dictionary defines collaboration as "the act of
working together with one or more people in order to achieve something" (2004). The breadth of
this definition indicates that anything from a friendship, to a university, a city, or nation may
24

qualify as a collaboration. In fact, upon further reflection, one may even wonder whether or not
collaboration should be limited to humans; many other social creatures work together to achieve
common goals by some means (Elliott, 2007).
For example, of the breadth of the definition of “collaboration,” take this example from the
context of education and research:
"The principles in a true collaboration represent complementary domains of expertise. As
collaborators, they do not only plan, decide, and act jointly, they also think together,
combining independent conceptual schemes to create original frameworks. Also, in a
true collaboration, there is a commitment to shared resources, power, and talent: no
individual’s point of view dominates, authority for decisions and action resides in the
group, and work products reflect a blending of all participants’ contributions " (JohnSteiner et. al. 1998).
According to Elliott (2007), to avoid the inherent danger of creating a definition that is
either too broad or too narrow in its scope, a solidification of many definitions is necessary. This
resulted in Elliot concluding, "Collaboration is the process of two or more people collectively
creating emergent, shared representations of a process and or outcome that reflects the input of
the total body of contributors” (p.31).
The human mind is an intrinsically social thing (Gee, 2013). Human cognitive capacities
reside in the language a person has inherited and the ways of seeing someone has learned.
Intelligence is the capacity to reach for social memory and to apply available logical and
computational tools. Human cognitive capacities are also visible in communities of practice.
Today, through ubiquitous computing and the social web, externalized memory and

25

computational tools that have historically unprecedented power are readily accessible. At the
same time, work, public, and community life is increasingly energized by collaborations. In the
new media landscape, peer-to-peer collaborations, from Wikipedia to the YouTube video library,
are products of massive social collaborations. The culture of closed book examinations or
isolated, individualized student work is diminishing as new media makes these ideas and
practices anachronistic (Kalantzis & Cope, 2015). Collaboration in the new media landscape is a
mutually beneficial and well-defined relationship entered into by two or more organizations to
achieve common goals. This relationship is a jointly developed structure, with shared
responsibility, mutual authority and accountability for success, and sharing of resources and
rewards (Mattessich, Marta, & Monsey, 2001).
As mentioned by Denning and Yaholkovsky (2008), collaboration is a desirable, useful,
and often necessary component of complex projects. Morris’s survey (2008) of knowledge
workers found that the majority of them wanted to work collaboratively on projects. Morris and
Horvitz also demonstrated, in many situations, collaboration in many situations is vital to the
success of the task being performed (2007).
The classical way of organizing collaborative activities is based on two factors: location
and time (Rodden, 1991). For instance, brainstorming is most often done in the same space and
time, whereas co-authors of a scholarly article may more often work independently in different
locations and at different times. Determining the conditions of effective collaboration is the
most important topic. Most researchers agree that effective collaboration must be democratic
and inclusive; that is, it must be free of hierarchies of any kind and must include all parties who
have a stake in the problem (London, 1995).

26

Four conditions for successful collaboration are suggested by Surowiecki (2004). In order
to create a meaningful collaboration, the first quality is a diversity of opinion, as each person
should have some private information, even if it is just an eccentric interpretation of known facts.
The second condition is independence, defined as when people's opinions are not determined by
the opinions of those around them. Decentralization, the third quality, is defined as being a state
when people are able to specialize and draw on local knowledge. The final condition is
aggregation, which relates to the existence of some mechanism for turning private judgments
into a collective decision.
However, successful collaboration does not always happen, in part because the process of
collaboration contains several challenges (Haig-Brown, 2001). Determining what is required to
build and sustain successful initiatives is also challenging, because each collaboration requires
unique considerations and elements to achieve a successful endeavor. Changes in membership,
external context, organizational territorial tensions, and collaborative purpose will lead to
changes in what is required to sustain each collaboration (Foster-Fishman et al., 2001). The
common factors identified for successful collaborations across the literature include attention to
trust and relationship building; sharing credit for the group’s accomplishments; the need for
leadership; commitment of time for the collaborative process; equal sharing of decision-making;
and adequate resources (Bell-Elkins, 2002; Metzler, et al., 2003; Tseng, Ku, Wang, & Sun, 2009;
Tseng & Yeh, 2013).
The results of Waters and Napier’s (2002) research study provided an overview of one
method for organizing and optimizing online collaboration. In this study, data was collected
about virtual team experiences through both quantitative and qualitative methods from 24
graduate students via pre-and-post-surveys, electronic chatrooms, forum postings, and e-mails.
27

From the results of this survey, five optimal elements in successful online teams were identified:
providing support; getting familiar with others; establishing communication; building trust; and
getting organized. Additional studies determined that these five elements can help students learn
effectively and efficiently in online teams in order to complete assignments successfully (Tseng,
Ku, Wang, & Sun, 2009).
There may be circumstances where collaboration is not the best course of action. To
determine whether it is appropriate to initiate a collaborative venture, it is necessary for all
parties to fully understand the limitations of the process. These limitations were discussed in
London’s (1995) study. Every group member should know that collaboration is a notoriously
time-consuming process and is not suitable for problems that require quick and decisive action.
Power inequalities among the parties can derail the process. The norms of consensus and joint
decision-making sometimes require that the common good take precedence over the interests of
a few. Collaboration is the process which works best in small groups and often breaks down in
groups that are too large. Collaborative ventures are meaningless without the power for the
group to implement final decisions.
There are differing opinions about what general agreement plays in the process of
collaboration. Some argue that it does not necessarily leads to agreement on all issues. Rather, a
"culture of collaboration" evolves during a project in which participants come to accept
differences and "constantly redefine the terms of their agreements in order to reflect their
growing understanding of mutual interests and goals" (The Institute for Educational Leadership,
1986, p. 16). Gray (1989) acknowledged that not all collaborations lead to consensus, but added
that when agreements for action are reached, they are always found by consensus. General

28

agreement is achieved when each of the group member agrees that they can live with a proposed
solution, even though it may not be the individuals’ most preferred solution.

Collaborative Learning: Definition and Process
Collaborative learning is an approach to teaching and learning that requires learners to work
together to deliberate, discuss, and create meaning. Smith and MacGregor (1992) define
collaborative learning as follows:
“Collaborative learning is an umbrella term for a variety of educational approaches
involving joint intellectual effort by students, or students and teachers together. Usually,
students are working in groups of two or more, mutually searching for understanding,
solutions, or meanings, or creating a product. Collaborative learning activities vary
widely, but most center on students’ exploration or application of the course material, not
simply the teacher’s presentation or explication of it” (p.1).
Brandon and Hollingshead (1999) defined collaborative learning as an activity that is
undertaken by equal partners who work jointly on the same problem, rather than on different
parts of the problem. Table 2.3 summarizes different aspects of collaborative learning, which
were extracted by the researcher from the reviewed literature.

29

Table 2.3: Summary of Different aspects associated with Collaborative Learning

Positive Factors

Researcher

Negative Factors

Researcher

In-depth
understandings

 (Totten, Sills, Digby, & Russ,
1991) (Totten, Sills, Digby, &
Russ, 1991)

Time-consuming

 (London,1995)
 (Pena-Shaff, Altman, &
Stephenson, 2005)
 (Birch & McDonald, 2007)

Learning more
materials

 (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson,
Nelson, & Skon, 1981)
 Pena-Shaff, Altman, and
Stephenson (2005)
 (Goold, Augar, & Farmer,
2006)
 (Totten, Sills, Digby, & Russ,
1991)
 (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson,
Nelson , & Skon, 1981)

Cognitive maturity

 (Baxter Magolda, 1992)
 (King & Kitchener, 1994)
 (Chiong & Jovanonic, 2012)

Motivation

 (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson,
Nelson, & Skon, 1981)
 (Totten, Sills, Digby, & Russ,
1991)
 (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson,
Nelson , & Skon, 1981)

Anxiety & Frustration

Positive attitude

 (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson,
Nelson, & Skon, 1981)

Less enthusiastic

Social learning &
Skills outcomes

Promoting creativity

 (Birch & McDonald, 2007)
 (Johnson, Johnson, & Holubec,
Circles of learning: Cooperation
in the classroom, 1993)
 (Daradoumis & Marques, J. ,
2000)
 (Tseng & Yeh, Team members’
perceptions of online teamwork
learning experiences and
building teamwork trust: A
qualitative study, 2013)

Longer usage of
gained knowledge

 (Beckman, 1990)
 (Chickering & Gamson, 1991)

Access to different
ideas

 (Pena-Shaff, Altman, &
Stephenson, 2005)

Misunderstandings

Communication
difficulties

Getting to know the
group members
Poor decision-making
skills

 (Pena-Shaff, Altman, &
Stephenson, 2005)
 (Falkner, Falkner, & Vivian,
2013)
 (Begel & Nagappan, 2008)
 (Birch & McDonald, 2007)
 (Capdeferro & Romero, 2012)
 (Goold, Augar, & Farmer,
2006)
 (Liu, Joy, & Gri, 2010)
 (Andres & Shipps, 2010)

 (Koh & Hill, 2009)
 (Chiong & Jovanonic, 2012)
 (Capdeferro & Romero, 2012)
 (Grzeda, Haq, & Lebrasseur,
2008)
 (Wang, 2007)
 (Korkmaz & Yesil , 2011)

In collaborative learning, students engage in their own knowledge construction by
integrating new information and knowledge networks into a learning community. Schrage (1990)
described collaboration as a process of shared creation, where two or more individuals with

30

supplementary skills interact to create a shared understanding that none of the participants had
previously processed or could have come to on their own. Collaboration creates a shared
meaning about a process, a product, or an event.
Team collaboration in online learning environment can promote potentiality, creativity, and
productivity during the teamwork process. According to Daradoumis and Marques (2000):
“Collaborative learning creates the potential for cognitive and metacognitive benefits […]
collaborative learning promotes affective and social benefits in distance education. In
particular, it increases the student interest and value that gives to the subject matter. It also
increases positive attitudes and social interactions among students” (p. 76).
Several studies have aimed to identify factors that influence the success of collaborative
learning in an online environment. Carabajal, LaPointe, and Gunawardena (2003) found three
dimensions of groups in online learning communities: task, social, and technological. A
framework for the effectiveness of collaborative learning introduced by Kirschner, Strijbos,
Kreijns, and Beers (2004) suggested that the collaborative learning process is contingent upon
technological, educational, and social affordances present in the task environment. Yoon (2006)
studied major behaviors performed by teams and determined three functions are important for
group performance: work, social, and management. Work, or completing a task, was the most
frequently performed behavior, followed by building relationships among team members, then
managing the team. At the beginning of teamwork, the social domain explained the largest
portion of observed behavior. Technology use did not seem to be the most influential factor in
the development of virtual teams. Yoon (2006) found that successful collaborative learning
needs to consider both task and social aspects of an activity. Lee et al. (2006) suggested that
instructors tend to focus more on the task dimension of the teamwork, causing students
31

perceptions on the social dimension to be not as strongly positive. In order to create positive
student perceptions in the social dimension, the assessment of the virtual teams has to cover the
“teaming process” as much as the team output (p. 521).
Collaborative learning requires working together toward a common goal. Different teams
have their own unique processes intended to improve the effectiveness and productivity
necessary for achieving the team’s goals (Tseng & Yeh, 2013). Team processing exists when
team members concentrate on completing the task and are aware of how well they are achieving
the goals and maintaining effective working patterns. Team processing was defined by Johnson
and Johnson (2000) as reflecting on a group session to describe what member actions were
helpful and unhelpful and make decisions about what actions to continue or change. By working
together, team members can identify and clarify cooperative patterns. When the team’s
processes reach the most appropriate condition and all members are mutually accountable, then
the team quickly and consistently do an effective job (Tseng & Yeh, 2013).
This type of learning has been called by various names: cooperative learning, collaborative
learning, collective learning, learning communities, peer teaching, peer learning, or team
learning. All of these terms incorporate group work. However, collaboration is more than
cooperation. Collaboration entails the whole process of learning. This may include students
teaching one another, students teaching the teacher, and the teacher teaching the students.
Collaborative learning means that students are responsible for one another's learning as well as
their own; reaching a learning objective implies that students have helped each other to
understand and learn. Cooperative learning is also a process that facilitate the accomplishment of
a specific end product or goal through people working together in groups. Cooperation and
collaboration seem to overlap, but in the cooperative model of learning, the teacher still controls
32

most of what is going on in the classroom or online learning environment, even if the students
are working in groups. Collaborative learning, on the other hand, is aimed at getting the students
to take almost full responsibility for working together, building knowledge together, changing
and evolving together, and improving together (Dooly, 2008).
The basis of both collaborative and cooperative learning is constructivism: knowledge is
constructed and transformed by students. Constructivist learning is an “active process in which
learners are active sense makers who seek to build coherent and organized knowledge” (Mayer,
2004, p. 14). The learning process must be understood as something a learner does by activating
already existent cognitive structures or by constructing new cognitive structures that
accommodate new input. Learners do not passively receive knowledge from the teacher;
teaching is a transaction between all the stakeholders in the learning process.
Collaborative learning has been practiced and studied since the early 1900s. Its principles
are mainly based on the theories of John Dewey (2009), Lev Vygotsky (1980), and Benjamin
Bloom (1956). Their collective work focused on how students learn, which has led educators to
develop more student-focused learning environments intended to place students at the center of
instruction. According to Vygotsky (1980), learning is a social act and must not be done in
isolation; this same idea is the foundation of collaborative learning. Results of research by
Vygotsky (1980) and Bruner (1985) indicated that collaborative learning environments are one
of the necessities for learning. Slavin’s (1989) research also suggested that when students and
teachers are working in a collaborative environment, students learn more, are more engaged, and
feel like they get more out of their classes. Totten, Sills, Digby, and Russ (1991) found that those
students involved in collaborative learning understand content at deeper levels and have higher

33

rates of achievement and retention than learners who work alone. They suggested that
collaborative learning gives students opportunities to internalize their learning.
According to supporters of collaborative learning, the fact that students are actively
negotiating, debating, and exchanging ideas within their groups increases students’ interest in
learning. By engaging in discussion and taking responsibility for their learning, students are
encouraged to become critical thinkers (Totten, Sills, Digby, & Russ, 1991). Students working in
small groups tend to learn more of what is being taught. They retain the information longer and
also appear more satisfied with their classes (Beckman, 1990; Chickering & Gamson, 1991).
Regarding effective collaborative learning, Slavin (1989) argued there should be both
"group goals" and "individual accountability" (p.53). The group’s task is to make sure that every
group member has learned something. Ideally, a collaborative learning task would allow for each
member to be responsible for some concept necessary to complete the task. This implies that
every group member will learn their assigned concept and will be responsible for explaining or
teaching this to other members of the group. Research has consistently found that the students
who gain most from cooperative work are those who give and receive elaborate
explanations (Webb, 1985). If students are required to collaborate to undertake a common task,
additional skills are necessary, including teamwork and negotiation skills, group decision
making, and task management (Schrage, 1990).
Results of a meta-analysis from the Cooperative Learning Center at the University of
Minnesota indicated that having students work collaboratively has significantly more impact on
learning than having students work alone. The analysis of 122 studies on cooperative learning
revealed that students learn more material when they work together. The cooperative learning
process includes talking through the materials with each other and making sure that all group
34

members understand the concepts and goals of the assignment. This proved more effective than
learning processes where students compete with one another or work alone individualistically.
More students are motivated to learn the material when they work together than when students
compete or work alone. Students also have more positive attitudes when they work together than
when they compete or work alone. Students are more positive about the subject being studied,
the teacher, and themselves as learners and are more accepting of each other’ differences when
they work together (Johnson, Maruyama, Johnson, Nelson, & Skon, 1981).
Types of Collaborative Learners
Wisconsin’s Guiding Principles for Teaching and Learning (n. d.) has categorized
collaboration in three different groups: student to student, student to teacher, and teacher to
teacher. For student to student collaboration, collaborative learning helps students build
interpersonal skills that, along with deep engagement with content, are necessary in college and
careers. According to Johnson, Johnson, and Holubec (1993), collaborative learning provides
students with the opportunity to develop social skills. Many of the outcomes expected as part of
a collaborative learning activity corresponded with goals for student content understanding and
skill attainment. The strategies associated with collaborative learning include collaborative
problem solving and role assignments, as well as task and group processing. These skills prepare
students for the future careers, where collaborative writing, teamwork, and problem-solving are
key elements of daily interactions.
In terms of a student to teacher collaboration, the purpose of collaboration is to learn and
unpack content together in order to develop a shared understanding of the material. According to
Harding-Smith (1993), collaborative learning approaches are based on the idea that learning
must be a social act; it is through interaction that learning occurs. Johnson and Johnson (1986)
35

pointed out that when students and teachers talk and listen to each other, they gain a deeper
understanding of the content and can develop the skills necessary to negotiate meaning
throughout their lives. Collaboration between teacher and student requires a shift from teacherled instruction to instruction and learning that is designed by both teachers and students.
Collaboration between student and teacher plays a critical role in helping students reflect and
engage in their own learning experiences. The constructivist learning movement is one current
example of efforts intended to increase the amount of collaboration between student and teacher
in the classroom. Constructivist learning leads to developing problem-solving skills, critical
thinking, and creative skills being applied in meaningful ways (Neo & Neo, 2009).
Professional learning communities, which provide teachers with established time to
collaborate with other teachers, have recently become a more common practice. A case study
conducted by Louis and Kruse (1995) highlighted some of the positive outcomes associated with
professional learning communities, including reductions in teacher isolation, increases in teacher
commitment and sense of shared responsibility, and better understandings of effective
instructional practices. Professional learning communities encourage collaborative problem
solving and allow teachers to gain new strategies and skills to improve and energize their
teaching.
Collaboration in an Online Setting
Collaborative learning in an online classroom can take the form of discussion among the
whole class or team activities within smaller groups. Macdonald (2003) categorized collaborative
activities as either process-oriented or product-oriented. Process-oriented collaboration involves
discussions and idea-sharing related to course content, which engage students in a structured
debate on a course topic. Process-oriented activities may not lead to a product. Product-oriented
36

online collaboration, however, may lead to a final product such as a project or essay. Productoriented tasks can be assessed using two elements: a common grade for the group based on the
quality of the group product and individual grades for the contribution of each individual (Wang,
2007).
Many studies have examined students’ perceptions of process and product-oriented
collaborations. Results from Pena-Shaff, Altman, and Stephenson’s study (2005) presented five
different categories. These categories summarized students’ perceived benefits of online
discussions. The first category was extended time to reflect on and structure their thoughts.
Some students felt that the online discussions allowed them to prepare comments, check assigned
readings, think about what others had written, and structure their thoughts before communicating
their ideas with others. The second category was access to different perspectives on the same
issue. In this category, the researchers found that students felt that the online discussion board
gave them the opportunity to read different perspectives on the same issue. This allowed them to
evaluate different frameworks, not just their own. The third category was explained as a database
of topics and integration of class material. The online discussion board provided a database of
topics under discussion. Some students felt that, since they could see the previous posts and the
relationship between the posts, they could expand their knowledge. The fourth category, more
in-depth discussion of class topics, indicated that some students felt an online discussion board
allowed them more in-depth discussions than in-class discussions would permit. The last
category was described as increased control. Some students believed the online discussion board
gave them the control over the discussion, which made them more comfortable discussing the
issues through this medium than they would face-to-face.

37

Collaboration in virtual teams may be more challenging than in traditional teams. PenaShaff et al., (2005) reported that there are factors that prevent students’ perceptions and
participation. These include written apprehension anxiety, which is the fear of publicly
expressing their comments. Some students perceived that their peers’ posting lacked substance;
others noted that participating in online discussion was a time-consuming activity. In a study
conducted by Chiong and Jovanovich (2012), results showed that social learning, defined as
learning through communication and knowledge exchange, was reported by students as one of
the perceived benefits of virtual collaboration. Students’ concerns about time constraints, delays
in communication, and differences in skills and knowledge among team members were found to
contribute to students’ reluctance to participate in online collaboration. Goold, Augar, and
Farmer’s (2006) study indicated that students felt that they learned more through discussions
with their peers and faculty than they did by reading the text alone. However, students were less
enthusiastic about working in a group within an online environment when compared to
collaborating in a face-to-face classroom setting.
Andres and Shipps (2010) studied the effect of online collaboration on team interactions.
Their research examined technological, educational or learning, and social affordances
associated with the facilitation of project-based learning and problem solving in technologymediated distributed teams. They found that, compared to co-located teams, technologymediated collaboration experienced greater instances of communication breakdowns,
misunderstandings, and difficulty moving forward. A research study by Koh and Hill (2009)
indicated that students found online group activity to be more difficult than face-to-face group
work. Students reported difficulty with communication and a lack of sense of community as the
most challenging factors. Online collaborative groups may also have trouble reaching

38

agreements, experience delayed group development stages, and take longer to get to know the
group members than individuals working on face-to-face group projects (Grzeda, Haq, &
Lebrasseur, 2008; Wang, 2007). Birch and McDonald (2007) reported that students found the
online group activity to be time-consuming and frustrating. However, students agreed that the
activity was beneficial in terms of cognitive and social learning outcomes.
A national survey-based study on student perceptions on group work conducted by Liu,
Joy, and Griffiths (2010) encompassed both online and face-to-face collaborations. By
incorporating a significant literature review, the researchers identified three key problems in
collaborative group work: poor motivation, lack in individual accountability, and negative interdependence, defined as when one or more students within the group complete the majority of the
work, which decreases the overall group contribution. Another study conducted by Drury, Kay,
and Losberg (2002) described a cross-sectional evaluation on perceptions of group work,
combining analysis of focus group interviews and an extensive questionnaire to monitor changes
in students' perceptions of collaborative group work throughout their studies. The researchers
identified the need, due to the complexity of learning both discipline concepts and metacognitive
aspects of group collaboration, to model group work within foundation courses. The majority of
students reported positive experiences in group work; however, a significant minority indicated
negative experiences within their collaborations.
Students can feel a high level of frustration in online collaborative learning activities
(Capdeferro & Romero, 2012). Capdeferro and Romero’s study (2012) found that difficulties in
communication, the lack of shared goals, and the imbalance in the level of commitment could
contribute to students’ frustration. Poor problem-solving and decision-making skills, as well as

39

relationship conflicts, could also threaten the success of the collaborative learning process
(Korkmaz & Yesil , 2011).
Demographics and Cultural Factors
Understanding the role of student demographics in the online learning environment can
assist institutions when making decisions regarding online programs. It is important to consider
the relationship between student demographics and success in online collaborative learning as
related to academic performance, perception, and the possession of self-regulated learning
characteristics. Understanding the role of student demographics in the online learning
environment would help institutions determine what resources need to be allocated toward
support of online learning programs, including online advising and technical support for
students, course development support for faculty, and investing in learning-management
software or collaboration software.
Ding, Bosker, and Harskamp (2011) discussed that, while Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) has the potential to lessen the gender gap between male and
female performance and persistence in physics, the positive findings from CSCL research “are
controversial where gender is concerned” (p.325). Leman (2010) pointed out that there is a
scarcity of empirical research linking “interactions and collaboration to gender and learning
outcomes” (p.218). Research has indicated that there are differences between how males and
females learn, converse, and interact (Kommer, 2006; Leman, 2010; Rice & Dolgin, 2002),
including when working within mixed-gender groups (Hawkins & Power, 1999) and also within
mixed-gender dyads (Ding, Bosker, & Harskamp, 2011; Harskamp, Ding, & Suhre, 2008). Some
studies have found that females in mixed-gender groups do not perform as well as females in
same-gender groups (Light, Littleton, Bale, Joyner, & Messer, 2000). One of the key findings
40

highlighted by Bennett, Hogarth, Lubben, Campbell, and Robinson’s (2010) review of studies of
small groups in science classrooms was that students in single-sex groups were more purposeful
than mixed-gender groups, but a group’ gender composition did not ultimately affect
understanding. In another study, females participated more actively and persistently on
collaborative learning activities when in mixed-gender groups, including generating more
science and group orchestration talk during computer-based learning activities (Goldstein &
Puntambekar, 2004). Gnesdilow, Evenstone, and Rutledge (2013) conducted a research study on
understanding how the gender composition in groups affects students’ learning outcomes in
science. Results from their study indicated that group gender ratio does influence students’
science learning and practices. Students in mixed-gender groups performed significantly better
than students in same-gender groups; having at least one group member of the opposite gender
increased individual students’ post-test performance.
Existing research suggests that cultural differences can have a negative effect on students’
participation in online courses. Shattuck (2005) observed that international online learners felt a
“sense of marginalization, or, sometimes even alienation” from American learners in a highly
interactive communication learning environment (p. 186). Reeder, Macfadyen, and Chase (2004)
found that different cultural communication patterns increased miscommunication; the greater
the perception of cultural differences between the participants in an activity, the greater the
incidents of miscommunication. Liu, Liu, Lee, and Magjuka (2010) reported the findings of a
case study that investigated the perceptions of international students about the impact of cultural
differences on their learning experiences in an online MBA program. The study revealed that
online instructors need to design courses in ways that remove potential cultural barriers,
including language, communication tool use, plagiarism, time zone differences, and a lack of

41

multicultural content, which may affect international students’ learning performances. The study
indicated that, in order to ensure full participation by international students, a culturally inclusive
learning environment needs to consider diversity in course design. Eastern students exhibited
modest, face-saving personalities in the group work and preferences for group work, whereas the
U.S. students appeared to be assertive, confident, and independent with a competitive attitude
that dominated the group interaction process (Liu, Liu, Lee, & Magjuka, 2010). According to
Hofstede’s study (1986), these findings reflect the collectivism and feminine attributes of Eastern
cultures and the individualism and masculine attributes of Western cultures. Almost all of the
students agreed that the cultural differences originating from ethnicity existed, but did not
believe these differences negatively affect their ability to communicate or collaborate in learning.
Campbell & Li (2006) examined Asian students’ perceptions of the much-promulgated
collaborative learning concepts of group work and group assignments. The research was
conducted in 2005 in a New Zealand tertiary institution. Twenty-two Asian students participated
in one-hour long, individual, semi-structured interviews. The study found that Asian students
highly valued the significance of group discussions where they could interact with students from
other cultures and backgrounds, improve their English language skills, enhance their cultural
understandings, and be provided with opportunities to make friends. However, the students held
intensely negative views about group assignments that require students to complete a project as a
group with shared marks determined by the performance of the group. Contributing factors
affecting group dynamics included: members’ attitudes and willingness to cooperate and
contribute as a team, the composition of the group, competing demands on students’ time and
attention, heterogeneity of the natural abilities of students, and the varying cultural values and

42

beliefs held by group members. Most Asian students felt disheartened, helpless, and desperate
when having to complete mandatory group assignments where grades were shared.
Age may or may not contribute to students’ success in online coursework. A research
study conducted by Colorado and Eberle (2010) found that students’ age did not significantly
affect academic performance in online courses. However, Spears (2012) mentioned that social
presence, social interaction, and satisfaction in online courses are significantly correlated with
age. This result was consistent with previous research that also found a significant correlation
between social presence and age in an online course (Richardson & Swan, 2003). Older learners
tend to have a higher perception of social interaction in face-to-face courses. Collaborative
learning was the only construct not significantly correlated with age. Frederickson et al. (2006)
reported in a study of online learners that younger students, defined as aged 16-25, reported they
learned less and were also less satisfied with online learning. However, students whose ages
ranged from 36-45 reported to have learned more and were more satisfied with online learning.
Social Networking Sites (SNS) are popular communication technologies in the world and
their growing popularity affects teaching and learning in higher education. Several studies
investigated impacts of using SNS, as well as examined the effects of gender and age differences
in those impacts. Females were more likely than males to use social networking sites for a
number of years; this may affect the degree to which students are engaged in course
collaborations (Madden & Zickuhr, 2011; Tarantino, McDonough & Hua, 2013). Today, 68% of
all females use social media, compared with 62% of all males (Duggan, 2015; Perrin, 2015).
According to Nelson, Laird, and Kuh (2005), students who use information technology for
academic purposes also have a higher likelihood of contributing and participating in active,
academic online collaboration with other students. This finding indicates that as engagement
43

with technology increases, engagement with academics also increases, promoting a deeper
connection between the students, educators, and course content (Mehdinezhad, 2011). By
participating in a community of learners, students become more engaged with the course content,
which increases the achievement of popular learning outcomes, such as critical thinking and
individual student development (Kuh, 1993, 2009; Kuh, Cruce, Shoup, Kinsie, & Gonyea, 2008;
Pike, Kuh, & McCormick, 2011). Therefore, student engagement through social media can
increase personal connections and create a virtual community that leads to better content learning
(Tarantino, McDonough, & Hua, 2013).
Pairing students requires careful consideration of the students being placed in each duo.
Beven, Warner, and McDowel (2002) explored successful structuring mechanisms for pair
programming, a form of collaborative learning where two students work together on one
program, with one student acting as driver and the other as navigator. In this study, the authors
identified that students at a high skill level prefer not to be paired with a student of a lower skill
level. Thomas, Robertson, and Ratcliffe (2003) found that students perform at their best when
they are paired with a student of equivalent skill and confidence level. Begel and Nagappan
(2008) explored industry-level pair programming and identified consistent issues related to
differences in skill and confidence level, as well as communication issues. In these studies,
anxiety was linked to the degree of cognitive and metacognitive dissonance.
Falkner, Falkner, and Vivian (2013) conducted a phenomenographic research study on
students’ reflections on collaborative learning activities, including their perceptions of the
purpose of such activities and corresponding feelings, such as anxiety. For data collection, the
researchers performed a series of in-depth semi-structured interviews with 10 undergraduate
students in a computer science program. The results from this study indicated that collaborative
44

learning has many opportunities for educators and students, including supporting increased
engagement, encouraging deeper learning, and offering opportunities to develop and reflect upon
group communication and self-regulation. However, sources of anxiety may be introduced that
impact the success of the collaboration, including when students are unclear or have conflicting
perceptions about expected learning outcomes.
Plonka (2012) explored the causes and impact of disengagement in pair programming,
including differences in skill level. The structuring of tasks, including degree of difficulty and
time coordination, were identified as primarily reasons for students’ disengagement.
Disengagement may be invisible when a collaboration dissolves without explicit agreement or
discussion. A phenomenographic study conducted by Vartiainen (2006) described the moral
conflicts perceived by students within collaborative projects and explored the conceptions
underlying student responses to issues such as differing skill level and communication
problems. Vartiainen identified two dimensions of variation: whether the student focuses on the
impact of issues on themselves or on the other members of the group. Wiggberg (2010)
presented arguably the most comprehensive study in this area, which explored students'
experiences with collaborative group work and how these experiences corresponded with
teachers' expectations. Wiggberg demonstrated three different stories of students' experiences
with an industry-standard software development project: work allocation practices,
responsibility for learning, and degree of ownership of project goals. Wiggberg found that
unclear learning objectives, such as whether the purpose of the collaboration is to achieve
deeper discipline learning or develop collaboration skills, may hinder learning outcomes and
introduce additional stresses.

45

Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
Collaborative learning is strong component of both online and face-to-face environments, but
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSLC), which is concerned with how people
interactively learn together using computer mediated communication (Stahl, Koschmann, &
Suthers, 2006), has emerged as a separate field of research (Resta & Laferrière, 2007). CSLC is
characterized by the sharing and construction of knowledge among participants using
synchronous or asynchronous communication as their primary means of communication. CSCL
is intimately concerned with education in regard to particular forms of learning. Collaborative
learning involves individuals as group members, as well as phenomena, including the negotiation
and sharing of meanings, such as the construction and maintenance of shared conceptions of
tasks, that are accomplished interactively in group processes. Collaborative learning involves
individual learning, yet is not reducible to one person. The relationship between viewing
collaborative learning as a group process versus as an aggregation of individual change is a
tension at the heart of CSCL. CSLC environments provide opportunities for students to
collaborate in inquiry-based practices to solve authentic problems, using technological tools as a
resource (Sinha, Rogat, Adams-Wiggins, & Hmelo-Silver, 2015). Because of these
technological tools, CSCL can be offered in single or multiple geographical locations. However,
CSCL research is not solely focused on technology. According to Bielaczyc (2001), CSCL needs
to be built around three levels of social infrastructure: culture, which is the philosophy and norms
supporting an approach to learning; activities, which Bielaczyc defines as practices; and tool,
which are related to technology.
The pedagogical base of CSCL is collaborative learning. Dillenbourg (1999) defined
collaborative learning as a process through which individuals build knowledge, skills, or
46

attitudes as the result of group interaction while solving a shared task or problem. At the heart of
collaborative learning is the need to analyze learning as an active social process; the learners
actively construct their knowledge. Interaction is important to the process of learners
understanding each other and generating a common language to perform a task (Salkind, 2004).
From a technological perspective, CSCL relies mainly on the design of Virtual Learning
Environments (VLEs) to support collaborative learning activities with tools such as e-mail,
discussion forums, chats, personal profiles, and notes. VLEs have a structure consisting of
several parts: knowledge, which is all the necessary information students need to learn;
collaboration among both real and virtual groups; consulting from the teachers or tutors who give
feedback; experimentation, which is the practical work of the students in a VLE; and personal
space for individual, user-specific information (Sheremetov & Guzmán, 2002).
Since the main focus of this research study is on master’s-level LIS students’ feelings and
experiences while collaborating in an online environment, the researcher will not review more
literature about the role of computer as a mediator for online collaborative learning.

Satisfaction
So and Brush (2008) define satisfaction as an affective learning result, indicating the
degree of learner reaction to values, quality of learning, and motivation for learning. Aragon
(2003) noted an emergence of research on the relationship between student satisfaction and
learning outcomes when creating social presence in online environments. Aragon (2003)
suggested learners who have a higher level of social presence are more satisfied with online
learning.
Students’ satisfaction with collaborative learning is an outcome of the collaboration
process and can be described as the degree to which a student feels a positive association with
47

their individual collaborative learning experiences. Students’ satisfaction can have repercussions
on how students work together, such as whether everyone performs an equal part of the work,
whether group members can work with each other, whether group members remain focused on
the task, and whether there is a good working atmosphere in the group (Gunawardena, et al.,
2001). Little is known about students’ experiences during the collaboration process in CSCL
environments. Understanding students’ experiences in these environments might help designers
provide specific instructions to enhance the quality of the online learning process.
Published findings on students’ satisfaction in face-to-face courses are usually related to
individual student characteristics, quality of relationships with faculty, curriculum, support
services, resources, and facilities (Spears, 2012). Other factors, such as contact with faculty and
administrators, career advisers, and social life on campus, can be attributed to student satisfaction
(Astin, 1993). While similar factors can be attributed to predicting satisfaction in online learning
courses, essential elements, such as social presence, social interaction, and collaborative
learning, continue to be deliberately woven into course design. When gauging satisfaction with
online courses, technology, physical distance, communications, availability, interaction with
instructor and peers, and course design are particularly different from face-to-face courses
(Spears, 2012).
Gunawardena and Zittle (1997), along with Kanuka and Anderson (1998), revealed
interactions between learner and instructor also contribute to satisfaction. Jung et al. (2002)
reported a learner’s satisfaction was more strongly related to student-student interaction than to
interaction with the instructor. Collaboration among students led to increased levels of
satisfaction. Frederickson et al. (2006) found that students who have interaction and access to the

48

instructor are more satisfied. Swan (2001) discovered that most students who reported high
levels of interaction also reported higher levels of satisfaction in the course.

Summary
Collaborative learning activities take place in evolving and challenging social systems, which
leads to interest in capturing the social, enacted, and process nature of motivation. From this
perspective, the group is considered a social system engaged in a meaningful activity that
deploys social processes to regulate interactions that lead toward completion of the activity. As
widely documented in the literature on collaborative learning, groups as social systems can
experience disturbances and ongoing challenges. These require coordination of interactions to
maintain the system as a whole and to restore engagement. Collaborative learning involves
interdependent individuals who all have metacognitive and agentic capacities. From this
perspective, research on motivation needs to capture the individual processes that regulate and
sustain individual engagement in the joint activity. Therefore, this study will focus on the
motivation as a component of Self-Regulated Learning and research LIS students’ emotions,
feelings, and beliefs in the social context of collaborative learning. In addition, literature related
to social cognitive theory was reviewed; this theory emphasizes on how cognitive, behavioral,
personal, environmental, and other factors play a role in human behavior, which is the main
focus of many psychological studies (Schwarzer & Born, 1997; Schwarzer, et al., 1997;
Sriramatr, Silalertdetkul, & Wachirathanin, 2016; Zhang & Schwarzer, 1995), but not the focus
of this dissertation research study.
By reviewing literature on collaborative learning in online environment, the researcher
noted a lack in studies that explore and investigate MLIS students’ experiences and feelings

49

while working on group assignments. Therefore, the researcher chose to conduct this exploratory
research study to fill this gap.

50

3.

Chapter 3: Methodology
Overview

This chapter outlines the procedure of the dissertation research, including research questions,
research hypothesis, research design, population and sampling method, data collection, and data
analysis. As articulated in the problem statement found in Chapter 1, this dissertation research
intends to investigate, explore, and compare online collaborative learning performances, online
collaborative learning perceptions, and success factors in group assignments.

Research Questions
This dissertation research intends to investigate the following research questions:
RQ I. What impact do demographic factors, technological skills, and past online
experiences have on online collaborative learning?
I.1. To what extent do demographic variables, technology skills, and past online
learning experience impact MLIS students’ performance in their online courses
involving collaborative learning?
I.2. To what extent do the aforementioned demographic variables, technology
skills, and past online learning experiences impact MLIS students’ perceptions
about their online collaborative learning experience?
RQ II. What affective factors, such as confidence, influence the success of online
collaborative learning?
II.1. What social and group variables, such as group size and social or interactive
climate, influence the success of online collaborative learning?
51

RQ III. Overall, what factors influence the success of online collaborative learning?
RQ IV. How do MLIS students describe their performance in online collaborative
assignments?
RQ V. What perceptions and affective experiences do MLIS students discuss regarding
current experiences?
RQ VI. What factors do MLIS students report that lead to positive or negative online
collaborative experiences?
RQ VII. What opportunities and obstacles do MLIS students identify that are associated
with the online collaborative experience in general?
RQ VIII. How do MLIS students project the future development of online collaborative
learning?

Research Hypotheses
The dissertation research hypotheses are as follows:
H1. There is no statistically significant difference between male and female students in
terms of performance in group assignments. This hypothesis is based on the study
conducted by Light, Littleton, Bale, Joyner, & Messer (2000), which found that
females in mixed-gender groups do not perform as well as females in same-gender
groups.
H2. Students who spend more time on social media have better online collaboration
performance than students who spend less time on social media. A research study,
52

conducted by Yang et al. (2011), found that interactive blogs play a significant role in
the peer interaction among students and lead to a better academic achievement. In
another study, it was reported that college students’ performance was negatively
influenced by the time spent on Facebook (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2011).
H3. There is a statistically significant difference between age groups in their abilities to
develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other members in their group.
This hypothesis is based on Spears’ (2012) study, which mentioned that social
presence, social interaction, and satisfaction in online courses are significantly
correlated with age. Frederickson et al. (2006) reported that students whose ages
ranged from 36 to 45 reported to have learned more and were more satisfied with
online learning.
H4. There is a statistically significant difference between female and male students in
being comfortable expressing their humor during online discussions related to the
assignment. This hypothesis is based on research studies indicating there are
differences between how males and females learn, converse, and interact (Kommer,
2006; Leman, 2010; Rice & Dolgin, 2002).

53

Figure 3.1 maps each research question to its related hypothesis in this study.

Figure 3.1: Phases, Themes, RQs, and Hypotheses of the Research Study

Research Design
This study employed a mixed methods approach with a sequential explanatory design. The
sequential explanatory mixed methods design is characterized by the collection and analysis of
quantitative data in the first phase of research, followed by the collection and analysis of
qualitative data in the second phase, which builds on the results of the initial quantitative results.
Weight is typically given to quantitative data, and the mixing of the data occurs when the initial
quantitative results inform the secondary qualitative data collection. Thus, the two forms of data
are separate, but connected (Creswell, 2009). The steps of this design are illustrated in Figure
3.2. Hence, this dissertation research design involves two phases: Phase I, an online survey as

54

the quantitative component for descriptive quantitative study, and Phase II, a follow-up interview
as the qualitative component. Some correlational analysis, along with other statistical tests, were
performed for Phase I of the study. For the purpose of data collection, this research study will
apply closed and open-ended questions via online survey, followed by semi-structured in-depth
interviews.

Figure 3.2: Sequential Design; Adapted from Creswell et al. (2003)

Population and Sample
The study population includes MLIS students who are or were taking an online course at ALAaccredited programs in the United States and Canada.
The sampling frame was established using data gathered through the 2015 ALISE
Statistical Report. The ALISE Statistical Report and Database is a compilation and analysis of
statistical data and information about graduate library and information science education
programs.
Based on the 2015 ALISE report, the population of this study was approximately 13,715
students from 45 schools who are enrolled in ALA-accredited master’s programs in Library and
Information Studies. It is important to note that not all of these students were enrolled in online
55

courses, and not all of these online courses had group assignments. Therefore, at the beginning of
the online survey, there were three pop-up questions. The first one asked if a student is in the
Master LIS program, the second one asked whether the student is currently or was enrolled in an
online course, and the third question asked whether they have been involved in group
assignments. By answering all screening questions in the affirmative, the online survey opened
to that student. The target sample of the dissertation research was approximately 375 2 students
for the online survey. This number was calculated using 5% margin of error and 95% confidence
level for the population of 13715 MLIS. Out of 652 participants, 457 completed the online
survey. For the purpose of this study, the online survey was distributed among 45 institutions
that hold online courses. When distributing the online survey, a request email with the link to the
online survey, along with an attachment showing instructional review board (IRB) approval, was
sent to the instructor of each online course and online program coordinators. The institutions that
offered online courses in Fall 2016 and instructors’ contact information are collected in an Excel
sheet in Appendix A.
The first phase of the study employed a census of the entire population and had 457
respondents. A census is a study of every unit, everyone or everything, in a population. It is
known as a complete enumeration, which means a complete count. A census provides a true
measure of the population with no sampling error, and benchmark data may be obtained for
future research studies. Generally, a census takes longer to collect, process, and release data and
it may also be difficult to enumerate all units of the population within the available time
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013). After preliminary data analysis of Phase I data collection,
an extreme case sampling was used for the follow-up interview sessions. The target sample size

2

Calculated from Survey Monkey Website| https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/sample-size-calculator/
56

for the follow-up interviews was 29 students. Extreme or deviant case sampling is a type of
purposive sampling that is used to focus on cases that are special or unusual, typically in the
sense that the cases highlight notable outcomes, failures, or successes. These extreme or deviant
cases are useful because they often provide significant insight into a particular phenomenon,
which can act as lessons or cases of best practice that guide future research and practice. In some
cases, extreme or deviant case sampling is thought to reflect the purest form of insight into the
phenomenon being studied (Leard Statistics, 2012).

Data Collection
The data collection for this study was divided into two phases. For Phase I, data was gathered
through an online survey that contained close and open-ended questions. The online survey
consisted of two sections. Section one had 14 demographic questions. Section two had 38
questions about the online collaborative learning experience. Twenty-nine of these questions
were close-ended questions, followed by eight open-ended questions. The online survey was
opened for more than a month from October 21st through November 30th, 2016.
Phase II of this dissertation research focused on MLIS students’ experiences when
collaborating on a group assignment. Data for this section was gathered through semi-structured
follow-up interview sessions with 29 students who were willing to participate in the interview.
Interview sessions were focused the MLIS students’ experiences and feelings, as expressed in
their own words, and were audio recorded. Recorded sessions were then transcribed and
analyzed through qualitative content analysis. Table 3.1 indicates the detailed data collection for
follow-up interview sessions.

57

Table 3.1: Detailed Data Collection for Follow-up Interview Sessions

Gender

Number

Female
Male
Total

16
13
29

Program Type
Hybrid
100% Online
Total

Institutions

Number
1

Kent University

1

North Carolina University

1

Rutgers University

2

San Jose State University

10

Simmons College

1

Southern Mississippi University

4

Texas Woman University

1

University of South Florida

1

University of Illinois

2

University of Kentucky

2

University of Tennessee

1

University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee

2

Total

29

Date & Time

Duration (Min)

Dec 07, 10:30

19

PF2

Dec 08, 15:00

22

PF3

Dec 09, 09:30

22

PF4

Dec 09, 10:30

22

PM14

Dec 09, 21:00

35

PM2

Dec 10, 09:30

18

PM3

Dec 10, 11:30

30

PM4

Dec 10, 15:00

30

PF5

Dec 10, 16:00

20

PM5

Dec 10, 17:00

27

PF6

Dec 11, 09:30

26

PM6

Dec 11, 11:30

29

PM7

Dec 11, 17:00

40

PF7

Dec 13, 14:30

18

PF8

Dec 13, 15:00

22

PF9

Dec 13, 15:30

43

PM8

Dec 14, 15:00

30

PF10

Dec 15, 15:00

43

PM9

Dec 15, 16:00

23

PM10

Dec 17, 09:30

18

3

PF1

4

3
26
29

Buffalo University

Interview Session

3

Number

PF: Female Participant
PM: Male Participant
58

PF11

Dec 17, 10:30

24

PF12

Dec 17, 15:00

20

PM11

Dec 18, 10:30

31

PF13

Dec 20, 15:00

55

PF14

Dec 20, 20:00

41

PM12

Dec 27, 15:00

27

PF15

Dec 28, 15:00

20

PF16

Dec 30, 15:00

17

PM13

Jan 02, 15:00

23

As shown in the table above, the data collection for Phase II of this dissertation research
study started on December 7, 2016 and ended on January 2, 2017. Figure 3.3 represents the data
collection process for Phase I and II.

59

Figure 3.3: Data Collection Process

Data Analysis
Data analysis for this dissertation research study consists of one initial data analysis, followed by
two stages of primary data analysis.
Following the completion of Phase I data collection, an initial data analysis was performed
in order that the researcher could enrich the interview questions and identify the main patterns
and themes. After conducting all 29 interview sessions, the data analysis officially began.

60

For the Phase I data analysis, some correlational data analysis, along with the ManWhitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test, had been performed. Correlation analysis is a term
that refers to the strength of a relationship between two variables. A strong, or high, correlation
means that two or more variables have a strong relationship with each other, while a weak, or
low, correlation means that the variables are hardly related. Correlation analysis is the process of
studying the strength of that relationship with available statistical data (Crossman, 2016). This
method allowed the researcher to compare and analyze the relationship among independent
variables, including age, gender, ethnicity, tech proficiency, academic background and countries
of origin, and dependent variables, such as online collaborative learning performance, online
collaborative learning perception, and success factors in an online course among MLIS students.
This design was selected because the study intended to analyze several variables, as well as the
strength of any significant relationships between the variables. According to Gall, Gall, & Borg
(2006), one of the advantages of correlational analysis is that the relationships between several
variables can be analyzed singly or in combination to determine how they may affect emerging
patterns of behavior. A second advantage of correlational design is that the strength of
relationships between variables can be analyzed. The most widely used type of correlation
coefficient is the Spearman’s rank-order correlation.
The Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient (rs) is a nonparametric measure of the
strength and direction of association that exists between two variables measured on at least an
ordinal scale. The test is used for either ordinal variables or for continuous data that has failed
the assumptions necessary for conducting the Pearson's product-moment correlation. The
assumptions for the Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient are: two variables should be

61

measured on an ordinal, interval, or ratio scale; and there should be a monotonic relationship
between two variables (Leard Statistics, 2013).
The Mann-Whitney U test is a nonparametric test for the significance of the difference
between the distributions of two independent samples. The major difference between the MannWhitney U test and Student's T-test involves the concept of normal distribution; normal
distribution of data is not necessary for use of this test. This test can be used if T-test
assumptions not met (Leard Statistics, 2013).
The Kruskal-Wallis H test, sometimes also called the one-way ANOVA on ranks, is a rankbased nonparametric test that can be used to determine if there are statistically significant
differences between two or more groups of an independent variable on a continuous or ordinal
dependent variable. It is considered the nonparametric alternative to the one-way ANOVA and
an extension of the Mann-Whitney U test that allows the comparison of more than two
independent groups. There are four assumptions associated with this test: the dependent variable
should be measured at the ordinal or continuous level; the independent variable should consist of
two or more categorical, independent groups; there should be independence of observations,
which means that there is no relationship between the observations in each group or between the
groups themselves; and, in order to know how to interpret the results from a Kruskal-Wallis H
test, whether the distributions in each group have the same shape (Leard Statistics, 2013).
Several types of descriptive statistics were performed for data analysis. These calculated
for ordinal variables, including frequencies and proportions or percentages, medians, modes, and
inter-quartile range. Depending on the number of values an ordinal variable can assume, a mean
and standard deviation may also be calculated. For example, Likert scale variables are ordinal

62

variables (Waller & Johnson, 2013). Table 3.2 represents the statistical tests for each hypothesis
of this dissertation study.
Table 3.2: Dissertation Hypotheses and Related Statistical Tests

Dissertation Hypothesis

Statistical Test

Ha 1. There is no statistically significant difference between male and
female students in terms of performance in group assignments

Mann Whitney U test

Ha 2. Students who spend more time on social media have better online
collaboration performance than students who spend less time on
social media

Kruskal-Wallis Test

Ha 3. There is a statistically significant difference between age groups in
their abilities of developing new knowledge and skills by
interacting with other members in their group.

Kruskal-Wallis Test

Ha 4. There is a statistically significant difference between female and
male students in being comfortable expressing their humor during
online discussions related to the assignment.

Mann Whitney U test

After completing the data analysis of Phase I, data analysis for Phase II began. The
procedure was to transcribe the recorded interview sessions for qualitative content analysis.
Qualitative content analysis has been defined as “a research method for the subjective
interpretation of the content of text data through the systematic classification process of coding
and identifying themes or patterns” (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p.1278). Qualitative content
analysis goes beyond merely counting words or extracting objective content from texts to
examine meanings, themes, and patterns that may be manifest or latent in a particular text. It
allows researchers to understand social reality in a subjective, but scientific, manner (Zhang &
Wildemuth, 2009). Qualitative content analysis has two approaches: inductive or deductive.
If the researcher has chosen to use inductive content analysis, the qualitative data has to be
organized. This process includes open coding, creating categories, and abstraction. Open coding
63

means that notes and headings are written in the text while reading it. After open coding, the lists
of categories are grouped under higher order headings (Burnard, 1991; McCain, 1988). This is
followed by abstraction, which means formulating a general description of the research topic
through generating categories (Burnard, 1996; Polit & Beck, 2004; Robson, 1993). Each
category is named using content-characteristic words. Subcategories with similar events and
incidents are grouped together as categories and categories are grouped as main categories (Dey,
1993; Kyngas & Vanhanen, 1999; Robson, 1993). The abstraction process continues as far as is
reasonable and possible.
Deductive content analysis is often used in cases where the researcher wishes to retest
existing data in a new context (Catanzaro, 1988). If a deductive content analysis is chosen, the
next step is to develop a categorization matrix and to code the data according to the categories. In
deductive content analysis, either a structured or unconstrained matrix of analysis can be used,
depending on the aim of the study (Kyngas & Vanhanen, 1999). After a categorization matrix
has been developed, all the data are reviewed for content and coded for correspondence with
exempliﬁcation of the identiﬁed categories (Polit & Beck, 2004). It is generally based on earlier
work such as theories, models, mind maps, and literature reviews (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005; Polit
& Beck, 2004; Sandelowski, 1995). When using an unconstrained matrix, different categories are
created within its bounds, following the principles of inductive content analysis. If the matrix is
structured, only aspects that ﬁt the matrix of analysis are chosen from the data (Patton, 1990;
Sandelowski, 1995). This can also be called testing categories, concepts, models, or hypotheses
(Marshall & Rossman, 1995). When using a structured matrix of analysis, it is possible to choose
only the aspects from the data that ﬁt the categorization frame or, alternatively, to choose those

64

that do not. In this way, aspects that do not ﬁt the categorization frame can be used to create their
own concepts, based on the principles of inductive content analysis.
Both inductive and deductive content analysis processes are represented as three main
phases: preparation, organizing, and reporting. Figure 3.4 represents these phases. This
dissertation study will employ an inductive approach for qualitative content analysis.

Figure 3.4: Qualitative Content Analysis Process (Adapted from Satu & Kyngas, 2008)

After coding, grouping, categorizing, and abstracting all the interview sessions, the analysis
of this phase was conducted, followed by the combining and reporting of the final results to
65

answer research questions. The process of data analysis for this dissertation study is illustrated in
Figure 3.5.

Figure 3.5: Data Analysis Process

Summary
This dissertation research study employed a mixed methods approach with a sequential
explanatory design. It involved two phases: Phase I, a descriptive quantitative study, and Phase
II, a qualitative study. The data was collected through an online survey during Phase I and
through follow-up interviews during Phase II of this study. The online survey was then analyzed
66

by statistical measures such as descriptive statistics, Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis H
test, and Spearman’s ran-order. For the last part of data analysis, the qualitative content analysis
method used to analyze the follow-up interview sessions. Figure 3.6 represents the step by step
process of data collection and data analysis.

Figure 3.6: Summary of Data Collection and Data Analysis

67

4.

Chapter 4: Results
Presentation of Findings

Results reported in this chapter are presented under two main sections: quantitative and
qualitative findings. Data analysis in Phase I consisted of quantitative analysis of close-ended
questions and qualitative analysis of open-ended questions, which were collected from the online
survey. Quantitative results consisted of the demographic characteristics of participants, selfreported results, students’ performance attitudes and perceptions, impacts of demographic
variables on students’ online collaborative performance and perception, and some nonparametric
correlation tests. Data analysis of Phase II was associated with the follow-up interview sessions
and was performed using qualitative content analysis. Three main themes emerged: group
composition, group outcome, and group collaboration. This chapter is organized according to the
research questions.

Results of Quantitative Data Analysis
This section will present a brief demographic description of the participants, various statistical
results pertaining to the relationships among several factors that influence performance and
perception among MLIS students, and results of open-ended questions from the online survey. A
series of nonparametric tests were performed (p < .05) to determine the impact of various
demographic variables on participants’ performance and perceptions. Statistical Package for the
Social Sciences (SPSS) version 24 was used to perform the statistical analysis.

68

Demographic Characteristics of Participants and Description of Self-Reported Results
Among 652 participants, 457 completed the online survey for a response rate of approximately
70%.5 Nearly 400 (n = 397) of these participants were female and 60 were male. Female
participants were 87% of the whole sample population, which reflects that library school students
are predominantly female.
Participants reported their ethnicity as 86% White/Caucasian, 3% Asian, 3% Latino, 3%
African-American, 2% Mixed Race, and 2% preferring not to report their race. Their
undergraduate degrees were from a wide range of different majors, including Art and Humanities
(65%), Social Science (17%), and Science (16%). The majority of participants (56%) were parttime students. A demographic summary of the participants is presented in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Participants’ Demographic Makeup

Age

Gender

Category

Frequency

Percent

397

86.9

Male

60

13.1

21-25

97

21.2

26-30

123

26.9

31-35

73

16.0

36-40

47

10.3

41-45

51

11.2

46 and more

66

14.4

391

85.6

Latino

13

2.8

Asian

16

3.5

African-American

12

2.6

Mixed Race

11

2.4

Prefer not to say

14

3.1

Academic Library

26

5.7

Archives

79

17.3

Female

5

Major

LIS

Ethnicity

White/Caucasian

Calculated from: http://www.custominsight.com/articles/random-sample-calculator.asp
69

General LIS

203

44.4

Public Library

39

8.5

School Library Teacher

54

11.8

6

1.3

Systems

25

5.5

Other

25

5.5

299

65.4

Social Science

80

17.5

Science

75

16.4

Part Time

256

56.0

Full Time

201

44.0

Total

457

100.0

Degree

Status

Undergrad

Special Library

Art & Humanities

Students’ Performance Attitude and Perception
Participants were asked to indicate their agreement level with 15 performance related statements
and 13 perception related statements on a seven-point Likert scale. Frequencies and percentages
for these agreement levels are reported in Table 4.2 and Table 4.3. As shown in the two tables,
the three highest-rated positive performance statements were: “I actively exchanged my ideas
with group members,” reported by 407 participants (90%); “I perform better in a small-size
group (5 students or less),” reported by 385 participants (85%); and “Before each virtual group
meeting, I will always prepare myself and complete all necessary readings,” reported by 348
participants (76%), as determined by the combination of agreement ratings. 6 The lowest-rated
positive statements were: “I perform better when there is group collaboration involved,”
reported by 275 participants (60%); “In my experience, I learn more from group collaboration
than if I was alone,” reported by 257 participants (56%); and “In the future, I will register for

6

The combination of agreement ratings includes Strongly Agree, Agree, and Somewhat Agree.
70

courses with collaboration among the group members,” reported by 229 participants (50%) as
determined by the combination of disagreement ratings. 7
Table 4.2: Performance Attitude - Descriptive Statistics
Agreement

Performance Related Statements

Disagreement

Neither Agree
or Disagree
f
%

f

%

f

%

I perform better when there is group collaboration involved.

97

21

275

60

85

19

I perform better in mixed-gender group.

120

26

57

13

280

61

I perform better in small-size group (5 students or less)

385

85

22

5

50

11

I managed my time better in online group assignment than if I was alone.

174

38

218

48

65

14

I was able to develop problem solving skills through group collaboration.

228

50

132

29

97

21

In my experience, it was easy to agree on group assignment decisions.

243

53

181

40

33

7

I achieved a higher grade because of collaboration.
Frequency and quality of my work were related to group awareness about my
work.
Before each virtual group meeting, I will always prepare myself and complete
all necessary readings.
Collaborative learning has helped me to learn to work effectively in groups.

82

18

228

50

147

32

158

34

162

36

137

30

348

76

62

14

47

10

241

53

137

30

79

17

I actively exchanged my ideas with group members.
I was able to develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other
members in my group.
In my experience, I learn more from group collaboration than if I was alone.

407

90

31

7

19

4

285

63

100

22

72

16

118

26

257

56

82

18

I understand course materials better with the help of other group members.
In the future, I will register for courses with collaboration among the group
members.

190

41

205

45

62

14

71

15

229

50

157

34

As shown in Table 4.3, the three highest-rated positive perception statements were
mainly about expressing feelings among group members: “I felt comfortable expressing positive
feelings (being happy/satisfied about something) during group assignment,” with the total
number of 410 participants (90%); “I was able to appreciate the humor of members of the
group,” with the total number of 375 participants (82%); and “I felt comfortable expressing my
humor in discussions related to the assignment,” with the total number of 332 participants (73%)
for the combination of agreement ratings. The two lowest-rated positive statements were: “When
the group assignment is hard, I either give up or choose the easiest parts,” with the total number

7

The combination of disagreement ratings includes Strongly Disagree, Disagree, and Somewhat Disagree.
71

of 402 participants (88%); and “I felt that online collaboration process in my group was not timeconsuming,” with the total number of 330 participants (72%) for the combination of
disagreement ratings. In addition, when asked if their online group collaboration was successful,
51% of the participants (f=235) responded that they “Neither Agree or Disagree.”

Table 4.3: Students Perception- Descriptive Statistics
Agreement

Perception Related Statements

Disagreement

Neither Agree
or Disagree
f
%

f

%

f

%

I felt that I was a part of a learning community in my group.

245

53

133

29

79

17

I felt that online collaboration process in my group was not time consuming.

91

20

330

72

36

8

I felt more confident about myself after each collaboration in my group.
When the group assignment is hard, I either give up or choose the easiest
parts.
I felt comfortable expressing negative feelings (being worried/concerned
about something) with my group.
I felt comfortable expressing positive feelings (being happy/satisfied about
something) during group assignment.
I felt comfortable expressing my humor in discussions related to the
assignment.
I was able to appreciate the humor of members of the group.
Positive reactions from other group members to my work, usually influenced
me to do more future work.
I enjoyed working collaboratively with my group

114

24

189

42

154

34

29

6

402

88

26

6

261

57

148

32

48

11

410

90

16

4

31

7

332

73

57

13

59

13

375

82

23

5

59

13

271

59

60

13

126

28

221

48

157

35

79

17

I usually find myself in the position of my group leader

268

59

97

21

92

20

I feel satisfied with my online collaboration experience

195

42

197

43

65

14

The online collaboration was successful in my group

41

9

181

40

235

51

Reearch Question I. Impacts of Demographic Variables on Students’ OCL
Research Question I.1 Performance
To address the first research question of this dissertation research, participants were asked to
indicate their agreement level with 15 performance related statements on a seven-point Likert
scale. Nonparametric tests such as Man-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H were used to for
further comparative analyses.

72

Gender. Results from the Mann-Whitney U test indicated that there were only two
statistically significant differences between male and female participants across the performance
related statements. With a mean rank of 268.99, male participants were statistically significantly
different from female participants with the mean rank of (U=9510.50, p=.004) to say that they
performed better in a mixed-gender group. When actively exchanging ideas with group
members, there were also statistically significant differences between male and female
participants. Male participants with a higher mean rank of 260.82 indicated that they exchange
more ideas with their group members than female participants (U=10001, p=.033). There were
no statistically significant differences between group means of performance related statements as
determined by Mann-Whitney U test. Based on the results discussed above, hypothesis one,
which states, “There is no statistically significant difference between male and female students in
terms of performance in group assignments,” was not supported by the study data.
Age. A Kruskal-Wallis H test showed that there were four statistically significant
differences among three different age groups (21-30, 31-40, and 41 and older). Age group of 41
and older with the mean rank of 276.68 (H=23.96, p=.000) showed a statistically significant
difference among other age groups for the performance related statement, “Before each virtual
group meeting, I will always prepare myself and complete all necessary readings.” Age group of
31-40 reported, “Collaborative learning has helped me to learn to work effectively in groups,”
with the mean rank score of 239.48 (H=8.65, p=.013). Age group of 21-30 showed two
statistically significant differences; first, they reported that they managed their time better in
online group assignment than if they were alone with the mean rank score of 242.04 (H=7.74,
p=.021); secondly, the performance related statement of “In my experience, it was easy to agree
on group assignment decisions” had high mean rank score of 242.97(H=6.54, p=.038). There

73

were no statistically significant differences among group means of other performance related
statements as determined by Kruskal-Wallis H test.
Since there was no statistically significant difference between different age groups and
developing new knowledge, hypothesis three, which states, “There is a statistically significant
difference among age groups in their abilities of developing new knowledge and skills by
interacting with other members in their group,” was not supported by the survey data.
Social Media Usage. Results from performing Kruskal-Willas H test found one
statistically signifant difference between participants’ performance and social media usage.
Those participants who spent less than an hour daily on social media reported that they always
prepared themselves and completed all the necessary readings before each virtual meeting with
the mean rank score of 246.19 (H=8.40, p=.015). There were no statistically significant
differences between group means of other performance related statements as determined by
Kruskal-Wallis H test. Hypothesis two, which states “Students who spend more time on social
media have better online collaboration performance than others,” was not supported and has been
rejected.
Number of Enrolled Online Courses during LIS Program. According to a MannWhitney U test, students who engaged in online collaboration were statistically significantly
more likely to report achieving a higher grade. The result indicated that those participants who
enrolled in more than three online courses during their MLIS program had a higher mean rank
score of 259.10 (U=13251.50, p=0.017). There were no statistically significant differences
among group means of other performance related statements as determined by Mann-Whitney U
test.
74

Percentage of group collaboration. Results from Mann-Whitney U test showed five
statistically significant differences for those participants reporting that more than 25% (f=300) of
their assignment involved group collaboration. These significant differences were related to the
statements: “In the future, I will register for courses with collaboration among the group
members,” with high mean rank score of 242.59 (U=19474.50, p=.002); “I perform better when
there is group collaboration involved,” with the high mean rank score of 241.99 (U=19653,
p=.003); “I managed my time better in online group assignment than if I was alone,” with high
mean rank score of 241.44 (U=19819.50, p=.005); “Collaborative learning has helped me to
learn to work effectively in groups,” with high mean rank score of 239.52 (U=20393, p=.016);
and “I was able to develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other members in my
group,” with high mean rank score of 239.22 (U=20484, p=.019). There were no statistically
significant differences among group means of other performance related statements as
determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
Group Size. Results from Kruskal-Whillas H test showed that there were 12 statistically
significant differences across the performance related statements among those participants with
the preference of group size of three or more people. The statements presented here are sorted
from the highest mean rank scores to the lowest with the significance: “I understand course
materials better with the help of other group members,” with high mean rank of 280.67
(H=62.10, p=.000); “In my experience, I learn more from group collaboration than if I was
alone,” with high mean rank of 279.58 (H=58.33, p=.000); “I perform better when there is
group collaboration involved,” with high mean rank score of 274.34 (H=61.86, p=.000 ); “In the
future, I will register for courses with collaboration among the group members,” with high mean
rank score of 272.92 (H=62.760, p=.000); “Collaborative learning has helped me to learn to
75

work effectively in groups,” with high mean rank score of 269.52 (H=60.50, p=.000); “I
achieved a higher grade because of collaboration,” with high mean rank score of 268.23
(H=40.33, p=.000); “I was able to develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other
members in my group,” with high mean rank of 266.73(H=44.50, p=.000); “Frequency and
quality of my work were related to group awareness about my work,” with high mean rank score
of 263.48 (H=26.97, p=.000); “I was able to develop problem solving skills through group
collaboration” with high mean rank score of 258.74(H=36.35, p=.000); “In my experience, it
was easy to agree on group assignment decisions,” with high mean rank of 258.20 (H=25.1,
p=.000); “I actively exchanged my ideas with group members,” with high mean rank of 256.22
(H=21.55, p=.000); and “I managed my time better in online group assignment than if I was
alone,” with high mean rank of 234.68 (H=37.46, p=.000). As determined by Kruskal-Wallis H
test, there were no statistically significant differences among group means of other performance
related statements
Computer proficiency. Results from the Mann-Whitney U test for this variable showed
three statistically significant differences among participants’ levels of computer proficiency.
Those participants who labeled themselves as an “Expert” showed statistically significant
differences in the performance related statements: “I perform better in mixed-gender group,”
with the mean rank score of 225.25 (U=4634.50, p=0.009); “In my experience, it was easy to
agree on group assignment decisions,” with the mean rank score of 224.65 (U=4883.50,
p=.050); and “Collaborative learning has helped me to learn to work effectively in groups,”
with the mean rank score of 225.49 (U=4538.00, p=.013). There were no statistically significant
differences among group means of other performance related statements as determined by the
Mann-Whitney U test.
76

In summary, results from the Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test showed
that gender, age, social media usage, number of enrolled online courses, percentage of group
collaboration, group size, and computer proficiency had an impact on participants’ performance
in online group collaboration. Interestingly, none of the performance related statements showed
any statistically significant differences within subgroups structured upon ethnicity, LIS major,
undergraduate degree, or Internet proficiency among participants.
Research Question I.2. Perception
With regard to the research question I, part 2 (RQ I.2) of this dissertation study, participants
answered 13 perception related statements using a seven-point Likert scale. For the purpose of
this research question, the researcher performed nonparametric tests such as Man-Whitney U test
and Kruskal-Wallis H.
Gender. Results from the Mann-Whitney U test showed that, between male and female
participants, there was only one statistically significant difference across the perception related
statements. Male participants with the higher mean rank of 262.71 were statistically significantly
different than female participants with the mean rank of 223.91 (U=9887.50, p=.028) in being
comfortable expressing their humor in discussions related to the assignment. Thus, hypothesis
four, which states, “There is a statistically significant difference between female and male
students of being comfortable expressing their humor during online discussions related to the
assignment,” has been confirmed. There were no statistically significant gender differences
between group means of other perception related statements as determined by Mann-Whitney U
test.

77

Age. A Kruskal-Wallis H test found there was only one statistically significant difference
among different age groups: 21-30, 31-40, and 41 and older. For participants aged 21-30, the
significance was related to the perception statement, “When the group assignment is hard, I
either give up or choose the easiest parts,” with the high mean rank score of 244.55 (H=6.75,
p=.034). There were no statistically significant age differences among group means of other
perception related statements as determined by Kruskal-Wallis H test.
Number of Enrolled Online Course during LIS Program. Comparing the results of
Mann-Whitney U test indicated that there were two statistically significant differences between
those who took three or less courses (f=85) and those who took more than three courses (f=327)
during their online program. Those participants who enrolled in three or less courses had a
statistically significant difference regarding the statement, “I felt that online collaboration
process in my group was not time-consuming.” The high mean rank score for this statement was
256.15 (U=13502.50, p=.032). Participants who enrolled in three or less courses also had a
statistically significant difference in the perception related statement about success of online
collaboration, with the mean rank score of 256.56 (U=13467.50, p=.020). There were no
statistically significant differences among group means of other perception related statements as
determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
Percentage of Group Collaboration. Results from Mann-Whitney U test showed three
statistically significant differences for those reporting more than 25% (f=300) of their assignment
involved group collaboration. These participants felt that they were part of the learning
community in their group, with the high mean rank score of 240.28 (U=20166.50, p=.010). They
also indicated significant differences in the perception related statements “I felt comfortable
expressing positive feelings (being happy/satisfied about something) during group assignment,”
78

with high mean rank score of 238.88 (U= 20585, p=.018), and “I feel satisfied with my online
collaboration experience,” with high mean rank score of 240.28 (U=20167, p=.009). There were
no statistically significant differences among group means of other perception related statements
as determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
Group Size. Kruskal-Wallis H test revealed 11 statistically significant differences across
the perception related statements among those participants with the preference of group size of
more than three persons (f=181). The statements presented here are sorted from the highest mean
ranks to the lowest with the significance: “I felt that I was a part of a learning community in my
group,” with high mean rank of 277.37 (H=62.35, p=.000); “I felt more confident about myself
after each collaboration in my group,” with high mean rank of 274.05 (H=48.52, p=.000); “I
enjoyed working collaboratively with my group,” with high mean rank score of 273.28
(H=66.29, p=.000 ); “I was able to appreciate the humor of members of the group,” with high
mean rank score of 266.14 (H=37.83, p=.000); “I felt comfortable expressing my humor in
discussions related to the assignment,” with high mean rank score of 265.17 (H=35.28, p=.000);
“The online collaboration was successful in my group,” with high mean rank score of 260.88
(H=35.93, p=.000); “I felt that online collaboration process in my group was not timeconsuming,” with high mean rank score of 259.80 (H=22.37, p=.000); “I feel satisfied with my
online collaboration experience,” with the high mean rank score of 258.67 (H=33.79, p=.000);
“I felt comfortable expressing positive feelings (being happy/satisfied about something) during
group assignment,” with high mean rank score of 253.68 (H=39.02, p=.000); “Positive reactions
from other group members to my work, usually influenced me to do more future work,” with high
mean rank score of 248.57 (H=17.31, p=.000); and “I felt comfortable expressing negative

79

feelings (being worried/concerned about something) with my group,” with high mean rank of
245.99 (H=19.57, p=.000).
Level of Computer Proficiency. Those participants (f=412) who reported their level of
computer proficiency as an “Expert” showed statistically significant difference from other
participants with different levels of computer proficiency for two perception related statements:
“I felt more confident about myself after each collaboration in my group,” with high mean rank
score of 225.18 (U=4663.50, p=.021) and “I usually find myself in the position of my group
leader,” with high mean rank score of 225.12 (U=4689, p=.024). There were no statistically
significant differences among group means of other perception related statements as determined
by Mann-Whitney U test.
Level of Internet Proficiency. Results from the Mann-Whitney U test showed that
among participants’ different levels of Internet proficiency, there were only two statistically
significant differences across the perception related statements. Those participants (f=428) with
“Expert” level of Internet proficiency found themselves in the position of the group leader with
the high mean rank score of 223.31 (U=1792, p=0.26). Other participants (f=13) who reported
their level of Internet proficiency as “Some Experience” felt satisfied with their online
collaboration experience with the high mean rank score of 316.96 (U=1534.50, p=.004). There
were no statistically significant differences among group means of other perception related
statements as determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
In summary, results from the Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test showed
that gender, age, number of enrolled online courses during LIS program, percentage of group
collaboration, group size, level of computer proficiency, and level of Internet proficiency had an
80

impact on participants’ perception in online group collaboration. Interestingly, none of the
perception related statements showed any statistically significant differences among subgroups
structured upon ethnicity, LIS major, undergraduate degree, or social media usage among
participants.

Nonparametric Correlations
To address research question II, additional nonparametric correlation analysis was performed. The
results are presented below.
Research Question II. Confidence Level with the Success of Online Collaboration
Spearman’s rank-order correlation was run to determine the relationship between 457
participants’ confidence level and success of online collaboration. There was a strong positive
correlation between confidence level and success of online collaboration, which was statistically
significant (rs= .44, p= .000).

Table 4.4: Relationship between Confidence Level and Success
The online
collaboration was
successful in my
group
I felt more confident about myself after
each collaboration in my group

Correlation Coefficient
Sig (2-Tailed)
N

.439
.000
457

Satisfaction and Performance Correlation
Spearman’s rank-order correlation was run to determine the relationship between 457
participants reported satisfaction after each collaboration and performance related statements.
81

Significant positive correlations were found between 13 performance statements and reported
satisfaction level at the 0.01 level (two-tailed). Table 4.5 includes all significantly correlated
performance statements and satisfaction level.

Table 4.5: Correlation among Satisfaction and Performance Relate Statements

I feel satisfied with my online collaboration experience
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig.
(2-tailed)

I perform better when there is group collaboration involved

.758

.000

I perform better in mixed-gender group

.146

.002

I perform better in small-size group (5 students or less)

.164

.000

I managed my time better in online group assignment than if I was alone

.345

.000

I was able to develop problem solving skills through group collaboration

.405

.000

In my experience, it was easy to agree on group assignment decisions

.328

.000

I achieved a higher grade because of collaboration
Frequency and quality of my work were related to group awareness about
my work

.473

.000

.318

.000

Collaborative learning has helped me to learn to work effectively in groups

.487

.000

.379

.000

.541

.000

.432

.000

.493

.000

I was able to develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other
members in my group
In my experience, I learn more from group collaboration than if I was alone
I understand course materials better with the help of other group members
In the future, I will register for courses with collaboration among the group
members
Note: **. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)

The four highest significant positive correlation were: “I perform better when there is
group collaboration involved” (rs= .76, p= .000); “In my experience, I learn more from group
collaboration than if I was alone” (rs= .54, p= .000); “Collaborative learning has helped me to
learn to work effectively in groups” (rs= .49, p= .000); and “In the future, I will register for
courses with collaboration among the group members” (rs= .49, p= .000).

82

Satisfaction and Perception Correlation
Spearman’s rank-order correlation was run to determine the relationship between 457
participants’ reported satisfaction after each collaboration and perception related statements.
Significant positive correlations were found between ten perception statements and reported
satisfaction level at the 0.01 and 0.05 level (2-tailed).

Table 4.6: Correlation among Satisfaction and Perception Relate Statements

I feel satisfied with my online collaboration experience
Correlation
Coefficient

Sig.
(2-tailed)

.411**

.000

.400

**

.000

I felt more confident about myself after each collaboration in my group

.431

**

.000

When the group assignment is hard, I either give up or choose the easiest
part

.117*

.012

I felt comfortable expressing negative feelings with my group

.202**

.000

I felt comfortable expressing positive feelings) during group assignment

.196**

.000

I felt comfortable expressing my humor in discussions related to the
assignment

.252**

.000

I was able to appreciate the humor of members of the group

.212**

.000

Positive reactions from other group members to my work, usually influenced
me to do more future work

.344**

.000

I enjoyed working collaboratively with my group

.511**

.000

I felt that I was a part of a learning community in my group
I felt that online collaboration process in my group was not time-consuming

Note: **. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed)

Table 4.6 includes all significantly correlated perception statements and satisfaction level.
Three highest significant positive correlations were: “I enjoyed working collaboratively with my
group” (rs= .51, p= .000); “I felt more confident about myself after each collaboration in my
group” (rs= .43, p= .000); and “I felt that I was a part of a learning community in my group”
(rs= .41, p= .000). In addition, there was a positive correlation between the perception related

83

statement, “When the group assignment is hard, I either give up or choose the easiest parts” (rs=
.12, p= .012), and reported satisfaction level, which was statistically significantly different at the
0.05 level (2-tailed). Those participants who do less in group and earn the group grade are
satisfied.
Success and social climate around the group
Significant positive correlations were found among social climate factors, including positive or
negative feeling expressions, humor appreciation, and group size related to reported success.
Table 4.7 exhibits that the results were significant at the 0.05 and 0.01 level (2-tailed).

Table 4.7: Success and Social Climate

The online collaboration was successful in my group
Correlation
Sig.
Coefficient (2-tailed)
.106*
.023
I perform better in small-size group (5 students or less)
I felt comfortable expressing negative feelings with my group

.182**

.000

I felt comfortable expressing positive feelings during group assignment

.164

**

.000

I felt comfortable expressing my humor in discussions related to the
assignment

.234**

.000

I was able to appreciate the humor of members of the group

.233**

.000

Note: **. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed)
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed)

Results from Open-Ended Questions
At the end of the close-ended questions in the online survey, students were asked to answer eight
open-ended questions. These questions were mainly focused on different aspects of online
collaboration that were not covered by the previous questions in order to enrich the follow-up
interview questions. The topics of open-ended questions were cloud-Internet based collaborative
tools; benefits and challenges of working collaboratively in group assignment; factors and
facilitators that lead to a successful collaboration in the group; and additional suggestions.
84

Online Collaboration and Cloud-Internet Based Tools
Of 457 participants who took the online survey, 444 reported using cloud-Internet based
collaborative tools. They specified a variety of collaborative tools accessed through Internet or
obtained through their institutions. Figure 4.1 represents the name and frequency of those
collaborative tools that were mentioned more than 10 times by participants.

Figure 4.1: Cloud-Internet based tools

Google Suite had the most frequency of usage among participants, with the total number
of 430.
Online Collaboration: Benefits & Challenges
Participants responded to questions regarding the benefits and challenges of online collaboration.
Of the 457 total participants in the survey, 423 participants responded to the benefits question
and 429 participants responded about the challenges of the online collaboration.
Benefits: Table 4.8 summarizes the main themes extracted from these participants about
benefits of the online collaboration.
85

Table 4.8: Frequency of Benefits of Online Collaboration in Group Assignment

Online Collaboration in Group Assignment
f

%

Knowing new people

80

19

Having complimentary
skills/knowledge

58

14

Equal division of labor

45

11

Building the relationship

14

3

Diverse undergraduate degree

8

2

Learning from each other

36

9

Peer editing

24

6

Brainstorming sessions

17

4

Getting feedback

17

4

Creativity & motivation

13

3

Clarification of the assignment

8

2

Feeling the group support

3

1

Less pressure because of less work

3

1

Different Personalities &
Enhanced Creativity

Meeting New People

Benefits



Advantages of Meeting New People. The majority of these participants identified meeting
new people (f =80), having complementary skills and knowledge (f =58), and equal
division of labor (f=45) were the main benefits of working collaboratively in their group.
One of the participants indicated:
“LIS is such a broad field and each person is coming into the graduate program
with their own ideas about what it is and different background knowledge that I
may not have. Working collaboratively exposes me to their ideas, as opposed to
an online class without group work, where there may be some discussion but not
the level of depth you get when you engage with classmates in group work”
(P71).

86



Different Personalities & Enhanced Creativity. Some participants mentioned that they
learned a lot from collaboration in their groups because they figured out how to navigate
different personalities and use people’s skills and talents. They also stated that online
collaboration in their group enhanced creativity and brought synergy to the group, while
testing their assumptions about their understanding of the assignment. In addition, learning
how to cooperate on assignments provided practical experience for the future jobs.
Networking and social perspectives were among the benefits pointed out by participants.
As one stated:
“I think the main benefit comes from a social perspective. It gives people an
opportunity for camaraderie amongst their peers, and that might be utilized in
future courses” (P37).
Sixty-one participants mentioned that they didn’t like anything about online collaboration

and they didn’t find any benefits of group work. One participant noted:
“I didn’t like working in the group and avoided it whenever possible. Online
learning is very lonely and can be quite intimidating” (P32.)
Challenges: Participants were also asked about the challenges of online collaboration.
Table 4.9 visualizes the frequency of challenges that were mentioned by participants.

Table 4.9: Frequency of Challenges of Online Collaboration in Group Assignment

Sched
uling
Confli
ct &
Lack

Time-consuming
Process

Online Collaboration in Group Assignment
Challenges
Different time zones/obligations
Coordinating virtual meetings
Trusting issues
Shared grade
Dealing with free riders
Poorly designed assignment
Personality conflicts
No/Less feedback
Decision-making

87

f

%

330
187
78
59
16
13
37
35
25

77
44
18
14
4
3
9
8
6

Frustration and Anxiety



Accountability of other members
Meeting the deadlines
Different level of skills and knowledge
No human aspects such as body language
Technological difficulties
Choosing the group leader
Stress
Different work ethics and styles
Too many opinions to deal with
Different level of skills and knowledge
No/Less contribution
Inequality of work load
Cohesive assignment
Large groups
Mandatory group work
Fear of other’s judgment
Tension between group members
Dropping out of the course

22
20
19
14
12
12
29
27
20
19
16
11
11
8
7
6
5
4

5
5
4
3
3
3
7
6
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
1

Time-consuming Process. Three hundred thirty participants mentioned that the online
collaboration in their groups was a time-consuming process due to waiting for others to
complete their shared portion of the assignment and time spent during virtual meetings,
making this the main challenge for online collaboration.



Scheduling Conflict & Lack of Contribution. Scheduling conflicts because of different
times zones and other life obligations, such as full-time jobs and family issues (f=330),
caused difficulties in coordinating virtual meetings (f=187). Trust issues (f=78) and being
dependent on others for a grade (f=59) were the other main challenges for online
collaboration. Participants mentioned additional issues, such as individuals who did not
actively participate or were totally absent, Internet/technological difficulties, problems
reaching consensus, and imbalance in commitment and quality of individual contributions
as the main challenges they faced during online collaboration in their group assignments.
One participant explained:

88

“I chose online courses in part because of my schedule (work, school, family).
Working in groups often made it difficult to balance these roles” (P241).


Frustration and Anxiety. Participants felt frustrated and stressed about the quality of the
final work and accountability of fellow group members. When groups were too large, it
was difficult to consolidate ideas, make sure everyone was involved, and ensure the
participants were going to meet their deadline. Additionally, some participants had trouble
with the missing human aspect of the online collaboration, such as facial expressions or
body language. One of them mentioned that “…some people cannot take a joke or can
take things far too personally” (P402).
Other participants contended that losing control and being dependent were the most

challenging aspect of their collaboration. One participant stated:
“I don't like being dependent, having to work around others' schedules, having to
pretend bad ideas are good for the sake of courtesy, or having my grade
influenced by other people. I especially hate it when group assignments can't be
conveniently divided between the number of people in the group” (P42).
Participants found that other aspects, such as being forced to engage in online group
collaboration, fear of judgments from others, individuals’ strong opinions that led to tension
between group members, lack of contribution, inequality of workload, and different work ethics
and styles as problem areas in collaboration. One participant indicated:
“There are two primary reasons I do not like working in groups. First is the
logistics, because time and geographic differences make it hard to connect in real
time, and in many instances, require communication via email which is often
more time-consuming because everything must be written out, rather than a quick
conversation in real time. Second is the nature of group dynamics, because there

89

always seems to be [someone] unable or unwilling to do the work required”
(P319).

Research Question III. Online Collaboration: Success Factors & Facilitators
Over 400 participants (n= 418) responded to the open-ended question on factors that influenced
the success of online collaboration in the group, the subject of research question III. The majority
of the participants pointed to positive and frequent “Communication” (f=151) as the key factor that
led to a successful group assignment. They mentioned two other major success factors being
participants who are willing to participate equally (f=50) or pull their own weight and meet the
deadlines, which might be related to the personality and work-ethic of each of the group member,
and clear understanding (f=49) of the assignment, which was designed precisely for group
collaboration and had rigid guidelines that made it easy to understand what needed to be done.
Table 4.10: Frequency of Success Factors Mentioned by Participants

Online Collaboration in Group Assignment

Success Factors
Communication
Equal participation

f
151
50

Clear understanding of the assignment

49

Transparent flow of information

45

Interpersonal skills

36

11
9

Responsible Leader
Collaborative tools
Mutual Goal
Cooperation
Smaller groups

35
31
31
30
15

8
7
7
7
3

Transparency about strength and weaknesses
of group members

12

3

Engaged instructors

10

2

Discussion boards
Social Connection

10
9

2
2

90

%
36
12
12

Students in groups benefitted from access to a set of online collaborative tools suggested
by their instructor. By finding software that allows group members to co-author or work
simultaneously on the same document, instructors can ensure that everyone has access to the
latest version and can prepare deliverables in less time. The majority of participants agreed about
this matter, with one elaboration:
“My school has a habit of changing the online learning platform, and none of the
tools offered so far have a good UX. Each group finds its own way. Consequently,
the set-up is time-consuming, and not everyone has the same experience with the
tools the group uses” (P299).
Social connection outside the group was the other success factor identified by many
participants. Due to social connections, participants preferred to work with the same people in
multiple groups. Participants also suggested utilizing social media, such as creating a Facebook
page for members’ interactions with each other and to track assignment progress.
Participants indicated that group members had to encourage each other to discuss their
strengths and weaknesses regarding the topic of the assignment before starting to distribute
responsibilities. This ensured that the right person was assigned to a role appropriate to their
ability. Participants also pointed out that engaged instructors facilitate the group process through
various means, including by reviewing the individual group discussion forums to see who is
participating, posting feedback messages to students on group assignment progress, following up
as needed, and promptly responding to students’ concerns and questions. Participants also found
virtual meetings helpful. One participant stated:
“I would say if you had a good group using the Skype for the face-to-face sessions
definitely will make the group run a lot better, I think… it could hold people more
accountable instead of having just a Google doc sheet and then just hope people
91

do what they are going to do… I would definitely say [virtual] face-to-face works
better” (P96).
In addition, participants pointed to variety of factors that lead to the success of group
collaboration: a transparent flow of information, including frequent feedback, among members;
mechanisms for ensuring that all members were kept up-to-date on matters relating to the
collaboration; ability for all members to voice concerns and suggestions; having interpersonal
skills such as being flexible, honest, supportive, and trustworthy; being able to discuss issues
openly and freely express feelings with group members; having a responsible group leader who
defined clear roles, set up multiple deadlines, and followed up with the group members to stay on
task; access to and proficiency with the collaborative tools needed to communicate; having
mutual goals among group members who were committed to the success of the team;
cooperation among group members working together to accomplish mutual goals; smaller groups
with similar interests, abilities, and schedules, including being in the same time-zone, which may
enable more communication; and having more discussion boards so participants can read and
write entries at any given time and access the discussion from almost anywhere for further
reviews and debates.
A few participants had strong arguments about why group work and collaboration will
not succeed in an online environment. They supported their arguments by mentioning that online
collaboration was somehow forced, mandatory, and ineffectual. These participants suggested
that instructors could allow students to independently complete parts of assignments and that
grades would be dependent on individual effort. As one participant explained:
“I find that, at times, group work at the graduate level tends to not provide the
most rigorous academic opportunity for students. Group work is helpful in that is
92

can develop skills for working as a team, but in my opinion, those skills should
have been codified in a graduate student years ago, and do not deserve attention
in graduate studies. Group work often is only as good as the least academically
able member of the group, leaving more adept wanting for a more challenging
and meaningful academic experience that, more likely, could have been delivered
via traditional independent research” (P116).

Online Collaboration: Suggestions
The last question of the online survey was related to the additional comments and suggestions
from the participants. A total of 246 participants responded to this question. In addition to
statements similar to those in previous sections, participants revealed some new ideas. The
majority of them implied that they appreciated the chance to rate their group members’
participation in different areas after assignments were due, as it provided increased
accountability for the group work. Participants also suggested that ratings should be submitted
individually to the instructor and not seen by other group members.
A mixture of feelings about online collaboration was extracted from participants’
comments. A few appreciated this type of activity, but the majority of participants expressed
extreme dislike. They described their feelings about group collaboration with negative words
such as “hate,” “dislike,” “pain,” “disastrous,” “forced,” “stressful,” “frustrating,” and “anxious.”
One participant commented:
“I'm really just not thrilled about group work in general, but I especially hate it
online. So much is lost when we can't rely on tone of voice and body language”
(P42).
Additionally, a great number of participants compared their professional collaborative
experiences to their online program or course experiences. One participant stated:
93

“I personally do not feel that the amount of group assignments required of MLIS
students is necessary (more than half of my courses have had a group
assignment). As an adult who has been in the workforce for over twenty years,
collaboration is not an unfamiliar skill. I do not feel that class assignments
performed over the Internet are in any way representative of a true collaborative
group environment” (P298).
In addition, participants discussed the nature of the online program and online courses
and the reasoning behind their decision to enroll in these types of courses. Online programs
allowed students to work around their schedules. In many cases, outside commitments, such as
full-time jobs or family obligations, led to participants not being able to attend on-campus
courses. With this in mind, the majority of participants strongly requested more online group
discussions rather than group assignments. They indicated that group discussions were more in
depth and more sophisticated because everyone was responsible for their share and achieving
their own grade, and therefore more accountable for their contributions. One participant
commented:
“I feel that online collaborative learning can (and does) occur through class
discussions and don't require group projects. The group projects were a lot of
work that didn't produce an equivalent level of learning. Group discussions did
allow practice in collaboration, and sometimes cleared things up. While I
wouldn't recommend having no group projects, I would recommend minimizing
their occurrence” (P29).

Summary of Quantitative Data Analysis
Quantitative data analysis of Phase I revealed numerous statistically significant differences
among various variables in both performance and perception related statements. Table 4.11

94

presents the summary of statistically significant differences among performance related
statements when statistical tests such as Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H were
performed.

95

Table 4.11: Summary of Statistically Significant Differences among Performance Related Statements with different Variables

Performance Related Statements

Gender

Social
Media

Age

# of Online
Courses

Performing better (collaboration)

% of Group
Collaboration

Group Size

U=19653
p=.003

H=61.86
p=.000

(>25%)

Performing better (mixed-gender)

(>3 Persons)

U=9510.5p=
.004

U=4634.5
p=0.009

(Male)

(Expert)

H=7.74
p=.021

Managing time better (collaboration)

Computer
Proficiency

U=19819.5
p=.005

(21-30 Y)

(>25%)

H=37.46
p=.000

(>3 Persons)

H=36.35
p=.000

Developing problem solving skills

(>3 Persons)

H=6.54
p=.038

Agreeing on group decisions

(21-30 Y)

U=13251.5
p=0.017

Achieving higher grade

U=4883.5
p=.050

(>3 Persons)

(Expert)

H=40.33
p=.000

(>3 Courses)

(>3 Persons)

H=26.97
p=.000

Working frequently were related to group
awareness about my work

(>3 Persons)

Preparing before each meeting

H=23.96
p=.000

Learning to work effectively

H=8.65
p=.013

(≥ 41 Y)

H=8.40
p=.015
(<1 H)

U=20393
p=.016

(31-40 Y)

Exchanging ideas with peers

H=25.1
p=.000

(>25%)

U=10001
p=.033

H=60.50
p=.000

(>3 Persons)

U=4538
p=.013
(Expert)

H=21.55
p=.000

(Male)

(>3 Persons)

Developing new knowledge & skills

U=20484
p=.019

H=44.50
p=.000

(>25%)

(>3 Persons)

H=58.33
p=.000

Learning more from collaboration

(>3 Persons)

H=62.10
p=.000

Understanding course materials

(>3 Persons)

Note: U= Man-Whitney U Test Results | H= Kruskal-Wallis H Test Results

Perception related statements that had statistically significant differences when statistical
tests such as Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H were performed are presented in Table
4.12. Group size had the most statistically significant differences among performance and
perception related statements.

96

Table 4.12: Summary of Statistically Significant Differences among Perception Related Statements and different variables

Perception Related Statements

Gender

# of Online
Courses

Age

Being a part of a learning community
(Feeling)

U=20166.5
p=.010

Group
Size
H=62.35
p=.000

(>25%)

(>3 Persons)

% of Group
Collaboration

U=13502.5
p=.032

Collaborating online wasn’t time
consuming (Feeling)

Computer
Proficiency

Internet
Proficiency

H=22.37
p=.000

(≤3 Courses)

(>3 Persons)

H=48.52
p=.000

Feeling confident about myself

(>3 Persons)

U=4663.5
p=.021
(Expert)

H=6.75
p=.034

Giving up when the assignment is hard

(21-30 Y)

H=19.57p
=.000

Feeling comfortable expressing negative
feelings

(>3 Persons)

U= 20585
p=.018

Feeling comfortable expressing positive
feelings
Feeling comfortable expressing my humor

(>25%)

U=9887.5
p=.028

H=39.02
p=.000

(>3 Persons)

H=35.28
p=.000

(Male)

(>3 Persons)

H=37.83
p=.000

Appreciating the humor from others

(>3 Persons)

H=17.31
p=.000

Performing more by the positive reactions
from others

(>3 Persons)

H=66.29
p=.000

Enjoying working collaboratively with
peers

(>3 Persons)

U=4689
p=.024

Being in the position of a leader

(Expert)

U=20167
p=.009

Feeling satisfied

(>25%)

U=13467.5
p=.020

Successful online collaboration

(≤3 Courses)

H=33.79
p=.000

(>3 Persons)

U=1792
p=0.26
(Expert)

U=1534.5
p=.004

(Some Experience)

H=35.93
p=.000

(>3 Persons)

Note: U= Man-Whitney U Test Results | H= Kruskal-Wallis H Test Results

Other statistical tests, including nonparametric correlation tests such as Spearman’s rho,
indicated that there was a strong positive correlation between confidence level and satisfaction
level. In addition, results from Spearman’s rho revealed a strong positive correlation between
satisfaction level with 13 performance related statements and satisfaction level with 10
perception related statements. Moreover, Spearman’s rho correlation test signified a positive
correlation among social climate and success in online environment which was significant at the
005 and 0.01 level.

97

Additional data analysis for Phase I of this research study revealed that Google Suite,
mentioned by 430 participants, was the collaborative tool and platform most often used by
participants when they needed to cooperate on their assignments. Furthermore, participants
discussed benefits and challenges, success factors and facilitators associated with online
collaboration and group work. Participants concluded the online survey with comments and
suggestions on online collaboration and collaborative learning.

Results of Qualitative Data Analysis
In addition to quantitative data collection, this dissertation research study also collected
qualitative data via follow-up interviews with MLIS students who are or were enrolled in either
online or hybrid MLIS programs. The description of results from the follow-up interview
sessions is presented in this section. After preliminary data analysis from the online survey,
extreme case sampling method was used, and 29 students were selected for the interview
sessions. Interviewees included 16 females and 13 male MLIS students from 13 institutions. The
purpose of student interviews was to investigate detailed information and develop a deeper
understanding of each student’s online collaborative learning experiences and their feelings
associated with those experiences.
The researcher specifically aimed to explore students’ experiences and perspectives of
collaborative learning in the online environment. Therefore, the interview questions were
enriched and customized for each interviewee. With the students’ consent, the interview sessions
were audio recorded via the GoToMeeting application. The audio recordings were then

98

transcribed and coded using the qualitative content analysis method. Using both theory-driven
and data-driven codes, themes and patterns were identified.
The theory-driven codes were taken from the literature related to collaborative learning,
specifically from three dissertation research conceptual frameworks: CoI Framework, Bandura’s
Model, and SRL. The data-driven codes grew out of data analysis of the interviews. These
included themes important to the interviewees and were labeled in the terminology used to
describe them it. Both conceptual and relational analysis methods were used. After defining the
themes, the process of content coding began. The following sections present findings and results
of the follow-up interview sessions. The adapted frameworks were used in terms of navigating
the study through the interview process. However, the results showed new themes that
incorporated the new levels of Online Collaborative Learning (OCL). The themes that emerged
from interview sessions were intended to answer part of the dissertation research questions:
Group Composition, Group Outcome, and Group Collaboration. Each analysis theme consists of
sub-themes, which are presented in Figure 4.2.

Figure 4.2: Themes of Analysis

The findings are divided in sections corresponding to the dissertation research questions
number IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII. During the interview session, the researcher asked general
99

questions, including ones about experiences with recent online collaboration, suggestions for
future development of online programs, and some customized questions based on participants’
answers to the online survey.
Although many recurrent themes emerged in the interview sessions, the following report
of the findings is provided in the following order: Group Composition, which included age-gap,
gender diversity, group formation, and group size; Group Outcome, with sub-themes including
performance, perception, instructor’s role, and achievements; and Group Collaboration, which
included report of a recent experience, general outcome, and future development.
Group Composition
Group composition describes the overall mix of characteristics among the people in the group,
defined as a theme of two or more individuals who interact interdependently to achieve a
common goal. All interviewees were asked to describe their opinion about different attributes
related to group composition. Through answers to this open-ended question, the researcher
explored the following attributes: age-gap, gender diversity, group formation, and group size.

Figure 4.3: Group Composition Themes

100

Age-Gap. Age-gap is one of the themes that emerged from interviewees’ comments about
group composition. Based on past and recent experiences, interviewees pointed out both positive
and negative factors associated with older and younger members of their groups. Interviewees
commented on positive factors of having older peers, defined as being 10 or more years older
than the individual, in their group. These included being more stable and motivated, having
personal and professional experiences. Interviewees also discussed negative factors related to
having older peers in the group, such as those peers having family obligations, technology issues,
and a gap between degrees and graduate work load. Some participants mentioned that age may
contribute to having a higher confidence level in terms of older peers having more experience,
but it may also reduce the older peers’ comfort level in term of using technology and their ability
to communicate via different collaborative tools. Some interviewees argued that the decades in
between undergraduate and graduate school were noticeable. The reason for this statement was
that many of the older peers had difficulty learning basic material, such as proper citation.
Some of the comments about the younger members of the group, defined as 10 or more
years younger than other participants, indicated peers recognized aspects such as being techsavvy, more prepared, less motivated, and less focused. Interviewees also mentioned that some
younger peers were not taking the program seriously. One of the interviewees pointed out:
“A person with ten years ahead, is a person with more experience, and the person
who is ten years younger they may not have as much experience, but they are
often bring other skills and qualities, like their awareness with technology, they
are savvy with technology” (PM03).
Gender Diversity. Interviewees indicated no preference in pairing with a specific gender.
Their preference was mixed-gender groups and they categorized their preference based on
101

different perspective, different initiative level, and different empathies which each female or
male members bring to the group. They commented that women and men have different trends
and different personalities. Mixed-gender groups were perceived as more balanced groups. One
of the male interviewees indicated:
“I do kind of enjoy having the mixed-gender group, I found that at least in my school and
in my program, that I am in minority as far as gender concerned, but I think it is nice to
have mixed-gender group. I really like the perspectives that others bring to the group”
(PM10).
Group Formation. Interviewees identified three major methods of group formation: selfenroll, manual-enroll, and random-enroll groups. Self-enroll enables the instructor to specify how
many students can join each group and whether students can see who has already joined each
group. Each student has the option to join the group. In some cases, this meant the instructor set
up a discussion forum where students would able to read their classmates’ names and short
biographies. Knowing enough about each classmate, such as their background, where they come
from, their occupational experience, and their educational background, was important to
participants. One of the interviews argued that when she has an option to choose her own
teammates, then if she got less than A as a grade, she would have no one to blame except herself.
Therefore, in her opinion, the self-enroll type of group formation is less distressing. However,
very few interviewees experienced this type of group formation.
Manual-enroll indicates that the instructor assigns students to each group based on some
logic. As described by interviewees, time-zone, and topic of interest were the most important
reasons used by the instructor to form groups. The majority of the interviewees claimed their
102

performance and final grade improved because the instructor formed their group based on the
students’ shared time-zone. These interviewees said that group members having the same timezone makes communication easier among the members of the group. One of the MLIS
interviewees pointed out:
“I think specifically in online environment where there is so much diversity, time
zone differences, and individuals and people in general, it is just hard to really
make connections, I had one professor which said submit your name and time zone
and I am going to form your groups as close as I can base on that time zone”
(PM10).
Random-enroll enables instructors to shape the groups based on how many students
should be placed together in how many groups, without the instructor using any logic to
determine which students are in which groups. Assignment of groups is completely randomized.
In this type of enrollment, because participants were unfamiliar with each other, they were also
unfamiliar with each individuals’ work ethic and had difficulty trusting the quality of their peers’
work. However, one of the interviewees indicated that:
“I like to be assigned randomly, just because if I wanted to choose, I will choose
someone with the same background as mine, verses if there is a randomly
assigned group, you ended-up being with someone who has different skills and
usually you can take away something more from them” (PF11).
Group Size. Based on the answers to the group size preferences, interviewees indicated
that, in general, the ideal number of people in the group depended on the type of assignment. If
there was a good communication among team members, then size did not matter. Beside these
general comments, interviewees divided their preference into two categories: small groups of

103

two to four members and large groups with five or more members. Interviewees identified varied
reasons for their preferences. Those who preferred working in pairs argued that when more
people got involved, inevitably only two people took the lead. With two people in the group,
there were less competing ideas and it was easier to collaborate, agree, and plan the action.
Interviewees counted the advantages for the groups of three or four as having more in-depth
conversations, more participation, more accountability, less repetition of ideas, less
miscommunication, fewer chances for slacking, and greater ease in coordinating time and
schedules. One of the interviewees stated that:
“Definitely smaller group is easier to work , because if you have more people in
the group I think it is easier to then slack off… if you have a large group of six or
seven people, there may be certain times that you might say… well if I don’t do
my best on it [because there are lot going on in my schedule] there is enough
people in the group, someone will take care of it… and then someone will take on
my slack, but with the group of three everyone is responsible and the work load
will be divided equally” (PM05).
Among the interviewees, none had a large group preference. They mentioned that large
groups were hard to manage; for example, if there are five people in the group, then there are
five responsibilities, five schedules, five individual locations, and potentially five different time
zones. Few interviewees described a negative experience with the groups of seven and eight
people.

104

Research Question IV. Group Outcome
Performance
Three major categories, which directly answer research question RQ IV, were extracted
from the interviews. These categories are independence, interdependence, and social media. The
majority of the interviewees reported that they performed better independently and explained
their reasons for this as being self-conscious, self-motivated, self-demanding, needing to have
control or power, specific work ethics and work pace, having high standards, dealing with only
one voice, and schedule. They argued that, because they were aware of their capabilities,
strengths, and weaknesses, they could be more in control of what they were submitting for an
assignment, which could be more cohesive and less time-consuming than working with others.
These individuals explained that they were frustrated and stressed by group collaboration. One of
the causes of these feelings was the lack of trust among group members. One interviewee
mentioned that:
“…. It is easier for me to have my own pacing, my own timeline, my own
restrictions, instead of somebody, not keeping the contact with me, not doing their
share of their work. And I am worried that are they come through the end because
they haven’t talk to me for three weeks… Umm... so, I would much rather have
everything weighted on my shoulders without having that extra stress about
worrying about the quality of the production of that other person” (PM07).
Another interviewee argued his opinion about working independently on the assignment
as:
“I am confident in my abilities as a student, and my motivation to work hard and
get the job done, when other people are involved I am less confident that everyone
involved would due diligence toward the task that we were assigned. So, it makes
105

me a little bit nervous to have my grade partially in the hands of someone else
who may not be as motivated to do well as I am” (PM04).
These interviewees explained that they managed their time better when they were
independently performing. They explained that the long wait for other group members to do their
part or respond to feedback, lack of agreement on meeting time and deadlines, juggling too many
people’s schedules, last minute participation, and different time zones were the main reasons for
their preference of individually working on assignments.
Overall, these 26 interviewees had strong and unified opinions about working
independently for assignments in online environment. Out of 29 interviews, only three
interviewees reported that they performed better when there was group collaboration. One
interviewee mentioned that being a procrastinator was the reason he performed better in group
collaboration. He argued that having multiple deadlines, being accountable to others, and
knowing that others relied on him for their grade forced him to perform better in group.
“We usually try to set deadlines for the group, in addition to the actual deadline
for the assignment. This way helps me to avoid procrastination, knowing that I
have to have part of it done by certain time” (PM13).
The other two interviewees explained their preference for group collaboration as being
based on hearing other people’s ideas, helping other group members, being responsible for less
work, being more focused, and being better able to manage their time. For these interviewees,
having multiple deadlines and being motivated by peer pressure were reasons for better time
management while collaborating in a group.
Interviewees were also asked about the impact of social media on their performance.
Interviewees noted similarities between the structure of social media platforms and their online
106

collaborative tool, which added more comfortable interactions and ease of use to the members.
They also mentioned that younger members of the group were more adept to this kind of
structure; younger group members regularly used informal and casual comments, short
sentences, and emoji while responding to a feedback. One female interviewee expressed her
opinion this way:
“…it is very apparent in the way that students respond on the discussion boards,
you’ll see a lot of short sentences, in terms of the language that is being used. I
also think the positive of the social media is that we have kind of being in the
condition read through comments, and replies, and we sort of doing the same
thing on an online discussion boards…” (PF16).

Research Question V. Perception
Interviewees’ perceived feelings as affective expressions and risk-free expressions. Affective
expressions include different types of feeling such as frustration, stress, anxiety, hesitation, lack
of self-confidence, insecurity, being anxious, introversion, happiness, excitement, and a sense of
belonging. Risk-free expressions were related to those feelings associated with interviewees’
different approaches in expressing their positive and negative concerns related to the assignment.
Affective expressions. Frustration, stress, anxiety, lack of self-confidence, hesitation,
insecurity, and being anxious in online collaborative activities were the most dominant themes
that emerged from interviewees. Out of 29 interviews, 28 interviewees stated that these feelings
were caused by a variety of issues related to online collaboration with other group members.
Despite group performance, specific issues such as large group size, different time zones, uneven
split of work, no or less participation, technological issues such as slow Internet connections or

107

improper functioning of recording equipment, getting off the topic at meetings, being forced to
collaborate, agreement issues, and lack of feedback from other group members were
acknowledged as issues by these 28 interviewees. Comments from two interviewees illustrate the
stress and anxiety related to the group activity and outcome. One female participant explained:
“I am more stressed about group members, than everything gets ready on time
with the good quality, or am I going to meet the deadlines based on my schedule,
or to get enough feedbacks … so for me group projects just add more anxiety and
stress, and this prevents me from learning anything new…” (PF06).
A male interviewee commented:
“I might have bit of the bias toward collaborative work at the graduate level
anyway, and the sort of online experience makes it a little more challenging and
frustrating and, so I think for me personally the whole process is a little more
cumbersome, and it took a little bit longer to come to agreement” (PM01).
A response about self-confidence from one of the interviewees explained the importance
of feedback being exchanged among group members:
“I feel less confident about myself because I think that I am end-up feeling
frustrated, and because it can be difficult to receive responses and feedbacks from
other group members, it is easy to doubt what you are doing and the way you are
approaching things is correct, and perhaps, the reason that you did not receiving
any responses or not receiving comparable work is because you are doing
something wrong or at least ineffective…” (PF03).
In addition to issues related to the participation of group members, being forced into
collaboration was mentioned by four interviewees. One stated:

108

“I think with the forced collaboration in the group projects, it is just added more
stress for me as a student than any benefit” (PF06).
One interviewee expressed himself as being introverted; this being an introvert prevented
him from learning in online collaborative activities because it caused him to be uncomfortable,
which then led to less performance in the group.
Risk-free expressions. Only one interviewee mentioned that she felt happy and excited
all the time during the online collaboration with her peers. She indicated that the “Social Aspect”
of collaboration was the main reason she was so excited about group collaboration. She
explained her excitement arose as a result of hearing new ideas and connecting with people from
around the world.
Based on their responses to the online survey related to group cohesion and group
leadership, 12 interviewees were asked about their sense of belonging to the group. Among these
12 interviewees, only two felt that they were part of their learning community. One explained
that, with the help of collaborative tools such as Google Hangout and Google Drive, they shared
great ideas in the online environment. One individual felt that she had a small learning
community where, despite working on one project together, each person had their individual
parts to contribute, so everyone’s ideas were valued, which later added value to their learning
community. Other interviewee mentioned that a sense of dedication encouraged him to engage to
share ideas, to debate, and to participate. He expressed his feeling this way:
“…even if the environment was not comfortable, even if I had a underperforming
group, I am still going to engage, I am still going to give ideas, because that what
you do when you are in graduate school, we are no longer in undergrad, we are
no longer sitting back passively while professor is lecturing at us, we are actively
creating new knowledge as a group of students as a group of graduate students,

109

so even if the group was underperforming group, I still actively engage because
that is what you need to do” (PM03).
Interviewees identified 11 reasons for not feeling as though they belonged to their
learning community. Some mentioned that because of scheduling conflicts, it was hard to feel
connected to other students in a virtual setting. Other issues included students tended to work
independently; lack of support from group members; no common goals and motivation; no
regular meetings; no sense of cohesion; lack of collaboration among peers; and a lack of
feedback. Some of the interviewees viewed friendship as inseparable from collaboration,
indicating the importance of peer relationships in collaborative learning. These interviewees
mentioned that, in an online setting where there were no face-to-face communications, no
friendship would have formed; therefore, no learning community could have been built. One of
the interviewees shared his feeling on not being part of his learning community this way:
“I think it goes back to “let get this done”, we are not going to be friends [we
don’t see each other, we don’t know each other], we are not going to build this
community, so to spend time to do that, seems to me pointless… so I don’t think
community building aspect is necessary at all… [in online classes and group
works] … so why pretend it…” (PM02).
A female interviewee pointed out:
“It just feels very disconnected in a way, and I don’t really feel the support of the
group in an online environment, it is harder to feel the connection with people,
than rather if they right in front of you…” (PF05).
Group leadership was examined by those interviewees who found themselves in a
leadership role. Five interviewees responded positively to this question in the online survey.
They enumerated their reasons for becoming group leader, including: they were the first person

110

to reach out to other group members; they were the first person to post something on the
discussion board; they wanted to have control over the group situation; and they were trying to
facilitate the conversation. After they became the group leader, they were in charge of setting up
different deadlines for group members, splitting the work evenly among group members, and
mediating between the instructor and the group.
Out of 29 interviewees, nine were asked to respond to a question on why they felt
comfortable expressing positive feelings and not negative feelings. Human factors, such as body
language and facial expression, were the limiting factors that forced them to keep everything
positive. When there was no other way to express concern aside from sending an email, these
interviewees mentioned that they carefully worded whatever they needed to say in order to avoid
hurting their group members’ feelings.
“If I come across something that I thought it needs to be changed or edited, I
would have to send a very carefully worded email to whomever I thought needed
to update something, just making sure that I did acknowledge that they did this
part well, but another part needs to be changed and suggest a possible solution
for that instead of just sending an email and said hey… this is wrong, and you
need to fix it. Because it’s not constructive” (PF07).

Instructor’s Role
All interviewees were asked to describe their opinion about their instructor’s role and how it
facilitated group collaboration and collaborative learning. Close monitoring and support by the
instructor were two of the major themes that emerged from this part of the interview sessions.
The interviewees demanded more involvement, such as following up with group members or the
group leader, having online office hours for students, collecting ongoing data on students’
111

progress, and contacting those students who did not participate early in the group process.
Interviewees stated that, with the help of a survey at the beginning of the semester, the instructor
could use some logic, such as same time zone or similar interests, to form collaborative groups.
In addition to concerns related to designing groups, interviewees discussed different
perspectives regarding assignment design. Interviewees indicated that an assignment should be
designed in the way that is complex enough to challenge students in the group to perform better,
discuss course content using multiple perspectives, and use tools to solve a problem or develop a
solution. This includes, but is not limited to, the instructor carefully explaining the expectations
and purpose of the assignment, as well as providing clear instructions and guidelines about how
students can collaborate and provide feedback to each other. As one interviewee discussed her
experience:
“One of the issues I see with the online school, sometimes we have professors
who treat online school as correspondence course, now there must be some level
of initiative of self-learning, I think that is just a part of online experience. But
you should have more feedback from the instructor, so when the instructor is
involved to a certain extent, it makes the group project for the whole class, more
successful” (PF10).
Two interviewees stated that they desired to have real-world library projects to deal with rather
than pretend ones.
Achievements
Gaining new knowledge and learning problem solving skills were two themes extracted from
eight interviews. These interviewees had positive and negative answers to these questions. Those
who felt that they gained new knowledge from the group collaboration mainly discussed it as an
112

experience where they learned new technology or collaborative tools and heard new ideas. These
interviewees also indicated that more informal collaborations, such as discussion boards where
they can openly collaborate through discourse about the readings and course materials, would
benefit them. A positive perspective pointed out by one of the interviewees as:
“…the online learning community is so much discussion based heavy, in terms of
forums and boards and things like that, I think you gain more view points from
students…” (PF16).
Other interviewees stated that they did not gain any new knowledge or problem-solving
skills in collaborative projects. This was due to replicated ideas in large sized groups,
complications such as being in the different time-zone, unconstructive feedback, and not being
able to make friends. These complications caused feelings of frustration, stress and anxiety for
most of the interviewees, which then acted as a deterrent for learning anything new. As one
interviewee explained:
“The input that people were giving in the projects, isn’t necessarily teaching
something new, it is more of they will say: “I’ll do this part, and you will do
that…”, not necessarily that: “hey… you did this, but I think you could change it
by doing this…” it is more like: “oh… you did that, good, let’s move on”. I don’t
think a lot come out of these kinds of conversations and collaborations” (PM05).

113

Figure 4.4: Group Outcome Themes

Group Collaboration
Research Question VI. Report of an Experiences
RQ VI. What factors do MSLIS students report that lead to positive or negative online
collaborative experiences?
All interviewees were asked to describe their most recent online collaborative experience.
This open-end question allowed the researcher to determine what contributed to the individual
participant’s online collaborative experience. Two dominant themes were found by the
researcher: successful experience and failed experience. All interviewees answered this question,
114

and some explained both successful and failed experiences they had during one semester. Almost
all of the interviewees specifically pointed out that accountability, dedication, mutual goal,
constant communication, reliable group leader, clear roles, multiple deadlines, same time-zone,
instructor’s support, and group project awareness from the start of the semester were the major
attributes that ensured the success of online collaboration. One interviewee said that having “a
great team leader” who facilitated the process had contributed to the success of their online
collaboration:
“…we were agreed and determined to how we would communicate, how we
would divide the roles, we kind of have a great project manager, she really did a
good job of laying out the deadlines for the project” (PF04).
Those interviewees who described their failed experiences pointed out multiple reasons
for the failure, such as no or less participation from group members, large group sizes, no or less
instructor involvements, students dropping out of the course, different work ethics, schedule
conflicts, communication issues, no clear roles, and individual’s strong opinions. One
interviewee stated that, among four individuals in her group, two barely contributed and the other
one asked questions without necessarily contributing on the original materials; the interviewee
felt like she ended-up doing a lot of work assigned to the entire group and that the group did not
have discussions.
The participants argued that, while each and every opinion mattered, online groups
tended to take a longer time to come to an agreement during discussions. One interviewee
emphasized his strong opinion about his failed experiences with group work:
“I have had a lot of bad group experiences, where either somebody doesn’t pull
the weight, or there is just so many different strong opinions going around, which
115

they don’t make sense at all… like where it is very hard to actually work together,
and complete the assignment if everyone done it in a very different way, or if just
some people don’t pull their weight off, as I said before, then you just end up
doing all the work yourself, anyway” (PF05).

Research Question VII. General Outlook
All interviewees were asked to explain the opportunities and obstacles associated with the
general online collaborative experience. Learning new technology, meeting people from around
the world, sharing new ideas, adding motivation, managing time, and carrying out less work
were reported as opportunities for online collaborative activities. One interviewee argued that,
although there are parts of online collaboration she might not like, she believed that collaboration
is important in life and the profession. In addition, she mentioned that some people might need
more practice than others in terms of how to work professionally and effectively with group
members. Another interviewee pointed out that she knew that there were many theoretical
benefits to group work, but in actual practical situations, there were more challenges involved.
She stated that when collaborating in a group with like-minded members who were willing to
work, there could be a great market for ideas. Having less stress due to breaking up large
assignments and building on complementary skills were other opportunities mentioned by
interviewees. As one person explained:
“Group members can have complementary skill in areas I am not familiar with,
by distributing work, more quantity and complexity of projects can be
accomplished” (PM09).
Two interviewees discussed that online collaboration and group projects had benefits to
both instructors and incompetent students as well. They explained that the benefits for the
116

instructors were having less assignments to grade and fewer students to handle. They also
mentioned benefits for incompetent students who either were unable or unwilling to participate
and do their part.
All interviewees pointed out numerous challenges regarding online collaboration. Five
interviewees emphasized the nature of the online program. One of them argued that the nature of
an online program was that work was done at an individual pace, not at the pace of anyone else,
regardless of a group project. Another interviewee mentioned that the majority of students in
online programs had full-time jobs and family obligations, which may or may not interfere with
group timing and meetings. He stated that different preferences over communication, passive
aggression, and negative feedback as a result of misinterpreted comments due to the lack of body
language or tone in communications added more stress and frustration to the online
collaboration. Another interviewee explained her challenges as:
“I don’t have to worry about trying to communicate with others, I don’t have to
set a meeting in my lunch break … …it just been lot more relaxing… to know that
I can just sit down for three hours and get it done in one sitting rather than
having to go back and forth with other group members” (PF06).
Interviewees articulated other challenges associated with online collaboration, including
having different time zones, lack of authentic connection, unreliable work, no or less human
factor, poorly designed assignments, and shared grades. Interviewees had different points of
view regarding course grades. The majority of them argued that they wanted to be assigned
individual grades and did not want to share their effort with those who slack, procrastinate, or do
not participate at all. One interviewee mentioned that:

117

“…it makes me a little bit nervous to have my grade partially in the hands of
someone else who may not be as motivated to do well as I am” (PM04).

Research Question VIII. Future Development
At the end of each interview session, all interviewees were asked to discuss their opinion
about the future and trends of online collaborative learning. They shared numerous expectations,
anticipations, and concerns. Their discussions involved three major themes: designing platforms,
adding audio and video communication, and having more discussion board activities.
Interviewees mentioned that colleges and universities should invest in designing userfriendly platforms, similar to social media, which would enable students to collaborate
effectively and efficiently online. Large numbers of collaborative tools such as Google Drive,
Google Docs, Google Sheets, Google Slides, and emails, as well as online platforms such as
WebEx, D2L, Blackboard, Moodle, and other learning management systems (LMS) were
discussed during interview sessions. One interviewee stated:
“I think that the platforms will be probably become a little bit easier and more
user friendly, I know that we have struggled with WebEx, I think as classes become
more and more online, we probably find ways to make those connections easier”
(PF04).
Adding audio and video features to online collaboration was a popular theme among
interviewees. Some of the platforms did include audio and video conference features, but most of
students stated that they did not use those features because it was not necessary to incorporate
such technology in order to complete the assignment. Interviewees argued that the instructor
could have made this type of communication obligatory to complete the assignment or included
it in the course description. By adding this technology, the human factor, including nonverbal
cues, could become more available. Interviewees also suggested adding Skype and Google
Hangouts to the list of required assignments. As one interviewee explained:
118

“A lot of universities now have an online program and having the ability to… you
know… turn on your computer, plug your microphone, talk to somebody in the
collaborative setting I think makes people smarter and again being able to talk
face-to-face even if it is not necessary face-to-face like we are talking here
[GoToMeeting app], being able to express your opinions out loud, and say…. Hey
this is what I think about this… and hear the same thing back and you can have a
good discussion, you can get the emotions, and the feelings of what being said
better” (PM10).
Some interviewees had the opposite point of view about the virtual meetings and audiovisual meetings in general. These interviewees stated that setting up a time to meet virtually was
difficult with overlapping schedules and that technical issues, such as difficulties with
microphones or webcams and Internet speed, were reasons to not include audio-visual
technology in online collaboration.
During interview sessions, the majority of the interviewees mentioned that they preferred
having discussion board activities; they also suggested that this should be their online
collaborative activity instead of group assignments. Interviewees pointed out numerous reasons
to accompany their arguments for this change. One interviewee remarked that he did not feel that
online collaborative learning required group assignments; collaboration could take place through
class discussions. He stated that group assignments contained a lot of work, which did not
necessarily produce the equivalent level of learning the course expected. He continued:
“…group projects did allow ‘practice’ in collaboration, and sometimes cleared
things up, while I wouldn’t recommend having no group projects, I would
recommend minimizing their occurrence. Most of time, I get ideas from other
people from discussion boards, I think we learn more from each other on those
activities rather than doing a group projects” (PM06).
119

Interviewees projected the future of the online programs as a growing trend, which will
get more sophisticated. Their suggestions for future online collaboration included being
transparent with students about the fully online or hybrid program, designing appropriate
assignments, arranging list of collaborative tools by instructor, setting standards for
communication, instructor’s engagement, making group work optional, and offering different
tuition rates for in-state students. One interviewee expounded:
“I think it’s going to get more prevalent, I work in the academic institution which
is putting a lot of money into it, because it’s a way of bringing students, and it is
relatively kind of inexpensive or relatively low overhead, so it’s cost efficient”
(PM08).

Figure 4.5: Group Collaboration Themes

120

Summary of Qualitative Data Analysis
By transcribing each interview session, qualitative content analysis was conducted, and three
major themes were extracted. These themes are Group Composition, Group Outcome, and Group
Collaboration. Major themes emerged under each theme, which were then further discussed and
reported. Figure 4.6 represents the summary of qualitative content analysis, themes, and subthemes.

121

122
Figure 4.6: Summary of Qualitative Data Analysis; Themes and Sub-Themes

Overall Summary of the Quantitative and Qualitative Results
Data analysis for this dissertation research study consists of one initial data analysis from the
online survey, followed by two stages of primary data analysis. In order to deepen understanding
of experiences and feelings of MLIS students’ online collaboration, the follow-up interview
sessions were performed with customized questions based on the interviewees’ answers to the
online survey.
Data collected from two phases, the online survey and follow-up interview sessions, were
analyzed. The impacts of demographic variables such as age, gender, and ethnicity on online
collaborative learning and social presence, both performance and perception, were evaluated.
The affective factors, which influence the success of online collaboration, were identified and
different strategies and approaches to overcome difficulties were investigated. In addition,
opportunities and obstacles associated with online collaborative learning were discussed and
identified and the affective experiences related to current gaps and future development of online
collaborative learning were discussed.
In general, results from these two phases of data analysis answered this dissertation’s
research questions and provided more in-depth knowledge and understanding to the researcher of
the online collaborative experiences among MLIS students.

123

5.

Chapter 5: Discussion
Chapter Overview

This chapter presents discussion regarding eight research questions investigated in this
dissertation research study. Previous research findings reviewed in Chapter 2 are used to support
or disconfirm the hypothesis and summarized in this investigation.
The purpose of this dissertation research study was to investigate, explore, and examine
relationship among social presence and online collaborative learning with students’ satisfaction
in the LIS field. The study also investigated the impacts of demographic variables on online
collaborative learning, including both performance and perception; identified which affective
factors influence the success of online collaboration; explored different strategies and approaches
to overcome difficulties, identified opportunities and obstacles associated with online
collaborative learning; and recognized the affective experiences with regard to current gaps and
future development of online collaborative learning. Therefore, this study provides additional
insights into the nature of online collaborative learning programs. To achieve the purpose of this
dissertation research study and answer research questions, the researcher collected data from 457
MLIS students via an online survey and employed various analysis methods, including
nonparametric tests such as Man-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H and nonparametric
correlation tests, such as Spearman’s rank-order. Additional data was collected via follow-up
interview sessions with 29 students who previously participated in the online survey. The results
of the analysis corresponding to each research question presented in the previous chapter
supported the assumptions that this study posed.

124

Many researchers and educators have compared online learning to teaching and learning
techniques developed for traditional, face-to-face courses. This dissertation research sought to
determine student performance and perceptions of social presence, social interaction,
collaborative learning, and satisfaction in an online collaborative environment. Therefore,
relevant research on these constructs was consulted for comparison. This section provided an
interpretation of the findings. It consisted of an overview of the results, followed by an
interpretation. This chapter is divided into two parts: the interpretation of the findings in
comparison to results from previous research and in relation to the research questions; and a
discussion of the strengths and limitation of the research study.

Discussion of Research Questions
Research Question 1: Online Collaborative Learning Performance & Perception
For Research Question I, this study sought to explore and investigate the impact of demographic
variables on students’ online collaborative learning performances and perceptions: gender; age;
social media usage; past experiences, such as number of enrolled online courses during LIS
program, percentage of group collaboration for the assignment, and group size; and technology
skills, including level of computer and Internet proficiency. Research questions were answered
by quantitative data gathered from the online survey. All 457 participants indicated their
agreement level with 15 performance related statements and 13 perception related statements on
a seven-point Likert scale. Nonparametric tests, including the Man-Whitney U test and KruskalWallis H, were used for further comparative analyses.

125

Findings from the data analysis showed that gender, age, social media usage, number of
enrolled online courses, percentage of group collaboration, group size, and computer proficiency
impacted participants’ performance in online group collaboration. Age, number of enrolled
online courses during LIS program, percentage of group collaboration, group size, level of
computer proficiency, and level of Internet proficiency had an impact on participants’ perception
in online group collaboration. As an overview, 90% of participants stated that they actively
exchanged their ideas with their group members; 85% revealed that they perform better in small
groups of five or less than five members; and 76% reported preparing themselves before each
virtual meeting. Detailed interpretation are discussed in the following sections.
Gender Diversity: Nearly 400 (n = 397) of participants were female and 60 were male.
Female participants were 87% of the whole sample population, which reflects the fact that
library school students are predominantly female. Based on the report from DATAUSA (2016),
most common gender with the degree in Library and Information Science is Female (80.9%).
Among these participants, 26% of respondents to the online survey believed that they performed
better in mixed-gender groups. Most of them (61%) had neutral feeling about gendered groups.
Based on the demographic of this study and profession in general, male students are minorities in
this program and they might not have the opportunities to engage in all-male groups. More male
than female participants reported that they preferred participating in mixed-gender groups and
that they actively exchanged ideas with their peers.
In regard to gender diversity, one statistically significant difference between male and
female groups was in a perception related statement about being comfortable expressing their
humor in discussions related to the assignment. Therefore, hypothesis 4, which states, “There is a

126

statistically significant difference between female and male students of being comfortable
expressing their humor during online discussions related to the assignment,” has been confirmed.
Using these reported results, it can be concluded that female participants were
accustomed to being around more female peers than male participants. Male participants were
used to collaborating in mixed-gender groups and being the only male in their group; they rarely
found themselves working in same-gender groups. This conclusion is based on the fact that male
participants might not have a choice about working in mixed-gender groups since the profession
is predominately female. This conclusion can be supported based on a report from the
Department of Professional Employees (DPE), which showed that women represented 82% of
graduates in Master of Library Science (MLS) programs in 2013-2014 and 80.9% graduates in
2015. In 2015, women accounted for 83% of all librarians, well above the average of 73 percent
for all education and library professionals (DPE Research Department, 2016). Women have
traditionally made up a majority of the library profession. In 1995, 83.9% of librarians were
women; in 2003, 84.4% percent of the librarian workforce identified as female. Therefore,
participating in mixed-gender groups showed statistically significant difference among the male
group.
Male participants identified a lack of male students in their program and labeled
themselves as minorities. These results are in contradiction with the Gnesdilow, Evenstone, and
Rutledge (2013), who reported that students in mixed-gender groups performed significantly
better than students in same-gender groups. As reported above, among 15 performance related
statements, only two statements showed statistically significant differences between male and
female participants. Based on the results discussed above, hypothesis 1, which stated that, “There

127

is no statistically significant difference between male and female students in terms of
performance in group assignments,” was not supported by the study data.
Age: This research study showed different perspectives on age and its relationship with
social presence and online learning. Findings revealed that participants ages 21-30 had the
highest mean rank scores in most performance related statements, such as better time
management, easy agreement in group decisions, a tendency to choose the easiest part of hard
assignments and achieving a higher grade because of collaboration. Therefore, this demographic
reported that they were satisfied after each group collaboration and felt more successful about
their results. Therefore, it can be concluded that the youngest age group in this study had better
learning outcomes. Other findings of the present study reported that age group 31-40 were more
confident about themselves and felt that they were part of their learning community, which can
explain why they engaged in leadership positions more than other age groups. They also had
higher mean rank score in expressing their negative feelings, which reflected their confidence
level. Age 41 and older were more open to expressing their humor, as well as their negative and
positive feelings. They also appreciated humor from other members of the group and always
prepared themselves before each virtual meeting.
Opposed to the findings of this dissertation study, Frederickson et al. (2006) reported in a
study of online learners that the youngest students (16-25) learned the least and were the least
satisfied with online learning; students whose ages ranged from 36-45 reported that they learned
the most and were the most satisfied with online learning. They argued that older students,
especially those with family obligations, are often seeking further education out of necessity,
either to keep a job or to get a better one. One key difference in the research population of the
Frederickson et al. study and this dissertation study can explain the contradictory results. In
128

Frederickson et al. (2006), the research population contained undergraduate students. Since the
population of this dissertation research study was graduate students, it can be concluded that
graduate students tended to have higher expectations, more motivation, and more serious
attitudes regarding online learning and group collaboration. These students were willing to gain
new knowledge and develop problem solving skills. This conclusion is also supported by results
from the in-depth interview sessions, where the researcher had the opportunity to ask
interviewees about age differences in their group and listen to discussions and arguments about
participants’ feelings toward age demographics. One interviewee mentioned that:
“I have a positive group experience when my teammates are my age or older,
because most of the time, younger team members are not taking the course or the
program seriously” (PF15).
Another interviewee explained age differences in her group and among group members:
“There were a good mix of individuals who wanted to come back to school and
they are in 40s or 50s, trying to get another degree and finish up what they want
to do… so, I found that it is easier to work with those who are more established
and have life experiences verses the new students just coming in …” (PM10).
These significant differences in the population of the study set results in a seemingly
inconsistent statistical conclusion between the two studies. Based on the quantitative data
analysis, hypothesis 3, which states, “There is a statistically significant difference among age
groups in their abilities of developing new knowledge and skills by interacting with other
members in their group,” was not supported by the survey data.

129

Social Media Usage: When performing Kruskal-Willas H test, only one statistically
signifant difference between participants’ performance and social media usage was observed.
Those participants who spent less than an hour daily on social media reported that they always
prepared themselves and completed all the necessary readings before each virtual meeting. It can
be concluded that, since they spent less time on social media, they found more time to focus on
their course work. Based on statistical analysis, social media usage has no impact on students’
online collaborative learning perceptions. Therefore, hypothesis 2, which states, “Students who
spend more time on social media have better online collaboration performance than others,” was
not supported and has been rejected.
Past Experiences: Results from participants’ past experiences, such as number of
enrolled online courses during their MLIS program, percentage of group collaboration, and
group size provided great insight about online collaborative learning performances and
perceptions. Results from performance related statements revealed that when participants were
enrolled in more than three online courses during their program, they were more likely to report
achieving a higher grade. Findings from perception related statements analysis showed that those
participants who enrolled in less than thee online courses felt that their collaboration was not
time-consuming and was successful. Due to insufficient data on this aspect, further research
studies needed to determine the relationship among number of enrolled courses and success
among MLIS students. Another factor, which influenced online collaborative learning and was
related to the past experiences, is percentage of group collaboration in each assignment.
Of the participants, 300 reported that more than 25% of their assignments involved group
collaboration. Based on other findings of this study, it can be concluded that those participants
who enrolled in more than three online courses where their assignments involved more than 25%
130

of group work, will register for courses with online collaboration among the group members,
where they will perform better and have more efficient time management than if they were
working alone. Based on the experiences that these participants gained through online course
work and collaborative activities, they learned to work effectively in groups and developed new
knowledge and skills by interacting with other group members. The more collaborative activities,
determined at a rate of more than 25%, in the group assignments, the more sense of belonging
group members felt in the learning community. When members felt that they were part of their
learning community, then they felt more comfortable expressing their positive feelings and, in
the end, they felt satisfied with their online collaborative experience.
The results of this dissertation research provided evidence that group size affects the
performance and development of individual perceptions of trust, cohesion, and commitment
when working with others on group assignments. Larger groups were associated with lower
reported interpersonal trust and interaction between group members. Findings revealed that 85%
of participants believed that they performed better in small size groups of five or less members.
There were 12 statistically significant differences across the performance related statements and
11 statistically significant differences across the perception related statements among those
participants with the preference of group size of five or less members.
Participants also revealed that collaborating in the groups of five or less students helped
them more efficiently manage their time, develop problem solving skills and new knowledge, as
well as encouraged them to participate in group decision-making process, frequently work in the
group, exchange ideas with peers, better understand course materials, and learn more from group
collaboration. These achievements from group collaboration led to the students obtaining higher
grades and, based on the successful experience, developing a willingness to register for more
131

online courses. Students in groups of five or less members have defined roles, less workload
pressure, and less scheduling conflicts. They also felt more confident about themselves, which
led to more communication and collaboration among the group members. These findings are
reinforced by other researches who found collaboration works best in small groups and often
breaks down in groups that are too large (London, 1995). Some studies reported that students
working in small groups tend to learn more of what is being taught, retain information longer,
and appear more satisfied with their classes (Beckman, 1990; Chickering & Gamson, 1991).
Technology Skills: The advent of Internet-based communication technologies offered
new opportunities for students to collaborate without meeting in person. The level of computer
and Internet proficiency among students can play a major role in the flow of information, ease of
interaction, and constant communication in online collaborations. Findings of this study showed
three statistically significant differences among participants’ level of computer proficiency.
Those participants who labeled themselves as “Expert” reported that they perform better in
mixed gender groups, easily agree on group decisions, and that collaborative learning helps them
learn to work more effectively in groups. Computer and Internet “Experts” also felt more
confident about themselves and, therefore, they more often became their group leader.
Participants with “Some Experience” felt satisfied with their online collaboration
experience. It can be concluded that these participants relied more on “Experts” in their groups to
lead the group interactions, handle communication, and deal with the more technological aspects
of the collaboration, which made the collaborative process easier for those participants with
“Some Experience” and produced the satisfied feeling at the end of the assignment. This finding
supports the idea that “Experts” tend to perceive themselves taking on leadership roles. Results

132

from an open-ended question about cloud-Internet based tools revealed that Google Suite has the
most frequency of usage among participants with the total number of 430.
Interestingly, none of the performance related statements and perception related
statements showed any statistically significant differences within subgroups structured upon
ethnicity, LIS major, or undergraduate degree among participants. Contrary to the findings of
this dissertation study, Hsu (2008) identified that different ethnicities and different academic
backgrounds had statistically significant differences among student’s online learning outcomes.
The researcher believes that a few key differences in the research population of the two studies
can explain the seemingly contradictory results. First, the Hsu (2008) sample was more
ethnically diverse and better distributed, whereas the sample set of this dissertation study as
mostly comprised of female White/Caucasians (87% female and 86% White/Caucasians). The
resulting homogeneity makes it challenging to draw statistically significant conclusions based on
different races and ethnicities. The same pattern exists with regard to academic background. The
Hsu (2008) research population contained students from a diverse set of graduate programs. This
research, however, is focused on master-level LIS students who overwhelmingly have Arts and
Humanities (65%) backgrounds. This significant difference in the studies’ populations results in
a seemingly inconsistent statistical conclusion based on academic background.
Research Questions 2 & 3: Success Factors for Online Collaborative Learning
Research questions two and three of this dissertation investigate the affective factors, which
influence the success of online collaboration activities. These factors include, but are not limited
to, the instructor’s role, social interaction, trust, and social climate.

133

Instructor’s Role: Often it is considered inevitable that students who study online will
suffer a sense of isolation. This sense of isolation can be minimized if instructors give advanced
planning to the development of the online environment (McInnerney & Roberts, 2004). Some
students find online courses isolating and lonely when they are not interacting with their
classmates or the instructor. Daugherty and Funke (1998) indicated that this issue of isolation is
“an important criterion for student satisfaction” with the web-based online course (p.21). This
feeling is often “based on the physical separation between student and instructor” and is one that
educators may be able to improve but are unlikely be able to successfully eradicate (Daugherty
& Funke, 1998, p.21). Integrating suggestions by participants may apply to overcome these
feelings. One of the keys to developing a community of learners is to let them get to know each
other. The first day of an online session could incorporate an icebreaker that helps the class begin
sharing about themselves, including something about their personality, life, or family.
Sometimes sharing having students share a photo may help others get to know them. A group of
students could also create social media profiles for better and more informal communications
and interactions.
Students need to feel like they are part of their online class community and members of
an instructional community. Findings of this dissertation research revealed that the course
instructor facilitates the community-building process by reviewing the individual group
discussion forums to see who is and is not participating, posting a feedback message to students
about group assignment progress, following up with students as needed, promptly responding to
students’ concerns and questions, and forming collaborative groups based on some logic such as
the students being in the same time-zone. Virtual meetings were mentioned by participants as a
means for instructors to promote collaboration.

134

Students expected the instructor to act as a collaborative culture developer, a planner, an
observer, a facilitator, and, above all, a communicator. These roles are interconnected and
overlapping, with different emphases at different times and in varying degrees throughout the
online course (Heuer & King, 2004). ARIS (2001) similarly identified four areas where the role
of the teacher is being redefined and the dynamics of the learning environment are being
reframed: dialogue, involvement, support, and control. The online instructor’s tasks translate to
“setting the scene, monitoring participation, facilitating critical thinking, and encouraging
student collaboration” (Youngblood, Trede, & di Corpo, 2001, p. 266). It is the instructor’s duty
to open online discussion about “goals, criteria of meeting goals, evaluations of whether goals
have been met, plus peer evaluation and self-evaluation” (Johnson, 2001, p. 49).
The finding of this dissertation regarding instructor participation is significant for online
instructors and course designers. This finding indicated that enhancing participation between
students and instructors is a key to helping students achieve their online learning goal with
satisfaction. Therefore, in order to increase participation, when developing educational
experiences for students in online learning communities, online instructors and course designers
need to be aware of the diversity of students’ learning styles and create multiple activities in
ways that use learning style preferences. Discussion boards are one of the learning platforms
suggested by both participants of the online survey and interviews. This finding will be
discussed more in the “Description of Experience” section of this chapter.
Social Interaction: Some research studies suggest that an asynchronous learning
environment provides the assurance of equal treatment for the learner by providing a way to
interact with instructors and peers without regard for race or gender (Rourke, Anderson,
Garrison, & Arche, 2001). Based on the results of this dissertation research study, which
135

indicated that 87% of the participants were female, and 86% were White/Caucasian, it can be
concluded that most of the members in each group were homogenous. Therefore, 90% of survey
participants were comfortable interacting with other students and reported that they actively
exchanged ideas in their group; 63% claimed that, because of interacting with peers, they were
able to develop new knowledge and skills. Participants and interviewees enumerated reasons for
this, such as earning a higher grade and developing new knowledge or skills, as building the
relationship for a successful collaboration, which led to them being satisfied about their online
collaboration activities. Participants had mixed feelings about the quality of interaction with
instructors in online courses. Some argued that their instructors treated the online program as
correspondence course; these participants perceived that their instructors facilitated fewer
discussions and created less of a community in online courses.
Findings from this study revealed that both social presence aspects, performance and
perception, had a strong positive correlation with overall course satisfaction. Similar to findings
of the current study, Richardson and Swan (2003) demonstrated in their correlational study that
students who perceived a high level of social presence in an online course were not only more
satisfied, but also learned more than students who reported low social presence. Other research
studies support these claims as well (Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997; Kang & Im, 2013). Adding to
this, Hample and Dallinger (1995) contend that a lack of social presence may lead to a high level
of frustration. It can be concluded that the satisfaction levels among participants is deeply
correlated to the agreement level of performance and perception related statements. In this study,
28 interviewees mentioned that they experienced frustration, stress, anxiety, lack of selfconfidence, hesitation, and insecurity. Only 42% of online survey participants reported that they
felt satisfied with their online collaboration experience.

136

Trust: Social presence is regarded as necessary for creating a trusting environment for
interpersonal communication and developing a welcoming social climate for discussion.
Although trust represents one of the most critical issues facing online groups, the need to work
with others through the text-based online environment can exacerbate trust issues. Dirks and
Ferrin (2001) and many scholars who researched trust assume a certain direct, rational, and
conscious relationship between one person’s perceptions and another person’s behavior. Trust
issues at a group level include fear of differences and epistemic challenges that are highly
emotional, paradoxical, and unconscious (Smith, 2009). Students need to trust each other in
order to successfully work together. Ideas for creating trust among group members include being
honest, working to eliminate conflicts of interests, and avoiding gossip.
This dissertation research study found that a feeling of connection and trust positively
affected students’ motivation. When students have difficulty creating the appropriate level of
mutual closeness, trust, and interdependence, they are likely to have a low level of participation
in group projects. A qualitative study by Vrasidas and McIsaac (1999) confirmed the relationship
among social presence, student participation, and motivation. The study found that students were
hesitant to participate in online collaborative learning because they lacked a feeling of
connection to others, which affected overall motivation.
Additionally, this speculation is consistent with the argument of Rourke et al. (1999) that
social presence is a critical factor in developing a successful community of inquiry; students
need to feel a sense of belonging and trust in order to recognize collaboration among students as
a valuable learning experience. Based on the results of this study, it can be concluded that trust
can be formed when students participated in small groups and supported each other, which then
led to students feeling that they were part of their learning community. When learners feel
137

supported by each other, it produces the conditions for taking risks in the learning process.
When they can develop trust in each other, then challenges will become part of the culture of the
group. Students can share ideas and comment on peers’ work in an environment of trust,
collaboration, and enjoyment.
Social Climate: The social climate in educational settings is shaped by the relationships
between instructors and students. Among students it is mainly influenced by the perception of
each group member about their group assignment and the ways feelings are expressed.
Expression is “the ability of participants in the Community of Inquiry to project their personal
characteristics into the community, thereby presenting themselves to the other participants as
‘real people’” (Garrison et al., 2000, p.4). The majority of the participants (f=151) pointed to
positive and frequent “Communication” as the key factor leading to a successful group
assignment. Communication is important for the success of the group. Since miscommunication
can create hard feelings and undermine the success of the group collaboration, students must
openly and effectively communicate.
Other success factors such as equal participation, clear understanding of the assignment,
transparent flow of information, interpersonal skills, responsible leader, collaborative tools, and
mutual goals were mentioned by the participants. Based on the findings of this study, 90% of
online survey participants felt comfortable expressing their positive feelings; 73% of them were
comfortable expressing humor in discussion related to the assignment; 82% appreciated the
humor from others; and 57% felt comfortable expressing negative feelings, such as being
concerned or worried. Many interviewees mentioned that it was really hard to express their
concerns and worry feelings in their group. Human factors, such as a lack of body language and
facial expression, were limiting for communicating negative emotions and forced participants to
138

keep everything positive. When there was no other way to communicate except to send an email
of concern, participants mentioned that they carefully worded whatever they needed to say in
order to avoid hurting other’s feelings. Twenty-eight interviewees stated that they experienced
frustration, anxiety, and hesitation during their interaction with peers, which may cause
unsuccessful collaboration.
Forty-percent of the participants believed that the online collaboration was not successful
in their groups. It can be concluded that group work and collaborative activities are expected to
produce results, but performance is hindered when group members do not work well together.
This can be described as not having a mutual goal. Group work is defined as members working
together toward a common goal; without a goal, there is no group. Findings from both
quantitative and qualitative data analysis revealed that students needed to know from the
beginning why a group was formed and be given a clear responsibility, which was part of the
work being equally distributed among group members. Knowing everyone's role and being
familiar with the responsibility of those roles created efficiency and flexibility. Group members
could clarify roles in their groups by reviewing team members' roles frequently, relating team
member expectations to the team's overall purpose, clarifying responsibilities when action
planning, learning what others do on the team, and figuring out ways to help each other.
Other success factors were identified from data analysis, which emphasized the
recognition of the diversity of the group. Group members come from different parts of the world
and have distinctive experiences, perspectives, and backgrounds. Members of the group should
appreciate and take advantage of this diversity. Interviewees were asked about their opinion on
gender and age diversity. Findings contradicted results from the online survey and quantitative
analysis on gender. All interviewees preferred mixed-gender groups and categorized their
139

preference based on different perspective, different initiative level, and different empathies
brought by each female or male member to the group. Since those sessions included more indepth discussions with the participants, findings of qualitative data analysis supported the
research study by Gnesdilow, Evenstone, and Rutledge (2013). Results from both quantitative
and qualitative data analysis on age gap were supported. Interviewees commented on the older
members of their group being more motivated, stable, and having personal and professional
experiences that were beneficial for the group and assisted group members in being more honest
about their feelings. This is consistent with previous research that found a significant correlation
between social presence and age in online learning (Richardson & Swan, 2003; Spears, 2012).
Successful collaborative learning requires quality interactions; quality interactions need
social interaction to establish a group culture and an exchange of experiences as a foundation for
knowledge production. Social presence seems to increase the learners’ satisfaction with learning
(Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997) and with social interactions, which are the foundation of social
learning (Tu, 2000). Findings of this study revealed significant positive correlations among
social climate factors, such as positive and negative feeling expressions, humor appreciation, and
group size, with reported success.
Research Questions 4 through 8: Online Collaborative Learning Experience
Research questions IV to VIII proposed to investigate a deeper understanding of past experiences
among MLIS students. Participants were asked to describe both positive and negative
experiences during their online course or program. In some places, for better understanding of
participants’ feelings and experiences, quantitative and qualitative data analysis were aggregated.
Online learning environments that feature mainly asynchronous text-based Computer
Mediated Communication (CMC) have been criticized for their lack of support for social
140

presence; this lack of social presence support may impact the sense of belonging and acceptance
in a group (Rovai, 2002). Collaboration begins with interaction when participants show
awareness of the presence of others and begin to relate as a group. Social presence creates group
cohesion, which enriches interaction. By forming a sense of community through communicating
on a social rather than an informational level, interaction can move to a higher level and become
collaborative (Garrison et al., 2000; Henri, 1992).
Findings of this study revealed specific indicators for social presence that affect
participants’ performance and perception in an online course. The first indicator is sharing
personal information, which may appear in short biographies on discussion boards or could be
seen on social media pages developed specifically for the group interaction and communication
outside of the online course collaborative tool. Since almost all participants have used at least
one social media platform, creating social media page for the group can elevate the social
interaction between peers. By sharing personal information, group members recognized the
group presence.
Another indicator related to the way participants defined themselves as either independent
or interdependent. Findings revealed that 60% of respondents to the online survey and 26
interviewees mentioned they were less likely to perform better when there is group collaboration.
They discussed many reasons for this, such as social loafing, collaboration being a timeconsuming process, and not being successful in collaboration. Social loafing phenomenon was
very common in online collaborative learning. Participants and interviewees of this study
identified social loafing as peers who were prone to exert less work and effort on group
assignment. Results from both quantitative and qualitative data analysis of this dissertation
research study provided great insight about social loafing in groups; 88% of online survey
141

participants and all 29 interviewees reported themselves as not being a social loafer. When
asked for deeper insight, they mentioned that there was at least one peer in their group who did
not work as hard or contribute as much as the rest of the group. Beside this lack of participation
from group members, participants discussed social loafing as dropping out of the course, giving
up on the assignment, and choosing to do the easiest part of the work. A few suggestions made
by participants may help alleviate social loafing in online collaborative learning: clearly defined
roles, constant communication among group members, self and peer evaluation, and having a
strong and responsible group leader. In addition, Thompson and Ku (2006) suggested that, in
some cases, rotating the leadership role among group members can create a sense of equality in
the group, which would help members avoid social loafing.
Among respondents, 59% of the online survey participants and five out of 29
interviewees found themselves in the position of group leader. These respondents reported their
computer and Internet proficiency level as “Expert;” they also felt more confident about
themselves after each collaboration in their group. Respondents enumerated their reasons for
becoming group leader: they were the first person to reach out to other group members, they
were the first person to post something on the discussion board, they wanted to have control over
the group situation, and they were trying to facilitate the conversation. This result is consistent
with the findings of Xie, Yu, and Bradshaw (2014), which suggested that students assigned as
group leaders posted more frequently, stayed in the system longer, and interacted with others
more diversely during the week of their moderation.
Discussion Board Activities: Based on the findings of Dixson, Kuhlhorst, and Reiff
(2006), discussion boards in an online environment seem to be a suitable solution for both the
students and teaching institution to allow for maximum learning flexibility with regard to both
142

time and place. Participants of the current study reported their preferences for participating in
more discussion board activities than collaborative assignments. They expanded their argument
by mentioning the nature of the online program and online courses and the reasoning behind
their decision to enroll in that type of courses. Online programs allowed students to work around
their schedules, not other people’s schedules. Participants argued that discussion boards are
reflective; because the forum discussions occur completely online, students have the flexibility to
add their input when they are prepared, which is not limited to time or location.
Online interaction allows for further discussion of a topic. It also provides students with
the opportunity of “think time,” defined as a distinct period of uninterrupted silence by the
teacher and all students that provides student with a space in which they can complete
appropriate information processing tasks, feelings, oral responses, and actions (Stahl, 1990).
Think time allowed students to reflect on course material and post more thoughtful comments to
the discussion board. Students expand their personal knowledgebase through the back-and-forth
engagement and interaction with other classmates, including sharing insights, perspectives,
points-of-view, and their personally held information and knowledge. There are dominant
personalities in each group which may make students feel intimidated or unmotivated to speak.
In discussion boards, each student has a voice that will be heard by everyone who chooses to
read the comment. If a student's points of view were challenged, they typically added carefully
considered reasons to back up previous comments.
Time Management: Online collaboration being a time-consuming process was another
finding discussed among participants as one of the major reasons they less likely to perform
better when there is group collaboration involved. Of the respondents, 72% reported that online
collaboration process in their group was time-consuming. This result supports the findings of
143

Birch and McDonald (2007), which found the online group activity to be time-consuming and
frustrating among students. However, a group activity was found to be beneficial in terms of
cognitive and social learning outcomes. Findings revealed that participants ages 21-30, those
who had more than 25% of their grade related to the group collaboration, and members of small
groups with five or less members managed their time better in online group assignment than
when working alone.
Benefits and Challenges: A total of 423 participants responded to the benefits and 429
participants responded to the challenges of the online collaboration. In summary, benefits of
online collaborative learning are meeting new people, being exposed to different personalities,
and enhanced creativity. Challenges of online collaborative learning can be summarized as it
being a time-consuming process, scheduling conflicts, lack of contribution, frustration, and
anxiety. These results are supported by previous research studies (Birch & McDonald, 2007;
Grzeda, Haq, & Lebrasseur, 2008; Falkner, Capdeferro, & Romero, 2012; Falkner & Vivian,
2013; London, 1995; Pena-Shaff, Altman, & Stephenson, 2005).

Summary of Findings in Relation to Research Questions
Based on the findings of this study, these participants gained experience throughout the
coursework and collaborative activities. They can learn to work effectively in groups and
develop new knowledge and skills by interacting with other group members. The more
collaboration activities incorporated into group assignments, the more sense of belonging to the
learning community group members feel. If students experience a sense of belonging to the
community, the they are more likely to successfully complete a class or a program. Successful
collaborative learning requires quality interactions; quality interactions need social interaction to
144

establish a group culture and an exchange of experiences as a foundation for knowledge
production.
Overall, the findings are valuable to online instructors and course designers when they
select instructional strategies or consider modifying a course to suit students' diverse learning
styles. These findings can provide instructors and designers with a greater understanding of how
students perceive community in an online leaning course.

Strengths and Weaknesses of the Dissertation Research
Several strengths and weaknesses are inherent in this dissertation research.
Strengths of the Study: This study has number of strengths. The major strength of this
study is the sample size of this study. Based on the 2015 ALISE report, the population of this
study was approximately 13,715 students from 45 schools who were enrolled in ALA-accredited
master’s programs in Library and Information Science. It is important to note that not all of these
students were enrolled in online courses, and not all of these online courses had group
assignments. Therefore, at the beginning of the online survey, there were three pop-up questions
that filtered the participants based on the study’s purpose. The target sample of the dissertation
research was approximately 3758 students for the online survey. This number was calculated by
5% margin of error and 95% confidence level for the population of 13,715 MLIS.
Among 652 participants, 457 completed the online survey for a response rate of
approximately 70%. This large sample size is more representative of the population, limiting the

8

Calculated from Survey Monkey Website| https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/sample-size-calculator/
145

influence of outliners or extreme observations. This sufficiently large sample size is necessary to
produce results among variables that are significantly different. For qualitative data analysis,
where the goal is to reduce the chances of discovery failure, a large sample size broadens the
range of possible data and forms a better picture for analysis. For this dissertation research study,
after preliminary data analysis from the online survey, extreme case sampling method was used,
and 29 students from 13 institutions were selected for follow-up interview sessions. The purpose
of student interviews was to investigate detailed information and develop a deeper understanding
of each student’s online collaborative learning experiences and feelings associated with those
experiences.
A comprehensive summary of the literature related to social presence in online learning
environments and understanding the relationship between social presence and student outcomes
is another strength associated with this study.
Limitations of the Study: This dissertation research study has several limitations. First,
the study population is limited in terms of the diversity and the lack of international student
samples. Second, the scope of the dissertation research was limited to participants’ experiences
in online collaborative learning environment and concentrated on social presence aspects and
satisfaction. Because the study focuses on correlation among variables, it does not show
causality. Similarly, finding a correlation between social presence or collaborative learning and
student satisfaction will not allow us to state that these two variables predict student satisfaction.
Also, the focus of this study was limited to online master programs or courses in Library
and Information Science. Courses in different fields of study have unique situations, which might
require different implementation of collaborative methods. Nevertheless, the online collaborative

146

learning model proposed by this study is created based on both the results of the study and an
extensive literature review.

147

6.

Chapter 6: Conclusion
Chapter Overview

This chapter includes a proposed conceptual framework for MLIS students’ online collaborative
learning, as well as suggestions for future research. In order to investigate MLIS students’
experiences and feelings while collaborating in online environment for group assignments, this
study adapts the Community of Inquiry (CoI) framework with a focus on social presence
element, Social Cognitive Theory with the focus on behavioral and environmental factors, and
Self-Regulated Learning Theory with those aspects related to one’s emotions and motivations.
The proposed model was created based on the adapted theories and results of this study.

Conceptual Framework of Collaborative Online Learning
As a result of advanced educational technologies hosted by the Internet, online learning
environments have provided students with the ability to socially engage in the learning
environment, participate in learning communities, and socially construct knowledge. The
findings of this study present the perspectives of the MLIS students regarding what it is like to
participate in an online course and indicate that the instructor’s role, group composition, group
outcome, and prior experiences in online course all influenced social interaction, which then led
to efficient collaboration and collaborative learning. Collaboration goes beyond an interaction
and requires coordinated, synchronous activity as the result of a continued attempt to build and
maintain a shared conception of a problem between both instructor and students. Collaboration
represents working together to achieve mutual goals and to solve a problem, create, discover. or
produce something.

148

Based on the findings of this dissertation research study, a conceptual framework was
developed to demonstrate the procedures for effective and successful online collaborative
learning among MLIS students.

Development of Conceptual Framework
The MLIS students’ online collaborative learning model is proposed in this dissertation research
study. Figure 6.1 is the conceptual framework of online collaborative learning. The indicators were
derived from data analysis of the both quantitative and qualitative data. This model includes six
major stages. These stages are: instructor’ role, group composition, group outcome, group
collaboration, successful collaboration, and satisfaction. This model serves for conceptualizing
the process of online collaborative learning among master’s students of Library and Information
Science on a continuum of processes that move from instructor’s role to students’ satisfaction.
Figure 5.1 presents the MLIS students’ online collaborative learning model.

149

Figure 6.1: MLIS Students' Online Collaborative Learning Conceptual Framework

Instructor’s Role: Based on the reports of experiences and expectations of the
participants of this study, the role of online instructors is multidimensional. Students described
the instructor’s role as active and evolving during an online course. They expected the instructor
to act as a collaborative culture developer, a planner, an observer, a facilitator, and a
communicator. These roles are mutually connected and overlapping, with different emphases at
different times and in varying degrees throughout the life of the course.
A collaborative culture starts with the instructor. The instructor could be the first person
to interact with students, then lead them to interact with each other based on some guidelines
which help to build the learning community. Developing a collaborative culture is also
dependent on clear communications among peers in the group. Having to express ideas in a
written format, then give feedback to others, creates a need for effective communication. As
students present ideas and read feedback from their peers, some communication can be
misunderstood. As Gills (2013) mentioned, a careful review of information’s presentation and a
150

second attempt to clarify the intent of the message is required. Gradually, over the course of the
program, communication becomes less ambiguous. Instructors have significant roles to notice
these kinds of ambiguity and address them at the right times. Other factors the instructor can
address in order to assist with the development of the collaborative culture are knowing the value
of other’s ideas and being sensitive to other’s feelings.
As a planner, the instructor’s role involves forming groups based on some logic,
designing appropriate assignments precisely for group collaboration, providing clear
expectations for each group member, setting the course outcome from the beginning, and having
rigid guidelines, which make it easy to understand what needs to be done.
As an observer, the instructor can closely monitor group discussion boards to identify
students’ involvement from the beginning of the group work, contact those students not
participating in the group process, evaluate the quality of the posts, and collect ongoing data
about students’ progress.
As a facilitator, the instructor can provide access to a solid set of online collaborative
tools to benefit students and their groups. By finding software that allows group members to coauthor or work simultaneously on the same document, instructors can ensure that everyone has
access to the latest version and can prepare deliverables in less time. Defining clear roles with
detailed responsibilities can facilitate the collaboration in the group and reduce confusion among
group members. The instructor can be a motivation element for the group collaboration by being
responsive and available for the students.
Communicator is the crucial role of the instructor. Heuer & King (2004) discussed this
issue in their model: “A key is an instructor who communicates before the class begins, who

151

fosters communication and collaboration among classmates, who responds timely and with
critical feedback” (p.7). By allocating online office hours for students to have virtual meetings
with the instructor either individually or with the group as a whole, following up with students
and providing constructive feedback, the instructor can play a role as a great communicator.
Group Composition: Group composition describes the overall mix of characteristics
among the people in the group, which is a unit of two or more individuals who interact
interdependently to achieve a common goal. As mentioned by participants and interviewees, the
way an instructor organizes the group has a major impact on the success of an online
collaboration and the students’ satisfaction. Other factors that affect online collaborative
learning are group size, gender diversity, and age differences.
Group Outcome: Based on the reports from participants and interviewees, group
outcome is deeply influenced by the previous online collaborative learning experiences. Those
participants with positive experiences tended to have more motivation and were more engaged in
group activities. Results from statistical analysis showed that those participants who enrolled in
more than three online courses during their MLIS online program tended to achieve higher
grades.
As discussed before, social presence is a concept related to one’s performance in the
group and perceptions of oneself and others. Findings of this study revealed three major factors
for participants’ performance: independence, interdependence, and social media. The majority of
the participants and interviewees reported that they performed better independently and
explained their reasons as being self-conscious, self-motivated, self-demanding, needing to have
control or power, possessing a specific work ethic and work pace, having high standards, dealing
with only one voice, and scheduling. They argued that, because they were aware of their
152

capabilities, they could be in control of what they were submitting for an assignment, which
could be more cohesive and less time-consuming than working in a group. These students argued
that they were frustrated and stressed most of the time when participating in group work.
Others reported that they performed better when there was a group collaboration. One
interviewee mentioned that being a procrastinator was the reason he performed better in group
collaboration. He argued that having multiple deadlines, being accountable to others, and
knowing that others relied on him for their grade forced him to perform better in a group setting.
Social media was discussed during follow-up interview sessions. Interviewees discussed
similarities between the structure of social media platforms and their online collaborative tool,
which added more comfortable interaction, higher confidence level, and ease of use to the
members.
Factors for students’ perception are social climate of the group, affective expressions, and
risk-free expressions. These factors were discussed in detail in the previous section of this
chapter.
Group Collaboration: Group collaboration begins as the result of the previous processes:
instructor’s role, group composition, and group outcome. Collaboration among group members
leads to meeting new people. By having efficient communication, group members can build a
trust, which adds to their motivation. By developing a trustworthy relationship among group
members, students tend to manage their time better and are eager to learn new skills and
technologies.
Successful Collaboration: Successful collaboration is the result of many factors in the
group process. These factors are equal division of labor, members’ location in the same time153

zone, members having mutual goals, setting multiple deadlines, accountability, dedication,
constant and clear communication, and using interactive software.
Satisfaction: Satisfaction in a course is an important “intermediate outcome” (Astin,
1993, p. 278). However, satisfaction in online environment is different from the traditional
environment. Satisfaction factors extracted from the results of the current study included: being
part of the learning community; having social interaction among students and students with
instructors; gaining confidence; expressing feelings whether they are positive, negative, or
humorous; and higher grades.
Findings from this study emphasize the importance of social presence, social interaction,
and satisfaction in online collaborative learning. These findings indicate students are generally
satisfied with their learning experience when social presence permeates all aspects of the
learning environment, the integration of social interaction in the learning environment is clear,
and collaborative learning through group process is used as a teaching and learning tool. This
study contributes to the teaching and learning in online courses and should be used to support
educators and instructional designers in the establishment of standards for distance education
courses.
Recommendations for successful implementation of collaborative learning in the online
environment are provided and the MLIS student’s online collaborative learning conceptual
framework is proposed. Finally, this chapter concludes with recommendations for future
research.

154

Future Research
Based on the findings in this study, the researcher outlines the directions for future research that
may contribute to the literature of online collaborative learning, as well as validity and reliability
of the coding mechanisms for online collaboration. Future research studies are needed to elevate
positive learning outcomes, especially since many results from the current study support the
findings of previous investigations that show many unresolved challenges and disagreements still
exist among online students. The possible future research studies could include:
-

Expanding the number of respondents to more diverse ethnic groups other than
White/Caucasian. It is valuable to collect data related to different races and cultures in
order to understand the perceptions of all participants.

-

Expand the number of participants who are international students. It is useful to collect
data related to international students in order to understand the perceptions of all students
in online courses or programs.

-

Develop longitudinal studies documenting changes in students’ perceptions of social
presence, social interaction, collaborative learning, and satisfaction in online courses over
time.

Conclusion
The researcher investigated and explored the online collaborative learning experiences among
MLIS students. Guidelines and tips for designing a successful online collaborative learning
environment, based on participants' experiences and lessons learned in this exploratory study,

155

were proposed. A model for MLIS students’ online collaborative learning was proposed. The
indicators were derived from data analysis of the both quantitative and qualitative data. This
model includes six major stages. These stages are: instructor’s role, group composition, group
outcome, group collaboration, successful collaboration, and satisfaction. This model serves to
conceptualize the process of online collaborative learning among mater’ students in Library and
Information Science on a continuum of processes that move from instructor’s role to students’
satisfaction. Recommendations for future studies were also provided.