THE ROLE OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDIO ENGINEER IN THE NATIONAL
RECORDING PRESERVATION PLAN
by
LYNNAE J. ROME

ABSTRACT
This report explores the Library of Congress’ actions, including reports and
recommendations made by the National Recording Preservation Board following the
passage of the National Recording Preservation Act in 2000. The report calls attention
to the audio preservation activities of private and non-profit organizations, which are a
cause for national concern. Finally, a case study of the process and procedure of
archiving a vintage, ½ inch reel-to-reel magnetic tape recording into a recommended
digital format will be presented. This will serve as a demonstration for how the
independent audio engineer, though consulting published guides on audio preservation,
may contribute to this important work.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
History
In 2000, the United States Congress passed the National Recording
Preservation Act directing the Librarian of Congress to establish a plan to archive the
nation’s recorded sound history and make recommendations for cooperation between
all stakeholders of this national treasure. It took thirteen years and the help of a
donation from musician Jack White to finally establish the National Recording
Preservation Foundation, which aims to begin enacting the preservation plan. The
challenges in preserving these treasured recordings are numerous, including the sheer
number of recordings that require archiving, the limited number of qualified personnel,
the acute need to rapidly complete the preservation process due to deteriorating media,
technical considerations and lack of best practices, copyright barriers, and limited
funding.
National Recording Preservation Act
There were several Congressional mandates in the National Recording
Preservation Act of 2000, including the establishment of the following:
•

National Recording Registry

•

National Recording Preservation Board

•

National Recording Preservation Foundation

The purpose, as stated by the act, was to “to establish the National Recording Registry
in the Library of Congress to maintain and preserve sound recordings that are culturally,

1

historically, or aesthetically significant, and for other purposes” (United States. Cong.
House. H.R. 4846, 2000, p.1). Although there have been useful studies with regard to
the scope of audio collections in need of archiving and the medium on which the
recordings exist, significant results of this conservation project are yet to be delivered.
In May of 2015, the ARSC Guide to Audio Preservation was published. This guide was
commissioned for and sponsored by the National Recording Preservation Board
(NRPB) and co-published by the Association for Recorded Sound Collections (ARSC),
the Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR) and the Library of Congress
(LOC). Additionally, several professional organizations and experts in the field have
published publically accessible preservation guidelines, as well as white papers and
journal articles that are accessible though membership or subscriptions. As of this
writing, the public awaits a singular, definitive international standards and best practices
manual for migrating and archiving recorded works.
National Recording Preservation Registry
The registry that was mandated by the National Recording Preservation Act has
been active since 2002. The Preservation Board has been tasked with choosing and
preserving audio recordings that are culturally, historically or aesthetically significant
(United States. Cong. House. H.R.4846). Each year, beginning in 2002, the board has
selected 25 recordings to be archived and included in the registry. The selections are
eligible for inclusion based on 1) Librarian’s criteria and 2) having been created at least
ten years prior to its inclusion. The 2012 registry included the titles "A Program of Song"
(album) Leontyne Price (1959); "The Dark Side of the Moon" (album) Pink Floyd (1973);

2

and "Music Time in Africa: Mauritania" Leo Sarkisian, host (July 29, 1973). The
Registry aims to provide a collection of significant works that are available to the public,
but is certainly not comprehensive. The complete registry can be accessed at the
Library of Congress Website https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-recordingpreservation-board/recording-registry/complete-national-recording-registry-listing/. It is
estimated that there are 46 million works in libraries and public archives with 44 percent
of those works being reported in “unknown condition” (Bamberger & Brylawski, 2010).
National Recording Preservation Board
The board consists of qualified members of seventeen organizations including
performance rights organizations, the Music Library Association, the Audio Engineering
Society, the Digital Media Association and other stakeholders and experts in recorded
sound. The board is designated to meet a minimum of one time annually. The terms and
responsibilities of the board are outlined in the National Recording Preservation Act of
2000.
National Recording Preservation Foundation
The foundation was also mandated and provides funding for private collectors,
libraries and commercial entities that do not have the resources to preserve their
collections. Its mission is to “support archives, libraries, cultural institutions and others
committed to preserving America’s radio, music and recorded sound heritage.” The
foundation has established a website at www.recordingpreservation.org that acts as an
aggregator for both technical guides and links to audio archives that are available for
public consumption.

3

National Recording Preservation Plan
The Council in Library and Information Resources and Library of Congress
published The Library of Congress National Recording Preservation Plan in 2012.
The plan is the follow-up to the 2010 National Recording Preservation Board
document, The State of Recorded Sound Preservation in the United States: A
National Legacy at Risk in the Digital Age. The plan outlines 32 recommendations
for short and long-term preservation. The plan requires participation from the public
and private sector, inviting expertise and contribution from all stakeholders. The
topics of concern in the plan are preservation infrastructure, preservation strategies,
public access to the archived recordings and long-term solutions. One notable
detail of the 2012 National Recording Preservation Plan (p.19) is to:
Initiate a program to videotape interviews and demonstrations by senior
audio engineers. To document recording practices used to capture sound
from legacy media, lecture demonstrations by expert practitioners should be
videotaped. They should cover older formats, playback techniques, and
playback systems. The videos should be developed under the auspices of
the Board and made available on the Audio Preservation Resource Directory
as free podcasts or webcasts. Possible partners with the Board include
ARSC and AES, as these organizations already have taken preliminary
steps to address this issue by identifying and interviewing experts.
This would provide an invaluable resource for non-specialists in audio archiving by
providing credible information and advice.

4

Plan Overview
The Plan encompasses four main points of necessity.
1. The plan identifies the need to develop the infrastructure necessary including
storage facilities, education, and research.
2. The second point is to develop a centralized strategy for preservation including
practical tools and implementation models.
3. Third is providing public access to archives for educational purposes. This will
include solving complications arising from copyright laws.
4. The last area of concern is long-term strategies. The Board will be central in this
phase of the plan in providing strong leadership.
Achievements to Date
The National Recording Preservation Act of 2000 has resulted in the
achievement of a few primary goals. The Registry, Board, and Foundation are in place.
The Board has been instrumental in publishing several publications based on studies
and roundtable discussions, including the ARSC Guide to Audio Preservation (2015).
The $200 million dollar Packard Campus facility dedicated to audio-visual conservation
was established in Culpeper, Virginia in 2007 (Nelson-Strauss et al., 2012). The
ambitious video program has, unfortunately, not come to fruition as of this writing.
Limitations
Implementing the goals of the National Recording Preservation Plan will continue
to be a protracted process. The National Recording Preservation Board has been
tasked with a colossal undertaking that requires funding, consensus among experts in

5

the field, cooperation from large and small institutions, a highly specialized labor force,
and time. Given that the National Recording Preservation Board is tasked to meet only
annually, and took thirteen years to produce a plan for the future, it can be predicted
that the full recommendations will fail to take hold until well into the future. The board
has made an encouraging, while gradual, start. Unfortunately, this task requires
increased urgency due to the physical formats and playback devices deteriorating
rapidly over time, which could prevent the program content to be captured and migrated,
and perhaps lost forever.
Opportunities for Independent Audio Engineers
According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the job growth for sound engineering
technicians between 2016 and 2026 is projected at 1,100 new jobs, or 6% growth (U.S.
Department of Labor, 2018). New job opportunities in the field appear to be scarce for
sound technicians, therefore the trained audio engineers may look to careers in which
they are self-employed. The question remains as to what the incentive might be for a
freelance audio engineer to participate in this preservation work. The work demands a
high level of expertise; it is time-consuming and requires expensive materials and
equipment with high operation costs. Playback equipment costs are often governed by
the whims of the consumer market, as evidenced by the current inflated cost of reel-toreel tape machines. Audiophiles are embracing reel-to-reel tape and are consequently
snatching up vintage professional tape machines at a cost of $10,000.00 and up,
inflating the cost of the machines due to high demand (Butterworth, 2017). In addition

6

to this financial hurtle, the engineer must invest time and money into research,
education and training.
When charging market rate for archiving work, the job may become cost
prohibitive to many small and large collectors alike, and the engineer can easily lose a
bid. Freelance audio engineers, non-specialists and small studios may quickly find the
business of audio preservation to be an unsustainable business model. However, with
the proper standards in place along with free access to guidelines and training, access
to playback and recording hardware/software, and infrastructure, perhaps the
independent engineer may offer an important contribution to the critical task of audio
preservation and archiving. This would demand partnerships with public libraries,
educational institutions and professional organizations. The freelance audio labor force
may be an untapped resource within the National Recording Preservation Plan.
Audio Preservation Education Programs
A map to successfully archive recordings will include education for audio
engineers. Highly skilled preservation engineers work throughout the U.S., but there
remains no authoritative manual directing audio engineers on proper methods of
preservation for each given format. A number of preservation guidelines that are
accessible to the general public are very useful, but they are not comprehensive and do
not replace the guidance offered by professionals in the field. The Library of Congress
website that is dedicated to the National Recording Preservation Plan provides a list of
university programs under Tools & Resources where only five university programs are
listed. Given the scarcity and barriers to entry of related university programs, the field is

7

in need of profound solutions to disseminate the information and skills necessary to
participate in audio preservation.
Diversity of Source Media
There is a tremendous diversity of source media among the items in need of
digitizing and archiving. Many of the media types are obsolete, have deteriorated to the
point that they are unplayable, or the playback machines are no longer functional.
Audio preservation experts have devised new ways of transferring this obsolete media.
For example, it is advised in the ARSC Guide to Audio Preservation that rare or
important wax cylinders are not played on historical equipment. Similarly, as
Dictaphone belts become more brittle and present with creases, they cannot be played
on historical equipment that bends them between two rollers, so modified playback
devices are being used to replay the content (Chamoux, 2018).
Below is a table of vintage physical media, demonstrating the variety of some
media utilized over time. This does not include modern digital media formats, which are
also susceptible to damage and loss.

8

Table I.1 Compiled table of audio recording media (Hess, 2006) (Library of Congress)

9

According to the 2010 report from the National Recording Preservation Board,
90% of the media in small collections are on cassette tapes (Bamberger & Brylawski,
2010). Cassette tapes were manufactured from 1962 – present, and are subject to the
same deterioration that can be seen in reel-to-reel tapes. As they are polyester-based,
loss of tape lubrication and binder hydrolysis, or sticky shed syndrome, can present in
tapes that have been stored in heat or humidity. Due to their portable nature, the tapes
are often subjected to excessive heat and debris, as they are often stored in cars.
Tapes in these climate conditions can become unplayable as well as damage the
playback machine (Brylawski et al., 2015). Restoration presents a special challenge, as
the thickness of the tapes makes them more fragile than reel-to-reel tapes and the
proven damage mitigation techniques cannot be used on cassettes (Hess, 2006).
Grant Funding
Both public and private collections will require funding to archive their recordings.
The 2010 report on the State of Recorded Sound examines the problems with funding
and advocacy.
Funding and advocacy for recorded sound preservation is decentralized
and inadequate. Recorded sound preservation has been
declared a national objective; however, without greater support as
a matter of public policy, this objective will not be realized (Bamberger &
Brylawski, 2010, p. 4).
The report notes that the additional considerations of copyright ownership and legal
access to the audio recordings complicate the matter of grant funding. Requests for

10

funding for recording preservation will compete with preservation of different media
absent of this additional obstacle.

11

CHAPTER II
METHODS
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to ascertain the feasibility of an independent audio
engineer to migrate an analog tape recording to a digital copy for the purpose of
preserving the recorded content.
Overview
To conduct the study, a vintage ½ inch reel-to-reel tape was obtained from a
private collector. The tape contains what is believed to be a second or third-generation
transfer of an early Otis Redding recording session. Documentation indicates the
content is a session of The Shooters from July 21, 1960 recorded at Gold Star
Recording Studios. The original program content occupied a ¼ inch reel-to-reel tape
and was migrated as a mix to the ½ inch reel-to-reel tape in 1985.
Three best practices documents were consulted while migrating the recording,
including Capturing Analog Sound for Digital Preservation: Report of a Roundtable
Discussion of Best Practices for Transferring Analog Discs and Tapes from the National
Recording Preservation Board published in 2006, the ARSC Guide to Audio
Preservation from May 2015, and the IASA Guidelines on the Production and
Preservation of Digital Audio Objects (web edition) from 2009. Additionally, the
engineer who transferred the original content to the ½ inch tape was consulted before,
during, and after the migration to digital format.

12

½ Inch Reel-to-Reel Magnetic Tape to Digital
Reel-to-reel, or open reel, magnetic tape is a format that was manufactured from
1935 to the present. This layer-based format is subject to deterioration that arises from
age, unfavorable storage conditions and mishandling. The layers include a flexible
substrate or base film (paper, cellulose acetate, or PET, Polyethylene terephthalate aka
Mylar/Polyester/Tenzar), fine ferromagnetic particles (oxide) suspended in a binder that
includes lubrication. Some tapes are also produced with a back coating (Hess, 2006).
Each layer can present a unique point of failure for degradation of the medium. There
have been a wide variety of chemical formulations used in the production of magnetic
tape over the course of 80 years, making the task of identifying the exact type of tape
difficult. Properties of each chemical formulation have different effects over time, and
under certain conditions, which leaves preservationists in a position where they must
make educated, but uncertain decisions about how to care for the tape that is in their
custody.
Signs of Degradation
Vintage reel-to-reel tapes, even when stored in ideal conditions, can present
signs of degradation. Common problems that are observed in magnetic tape are
cupping, binder hydrolysis (or sticky shed syndrome/SSS), and vinegar syndrome in
acetate tape. In the case of cupping, the binder layer of magnetic tape may shrink at a
different rate than the base of the tape (Brylawski et al., 2015). Identifying sticky shed
syndrome can be difficult until the tape is played back, as the symptoms may not
present with the naked eye. If the tape is squealing, presenting signs of stiction (tape

13

sticks to heads and guides on the playback machine) and/or leaves a gummy deposit on
the machine, chances are likely that the tape is suffering from SSS.

Figure 2.1 Gummy deposit accumulated on heads after playing a tape with SSS.

14

Figure 2.2 Residue from cleaning heads on tape machine after playing a tape with SSS.
Mechanical damage can occur when a tape is stored with a loose or uneven
tension pack, or on a hub without flanges or hold down tape to protect it from unwinding
and other physical harm. Wrinkles can imprint on the tape causing dropouts as the
wrinkled parts of the tape pass unevenly over the reproduce head on the tape machine.
Multiple layers of the tape can inherit the wrinkles if the deformed part of the tape is
wound within the tape pack and stored that way.

15

Figure 2.3 Example of wrinkled 2-inch tape submitted for migration to digital format.
Wrinking can occur from mishandling and not properly winding the tape. This tape also
suffers from SSS.
A cultivated vocabulary is crucial to the learning process. This allows for more
targeted research and clear communication with mentors and advisors. Any audio
engineer who is inexperienced in restoration and archiving would be advised to explore
vocabulary in glossaries, professional journals and among colleagues. One example of
a robust list of terms and definitions to describe tape condition is available on the IASA
website in the publication IASA Cataloguing Rules (IASA Editorial Group, 1999), and
includes:
•

Backcoat shedding

•

Bleeding

•

Blocking

16

•

Brittleness

•

Cinching

•

Cupping

•

Curvature

•

Damaged reel (or cassette or cartridge casing)

•

Dust or Dirt (Dirty/Oily)

•

Edge damage

•

Embossing

•

Gummy deposit

•

Hydrolysis

•

Interlayer adhesion

•

Kink

•

Leafing

•

Loose wind

•

Magnetic coating lift

•

Magnetic coating shedding

•

Magnetic losses

•

Manufacturing surface defect

•

Mould (Mouldy)

•

Scouring

•

Splice

•

Splice, dry (Dry splice)

17

•

Spoking

•

Squealing

•

Stiction

•

Stretch

•

Vinegar Syndrome

•

Windowing (Windows)

•

Wrinkle

Mitigation
Some of the symptoms of damage can be mitigated in order to bring the tape to a
state in which it can be played back. Mechanical damage, such as wrinkling, may be
repaired by cutting off the damaged section and using splicing tape to replace it with
acid-free paper leader tape, providing there is no program content on the wrinkled
section.
Hydrolysis (moisture absorption) is the offender that can cause sticky shed
syndrome. Magnetic particles shed and debris begins to build up on the tape machine,
making playback impossible as both the tape and the machine become damaged. There
are a variety of options for repairing PET tapes suffering from sticky shed syndrome
(SSS, also known as binder hydrolysis and a sub-category of sticky binder syndrome)
that are suggested in the NRPB roundtable discussion, ARSC guide and IASA
guidelines including environmental chambers and desiccants (substance that absorbs
moisture from the air), and baking (incubation). All three guides warn against incubation
unless it is a last resort and done for preservation transfers only. Incubation is a

18

remedy for polyester based tapes only. Acetate tapes must be treated differently; they
are likely to be damaged by the baking process. Mitigation for acetate tapes is a subject
in need of further research, as there is little mention of procedures for acetate-backed
tapes in any of the guidelines. The ARSC guide states that “baking should be done in
laboratory-grade ovens by trained professionals” and only with metal flanges, not plastic
(Brylawski et al., 2015, p.60). However, the 1993 patent that describes the process
suggests that the advantage is that it can be practiced with the use of a standard
portable consumer convection oven (Medeiros et al.,1993).
While the NRPB, ARSC and IASA recommend treating SSS with the less
destructive use of desiccants and environmental chambers, these methods are time
consuming, as they must be done over the course of several months. It is reported that
desiccants are not always effective. Therefore, incubation offers expediency that many
restoration projects require.
According to Richard Hess, PET tapes that are expected to suffer from sticky
shed syndrome and respond well to incubation include:
•

Pre-1990 Agfa PEM 468 and PEM 469

•

Ampex/Quantegy 406, 407, 456, 457

•

Early 1980s Audiotape/Capitol: Q15

•

Scotch/3M: 226, 227, 806, 807, 808, 809

PET tapes that do not respond to incubation are:
•

Scotch/3M 175

•

Sony PR-150

19

•

Melody 169

•

Pyral tapes

•

Any cassette that squeals (Hess, 2006, p. 11-12).

These lists are not comprehensive, but do offer some insight on the more common
tapes that might emerge in migrating content in the course of an audio engineer’s
career.
The NRPB, ARSC and IASA guidelines present only a birds-eye view of
mitigation processes, therefore detailed instructions to repair damaged media for
playback must be researched before proceeding with any process. US Patent
5,236,790 sets forth basic guidelines for incubation and can be referenced as a starting
point for restoration from SSS. The 1993 patent is assigned to Ampex Systems
Corporation and suggests that typical tape restoration incubation temperature is 54°C
(or 129.2°F) for 16 hours at ambient humidity.
Alternately, the IASA guidelines suggest incubation at 50°C (122°F) for 8-12
hours at 0% humidity. Upon further searches, the incubation (baking) procedures
provided in anecdotal resources such as the Tangible Technology website and the
ARSClistserv range from 120°F to 145°F with incubation times anywhere from 1 hour to
24 hours or more. It appears that incubation times and temperatures that are effective
vary and depend on the tape composition and condition, how many tapes are being
baked at once, the size of the tape and other factors. Because there is no standard
agreement between published resources, the procedures appear to be largely
experimental.

20

As a practical guide, the instructions from Eddie Ciletti on his Tangible
Technology website have been an effective resource for incubation, with suggestions on
the exact consumer-level dehydrator that can be used as opposed to a convection oven
or hair dryer. The Ciletti guide makes note of checking for magnetic fields on the
incubation device so as not to bring about damage to the magnetic particles on the tape,
and also offers time and temperature suggestions for various tape sizes (Ciletti, 2011).
The guide instructs the user to flip the tape every half hour of incubation. The author
has consulted this guide to restore dozens of vintage PET tapes and has found that the
suggestions that are on the conservative side of temperatures and times have been
effective for successful playback.
Challenges
While restoration is possible in many cases of PET based tapes, there are
circumstances when the media cannot be restored to allow for playback. Damaged
tape with paper or acetate base can present special challenges that may require
specialized equipment or materials that may be considered too difficult or expensive to
acquire. These restorations may also demand techniques that are too risky or advanced
for an engineer new to audio archiving. In this circumstance, the engineer must
consider whether s/he has the resources to properly complete the transfer.
The quality and condition of the playback machine and recording rig must be
considered to meet basic recommendations for archival quality transfers, and to meet
the needs of the media. Reel to reel tape offers a variable format with different playback
speeds, track numbers and track configurations. Two consumer tapes that were

21

considered for the study contain descriptions of the track. The Fantasia tape alerts the
user “This tape recording contains two automatic reversing signals, one at end of side A
program, the other at the end of side B. These program reversing signals function only
with tape recorders which are equipped with Ampex-style reversing circuitry.”

Figure 2.4 Back of tape box for commercially released recording.
Another example of an alternate tape track configuration is below. The printed
instructions on the box are “All Radio Yesteryear tapes are recorded at ½ track to insure
compatibility with all machines. To play this tape on a ¼ track recorder, turn the right
channel playback volume control to ‘off’”.

22

Figure 2.5 Front of tape box for commercially released 3¾ IPS tape.
The archiving process can be much less complicated when the documentation
for the tape is provided with the tape itself. However, in many cases, there is little or no
documentation and the tapes themselves must be identified by a best guess. Absent of
documentation, tape track configuration can be viewed with a magnetic viewer. (Bailey,
2012). It is unlikely that a studio or freelance engineer would have a need for this
device unless their work involves archiving on a regular basis. The cost of a magnetic
viewer is between $99 and $400. If the content on the tape is unknown, and the tape
appears to be in good condition, the engineer may attempt to play the tape, but
immediately stop if the playback presents any signs of degradation: stiction, shedding,
23

squealing or any other symptom that does not occur in normal operation. At that point,
the engineer must decide if and how the tape will be restored for playback.
The playback machine must be clean and well-maintained, the A/D converters
should be high-quality and capable of a minimum of 96 kHz sample rate and 24 bit
depth. The signal path should be as clear as possible to achieve transparency in order
to faithfully capture the content and meet standards put in place by the various
guidelines.
Archiving Procedure
The study examines the procedures involved in migrating analog audio to a
digital format. The migration process began with research and consultation through
referencing guidelines and seeking expert counsel. Every attempt was made to follow
best practices, given real-world time and budget constraints. Decisions were made
regarding which guideline to follow at any given step, and how to proceed.
The importance of this section is to demonstrate the level of ease or challenge a
typical independent audio engineer would encounter in correctly digitizing and archiving
a vintage recording.
Objective
The NRPB defines the objective of migrating audio as capturing “complex analog
signals with as much transparency to the original as practical” (National Recording
Preservation Board, 2006, p.34). Given that stipulation, the tape selected for this study
will inherently not satisfy the criteria, as it is not a first generation recording, and it is
known that the transfer in 1985 introduced at least one device into the recording chain.

24

Additionally, the engineer who completed the transfer believes that he may have
transferred the ¼ inch tape to 2-inch tape and then back to the ½ inch tape, making the
tape in the study a third generation transfer. However, criteria can be set for this tape,
as the standards for migration can be applied to this specific transfer. The content of
the final digital object will not be true to the original recording, but it can be as true as
possible to the content in its current state.
Guidelines
Three published, and publically accessible, guides were selected to use as a
reference during the migration process: The National Recording Preservation Board
Capturing Analog Sound for Digital Preservation: Report of a Roundtable Discussion of
Best Practices for Transferring Analog Discs and Tapes (National Recording
Preservation Board, 2006), ARSC Guide to Audio Preservation (Brylawski et al., 2015),
and Guidelines on the Production and Preservation of Digital Audio Objects (IASA
Technical Committee, 2009). These guides offer a broad view and some details into the
archiving process. Additional resources were consulted, including publications, websites
and experts in the field. Selected topics from these guidelines are compared in the
following table.

25

Table II.1 Guide comparison chart, page 1.

26

Table II.2 Guide comparison chart, page 2.

27

Process
The ARSC Guide indicates that the process of archiving content from one
physical medium to another is expected to take three times the run time of the content.
These steps, according to the guidelines, include:
•

Audio Object Inspection

•

Alignment of Playback Equipment

•

Signal Extraction

•

Quality Control

•

Embedding of Metadata

•

Checksum Calculation

•

Ingest Into Long-Term Storage
In order to estimate the length of time needed for the study, the ½ inch tape

stored on a 10½ inch reel was examined and found to be somewhat less than 2500 feet
in length at a speed of presumably 30 IPS. The manufacturer provided markings
describing the length of tape on the tape reel, and the engineer inscribed the speed on
the tape storage box; it should be noted that speed could not be confirmed until the
initial audition playback. Using a tape run time chart, the run time was determined to be
less than 15 minutes, which established the archiving time to be approximately 45
minutes.
Audio Object Inspection. The inspection process is an information-gathering
exercise, which can include everything from the content on the tape to the properties of
the media itself. During the initial inspection on March 31, 2018, the tape was examined

28

in its box at Colorado Sound Studios. The only information on the box included an
inscribed “30 IPS”, with no additional tracking sheets or further information. When
visually inspected, the tape appeared to be in good condition with no visible signs of
mechanical damage. The engineer who provided the tape for the study was present,
and was consulted on the nature of the recording. He also advised throughout, and
contributed to the migration process. The Ampex ATR-104 tape machine operation was
new to the author and supervision was necessary to operate it effectively.
The information gathered from the engineer’s recollection is that the tape was
likely still in the original box and on the original reel, so it was presumed that the tape
was a Scotch 3M 226. The content was recorded from a ¼ inch reel-to-reel two track
binaural tape recording. The engineer could not recall the exact year, but remembered
the album he was working on that was released in the same year, which was Chuck
Pyle’s Drifters Wind. Given that information, it was determined that the content was
recorded onto the ½ inch tape in 1985. This information led to the detail that the signal
would have been sent through the console that was in the studio in 1985, which was a
Trident TSM. The engineer believed that it was likely that the content was mixed
through the Trident TSM onto a 2-inch tape. Then it would have been bounced in stereo
onto the ½ inch tape presented for the study.
Since there was no documentation with the tape box to verify that the content
was what was believed to be on the tape, and to determine whether the tape was
suffering from SSS (as expected, based on the fact that it is a Scotch 3M 226 tape), the
decision was made to attempt to play it.

29

The tape machine used for playback is the precise machine that was used in
1985 to transfer the content to the ½ inch tape. It is an Ampex ATR-104. The machine
was prepared by removing the head stock and cleaning with 99% isopropyl alcohol on
cotton swabs and demagnetized with a degausser. The machine was then calibrated
with MRL reproducer alignment tape: 0dB, 30 IPS, AES (IEC2) Equalization, 250
nWb/m ref. fluxivity; for +6 dB, it was set to -3dB.

Figure 2.6 MRL calibration tape.
After the machine was calibrated, the heads, guides and tension arms were
cleaned with 99% isopropyl alcohol and cotton swabs one more time before playback.
As the audition playback began, it was determined that the content on the tape was the
content that was expected. However, the tape quickly showed signs of SSS with stiction
causing the tape to slow the machine and tension arms to be put under stress. The
playback was stopped and the tape was shuttle wound tails out for restoration.
Although it is advised to wind vintage tapes in play speed for a library wind with a flat
tape pack even tension throughout, shuttle wind on the Ampex ATR-104 is a
compromise between Play and Fast Forward or Rewind. Time restrictions demanded a
30

faster solution than playback. The machine was cleaned again, and found to have
deposits on the heads, as is common with SSS. The time involved in the entire process
of testing the tape was approximately 50 minutes.
Because the tape was exhibiting signs of SSS, and the project needed to be
completed promptly, the decision was made to incubate the tape. More conservative
solutions would have taken too long to complete in the timeframe allotted for the project.
An important test to ensure that the tape is a candidate for incubation is to shine light
from behind the tape with something behind the tape to view a shadow (see figures
below). The objective is to determine the composition of the base of the tape. If the
tape is PET based, it will be opaque. This will indicate that it is safe to bake. If the tape
is acetate based, it will be transparent and cannot be baked without damaging the tape
and must be treated differently.

Figure 2.7 PET based tape is opaque, and light will not pass through. This test
determined that this tape is safe to bake for restoration.

31

Figure 2.8 Acetate based tape is transparent, as a shadow is visible when illuminated
from behind. This tape cannot be baked for restoration without damage to the tape.
Restoration. The steps from the ARSC guidelines that suggest the time it takes
to complete a migration do not include restoration, though many media items will require
restoration prior to capturing the signal. The incubation process on this ½ inch tape was
completed on April 5, 2018 at Colorado Sound Studios. Equipment used included a
NESCO American Harvest 500 watt dehydrator with a variable thermostat and modified
trays, a domestic grill thermometer to monitor the dehydrator’s internal temperature and
an iPhone as a timer.

32

Figure 2.9 Incubator rig.
An arbitrary incubation temperature and time were selected based on consulting
the guides, the patent, advisors, and from personal experience. Since the tape was
sticky and shedding only to a minor degree, but not squealing or leaving excessive
deposits, it was determined that a 1½ hour bake at 130°F would be attempted.
Recommendations for much longer times were disregarded, as the tape could be
returned to incubate again should the first incubation fail to produce desired results.

33

Figure 2.10 Domestic dehydrator used for tape incubation.

Figure 2.11 Thermometer placed in center of dehydrator to monitor temperature.

34

Figure 2.12 Thermostat set to just above 125°F to reach a temperature of 130°F.

Figure 2.13 Monitoring time and temperature with domestic thermometer and iPhone.

35

The dehydrator was first pre-heated while empty, with the thermostat set to
approximately 130°F while monitoring the temperature. It was discovered that the the
thermostat on the dehydrator was alarmingly inaccurate, and needed to be adjusted
down at least 5°F to achieve the correct temperature. The tape was not inserted until
the temperature was accurate.
The tape was placed on the second to the bottom ring of the dehydrator to keep it
farther from the dehydrator motor and fan and still allow air flow. The tape was flipped
at 30 minutes, 30 minutes, 15 minutes and removed after the final 15 minutes, enabling
even incubation time on each side of the tape. The temperature monitor indicated that
each time the lid was lifted to flip the tape, the internal temperature dropped
approximately 8°F and would take about one minute to get back up to temperature after
the lid was closed again. After one hour of operation with the thermostat set at the
same level, the temperature increased to 134°F, and the thermostat was adjusted down
to achieve a temperature closer to 130°F. The inconsistency in the dehydrator
temperature demands that any incubation that is not in a laboratory-grade oven be
closely monitored. Further study regarding temperature inconsistencies in domestic
dehydrators would be useful, as well as further study on the acceptable amount of
temperature fluctuations in incubation without further compromising the media.
Upon completion of the process at approximately 6:30 pm, the dehydrator was
opened and the tape was left to cool overnight to prepare for the transfer session the
next morning. According to guides, in ideal conditions incubated tapes should be
cooled to the ambient temperature of the room where the transfer will take place. They

36

should not be played back on tape machines until they have cooled.

Figure 2.14 Tape left to cool. A useful modification to the dehydrator is when plastic
grills are carefully cut out from every other ring in order to accommodate 2 inch tape
formats.
Results of the incubation would not be revealed until the next morning, as there
are no visual indicators of a successful incubation. The incubation process took
approximately 4 hours from unpacking equipment to packing it back up and leaving the
tape to rest for the night.
Alignment of Playback Equipment. According to the ARSC guidelines, step
two begins with alignment of the playback equipment. For this study, it is step three,
and took place at 7:30 am on April 6, 2018. The Ampex ATR-140 was cleaned and
aligned in exactly the same fashion that it was done during the inspection phase. The
tape head stack was removed, cleaned and demagnetized and then replaced in
preparation for the calibration tape. The machine was calibrated with MRL reproducer

37

alignment tape, 0dB, 30 IPS, AES (IEC2) Equalization, 250 nWb/m ref. fluxivity. The
machine was calibrated at 1kHz on Repro Gain to -3dB on VU meters, 10kHz on Repro
EQ Hi Speed Hi Freq to -3dB on VU meters, 16kHz it was observed that VU meters
dropped 1dB (but there is no adjustment available), and 100Hz Repro EQ Hi Speed Low
Freq to -3dB on VU meters. This is the precise adjustment that was done on the
machine in 1985, given that the engineer from the original session was present,
advising and contributing to this session.
The heads, guides and tension arms were cleaned with 99% isopropyl alcohol on
cotton swabs before the tape was prepared for transfer.
Signal Extraction. Consideration in the signal extraction phase includes
decisions regarding the media and format to migrate the program content to, creating a
transparent signal path for optimal reproduction, optimal levels, and preparing for
failures. Ideally, when digitizing analog content that is on a compromised medium, it is
best to transfer to a RAID system so that multiple copies can be captured at once in
case of failure. The NRPB and IASA agree that the digital standards for archival
preservation are 96 kHz sample rate and 24 bit depth BWF.wav files. The organizations
arrived at this decision after much debate when considering interoperability, simplicity,
and ubiquity of linear Pulse Code Modulation (IASA Technical Committee, 2009). While
they recognize that alternatives should be explored, the current standard is set for now.
With these considerations in mind, it was decided that the signal would pass from
the tape machine, through a patch bay and patched directly into input 1-2 in the DAW,
Avid Pro Tools HDX version 12. While the ideal would be to remove the patch bay from

38

the signal chain, it was not practical to do so. Storage was on a G-Drive external hard
drive with thunderbolt connector with a transfer rate of 165 MBps and spindle speed of
7200 rpm (G-Technology).
Additional specifications for this session include the following:
Mac Pro 6-Core Intel Xeon E5/3.5 GHz Processor/16GB RAM
Avid Pro Tools HDX Version 12
Avid Pro Tools HD I/O
Metering with iZotope Insight as plugin on the Master Fader
The Pro Tools session was set up for 96 kHz sample rate and 24 bit depth with a BWF
.wav file. While the author considered the full guidelines, several concessions were
made in the decisions based on time considerations, accessibility and experience.
The initial playback test signals appeared to be within an acceptable level, with
Peak Levels L at -3dBFS and R at -2.7dBFS. The guidelines call for “as close to
0dBFS” Peak Levels as possible, which is somewhat vague for a non-specialist to
interpret. Without knowing the content material on the entire tape, and given that it is
best to play the tape back only once if possible, the levels were left as is, even if slightly
lower than optimal to account for higher levels in the content later on the tape. The tape
was shuttle rewound, and the signal extraction began.
A technical complication arose during the recording of the first song. There was
a buffer size error that necessitated stopping and reviewing the session setup.

39

Figure 2.15 CPU failure during the first playback.
The message is uncommon in this specific system at Colorado Sound Studios,
so the system setup was reviewed and found to be normal.

40

Figure 2.16 Setup verification.
The tape was rewound a third time, and replay began again in order to continue
capturing the content. The remaining session went according to plan. The tape was
stopped between each of the three songs, and the session was saved. The Peak Level
on the all three songs remained close to, but below, 0dBFS. The session was saved a
final time, the studio was returned to normal and the hard drive was retrieved when the
session ended at 8:33 am. The program content run time including three songs, was
found to be 9 minutes 28 seconds. The transfer session took slightly more than 1 hour.
Quality Control. The quality control begins during the session while monitoring
for quality sound and any anomalies. The metering is important in order to make certain
that peak levels stay below 0dB full scale, but close to it, since the capture for archival

41

purposes will not undergo any further mastering. The meter used was the iZotope
Insight plugin on the master track in Pro Tools.

Figure 2.17 Metering with iZotope Insight.
The recorded content was reviewed by listening to the full program material in
Studio B at Colorado Sound Studios, and found to be complete with no dropouts.
Results of the metering were logged:
Song 1: Getting Hip
Peak L: -2.2dBFS, Peak R -2.2dBFS; Integrated LUFS -15.2; LU 4.3
Song 2: She’s Allright
Peak L: -3.1dBFS, Peak R -2.7dBFS; Integrated LUFS -15.7; LU 4.7
Song 3: Gamalama
Peak L: -1.5dBFS, Peak R -2.5dBFS; Integrated LUFS -13.9; LU 4.1
Though the guides leave some interpretation for optimal peak levels, it is evident that
the guidelines do specify to stay below 0dBFS, which was accomplished. The files were
42

played from within Pro Tools, and as a .wav file in the Mac OS Preview to verify that the
files were not corrupted. Additional quality control was not conducted beyond these
tests.
Embedding of Metadata. This specific project does not necessitate embedding
of metadata, as the content will not be released to the public and is not part of a library
collection. However, metadata options were explored regarding the RIN (Recording
Information Notification) standard developed by DDEX. The Soundways RIN-M plugin
is free of charge and compatible with Pro Tools. It allows the metadata of a recording
session, from song title, to performer, to engineer, ISRC codes and more to be logged in
a .rin file that is sent upstream to any other production house that works on the project.
Presumably, the .rin file would stay with the song files. While this plugin is useful for the
music industry, it does not appear to be a solution for archiving purposes, as the fields
may not offer what is needed for preservation files. Metadata suggestions for large
collections or libraries are available in the ARSC Guide. There are links to free file
management solutions available on the Library of Congress website, as well.
If the metadata was to be captured for this project, it would include information
about the content, with song titles, date, performers, studio where it was originally
recorded, any information available from the tracking sheets, the media, speed and
track configuration from the original media, then the same information for the ½ inch
tape that was used in the study, including condition and restoration activities. The
recommendation is to include all information available to future-proof the content.
Some examples of the metadata that accompanies professionally

43

produced media are tracking sheets and tracking detail reports. Television tracking
reports contain different information than tracking sheets for music.

Figure 2.18 Example of a tracking detail report from broadcast television.

Figure 2.19 Tracking sheet from a recording session.

44

Details on the content of the recording are not the only metadata to be stored
with digital objects. The ARSC Guide outlines the metadata to be included as inventory
of content and its storage location, administrative metadata, transformative metadata
and log events, technical and descriptive metadata, and preservation metadata. This
guide is geared toward library use and larger collections, but these guidelines, or parts
of the guidelines, might be useful for an individual as well.
Checksum Calculation. A checksum calculation is a process to test data
integrity. The decision was made to disregard this step for the purpose this study.
Ingest into Long-Term Storage. Modern digital objects are often more fragile
than the media that the content has migrated from for the purpose of preservation.
Digital files must be actively managed as files can be corrupted, erased, storage
devices damaged, and digital formats can become obsolete (Brylawski et al., 2015).
Large organizations have robust digital storage systems in place to manage their
collections. However, individuals and small organizations must take special care to
store files in the safest way possible. The ARSC Guide suggests making several copies
of the same set of files to store in different geographic locations. For this study, the files
were copied from the original hard drive at the studio to a second external hard drive
that is stored in a different location, and a third copy stored in the cloud in Dropbox.

45

CHAPTER III
RESULTS
The objective of the transfer was to migrate the analog signal on the ½ inch tape
to an accepted digital format for archiving with as much transparency as possible.
Absent of the ability to perform tests on the content from original tape that was suffering
from SSS, there is no way to measure the transparency of the transfer. The content
could not be migrated until the tape was restored to playable condition, and it is believed
that incubation can change the character of the original media. However, the conditions
were as favorable as possible, with access to the same tape machine that the content
was recorded on as well as contributions and advice from the engineer who recorded
the content onto the ½ inch tape in the study. The signal path was considered, and kept
as transparent as reasonable. The content on the tape was captured with acceptable
levels.
The program content run time is 9 minutes 28 seconds. Based on the run time,
according to the ARSC guide, the entire migration process should have taken a little
over 28 minutes to accomplish. This study required 7 hours 50 minutes and included
testing, restoration, and the remaining steps in migration. This time does not account
for many hours of research necessary to learn vocabulary and grasp a deeper
understanding of the analog tape medium. The contrast between the expected time and
actual time to complete the transfer demonstrates the level of difficulty a non-specialist
can encounter while learning the process.

46

It was discovered that the three guides that were consulted were helpful, but not
adequate as practical guides to transfer the recording for a non-specialist. It was
necessary to research further and seek help from experts in order to learn to calibrate
and use the unfamiliar tape machine. While the objective was achieved, it would not
have been possible without consulting supplementary publications and experts in the
field.

47

CHAPTER IV
CONCLUSION
The study was to ascertain the feasibility of an independent audio engineer to be
able to migrate an analog tape recording to a digital copy for the purpose of preserving
the recorded content. While the migration from analog to an accepted digital format was
achieved, a non-specialist could not have easily completed the project, in isolation, with
written guides as the sole resource for information and training.
The guides were found to be excellent resources on background information and
selected granular elements, but did not include comprehensive details in most cases.
The guides are freely accessible to the public, providing that Internet service is
available. In electronic form, the guides were searchable and easily readable.
However, some of the information and descriptions were ambiguous and need further
definition. For example, specifications for an “acceptable level of introduced altered
signal” are included but not defined. What is “acceptable” in this instance? What
criteria would be used to define “acceptable”? The guideline for Peak Level as close to
0dBFS without going over is not specific. Is the target peak level at -3dBFS close
enough, or -5dBFS? This should be defined within a range for clarity. These
frustrations inspired searching for answers from different resources.
The most helpful supplemental guidance was found to be consulting with a
professional expert, reading publications from the Audio Engineering Society (AES), and
the ARSC listserv. These resources are less accessible, as access to the AES
publications requires membership or access to a library that subscribes to the

48

publications. The ARSC listserv is accessible with membership to the organization and
a request for permission to participate. Personal access to experts in the field can be
difficult if relationships have not been cultivated. Most successful professionals have
limited time and would need to consider whether they can afford to take the time to
mentor someone.
A great deal of preparation is required in order to develop the specialized skills
needed for audio preservation and archiving. Beyond consulting the industry guidelines,
the steps that can better prepare a non-specialist for this undertaking include:
•

Learn the Vocabulary

•

Read the Manual

•

Join Professional Organizations such as AES, ARSC, IASA

•

Find a Mentor/Advisor

•

Participate in Community

The work of audio preservation and archiving is important and rewarding, but it cannot
be done in isolation.
Additional Considerations
Recording preservation does not have the perception of importance of other
challenges that face humanity. For example, when bees vanish due to colony collapse
disorder, the earth will have no food. That thought can elicit enough fear to move
people into action. However, when warned that many thousands, and possibly millions,
of recordings will be destroyed due to age and will be lost forever, there is apathy. The
National Recording Preservation Act was introduced 18 years ago. In that time, only

49

small steps have been achieved in the activity of migrating our most vulnerable media
by comparison to the media that has not been preserved.
Illuminating the value of these recordings and archiving activities for educational
purposes, connection to community, and connection to history from the ground up may
result in a renewed interest in this important work. These aspects of preservation work
could be explored, communicated and prioritized. Limiting the archiving process to only
specialists results in a lost opportunity to connect young people, students, and nonspecialists to this rewarding work. Partnerships could be explored with local library
programs where students participate in preservation; universities with audio programs
have many students who could be a valuable resource. When framed correctly, local
partnerships could offer another solution to create a workforce in the colossal task at
hand.
Final Thoughts
Given the amount of migration that must be accomplished in the time prior to
media deteriorating beyond playability, the independent audio engineer or audio
engineering student could provide an important resource by participating in the
preservation task. However, an incredible level of expertise, experience and guidance
is necessary to do this work. The barrier to entry is high, and for many, there is little
financial reward due to the time commitment and immense amount of overhead.
According to the Library of Congress, it is estimated that 400 years of man-hours would
be required for archiving just their collections.

50

Non-specialists need help to close the information gap, and that could start with
the NRPB re-evaluating the barrier to entry and prioritizing the completion their selfdescribed Priority #1 from the Roundtable Discussion in 2006:
Develop a Web site that identifies the core competencies for audio preservation
engineers. This information could be distributed in video format (National
Recording Preservation Board, 2006, p. 13).
Apprenticeships are preferred, but the number of specialists who could take on
apprentices is not adequate to train the sheer number of people necessary for the work.
If the NRPB and Library of Congress were able to provide a free video training or online
video certification program for non-specialists in each medium, disseminating the
research in an accessible way, perhaps requiring assessments to receive a certificate,
the independent non-specialist would have an incentive to participate. When time is the
enemy, a video training program, rather than academic publications, could provide a
better solution to prepare a workforce. Video training can be far less time-consuming
and more comprehensible for the learner than doing the independent research that is
necessary when referencing guidelines alone. While the publically accessible
guidelines are a tremendous primer, they do not offer the depth of study needed to
actually do the work.
Non-specialists could be encouraged to use media and program content that is
not crucial to preserve in order to practice and fail, and in the process they would gain
the necessary skills to help with this work. When more people are prepared and
qualified to do the work, all stakeholders win.

51

Another option for enlisting assistance in recording preservation would be to
incentivize college-level audio programs to include an archiving component as a
graduation requirement. The feasibility of these solutions should be considered further.