ABSTRACT
DIGITIZATION GUIDELINES FOR STATIC & NON-STATIC (AUDIOVISUAL)
MEDIA: COMPLIANCE & CHALLENGES IN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES
by
Maali Alghnimi
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2018
Under the Supervision of Professor Iris Xie

This doctoral dissertation aims to explore digitization practices at academic libraries in the
United States. It examines adopted digitization guidelines, levels of compliance with these
guidelines, challenges, and solutions. It seeks answers to five research questions in relation to
academic libraries’ compliance with static and non-static (audiovisual) media digitization
guidelines, encountered challenges, and applied solutions. A mixed methods explanatory
research design was adopted for this comparative study. Purposive sampling was applied. The
study sample consisted of 68 subjects from doctoral universities with highest and higher research
activity based on the 2015 classification issued by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of
Higher Education. Quantitative and qualitative data were gathered through three collection
methods: document analysis, electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. Document
analysis was conducted for five sets of digitization guidelines (i.e., ALCTS, BCR’s CDP Digital
Imaging Best Practices Working Group, CARLI, FADGI, and NARA), wherein one (i.e.,
CARLI) consisted of five documents. Open coding was applied to explore themes in qualitative
data collected by the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews. The Wilcoxon

ii

Signed Ranks Test was applied to examine differences between digitization of static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media regarding challenges, levels of compliance, availability, and
usefulness. The Paired Samples Test was applied only for sets of quantitative data that have
normal distribution. Findings revealed differences in the adoption of digitization guidelines for
digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Consistency, Standardization, and
Sustainability was the most frequent type of reason for compliance with digitization guidelines
adopted for static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Planning and Workflow was the most
frequent type of reason for not complying with digitization guidelines adopted for static media,
whereas Hardware was the most frequent type of reason for not complying with digitization
guidelines for non-static (audiovisual) media. Statistical analyses revealed no significant
differences in levels of compliance, availability, and usefulness between static and non-static
(audiovisual) media among ALCTS, consortium/consortia, and a university’s own customized
digitization guidelines. Open coding indicated that Funding and Hardware challenges appeared
among the three most frequent types of challenges for static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests revealed significant differences (with the exception of
external funding) between digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media in terms of
budget, digitization equipment/hardware, digitization software, staff digitization skills, and the
need for more professional training. Different types of applied and suggested solutions were
explored, wherein Planning and Workflow and Funding solutions were most frequent among the
applied and suggested solutions for static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The theoretical
implications of this study focus on digitization guidelines and compliance levels with those
guidelines, and digitization challenges. Practical implications aim to provide suggestions to

iii

enhance development of digitization guidelines, and to reduce the effect of challenges faced in
digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media.



Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1. Background
Conway (1996) described our world as a digital one, providing examples such as using
the keyboard as communication tool. Digital information is changing the way people learn,
communicate, and think (Smith, 1999b). “Print is not always the best way to record and
disseminate information” (Arms, 2000, p. 6). “For some materials, digital versions are going to
be all the user needs” (Lesk, 1997, p. 26). This movement toward digital forms of life affects
many aspects, such as dealing with information in many sectors in the community, including
libraries. Libraries are moving towards creating and disseminating information electronically
(Smith, 1999a). Converting materials to digital formats or cooperating with publishers to
facilitate online availability of these materials are activities conducted by university libraries
(Arms, 2000).
Born digital records and those reformatted from analog resources are increasing
significantly (Sanett, 2013). Indeed, today’s world is well-known for rapid changes and
developments. Users need to access information regardless of the geographical or temporal
boundaries. However, the analog format of valuable resources residing on shelves are not serving
the purposes of online access and delivery. In addition, the time poses a threat on these valuable
materials, highlighting the necessity of digitization.
Lee (2001) mentioned that the 1990s represents the decade of digitization, a trend that
continued during the 2000s. Conway (1996) discussed that imaging is not limited to creating a
precise picture of a book or map, instead it involves a transformation of the concept of format.

1

Keneley, Potter, West, Cobbin, and Chang (2016) revealed that multiple asynchronous usages
are applicable through digitization, so both temporal and spatial relationships between records
and researchers are shifted as a result of enhanced access via digitization to archival records. In
other words, digitization has facilitated wider access to rare and special collections (Falk, 2003).
This demonstrates that digitization can serve as a link between the user and the resource, a new
dimension for access to information.
Saving written content is made easier through the use of digital technology, which
increases the availability of more information (Lesk, 1997). Digitization protects fragile
documents by reducing their handling, and can provide the feature of searching for items
electronically (Pandey & Misra, 2014). Preserving valuable materials, as well as improving
preservation and access are the main reasons for digitization (Abd Manaf & Ismail, 2010). For
instance, the content of deteriorating negatives can be captured through digitization in order to
provide future access to them as indicated by Matusiak and Johnston (2014). Consequently, it is
clear that digitization serves access and preservation.
Regarding digitization within a particular context, many studies have focused on
digitization practices at academic libraries (Iwhiwhu & Eyekpegha, 2009; Lampert & Vaughan,
2009; Pandey & Misra, 2014; Potter & Holley, 2010). Academic libraries have valuable
information resources in different scientific domains. A variety of materials are digitized by
university libraries: coins, music, art, children’s literature, other countries’ artifacts, and
newspapers’ archives (Liu, 2004). It is clear that digitization is important nowadays in many
contexts, especially in academic settings such as universities and their libraries, which deal with
researchers and information seekers.

2

This reality results in a need to explore the digitization practices conducted within the
same context by similar types of institutions. In other words, there is a need to explore the
adopted digitization guidelines utilized and best practices identified by academic libraries in the
United States as they undertake digitization projects. Such exploration helps in figuring out
whether or not there exist unified digitization guidelines to understand their designs and provide
suggestions for enhancing them. Also, challenges encountered can be explored, which may
facilitate the recommendation of appropriate solutions to successfully address them. This
doctoral dissertation fills the gap in identifying the adopted digitization best practices,
particularly digitization guidelines adopted by academic libraries in the United States that their
universities were listed in the 2015 classification issued by The Carnegie Classification of
Institutions of Higher Education. The compliance level with these digitization guidelines
reported by the sample examined will also be investigated. In addition, challenges encountered in
the digitization effort will be explored in order to suggest the appropriate solutions.

1.2. Definitions of Key Terms
This section introduces definitions for the key terms used in this doctoral dissertation.
Definitions were derived from different references, including general dictionaries, specialized
dictionaries, glossaries, and specialized literature. This variety of references helps in
understanding how a particular term is interpreted in different contexts. Examples and
explanations can be found in the following sub-sections (Sections 1.2.1.-1.2.5.) in this chapter.

3

1.2.1. Guideline
Even though this section is referring to the term guideline directly, it aims to explain the
terms standard, and best practice(s) as well. Many digitization documents available online use
different terms and expressions such as guidelines and best practices (Section 2.1.4.). Chapter
Four of this doctoral dissertation includes a document analysis for nine digitization documents
(Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.). These documents were issued by different sources (Section
3.3.1.). During the analysis process, it was noticed that the titles of the examined digitization
documents have different terms, such as guidelines and best practices. The term guidelines will
be used for this doctoral dissertation, whereas the terms used by cited literature and researchers
will be introduced as they are. However, clear agreement is important to understand the
meanings of these terms in order to understand the concept of digitization best practices,
guidelines, and standards.
Dictionaries were consulted in order to provide definitions to explain the meaning of
these key terms. The term guideline was defined by Rooney (2004) in Bloomsbury English
Dictionary as “an official recommendation indicating how something should be done or what
sort of action should be taken in a particular circumstance” (p. 827). Specialized dictionaries
provided other definitions for the term guideline(s) as well. For example, Reitz (2004) explained
the term guidelines in the Dictionary for Library and Information Science as “Recommended
procedures for accomplishing a given task or achieving a set of goals and objectives, formulated
by a body with authority to speak on the subject but less binding than the formal standards used
in evaluation and assessment” (p. 325).

4

Moreover, the literature provided different definitions to clarify the meaning of a
particular term for the reader. For instance, Besser (2003) defined standards as “Formal
structures, procedures, and tools designed to promote uniformity and predictability. Typically
developed, adopted, and promoted by large organizations that can advocate for their broad usage.
Data standards enable the exchange of data, while technology standards enable the delivery of
data between systems” (p. 82). Recently, Perrin (2016) described the digitization standard as “a
document created to ensure that items in a particular project meet an established minimum
standard for capture” (p. 66).
Further, the term best practice(s) is defined in different information resources such as
dictionaries. For example, Hornby (2005) explained it in the Oxford Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary of Current English as “a way of doing sth [sic] that is seen as a very good example of
how it should be done and can be copied by other companies or organizations” (p. 133). Also, a
specialized dictionary introduced the same expression based on a specific context, which is
library and information science. Reitz (2004) interpreted best practices in the Dictionary for
Library and Information Science as the following:
In the application of theory to real-life situations, procedures that, when properly applied,
consistently yield superior results and are therefore used as reference points in evaluating
the effectiveness of alternative methods of accomplishing the same task. Best practices
are identified by examining the empirical evidence of success. (p. 66).
Conway (2008) said in his article regarding the best practices to digitize photographs “A
guideline is only as valuable as the extent to which its recommendations are adopted beyond the
organization that make them” (p. 101). However, Druery, McCormack, and Murphy (2013)

5

indicated that there is an absence of a standard meaning for the term best practices among
professionals, who are using this term in spite of its frequency in the literature of library and
information science.
Indeed, identifying explicit definitions for best practices in the context of library and
information science was challenging. Instead, definitions from other contexts were found in
order to represent an almost similar concept. Peters and Heron (1993) indicated that in many
contexts, the term best practice is used to identify strategies that are obviously superior based on
the experts’ points of view. Bretschneider, Marc-Aurele Jr., and Wu (2004) said regarding the
implication of the term best practice that “it is best when compared to any alternative course of
action and that it is a practice designed to achieve some deliberative end” (p. 309). However, in
the context of accounting, Bragg (2013) indicated that any improvement added onto existing
systems is considered a best practice.
It became clear that the expression best practice(s) occurs in various contexts. Although
there is an absence of consensus regarding a single definition, there is general agreement among
all the previously discussed definitions. This lies in considering best practice as the best method,
strategy, or way of doing a particular action. Each definition introduced an explanation fitting a
particular context. After examining the previous definitions, none directly refers to digitization.
It is important to realize that standards and best practices are not the same. Official
standards organizations like ISO (International Standards Organization) and NISO (National
Information Standards Organization) develop standards as explained by Abbas (2010). On the
other hand, both standards developers and community users who use the standards are
responsible for the development of best practices (Abbas, 2010). “If the best practice proves

6

useful within the community or information agency, it may be suggested as an addition or
provision of an existing standard or as the basis for a new standard” (Abbas, 2010, p. 64).
After all, there is a need to develop a precise definition for the term guidelines, which fits
more perfectly to the scope of this doctoral dissertation. For the purpose of this doctoral
dissertation, the expression digitization guidelines is defined as the best recommendations in
regard to the technical specifications and strategies adopted to efficiently digitize various types
of analog items including both static and non-static (audiovisual) media in order to facilitate
access and preservation to the created digital objects in the future. It is obvious that this
developed definition connects between the concepts of digitization and digital preservation. As a
consequence, this definition might be limited in its scope, because it is tailored to the context and
aim of this doctoral dissertation.

1.2.2. Digitization
Rooney (2004) defined the term digitize in Bloomsbury English Dictionary as “to convert
an image, graph, or other data into digital form for processing on a computer” (p. 522); in
addition, the term digitization was mentioned as a derivative word within the same headword.
Specialized dictionaries in the area of library and information science have introduced more
precise definitions based on this particular context since the 20th century. Watters (1992)
explained digitization in the Dictionary of Information Science and Technology as the following:
the process of converting nondigital information to a digital format. In communication
this is the process of converting analog signals to digital signals. In information systems
digitization often refers to the process of converting an image (such as a photograph or
7

map), using some type of scanning device (or digitizer), into digital representation so that
it can be displayed on a screen and/or manipulated. (p. 65).
Furthermore, Pearce-Moses (2005) interpreted the term digitization in A Glossary of Archival
and Records Terminology as “The process of transforming analog material into binary electronic
(digital) form, especially for storage and use in a computer.” (p. 120).
Many researchers in the area of library and information science undertook/expended
considerable efforts to define the term digitization. Various definitions were created during the
intervening years in order to provide clarity. The efforts of Lee (2001), Besser (2003), and
Hughes (2004) provide examples of early trials to define the concept of digitization. Lee (2001)
interpreted digitization as “the conversion of an analog signal or code into a digital signal or
code” (p. 3), while Besser (2003) defined the term digitizing as “The process of deriving digital
objects from analog originals by converting their sampled values to binary code” (p. 72,
emphasis original). Later, Hughes (2004) clarified digitization as “the process by which analogue
content is converted into a sequence of 1s and 0s and put into a binary code to be readable by a
computer” (p. 4).
Definitions of digitization were shaped not only by expert individuals in the field.
Specialized institutions also participated in shaping these definitions. Many institutions are
dealing with digitization, making it necessary to clarify the meaning of the term. The Institute of
Museum and Library Services (2006) defined digitization as “the process of converting, creating,
and maintaining books, art works, historical documents, photos, journals, etc., in electronic
representation so they can be viewed via computer and other devices” (p. 13).

8

Other researchers also came up with many definitions to explain this term. Fatoki (2007)
interpreted digitization as “a process towards building digital libraries, which involves taking
traditional library materials, typically in the form of books and papers, and converting them to
electronic form, where they can be stored and manipulated by a computer” (p. 15). Additionally,
Beagrie and Jones (2008) stated digitization as “The process of creating digital files by scanning
or otherwise converting analogue materials” (p. 25). Recently, Paul and Singh (2014) clarified
digitization as “the process of transforming the information from documents such as a printed
book, picture or video into bits” (p. 221). Caro (2016) referred to digitization as “scanning” in
her book and described it as one of the first steps taken to create a digital collection.
Overall, it became obvious that most of the previously discussed definitions share
similarities. First, digitization mainly refers to converting. Second, the conversion process is
from analog into digital form. Third, facilitating computer processing to handle and manipulate
the created digital objects is the goal of such conversions. Fourth, enabling viewing of the
digitized items electronically is another goal of digitization. Since the scope of this doctoral
dissertation focuses on the process of digitizing analog media for preservation and access
purposes, a single definition, introduced by Pearce-Moses (2005), is adopted for this doctoral
dissertation. There are three reasons for choosing this definition. First, this definition stated that
digitization is a process. Second, conversion took the form of an action that transformed analog
materials into digital form. Third, the purpose of such a transformation is facilitating both storage
and use through using a computer.

9

1.2.3. Static and non-static (audiovisual) media
This doctoral dissertation discusses the digitization of both static and non-static
(audiovisual) media. Therefore, it is important to understand the meaning of three terms: media,
static, and non-static (audiovisual). Many specialized glossaries provided different definitions to
clarify the meanings of these terms. For instance, the term media in the ALA Glossary of Library
and Information Science is defined as “Materials or tools in all formats … and all channels of
communication upon which information can be recorded, stored, or transmitted” (Media, 2013,
p. 164).
After gaining an understanding of the meaning of the term media, it became crucial to
realize the meanings of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The term static was briefly
defined in the Random House Webster’s Easy English Dictionary: Intermediate as “not moving
or changing” (Static, 2001, p. 425). Printed books, manuscripts, photographs, maps, and journals
are examples of static media (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Within the context of this doctoral
dissertation, static media refers to materials such as books, photographs, posters, maps,
newspapers, and manuscripts.
Gilmour (2006) mentioned in Collins English Dictionary & Thesaurus that the term non
is a prefix that refers to negation. Further, Walter (2005) indicated the usage of the prefix non in
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary as “to add the meaning ‘not’ or ‘the opposite of’ to
adjectives and nouns” (p. 856). Therefore, non-static is opposite to the concept of and term static
media as explained in the previous paragraph. Audio and video are examples of dynamic media
(Xie & Matusiak, 2016). In other words, non-static media refers to materials such as audio/voice
recordings and analog videos based on the scope of this doctoral dissertation.

10

The differences between static and non-static media can be clearly understood by
examining the Minimum Digitization Capture Recommendations, submitted by (Bogus, Blood,
Dale, Leech, & Mathews, 2013). In this online document, different materials were classified by
Bogus et al. (2013) into two categories, which are either “Static” or “Time-Based Media.” Rare
books, manuscripts, maps, microforms, art on paper, three-dimensional objects, and
photographic processes are examples of static media that were mentioned by Bogus et al. The
second category that was mentioned by Bogus et al. is the time-based media which included
audio, moving image film, and video. For a better differentiation, the time element that exists in
time-based media makes this media different than other analog materials as clarified by Bogus et
al. (2013). For the purpose of this doctoral dissertation, materials are classified as static or nonstatic (audiovisual) media.

1.2.4. Master and derivative files
Understanding the meaning of master, access, and derivative files is important in the
context of digitization. Specialized guidelines in digitization usually discuss different types of
files. Based on the scope of this doctoral dissertation, it is crucial to differentiate between these
types of files for a better understanding of digitization literature and guidelines. Besides, this
doctoral dissertation contains document analysis of a number of digitization guidelines, which
discuss different types of files in more details (Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.). Digitization
projects specify the technical details of these types of digital files to accommodate projectspecific objectives and ambitions.

11

Master and access files differ in their concepts and usage purposes. Frey and Reilly
(2006) defined digital master thusly: “It represents the highest quality file that has been digitized
… the main issues in creating the digital master relate to longevity and quality” (p. 3). On the
contrary, Besser (2003) interpreted an access file as: “A file derived from a master file that is
used to make a digital collection item accessible without hazarding the master. Typically
compressed to reduce storage requirements and speed online delivery” (p. 67, emphasis
original).
However, Frey and Reilly (2006) explain the meaning of a derivative file as “….the files
for daily use. Speed of access and transmission and suitability for certain purposes are the main
issues to consider in the creation of derivative files” (p. 3). Moreover, Lee (2001) defined a
derivative as “any object (analog or digital) derived from the master digital image produced in
the scanning process” (p. 89). Besser (2003) clarified the meaning of a derivative file as: “A file
derived or created from another file, rather than created during an original digitization process.
Differs from a copy insofar as the derivative file may be altered in some way from the original”
(p. 71).

1.2.5. Challenge
Challenge is another key term within the context of this doctoral dissertation. Landau
(2000) defined the term challenge in the Cambridge Dictionary of American English as
“something needing great mental or physical effort in order to be done successfully, or the
situation of facing this kind of effort” (p. 133). Furthermore, this term was explained in the
Random House Webster’s Easy English Dictionary: Intermediate as “something that is difficult
12

to accomplish and that tests a person’s skill or ability, esp. in an interesting way” (Challenge,
2001, p. 66). After all, there are many challenges facing digitization, but this dissertation is
focusing only on three types of challenges: funding, technology, and staff skills. Based on the
discussed challenges discussed within this dissertation, the definition provided by Challenge
(2001) is adopted on account of its simplicity.

1.3. Research Problem, Questions, and Hypotheses
The lifespan of papers was reduced to decades instead of centuries as a result of using
acid-process wood pulp, alum-rosin sizes, and chemical bleach (Lesk, 1997). “High temperatures
and relative humidity accelerate the chemical processes that lead to embrittlement and
fluctuations in either or both of those environmental factors add additional stress to books”
(Smith, 1999a, p. 4). Also, Lesk (1997) mentioned that there are no surviving copies for 15% of
the books published during the 18th century by Cambridge University Press. Even though papers
can last for a relatively long period of time in some cases, other types of materials might not be
capable of lasting for a similar time period due to disasters or data loss. In many cases, these
materials may differ in their characteristics and expected lifespan. Digitization may help in
providing continued access and preservation to print materials.
Information exists in different materials that can be found in libraries, archives,
museums, or other similar environments. The content of these materials contains valuable
information that stored in different types of materials such as, but not limited to: manuscripts,
maps, posters, microfiche, rare books, photographs, audio recordings, and moving images.
Digitization plays a principal role in providing access to the content of different materials for
13

future use through creating digital objects. Therefore, digitization plays a main role in storing
and disseminating this information.
Digitization involves many standards, principles, and practices that need to be clarified
and understood. The Federal Agencies Digitization Guidelines Initiative (FADGI) has provided
many guidelines explaining the digitization process, outlining the many steps that must be
followed for digitization workflow planning, such as: defining the requirements, assessing
organizational capabilities, project management, and developing the workflow plan. Moreover,
the digitization workflow plan introduced by FADGI (2016) demonstrated that some activities
conducted are before the actual digitization step (e.g., selection and condition evaluation),
whereas other activities are performed after the digitization step (e.g., quality review and
archiving). It is understood from this statement that digitization is not a single-step undertaking,
rather it is a process or workflow incorporating many different activities.
Digitization consists of many activities and aspects that are beyond the scope of this
dissertation. Metadata, digitization software, and quality control are some examples of the
aspects not addressed in this study. This dissertation’s focus is on aspects related to digitization
guidelines, compliance with these guidelines, technical specifications, strategies, encountered
challenges, and solutions. Different guidelines and technical specifications are adopted to
implement digitization in various contexts, such as museums and libraries around the world.
There is a need to explore digitization best practices conducted by academic libraries in the
United States for both static and non-static (audiovisual) media, in addition to reporting the
challenges encountered.

14

Much of the literature discussed digitization conducted by academic libraries worldwide.
Some of those studies focused on a particular theme regarding digitization, such as copyright
clearance or staff training. However, it seems as if there is less published information focusing
on identifying digitization best practices among academic libraries for both static and non-static
(audiovisual) media, as well as reporting on challenges encountered and the recommendation for
appropriate solutions. This dissertation attempts to address this research gap through exploring
the digitization best practices adopted by academic libraries in the United States. Moreover, it is
intended to report the challenges facing digitization efforts and to draw necessary comparisons
between digitizing both static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Additionally, it is intended to
suggest convenient solutions to overcome the encountered challenges.
This dissertation focuses on the conversion of analog materials; born-digital materials are
beyond the scope of this study. Consequently, this dissertation aims to seek answers to five
research questions, which are directly related to the area of digitization. The first purpose of this
doctoral dissertation is to explore the digitization guidelines adopted by academic libraries in the
United States for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The second purpose is to
investigate compliance levels with adopted digitization guidelines of academic librarians
examined in this study, and further investigate whether there are differences in compliance
regarding digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
The third purpose is to report on challenges facing the examined academic libraries
during digitization of both static and non-static (audiovisual) media, as well as to draw
meaningful comparisons. The fourth purpose is to investigate whether there are any differences
in the challenges academic librarians face when digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual)
media. The fifth purpose is to discuss applied and suggested solutions to overcome encountered
15

challenges around/regarding digitization at the examined academic libraries. Accordingly, the
five research questions defined for this doctoral dissertation deal directly with digitization with
each one of them reporting on a particular theme.
This dissertation has 15 hypotheses which can be either rejected or not after applying the
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test (nonparametric test) or Paired Samples Test with a significance
level at 0.05. The first nine hypotheses (Hypotheses 2.1.A-2.3.C) are related to the second
research question. These hypotheses will be applied only for three digitization guidelines
(Sections 4.2.1.-4.2.3.), because of their occurrence in both sections (i.e. “Digitization of Static
Media” and “Digitization of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media”) of the electronic questionnaire.
These three digitization guidelines are: 1) ALCTS, 2) consortium/consortia digitization
guidelines, and 3) a university’s own customized digitization guidelines. Only these three
digitization guidelines were selected because ALCTS guidelines discuss both types of media
(i.e., static and non-static [audiovisual] media), whereas there is a possibility that these types of
media are discussed as well by the other two guidelines. This research question focuses on
exploring whether there are differences in the reported compliance with the digitization
guidelines by academic libraries in the United States for digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media.
On the other hand, the remaining six hypotheses (Hypotheses 4.1-4.6) are related to the
fourth research question. Again, these hypotheses can be either rejected or not after conducting
the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test with a significance level at 0.05. Hypotheses 4.1-4.6 are
designed to explore whether there are differences in the challenges academic libraries encounter
in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media (Section 4.4). These differences concern
the following six aspects: 1) budget, 2) external funding, 3) digitization equipment/hardware, 4)
16

digitization software, 5) staff digitization skills, and 6) the need for more professional training on
digitization. Therefore, these are the research questions and hypotheses:
RQ1. How do academic libraries comply with digitization guidelines and associated reasons?
A) What are the digitization guidelines and technical specifications adopted by academic
libraries for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media?
B) To what extent do academic libraries comply with digitization guidelines and what
are the associated reasons?
C) To what extent is the availability of the digitization guidelines and what are the
associated reasons?
D) To what extent is the usefulness of the digitization guidelines and what are the
associated reasons?
RQ2. Are there differences in relation to academic libraries’ reported compliance with the static
and non-static (audiovisual) media digitization guidelines?
H2.1 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding the level
of compliance with the digitization guidelines for static versus non-static
(audiovisual) media.
H2.1.A There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of compliance with ALCTS digitization guidelines for static versus nonstatic (audiovisual) media.

17

H2.1.B There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of compliance with the consortium/consortia digitization guidelines for
static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H2.1.C There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of compliance with the university’s own customized digitization
guidelines for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H2.2 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding the level
of availability of the digitization guidelines for static versus non-static (audiovisual)
media.
H2.2.A There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of availability of ALCTS digitization guidelines for static versus non-static
(audiovisual) media.
H2.2.B There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of availability of the consortium/consortia digitization guidelines for static
versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H2.2.C There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of availability of the university’s own customized digitization guidelines
for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H2.3 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding the level
of usefulness of the digitization guidelines for static versus non-static (audiovisual)
media.
18

H2.3.A There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of usefulness of ALCTS digitization guidelines for static versus non-static
(audiovisual) media.
H2.3.B There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of usefulness of the consortium/consortia digitization guidelines for static
versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H2.3.C There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
the level of usefulness of the university’s own customized digitization guidelines
for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
RQ3. What are the challenges that academic libraries face in digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media?
RQ4. Are there differences in the challenges that academic libraries face in digitizing static and
non-static (audiovisual) media?
H4.1 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding budget
for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H4.2 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding external
funding for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H4.3 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
digitization equipment/hardware for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.

19

H4.4 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding
digitization software for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H4.5 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding staff
skills in digitization for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media.
H4.6 There is no significant difference reported by academic libraries regarding the need
for more professional training on digitization skills for static versus non-static
(audiovisual) media.
RQ5. What are the solutions that academic libraries apply or suggest how to overcome these
challenges?
The first research question deals with guidelines and standards recommended by
specialized agencies, initiatives, universities, university archives, or consortia in the United
States regarding the digitization process. Minimum requirements are defined by these institutions
to improve the digitization process of different materials such as: rare books, manuscripts,
photographs, maps, audio recordings, and moving images. Hence, the aim behind this research
question is to identify adopted digitization guidelines and technical specifications by academic
libraries in the United States for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Also, levels
of and reasons for compliance, the availability and usefulness of the adopted digitization
guidelines reported by academic libraries are investigated for both static and non-static
(audiovisual) media. Software for digitization is beyond the scope of this doctoral dissertation
because of the variant types of software, such as commercial or open-source software, as well as
constant change and rapid development in software production.

20

The second research question aims to investigate the level of compliance reported by the
examined academic libraries in adopting digitization guidelines for static and non-static
(audiovisual) media in greater detail. This research question aims to draw a comparison between
compliance levels of adopting digitization guidelines for static media versus compliance levels of
adopting digitization guidelines for non-static (audiovisual) media. Additionally, reported levels
of availability and usefulness by academic libraries regarding adopted digitization guidelines for
static versus non-static (audiovisual) media are investigated.
The third research question aims to explore the challenges US academic libraries face
during digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Further, this research question
draws a comparison between the digitization challenges of static and non-static (audiovisual)
media. In other words, this question aims to define the challenges facing academic libraries in
digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media in general. It then compares the reported
digitization challenges of static media to those of their non-static (audiovisual) counterparts.
The fourth research question aims to explore whether there are any significant differences
in the challenges faced by academic libraries in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual)
media. Differences could be based on many aspects related to the digitization process. However,
this research question compares agreement levels given by the subjects for questions 26 and 41
in the electronic questionnaire. Each contains six statements related to different themes around
digitization challenges: 1) budget, 2) external funding, 3) digitization equipment/hardware, 4)
digitization software, 5) staff digitization skills, and 6) the need for more professional training on
digitization.

21

The fifth question aims to explore appropriate solutions to overcome challenges facing
the digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. A fundamental component of this
doctoral dissertation involves exploring solutions. Understanding the challenges of digitizing
static and non-static (audiovisual) media is not enough to develop a comprehensive base of
knowledge regarding digitization within the context of academic libraries in the United States. It
is equally important to address practical solutions to overcome the encountered challenges.
These solutions could either be applied or suggested by the examined sample of this study.

1.4. Significance of the Study
Digitization is important in our contemporary life for delivering valuable information to
future generations. Many scientific domains have discussed this process from particular
perspectives such as information studies, computer science, and engineering. However,
information studies discuss digitization from different angles, including digitization workflow,
staff training, copyrighted materials, and involved computer technologies in the digitization
process. Several studies conducted worldwide in different contexts such as museums, archives or
libraries have introduced important knowledge to the community regarding digitization
(Asogwa, 2011; Bin, 2006; Jones, 2005; Primary Research Group Staff, 2016).
A limited number of research studies discussed the concept of digitization practices in
academic libraries (Alhaji, 2007; Pandey & Misra, 2014; Rafiq & Ameen, 2013b). Hence, this
doctoral dissertation examines the digitization practices conducted by academic libraries located
in the United States, particularly technical specifications and guidelines adopted for digitizing
both static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Reported levels of compliance, availability, and
22

usefulness by academic librarians regarding adopted digitization guidelines for static versus nonstatic (audiovisual) media are also examined.
Additionally, this dissertation explores the challenges that academic libraries encounter in
digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media, as well as appropriate solutions. Examining
these related themes within this dissertation helps in shaping an overall understanding regarding
digitization best practices in the context of academic libraries in the United States. Such an
understanding has a two-dimensional significance, which is theoretical and practical in nature. A
third dimension is addressed in the dissertation as well, namely a methodological significance.
The theoretical significance of this doctoral dissertation lies in exploring the digitization
guidelines and technical specifications for each type of static and non-static (audiovisual) media
among different institutions belonging to the same context. Knowing this matter helps in
simplifying the establishment of digitization initiatives or even improving current initiatives at
similar institutions in the United States or other countries by building a basic and theoretical
knowledge regarding best practices. Another theoretical significance concerns exploring widely
adopted digitization practices by academic libraries, which helps similar institutions to identify
the most widely used practices and guidelines as a starting point for establishing digitization
initiatives at their institutions. Moreover, this dissertation aids in evaluating current digitization
guidelines and providing suggestions to improve them from an academic librarian’s perspective.
It is important to understand earlier efforts provided in digitization through examining
digitization guidelines and relevant literature. Thus, providing new information and knowledge
will help in filling the gap in previous literature, in addition to suggesting solutions to overcome
any encountered limitations or challenges.

23

The practical significance of this study lies in accomplishing digitization projects
harmoniously with familiar digitization standards and guidelines that are adopted by other
similar institutions. This means that if a particular academic library is conducting digitization
activities in the same way as other academic libraries, it helps in establishing future cooperation
such as access sharing between digital collections. Such understanding of familiar digitization
guidelines and best practices will help in improving several areas linked to digitization practices.
For instance, improving staff digitization skills through conducting workshops and seminars
positively affects digitization projects.
Also, exploring digitization strategies and processes will assist in applying such projects
more efficiently. This doctoral dissertation aims to provide help in selecting wisely regarding
different areas such as digitization strategies, technical specifications, and compliance with
digitization guidelines. Moreover, reporting on digitization challenges offers examples to some
libraries, optimizing their chances of handling such situations successfully. Similarly, shedding
light on these challenges may help professionals in the area of digitization to closely examine
these challenges and suggest effective solutions.
The potential methodological significance of this study becomes clear within this
doctoral dissertation. There are two sequential phases for this study, which are quantitative and
qualitative. Both are related and support each other for data collection and analysis. Gathering
the required data for answering the five research questions was achieved through applying
quantitative and qualitative data collection techniques. The adopted qualitative data collection
techniques helped in collecting the missing data, gathered in the first phase by the quantitative
data collection technique. Hence, more in-depth data were collected through both data collection
techniques, which facilitated more detailed and accurate results. In other words, the adopted
24

research methodology for this doctoral dissertation helped in providing a rich quantity of data
that were also thorough and in-depth.
This doctoral dissertation is following a mixed methods research design, particularly the
explanatory design. Purposive sampling was adopted to collect data for the quantitative and
qualitative phases of the study. Data collection techniques consisted of document analysis, an
electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. Qualitative and quantitative data were
analyzed through applying different data analysis techniques, specifically: open coding,
descriptive statistics, and statistical analysis for comparison (i.e., Paired Samples Test and
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test [two-tailed]). Further details about the design of this doctoral
dissertation are discussed in section Research Design (Section 3.1.).

1.5. Chapter Summary
Valuable information resources need to be accessed and stored beyond geographical and
temporal boundaries. It is clear that digitization is important in our contemporary era. This
chapter discussed the scope of this doctoral dissertation within the area of digitization. Five
research questions were addressed concerning digitization. The themes of these research
questions dealt with digitization guidelines, compliance levels, encountered challenges, and both
applied and suggested solutions. Exploring these themes is a main aim of this doctoral
dissertation.

25

Chapter 2 Literature Review
The rise of the internet is considered an important development that facilitated more usage to the
electronic network between computers (Lesk, 2005). The online information industry took the
form of online hosting services during early 1990s, enabling information retrieval by subscribers
through special terminals, then their personal computers (Calhoun, 2014). Enhancing the quality
of computer displays and the software used for handling information led to encouraging more
people to read directly from computer screens (Arms, 2000). Furthermore, digital finding aids
and surrogates were new methods offered by electronic technology to provide researchers with
more access to the collections (Smith, 1999a). All these changes and shifts in technology
development affected many sectors dealing with information resources, particularly libraries.
Contemporary libraries are distinguished for their numerous collections, which differ
based on their types and formats. Analog and digital items are hosted by these libraries; this
addition adds richness to their collections and resources. Arms (2012) stated that “libraries have
succeeded in embracing much of the potential of online information, often in ways that were not
predicted” (p. 589). Libraries are shifting from print to digital collections during the current
transition period (Moghaddam, 2010). A decline in the importance of printed materials has
occurred as a result of increased reliance on digital collections (Falk, 2003). This shows the
increasing importance of information in digital form.
Libraries today are shaped by new technological advances, and the way people interact
with libraries was shifted as a result of the new electronic resources and virtual access to
information (Purcell, 2016). Most information is born digital and disseminated only
electronically nowadays (Gladney, 2006). There are many examples of digital materials such as
26

databases, texts, audio, still and moving images, web pages, and software, which exist in
numerous formats (Moghaddam, 2010). Indeed, the digital world is represented by binary strings
consisting of 0s and 1s, offering the opportunity for data creation, manipulation, and sharing
(Kannappanavar, Rajanikanta, & Tandur, 2010). Hence, the way of learning, communicating,
and thinking is transformed as a result of the digital information (Kannappanavar et al., 2010).
This shows that individuals’ information needs will be affected by the new changes. Hence,
libraries need to accommodate their services based on technological developments regarding
accessing and preserving information.
Indeed, the growing demand for quick and easy access to updated information content
came as a result of the expansion of computer networks and the availability of high-speed access
to the internet (Hughes, 2004). Network accessibility, ease of search, convenience of use, along
with overall satisfaction and digital information’s accessibility were among the factors
motivating users to use digital resources instead of materials available in traditional form (Paul &
Singh, 2014). Also, flexibility is one of the advantages of digital information that facilitates
editing and reformatting digital texts, which are neither finite nor final, unlike printed texts on
paper (Smith, 1999b).
Unfettered access, better analysis and manipulation capabilities, along with flexibility,
represent examples of the potential benefits of digital information (Kannappanavar et al., 2010).
Digital products facilitated faster searching and less storage area (Bansal, Kumari, Kumar, &
Singh, 2005). Arms (2000) discussed the many benefits of digital libraries such as: 1) bringing
the library to the user, 2) searching and browsing by using computers, 3) sharing information,
and 4) updating information easily. Also, Calhoun (2014) mentioned many key outcomes
emerging as a result of the first decade (i.e., 1991-2001) of digital library research and practice
27

such as: 1) technological innovations, 2) digitization and digital preservation, and 3) metadata
and standards. For instance, there are many digitization advantages such as: full-text searching, a
user interface with a new design, cross-collection indexing, besides digital data that are easy to
reformat, edit, or print (Kannappanavar et al., 2010).
Accordingly, new activities and responsibilities related to digitization are assigned to
librarians as a result of the nature of the newly hosted collections. The amount of digital
information has rapidly increased, because of digitizing analog items and the proliferation of
digital publication (Digital Preservation Coalition, 2008). “Digitization is a complex process, and
there are concrete benefits to be realized from many types of digitization projects” (Hughes,
2004, p. 9). Kannappanavar et al. (2010) explained the importance of digitization as a result of
two reasons: the availability of electronic information for a wider audience, and more concepts
related to digitization other than hardware and software such as: access systems, project
planning, and preservation of digital assets.
The literature review in this chapter covers many aspects related to the scope of this
doctoral dissertation. This literature review contains the following sections: 1) Digitization:
Research and Practice (Section 2.1.), 2) Significance of digitization (Section 2.1.1.), 3)
Digitization strategies (Section 2.1.2.), 4) Digitization process (Section 2.1.3.), 5) Digitization
guidelines (Section 2.1.4.), 6) Components of digitization guidelines (Section 2.1.5.), 7)
Digitization of static media compliance (Section 2.1.6.), 8) Digitization of non-static
(audiovisual) media compliance (Section 2.1.7.), and 9) Digitization: challenges and suggested
solutions (Section 2.1.8.) and its sub-sections (Sections 2.1.8.1.-2.1.8.4.).

28

2.1. Digitization: Research and Practice
Technology facilitates the storage and transmission of digital information, which leads to
expanding the ease of access to source materials and bibliographic records within the context of
research libraries (Smith, 1999a). A worldwide movement from analog systems to digital ones
represents a paradigm shift (Rafiq & Ameen, 2013b). Indeed, “Digital files can provide
extraordinary access to information” (Smith, 1999b, p. 7). High costs for preserving tangible
materials, establishing remote access, decreasing budgets to acquire new stocks for the library,
and the increase of electronic information are reasons to encourage digitization (Pandey & Misra,
2014). Smith (2001) indicated that preserving analog collections and extending their reach
represents two reasons identified by libraries for digitization. Other reasons for digitizing library
materials are: making public records more accessible, providing new ways of accessing
materials, preserving old materials, providing enhanced facilities for searching and retrieval,
besides, it is an opportunity to develop the staff skills and the technical infrastructure (Pandey &
Misra, 2014).
Since digitization deals with different materials within the library context, it is essential
to pay attention to types of materials and their variant natures. The first type of digital material is
converted into digital form from an analog one, while the second type is originally produced in a
digital format, such as digital photographs and electronic books (Pandey & Misra, 2014). This
doctoral dissertation is restricted its focus to the digitization of analog materials only, including
both static and non-static (audiovisual) media. A variety of formats and mediums can be
digitized: images, maps, manuscripts, and sound recordings (Abd Manaf & Ismail, 2010).

29

Nonetheless, libraries and museums host a huge variety of information resources. For
some digitization projects, a careful selection of these materials may help in enhancing the
overall success of the digitization project itself. Academic importance, increasing access to
documents, and preventing originals from damage represented the major three criteria in
selecting library materials for digitization (Rafiq & Ameen, 2013b). Similarly, Vrana (2010)
found that user interest was the most important selection criteria for digitizing library materials,
while an item’s age came second, followed by its cultural value.
Regarding type of materials, Paul and Singh (2014) found that institutional publications
received the first priority for digitizing materials, while journals were ranked second, and
personal collections third. Theses and dissertations, rare books, as well as journals and other
serials received the highest priority in digitization as mentioned by Rafiq and Ameen (2013b).
Also, The Institute of Museum and Library Services (2006) investigated the mostly digitized
items by academic libraries, and it was found that photographs were digitized by 8.3% of the
examined academic libraries, 13.1% of them digitized course materials, and 8.2% of them
digitized institution’s information.
Moreover, there is more than a single way for digitizing these variant materials. The
terms in-house and outsourcing refer to the physical location of the digitization process, as well
as personnel involved in this process (Lee, 2001). In-house digitization means that the material is
captured locally at the institution and the institution is responsible for providing the appropriate
hardware, software, overheads, and trained personnel even if the location of the digitization
process is different from the location used to hold the collection (Lee, 2001). Hence, regarding
digitization of special and rare collections, in-house digitization is often used for these

30

collections in order to ensure a safe environment (Rieger, 2010). Consequently, the scope of this
doctoral dissertation encompasses only in-house digitization best practices.

2.1.1. Significance of digitization
“Preservation and access go hand-in-hand” (Zorich, 2007, p. 458). Many researchers in
their studies discussed the significance of digitization for access and preservation (Falk, 2003;
Liu, 2004; Pandey & Misra, 2014; Paul & Singh, 2014; Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Many
institutions are spending large amounts of money on digital conversion projects in order to
provide increased access to their collections, as well as preserving these collections (Smith,
1999b). There are two aims of digitizing materials at the library, preserving and providing access
for library patrons (Pandey & Misra, 2014). For instance, digitization is one of the strategies for
preserving newspapers at university libraries located in Nigeria, as well as increasing access to
these newspapers (Ugah, 2009). Hence, supporting access and maintaining long-term
preservation for audiovisual materials through the digitization approach is commonly accepted
practice (Xie & Matusiak, 2016).
The advantages of digitization make it acceptable to many institutions focusing on access
and preservation. Digital image collections play a role in increasing awareness and providing
access to analog collections, which “thus serve both an educational and a promotional function”
(Besser, 2003, p. 31). Using digital surrogates supports the conservation of original artifacts
through reducing the tear in these original artifacts, but these digital surrogates may lead to
increasing handling of the original artifacts as a result of the increased awareness (Besser, 2003).

31

In the future, the digital version may be the only available record of a deteriorated or destroyed
original object (Gertz, n.d.).
Most digital projects in the United States aim to provide wider access to collections of
historical resources for the purpose of contributing to research, education, and awareness (Liu,
2004). Rare materials become accessible through digitizing them, although the electronic
versions do not substitute for the originals (Potter & Holley, 2010). Allowing electronic access to
ancient documents through converting them became a necessity for many reasons, such as
reducing the number of paper documents, and enhancing access to these documents (Charfi,
Boussellaa, & Alimi, 2007).
Access and preservation goals are interrelated, because keeping scholarly materials
usable over time facilitates accessing these materials (Rieger, 2010). Access and preservation are
the two goals of digitization that one completes the other by indicating that surrogate copies of
both rare and fragile items are created by digitization to support preservation practices (Xie &
Matusiak, 2016). Using computers in indexing and digitization is incorporated with other
techniques such as allowing virtual scrolling as a way of preserving the original documents,
using keywords in indexing as a way of enhancing searching the document, defining rare
materials by having them in compact optical media, and enabling both remote and simultaneous
access for most demanded materials (Charfi et al., 2007). Similarly, keyword searching and
attaining high quality reproductions of original materials through optical character recognition
(OCR) as a result of digitization greatly affects rare materials (Potter & Holley, 2010).
Digitization is crucial for access. Beagrie and Jones (2008) defined access as “continued,
ongoing usability of a digital resource, retaining all qualities of authenticity, accuracy and

32

functionality deemed to be essential for the purposes the digital material was created and/or
acquired for” (p. 24). Digitization provided new opportunities for special collections through
open access by making the content of primary sources available online for users worldwide
(Daigle, 2012). Preserving original texts, as well as providing access for both researchers and
scholars is accomplished through digitizing manuscripts (Sahoo & Mohanty, 2015). Hence,
access can be increased as a result of making materials available online, while instances of
handling original materials will be reduced (Caro, 2016). For instance, Caro (2016) mentioned
that creating digital surrogates at the Billings Public Library led to preservation of the original
images in addition to improving online access.
The objective of increasing accessibility was the most preferred objective of digitization
from librarians’ perspectives, while preservation objectives ranked second (Paul & Singh, 2014).
Keneley et al. (2016) observed that planning and risk management represent an essential part of
the digitization process, meaning that digitization is viewed as a primary part of the record
preservation process. Although recognized as an access tool, considering digitization as a
preservation method is not yet accepted (Capell, 2010). Indeed, considering digitization as a
strategy for preservation is an ongoing debate (Matusiak & Johnston, 2014). There was an
acceptance of digitization as a way of copying to facilitate a wider access, however, looking at it
as a way of producing “preservation-quality copies” has not yet been accepted (Matusiak &
Johnston, 2014, p. 248). The digital copy created by the institution means this new resource will
require preservation, raising many concerns regarding assuring digital resources’ accuracy,
authenticity and continued existence (Gertz, n.d.).
There are many reasons for digitizing materials: enhanced access, and reducing handling
of fragile materials (Fatoki, 2007). The only method for providing access to objects that cannot
33

be physically handled is through digitization (Zorich, 2007). “For materials that cannot withstand
frequent handling or, because of their value or content, pose security risks, digitization has
proved to be a boon” (Smith, 2001, p. 7). Also, preserving fragile materials by providing an
alternative accessible resource is considered as an option fulfilled through digitization (Keneley
et al., 2016). Lampert and Vaughan (2009) mentioned that the goals of digitization include
enhancing access to digital collections along with building access to collections of different
formats for supporting research and teaching efforts at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas
(UNLV). Both factors, of having unique items within the collection and increasing access to
fragile items reflecting a preservation concern, were the most two important factors for
establishing or enhancing digitization projects (Lampert & Vaughan, 2009).
Storage and distribution of digital files created through digitizing the originals represent
the main factors for digitization (Wentzel, 2006). Accessing digitally formatted information is
cheaper as compared to accessing the print versions (Alhaji, 2007). Digitization helps in
providing electronic access to a library’s collections, preserving items and also protecting them
from being stolen as a result of the absence of electronic security systems in developing
countries (Jagboro, Omotayo, & Aboyade, 2012). Reasons for digitizing analog collections
include: building qualified staff with essential skills, enhancing access to rare and fragile items,
and influence the building of digital projects due to the experimental nature of many of them (Ma
& Semali, 2003).
Providing online access to digitized materials for both local and international users is the
reason for libraries’ involvements in digitization projects around the world (Rafiq & Ameen,
2013a). Digitization is adopted to create digital collections from the information resources in
print format at university libraries in order to facilitate remote access (Rafiq & Ameen, 2013b).
34

Another recent case of the digitization experience is discussed by Chmielewska and Wróbel
(2013), who described the digitization process that took place at University of Warsaw Library in
order to provide access to the historical documents.
There are many reasons for encouraging cultural institutions all over the world to be
involved in digital projects: promoting the institution and its collections, reducing the handling of
heavily used items, and providing access (Asogwa, 2011). Continuous commitment from the
institution to migrate both image and index data to a newer technology is essential for ensuring
long-term access (Conway, 1994). Improving access to digital resources is the main purpose of
the digitization, and creating digital surrogates of fragile and rare items through digitization is
beneficial in reducing damage caused by physical handling (Gbaje & Bot, 2009). Academic
libraries, in most cases, do not exchange rare materials through interlibrary loan since borrowing
the digital version or digitizing a requested material for a fee is a viable option which fulfills the
needs of the most research (Potter & Holley, 2010).
Digitization is also used for preservation purposes. Digitization is one among several
promising long-term preservation strategies (Capell, 2010). Lynch and Brownrigg (1986)
mentioned many features of digital images regarding the use of digitization for preservation and
conservation. For example, digital images cannot be deteriorated through use, they are less
affected by environmental disasters, and they can be delivered through a high speed connection
(Lynch & Brownrigg, 1986). Preserving the original, as well as increasing either access, or sale
are the main reasons that spur libraries, publishers, and museums to get involved in digitization
projects (Lee, 2001).

35

Both preservation purposes and providing wider access lies behind digitizing rare and
special collections (Falk, 2003). Preservation was the main purpose for developing digital
collections at 53.33% of the surveyed public libraries in Croatia, while increasing access to
digital materials was the main reason for 40% of them (Vrana, 2010). Making cultural heritage
materials in physical and digital formats accessible for teaching, research or personal enjoyment
is the reason for preserving these materials (Zorich, 2007). Hence, it is essential to take
preservation issues into consideration when digitizing cultural heritage collections (Xie &
Matusiak, 2016).

2.1.2. Digitization strategies
There are no strategies guarantee success in ensuring consistent quality in collections
digitization, because of the uniqueness of each project (Chapman, 2004). Nevertheless, a few
studies discussed two common strategies of implementing digitization even though terminology
differences may occur in naming them. For instance, both Coyle (2006) and Dahlstrӧm (2010)
discussed two different digitization strategies. Coyle (2006) reported mass and non-mass
digitization, whereas Dahlstrӧm (2010) indicated that the digitization strategies are both mass
and critical digitization. Researchers explained the significant differences between these different
digitization strategies, which affect the digitization workflow and the final products.
For example, mass digitization (e.g., Europeana and Google Book Search) focuses on
scale in order to digitize large collections on a systematic basis, whereas critical digitization
focuses on a limited number of documents to manually and critically produce a digital object
enriched with large amounts of metadata (Dahlstrӧm, 2010). Therefore, Dahlstrӧm, Hansson and
36

Kjellman (2012) indicated that libraries prefer the ideals of mass digitization strategy since it is
simple and linear, whereas critical digitization is threatened by avoidance for its high costs. In
other words, mass digitization adopts the quantitative design since it focuses on massive amounts
of documents, whereas critical digitization adopts the qualitative one since it focuses on unique
documents (Dahlstrӧm, 2010).
It is worth mentioning that non-mass digitization emerged as a result of preservation
projects which either provide access to rare materials or create copies of those that may be
deteriorating (Coyle, 2006). In contrast, mass digitization aims to convert the entire libraries’
materials without a selection strategy, whereas non-mass digitization conducts a careful selection
of materials (Coyle, 2006). Nonetheless, mass digitization has many issues such as developing a
user interface for the materials which were digitized (Coyle, 2006). Additionally, mass
digitization uses industry standards like TIFF, while there is a lack of common standards for the
overall package that includes images (Coyle, 2006). As a result, it became obvious that
determining the most appropriate digitization strategy between the two depends on the library’s
goals and objectives for conducting the digitization project.

2.1.3. Digitization process
A goal, rather than a technology, must shape digitization projects (Kannappanavar et al.,
2010). Indeed, digitization projects require adequate preparation. Having a clear and coherent
digitization policy can be a major factor in implementing a successful digitization project. The
topic of digitization policy was discussed by many researchers in their studies (Alhaji, 2007;
Iwhiwhu & Eyekpegha, 2009; Pandey & Misra, 2014; Rafiq & Ameen, 2013b). Ebdon, Gould, &
37

Varlamoff (1999) mentioned that the IFLA/UNESCO survey revealed that only 48% of the
examined libraries and archives have a program to digitize collections. Also, The Institute of
Museum and Library Services (2006) mentioned that 30.6% of all digitization policies at
academic libraries were related to access, 23% to digital format, and 19.7% to issues of
intellectual property.
Digitization is associated with many activities and responsibilities that are essential for
success (Walsh, 2013). Planning, designing, implementation, and evaluation represent
requirements for any digitization project (Bansal et al., 2005). Huge amounts of strategic
planning before successfully digitizing any item is a requirement for digitization initiatives
(Mallan & Park, 2006). Planning digitization projects includes defining guidelines and standards
for image quality, as well as metadata standards (Fatoki, 2007). Both organizational affiliation
and a commitment at the institutional level for long term maintenance and preservation of digital
assets are required to have digitization programs that are sustainable in nature (Xie & Matusiak,
2016).
Many researchers discussed digitization workflow and its variant stages (Pandey &
Misra, 2014; Wentzel, 2006; Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Purcell (2016) clarified five stages of
digitization: the concept stage such as defining the project’s vision and mission, creating a team
by defining the required people and equipment, decision-making as demonstrated by determining
the technical and content decisions, the implementation stage such as selecting and creating
digital content as well as purchasing equipment, and finally the stage of sustaining efforts by
preserving, migrating, and securely storing created digital content in a virtual environment which
is stable in its nature.

38

The six basic steps for the digitization process mentioned by Xie and Matusiak (2016)
are: 1) planning, selecting and preparing materials, 2) image capture, 3) digital processing, 4)
creating metadata, 5) ingesting, and 6) digital preservation. Zuo (2013) said regarding the
workflow of digitization at archives that “Archives digitization of the basic aspects include:
Sorting archives, Building a database, Archives scanning, Image processing, Image storage, Data
quality, Data articulated, Data inspection, Data backup, Results-based management and so on”
(p. 4278).

2.1.4. Digitization guidelines
Creating high-quality and sustainable digital objects supporting interoperability and
consistency across collections and institutions is the purpose of digitization guidelines (Xie &
Matusiak, 2016). Digitizing at the highest resolution suitable for each material, and digitizing at
a high level of quality to avoid rehandling the materials are examples of general digitization
principles identified by Xie and Matusiak (2016) in some of the current guides. Many
digitization standards and guidelines regarding technical specifications were developed and
suggested by specialized institutions and initiatives.
There are many digitization guidelines available on the internet, which differ in many
aspects. Conway (2008) said regarding the implication of the lack of digitization quality
standards: “continuing investment in small scale experimental projects by small and mid-size
organizations that either are unaware of or do not necessarily trust the recommendations of
existing best practices guidelines” (p. 100). However, knowledge and awareness of the most
recent best practices, metadata schemata, and hardware and software components is essential for
39

leaders of such digital initiatives (Purcell, 2016). Determining the minimum dpi, file formats,
compression, and bit-depths for both master files copies, and the gallery of the digital library are
defined by the library initiatives (Liu, 2004).
Recommended resolution, file formats, and color bit depths for listed variant types of
items would be included in a digitization standard; other standards may discuss adjusting
scanners and setting up the room for scanning (Perrin, 2016). Hence, digitization must comply
with set standards, but finding the proper standard or any existed one is a challenge (Walsh,
2013). Besides, users’ different needs affect defining aspects such as sizes, formats, and degrees
of optimization (Walsh, 2013).
Different digitization guidelines were developed by organizations, universities, archives,
and other institutions in the United States to suggest recommended technical specifications.
Some of these were developed to serve particular contexts like archives, digital libraries, libraries
or consortia. For instance, the Consortium of Academic and Research Libraries in Illinois
(CARLI) created its own documents regarding digitization best practices for different materials.
Also, the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) published its own
document of technical guidelines regarding digitizing archival materials.
An examination of digitization guidelines available on the internet in order to conduct a
document analysis revealed significant differences among the examined digitization guidelines.
First, there was variation in the used expressions to name the titles of these documents. For
instance, the term digitization was used in some documents, whereas others referred to
digitization as digital imaging or digitization capture. Similarly, some documents used the term

40

guidelines in their titles, whereas others used recommendations, or best practices. Thus, it
became obvious that there is an absence of agreement on choosing terms.
Furthermore, the structure and contents of the examined digitization guidelines varied
among these documents. It was noted that several digitization guidelines included some other
activities that take place either before or after the digitization action itself. For instance, some
digitization guidelines provided explanation about different concepts such as quality control, file
naming, handling metadata, digital preservation, storage, used software and hardware,
digitization equipment, and technical specifications. Others discussed fewer concepts. Further,
the level of detail varied among the documents examined for this dissertation. Some digitization
guidelines were brief in their provided information; other guidelines provided more detailed
explanations such as explaining main concepts or terminology and providing external links.
Also, examining digitization guidelines during the document analysis step for this
doctoral dissertation revealed various differences among these guidelines or best practices,
although some similarities were found. It was noticed that there is no particular design or
structure for creating digitization guidelines that all institutions are following. The variation
found among the examined digitization guidelines might provide choices for institutions working
to create their own guidelines, but it might just as easily create a challenge. Therefore, it is
important that a digitization guideline be extremely informative in a reasonable way that reduces
possible confusion or ambiguity from the reader’s side.
Regarding national and regional digitization guidelines examined for this dissertation,
there are two national digitization guidelines and other two regional ones. These national
guidelines are: 1) Association for Library Collections and Technical Services (ALCTS), 2)

41

Federal Agencies Digitization Guidelines Initiative (FADGI), and 3) National Archives and
Records Administration (NARA). The sources of these regional guidelines are: 1) BCR’s CDP
Digital Imaging Best Practices Working Group, and 2) Consortium of Academic and Research
Libraries in Illinois (CARLI). After conducting document analysis for this doctoral dissertation,
it was noticed that these four digitization guidelines are thorough in their explanations and all
discussed various topics. Examples of these topics were metadata, file naming, quality control,
and hardware.
The Association for Library Collections and Technical Services (ALCTS), a division of
the American Library Association issued the Minimum Digitization Capture Recommendations
in 2013, submitted by (Bogus et al., 2013) to discuss the digitization of both static and timebased media. The authors reviewed previous research, the practices of nearly 50 organizations,
FADGI guidelines, other guidelines, and a sample of digitized works to recommend the
minimum acceptable specifications (Bogus et al., 2013). Regarding FADGI guidelines, FADGI
(2016) mentioned that these guidelines represent the participating agencies in FADGI Still Image
Working Group, as well as the shared best practices. These digitization guidelines focus on
cultural, archival, and historical materials such as still images, maps, and manuscripts, whereas
moving image and audio/visual materials are not discussed (FADGI, 2016). Puglia, Reed, &
Rhodes (2004) mentioned that The NARA Technical Guidelines for Digitizing Archival Materials
for Electronic Access: Creation of Production Master Files – Raster Images is a revision of the
NARA Guidelines for Digitizing Archival Materials for Electronic Access published in 1998.
Digital image capture and file formats are examples of the topics discussed in these guidelines
for digitizing specific types of materials such as graphic illustrations, maps, and photographs
(Puglia et al., 2004).
42

BCR’s CDP Digital Imaging Best Practices Working Group (2008) introduced the second
version of the BCR’S CDP Digital Imaging Best Practices, whereas it was originally published
in 2003 as the Western States Digital Imaging Best Practices by the Colorado Digitization
Program. This version of guidelines included sections related to image quality, storage and
preservation, digital photography, and selecting equipment (BCR’s CDP Digital Imaging Best
Practices Working Group, 2008). However, CARLI was formed by the merger of three Illinois
academic library consortia (Illinois Cooperative Collection Management Program, Illinois
Digital Academic Library, and Illinois Library Computer Systems Organization), and started its
operations in 2005 (History & Governance | CARLI, 2017). The website of CARLI (URL:
https://www.carli.illinois.edu/products-services/contentdm/cdm-documentation) has several
documents to describe best practices for different digital collections: images, text, audio, moving
images, and three-dimensional objects.
The fourth chapter of this doctoral dissertation has a document analysis of these national
and regional digitization guidelines (Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.). The two specialized sections
in the fourth chapter provide an analysis of digitization guidelines for both static and non-static
(audiovisual) media. Five digitization guidelines were examined, whereas one of them (i.e.,
CARLI) has five documents. Three digitization guidelines focused on static media only (i.e.,
BCR’s CDP Digital Imaging Best Practices Working Group, FADGI, and NARA), whereas both
static and non-static (audiovisual) media were discussed by two guidelines (i.e., ALCTS, and
CARLI). During the document analysis process conducted for this study, technical specifications
for digitization were gathered from different resources for a better explanation and
understanding. The examined digitization standards and minimum requirements are suggested by
specialized agencies to handle the digitization process of both static and non-static (audiovisual)
43

media. The fourth chapter of this doctoral dissertation has more details regarding digitization
standards and technical specifications.

2.1.5. Components of digitization guidelines
Guidelines and standards regarding digitization activities vary among different projects,
while different types of libraries used their own digitization policies (Liu, 2004). The availability
of multiple best practices as a result of the diversity of the ideas and the selected materials for
digitization represent an obstacle (Hurst-Wahl, 2009). “In most cases, organizations have not
made their practices publicly available. We feel that best practices simply have not emerged yet
in most areas of electronic records and digital asset management” (Nelson, 2009, p. 2). However,
documents for explaining digitization best practices may differ in their designs and contents.
There are many sections of these documents, which explain the components of digitization best
practices. Hurst-Wahl (2009) indicated that best practices are not limited to the conversion
process, but that it deals with many aspects such as metadata, selection process, and outsourcing.
Regarding library digitization, Sotošek (2011) described different best practice examples
dealing with many aspects: 1) image capture standards, 2) digital capture equipment, 3) handling
the materials, 4) generating metadata, 5) Optical Character Recognition, 6) accessing the digital
content, 7) workflow management, 8) quality assurance, and 9) digital preservation’s cost
modelling. Likewise, Nelson (2009) the chair of the SAA Technology Best Practices Task Force
introduced an online report on identifying best practices for various materials such as digital
images and texts. The report provided by Nelson (2009) presented selected bibliography of best
practices gathered from various resources on handling different aspects such as: building digital
44

collections, metadata, digital audio, and technical standards defined for the digital conversion.
Similarly, the content of the document provided by ETH-Bibliothek (2016) described six main
sections for digitization best practices, which deal with: 1) planning, 2) preparation of the
material, 3) digitization process, 4) storage and archiving, 5) metadata and recording instruments,
and 6) sources. Under these six main sections provided by ETH-Bibliothek (2016), many subsections were nested which deal with different aspects such as: 1) digitization parameters, 2) file
names, 3) file formats, master and usage formats, 4) scanners, and 5) quality control and image
processing.
As seen in the previous paragraphs, best practices may deal with many areas, including
metadata, selection, and quality control. However, these areas are beyond the scope of this
doctoral dissertation, whereas digitization technical specifications and standards represent one of
the main themes of this study. For the purpose of this study, six documents containing
digitization guidelines analyzed during the document analysis stage contained the term best
practices in their titles. These digitization guidelines were issued by BCR’s CDP Digital Imaging
Best Practices Working Group, and the Consortium of Academic and Research Libraries in
Illinois. The document analysis technique conducted on these documents within this doctoral
dissertation examined the adopted technical specifications for digitizing various materials.
The following two sections (Sections 2.1.6. and 2.1.7.) deal with digitization compliance
for both static and non-static (audiovisual) media, respectively. These two sections present
information regarding digitization of various types of static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Many digitization aspects are discussed: different types of these media, statistics about digitizing
these media, technical factors/specifications, and file formats. In other words, these two sections

45

provide an introduction to basic knowledge within the area of digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media.

2.1.6. Digitization of static media compliance
Materials prepared for the digitization process differ in their nature. Archival records,
rare books, newspapers, photographs, manuscripts, and postcards represent the majority of static
media converted, either through digital photography or scanning by digital cameras or scanners
(Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Static media are considered as vital materials for digitization projects in
many institutions. However, storing texts is described by Leggett (2014) as a complicated
process for archives, because of the two different types of text. Text could either be born a digital
text file, or originally in a physical format, whereas the second type should be treated as an
image although it appears as text from users’ points of view (Leggett, 2014). This shows that
adopting digitization technical specifications is not enough to ensure a successful digitization
project. Instead, a comprehensive understanding is required by the personnel involved in
digitization regarding all factors involved that may affect the digitization process.
There are many recent statistics regarding digitizing static media. These demonstrate the
actual status of digitization in particular contexts. For instance, the Primary Research Group
Staff (2016) surveyed the digitization projects at 61 participating libraries and museums. Primary
Research Group Staff (2016) mentioned that 41.46% of the surveyed libraries and museums
located in the United States considered digitization of photographs as the most critical
factor/medium for them. In comparison, the same study showed that 24.39% of the investigated
museums and libraries located in the United States considered digitizing text as the most critical
46

factor/medium. These statistics provided by Primary Research Group Staff’s (2016) study
confirm the importance of converting static media by those libraries and museums, particularly
photographs.
There are many considerations regarding the digitizing of static media. Resolution, pixel
bit depth, color mode, modes of capture, compression, and formats represent technical factors of
digitizing static images (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Resolution, color mode, and file format
represent the three factors affecting the digitized document’s quality and file size (Zhou, 2010).
Recently, Xie and Matusiak (2016) mentioned that the quality of digital master files is directly
affected by image measures such as resolution, color mode, and bit depth. Resolution was
explained by Mani (2009) as “The number of dots, or pixels (picture element), used to represent
an image” (p. 70). Puglia (2000) explained that resolution can be described in several ways,
which are: 1) dots per inch (DPI), 2) pixels per inch (PPI), and 3) lines per inch (LPI) used for
halftones. One source defined bit depth as “The number of bits allocated to an individual pixel in
a digital image” (Monson, 2017, p. 171). Furthermore, Xie and Matusiak (2016) mentioned three
types of color modes which are: 1) bitonal to be used for text materials without illustrations, 2)
grayscale to scan items like black and white film negatives or photographic prints, and 3) RGB
color mode to be used for colored visual and textual items. However, it is worth mentioning that
resolution refers to pixels per inch (ppi) or dots per inch (dpi), whereas pixel bit depth ranges
from 1-24 bits per pixel (Mani, 2009). Recently, Bogus et al. (2013) mentioned different values
for the bit depth, which can be represented by the multiples of 8 like 1, 8, 16, 24, and 48, besides
they explained that the higher numbers contain more colors.
Defining file formats, minimum digitization requirements, and suggested hardware are
included and described as part of many digitization guidelines. Regarding file formats, it is
47

recommended that images be stored in different file formats by having a specific format for
archiving purposes and another for internet access (Leggett, 2014). Monson (2017) mentioned
TIFF, JPEG, JPEG 2000, PNG, PDF, and PDF/ARCHIVAL as examples of image file formats.
TIFF format is best for archiving, as it stores a lot of information with lossless compression,
while other smaller formats, such as JPEG and PNG are recommended for internet access
(Leggett, 2014). PDF is used in digitization as a derivative format, while PDF/A is used to
ensure preservation of an electronic document (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Regarding JPEG 2000,
Fleischhauer (2014) mentioned that this file format was used by the library for derivative files to
provide online access for files with large content such as scanned newspaper pages and maps,
because of its ability to scaling and zooming.
Master files are saved as TIFF files that are uncompressed, whereas JPEG file format is
used for derivative files of photographs (Monson, 2017). Encryption, watermarks, or other access
inhibitors should not be included in master files, additionally these files should not be
compressed, either by lossy or proprietary compression (NISO Framework Working Group,
2007). Zhou (2010) indicated that uncompressed images in TIFF format represent master files,
whereas compressed files represent access files. From a practical perspective, Yu (2014)
indicated TIFF file format was used for preservation purposes during digitizing selected items of
rare Chinese books, whereas JPEG file format was used to create internet access files. Also,
TIFF file format was selected for archiving scanned images in digitizing scientific articles
(Anderson, 2001).
This variation of file formats makes particular formats more eligible for digitization and
digital preservation, while others might not satisfy the needs of digitization or digital
preservation projects. Nonetheless, an overall understanding will be developed through
48

examining official digitization guidelines later in this doctoral dissertation. The fourth chapter of
this study (Section 4.1.1.1.) includes an analysis of technical specifications that were mentioned
by the analyzed digitization guidelines for different types of static media.
Best practices take into consideration the digitization process as well. FADGI (2016)
explained the digitization workflow plan for both large and small projects, in addition to
introducing two workflow examples for large projects. In general, FADGI (2016) mentioned that
the workflow plan considers certain steps, which are: 1) selecting materials, 2) condition
evaluation, 3) cataloging, 4) creating metadata, 5) production scheduling, 6) digitization prep, 7)
digitization, 8) post processing, 9) reviewing the quality, 10) archiving, and finally 11)
publishing. However, the literature introduced many examples for the digitization process as well
in order to clarify the stages and steps of digitization (Anderson, 2001; Xie & Matusiak, 2016).

2.1.7. Digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media compliance
Ebdon et al. (1999) mentioned that the IFLA/UNESCO survey revealed that 50% of the
examined libraries and archives digitize sound recordings, whereas only 25% of these
institutions digitize film or video. Audio and moving images are in smaller quantities as
compared to photographic and textual items hosted by digital libraries, although they are
increasing in their numbers (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Libraries preserve and provide access to
moving images such as films and video recordings (CARLI, 2017c). There are many examples
for audiovisual resources: music, oral history, poetry readings, lectures, speeches, and broadcast
programming, while the majority of these recordings are in analog format and face deterioration
(Xie & Matusiak, 2016).

49

Primary Research Group Staff (2016) reported that only 4.88% of the surveyed museums
and libraries located in United States considered digitizing voice recordings or music items as the
most critical factor/medium. Regarding digitizing films or videos by the surveyed museums and
libraries located in United States, only 2.44% of them considered digitizing films or videos as the
most critical factor/medium (Primary Research Group Staff, 2016). However, none of the
surveyed college and university libraries considered digitizing films or videos as the most critical
factor/medium (Primary Research Group Staff, 2016). Comparing these statistics to those
mentioned by Primary Research Group Staff (2016) in the previous section reveals a point of
view. It is assumed that digitizing photographs and texts is preferred by many libraries and
museums in the United States as compared to digitizing voice recordings and videos. This might
be a result of their smaller quantities in comparison to photographs and texts, as indicated by Xie
and Matusiak (2016) earlier. However, closely exploring the reasons for this preference will help
in initiating a better understanding of these statistics. Such an understanding may help in
improving digitization of audio and video materials in the future.
Non-static (audiovisual) media are complex, for reasons involving many aspects and
technical factors beyond the scope of this doctoral dissertation. However, this section provides a
brief introduction to the nature of some types of these materials. This section is restricted to a
discussion of introductory information for some basics regarding some of these non-static
(audiovisual) media. Examples of some of these technical factors or specifications, and file
formats will be briefly discussed.
There are many technical factors related to digitizing audio materials. Sampling rate
represented in kilohertz (kHz), and bit depth are the two technical factors for digitized sound’s
quality (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Sampling rate was defined by Digital Preservation Office at the
50

University of Michigan Library (2014) as “how many times per second the sound wave is
measured and is expressed in kHz” (p. 4). Feltner-Reichert et al. (2011) described bit depth in the
context of digital audio as “range of numbers used to represent each amplitude measurement of a
sampled sound wave” (p. 11). Furthermore, Leggett (2014) explained relevant terms related to
audio data such as: 1) the recording’s used number of bits refers to bit depth, and 2) being the
recording in either mono sound (for recordings with a single microphone) or stereo (for
recordings with two or more microphones) refers to channel.
Audio and video data have specific file formats for storage (Leggett, 2014). International
Association of Sound and Audiovisual Archive (IASA) mentioned that preservation formats are
not appropriate for delivery, and at the same time delivery file formats cannot be used for
preservation purposes (IASA Technical Committee, 2009). IASA recommends using both
WAVE (file extension .wav) and BWF formats for archival purposes, with the BWF being more
acceptable and preferable for archiving (IASA Technical Committee, 2009). Regarding access
files, MP3 is a popular delivery format (IASA Technical Committee, 2009). Similarly, BWF and
WAV can be used for master files (uncompressed); both are suitable for preservation purposes,
while MP3 is the most common derivative format for access files (Xie & Matusiak, 2016).
On the other hand, moving image materials were the subject of considerable attention in
the literature. Video recordings and films are examples of moving images to which libraries are
working on providing access, as well as preserving them (CARLI, 2017c). Requiring a playback
machine for audiovisual resources, and their time-based nature represent their main difference
from static media (Xie & Matusiak, 2016). Leggett (2014) mentioned that video materials are
more complicated than audio materials, because video materials contain both sounds and images.

51

Many technical factors are related to moving images: resolution, scanning, aspect ratio, frame
rate, sampling, and bit depth (Xie & Matusiak, 2016).
The lack of best practices and standards for digitizing moving images is one of the
perceived barriers to digitizing archival moving images as reported by Gracy (2012). Due to the
complexity of video digitization, the topic is not completely discussed in this section. Instead,
much of the literature explained video digitization (Bogus et al., 2013; CARLI, 2017c; Xie &
Matusiak, 2016). However, the fourth chapter (Section 4.1.1.2.) discusses the technical
specifications for video digitization mentioned by the examined digitization guidelines during
the document analysis process.

2.1.8. Digitization: challenges and suggested solutions
Challenges facing digitization represent one of the major topics discussed by the relevant
literature (Conway, 1994; Iwhiwhu & Eyekpegha, 2009; Jagboro, et al., 2012; Keneley et al.,
2016; Lee, 2001; Pandey & Misra, 2014). Establishing digitization projects is essential for many
academic libraries and other institutions such as museums and archives. Lopatin (2006)
mentioned that staffing, workflow, managing budgets, defining technical specifications, and
metadata creation are required for effective project management in order to establish successful
digitization projects since they are very complex. However, it is very common in many situations
to encounter different challenges either before or after starting the digitization process. Various
types of challenges may dramatically affect any digitization project.

52

Challenges facing digitization projects at academic libraries received special attention
from researchers around the world. For instance, difficulties could be related to the technology
used, skills required, and costs occurring within digitization processes (Keneley et al., 2016).
Many challenges face digitization projects, such as: legal issues, changing software and hardware
on a constant basis, funding, staff members’ phobia towards computers, lack of appropriate
technological infrastructure, technical expertise, and deteriorating digital media (Pandey &
Misra, 2014). It is obvious that issues concerning funding, technology, staffing, and copyright
represent examples of major categories regarding digitization challenges. The literature
investigated such issues closely within different contexts, besides solutions were suggested to
overcome these challenges successfully as discussed in the next sub-sections (Sections 2.1.8.1.2.1.8.4.).
Digitization is facing serious challenges that cause dramatic effects in its application. This
section reports on the challenges encountered and is divided into four sub-sections. The first
(Section 2.1.8.1) discusses the funding challenges and their suggested solutions, while the second
(Section 2.1.8.2.) describes the technology challenges regarding digitization, along with
suggested solutions. The third sub-section (Section 2.1.8.3.) details staffing challenges and
suggested solutions, while the fourth sub-section (Section 2.1.8.4.) provides an overview of
copyright challenges and suggested solutions. All sub-sections will be discussed briefly in order
to achieve a comprehensive representation and clarification regarding challenges encountered
within the context of digitization.

53

2.1.8.1.

Funding challenges and suggested solutions

Academic Libraries have greater access to historical documents and other resources, as
well as obtaining both foundation assistance and federal funds to participate in materials
preservation (Liu, 2004). However, it is an expensive, difficult, and long-term process to build a
digital library system and a digital preservation system (Alam, 2012). A large amount of funding
is needed for digitization projects, since these projects are costly (Pandey & Misra, 2014).
Funding issues may have a huge impact on both current and future digitization initiatives. It is
one of the most common challenges facing digitization projects in various contexts described in
the literature. In some cases, it was considered the main challenge for certain digitization
projects. Logically, funding and financial constraints may negatively affect other factors of
digitization projects, such as staff training and technology infrastructure.
From a statistical point of view, the Primary Research Group (2013) in its survey
mentioned that the annual budget for digitization projects at college libraries reached $59,439,
while $41,675 is the mean of digitization expenses spent by the participants in United States.
Recent statistics by Primary Research Group Staff (2016) reported that the mean of the annual
budget of college or university libraries for digitization projects reached $95,033.89, while
$51,972.41 was the mean of the annual budget of the surveyed participants located in the United
States. Clearly, the reported statistics by both Primary Research Group’s (2013) and Primary
Research Group Staff’s (2016) show that the annual budget for digitization projects dramatically
increased in the contexts of college or university libraries in United States within the short span
of three years.

54

However, The Institute of Museum and Library Services (2006) mentioned that 40% of
large academic libraries received funding to support their digitization activities. Many studies
discussed the funding issue and its impact on digitization projects (Conway, 1994; Lee, 2001;
Pandey & Misra, 2014; Potter & Holley, 2010). Digitization projects are very expensive in terms
of money needed and time required (Lee, 2001). For instance, Ebdon et al. (1999) mentioned that
the IFLA/UNESCO survey revealed US$7.72 is the average estimated per-page cost for
digitizing. Also, acquiring digital imaging technology is expensive, the case as well for many
other issues including funding maintenance contracts, needed labor, and systems upgrades
(Conway, 1994). Funding the needed hardware, software, accommodation, and staff are
examples of costs for in-house digitization (Lee, 2001). Also, the digitization process creates
expenses such as maintenance and other costs for computer storage (Potter & Holley, 2010).
Indeed, The Institute of Museum and Library Services (2006) found that lack of both staff time
and funds were the greatest obstacles for digitization activities.
Solutions and recommendations to overcome these funding challenges were suggested by
many studies. For instance, Kannappanavar et al. (2010) mentioned that most costs of digitizing
library materials are spent on both the technical staff with the required expertise and other
additional resources, whereas cataloging new materials adds more cost to the budget. Hence, it is
recommended to include several categories for digitization projects’ budgets such as: services
and legal fees, maintenance, training the staff, and indirect costs (Pandey & Misra, 2014).
Furthermore, not digitizing rarely used collections is recommended, because the costs cannot be
justified regarding time, money, and resources (Kannappanavar et al., 2010). Similarly, other
researchers and specialists came up with a variety of solutions to overcome funding issues facing
digitization projects. For example, Ifijeh, Iwu-James, and Osinulu (2015) suggested practical
55

solutions regarding newspaper digitization in Nigerian academic libraries through starting library
advocacy programs to attract attention and gain help from the public, besides seeking financial
funds for digitization programs from telecommunication companies and participating in library
consortia.

2.1.8.2.

Technology challenges and suggested solutions

Each element of the digitization project is affected by technology, which is changeable in
its nature (Purcell, 2016). Technological issues are experienced along different stages of the
digitization process; they appear in varying levels of complexity as well. For instance,
complicated technical challenges occur during digital image conversion (Conway, 1994).
Furthermore, there are many technological issues such as: defining the digital image’s size on the
Web site owned by the library and using internal servers of the library to store thousands of
image files, besides the reliability of the used software and equipment (Liu, 2004). Keneley et al.
(2016) indicated that issues related to file sizes and quality are caused as a result of large
photographs or letter books, which contain copies of correspondence on onion-skin paper.
There is a need to enhance the technology used for digitizing analog materials, in
addition to addressing the needs of end-users through providing more efficient tools for
transforming digital content (National Digital Library Program at the Library of Congress, n.d.).
According to Amollo (2011), libraries should create standards for digitization, particularly for
the intended processes, so interoperability will be ensured through standardization if libraries
choose to cooperate. Regarding standardization, Kanyengo (2009) mentioned that costs will be
reduced through having a uniform standardized preservation policy made by a consortia of
56

research institutions and universities. Also, Kumar and Sathya (2015) mentioned various
digitization challenges with brief explanations such as: technology obsolescence, multilingual
text support, and data size.
Digital materials are fragile and depend on technologies to maintain their viability
(Flecker, 2003). However, original materials in the analog format should not be replaced by
digital surrogates (Kannappanavar et al., 2010). Unfortunately, technical formats and media of
old digital materials will be unusable as a result of rapid changes in technology (Flecker, 2003).
Moreover, other technological issues may deal with the scanning process itself. Contact
digitization, meaning that the scanner’s glass touches the item’s surface, is usually not allowed
for digitizing delicate and rare items such as paintings; additionally the used lighting may
damage these fragile items (Lee, 2001). Similarly, Bülow and Ahmon (2011) considered
exposure to light as one of the risks occurring during imaging, because imaging systems use light
sources that are more intense compared to the light used within an office context. Also, Bin
(2006) reported the huge amount of data generated in the digitization process during digitizing
Chinese newspapers as a challenge, whereas incomplete original data such as missing special
symbols in PDF pages poses another challenge.
Recommendations, solutions, and suggestions were introduced by researchers to
overcome this encountered technological challenge. For instance, Liu (2004) recommended
avoiding having many steps, using easy equipment, avoiding removing the binding of books,
along with having the feature of curvature correction in the used software for image processing.
Moreover, using simple software applications like Paint Shop Pro for photo imaging, and
mounted digital cameras instead of flatbed scanners, which became trendy, were ideas suggested

57

by Liu (2004). Liu’s (2004) observation regarding the use of digital cameras may help in
avoiding damage caused by contact digitization described earlier in Lee’s (2001) research.

2.1.8.3.

Staff Skills challenges and suggested solutions

“There are many staff roles, each requiring different skills and abilities, that must work
together to build a successful digital collection” (NISO Framework Working Group, 2007, p.
88). Staff skills are considered as one of the most serious challenges facing digitization. Many
studies reported a critical gap in training staff to adequately handle digitization projects. For
instance, Iwhiwhu and Eyekpegha (2009) found that 42.5% of the library staff did not receive
any ICT training, whereas 70% of the respondents indicated that digitization projects are not
managed by trained personnel. Similarly, Alhaji (2007) reported that 70% of the survey
respondents had no prior digitization experience, making inadequate knowledge and skills one of
the main challenges facing Nigerian university libraries. Also, Vrana (2010) mentioned that all
surveyed public libraries in Croatia need more education in digitization and developing digital
collections for their librarians. However, (Ifijeh et al., 2015) implied that having highly trained
people to plan or implement digitization projects is missing, further, it is difficult and costly to
locate information technology experts in Nigeria.
The mean number of man hours spent annually by staff and associated workers on
digitization efforts in the United States reached 4,924.88, while the mean number of these man
hours within the context of college and university libraries reached 4,317.81 (Primary Research
Group Staff, 2016). It is worth mentioning that the Primary Research Group (2013) mentioned
that the mean number of staff hours spent annually by departments on digitization in the United
58

States reached 2,935.98, while the mean number of these staff hours reached 4,761.21 within the
context of college libraries. As a result, the recent statistics provided by Primary Research Group
Staff’s (2016) study show a dramatic increase in the man hours devoted annually for digitization
effort in the United States. Based on the scope of this doctoral dissertation, these statistics reflect
the importance of enhancing staff skills in digitization. However, 56.25% of the surveyed college
and university libraries assumed that staff labor spent on digitization will remain the same over
the next two years, 6.25% of them expected a drop, and 37.50% of them expected staff labor on
digitization to increase (Primary Research Group Staff, 2016).
Resistance to change is a common matter facing staff regarding a digitization project
(Pandey & Misra, 2014). Unfortunately, a considerable number of librarians do not have basic
computer training, and specialized digitization training (Jagboro et al., 2012). From a practical
perspective, Lampert and Vaughan (2009) of UNLV investigated success factors regarding
digitization programs at 123 Association of Research Libraries member libraries. Although more
than 40% of respondents reported receiving constant administrative support for the digitization
program from the library’s administration, skills related to promotion and marketing, as well as
multimedia formats received the lowest rating averages (Lampert & Vaughan, 2009). However,
The Institute of Museum and Library Services (2006) found that training current staff to maintain
digitization activities is reflected only by 45.2% of academic libraries. However, Maroso (2005)
indicated that online courses and workshops held at the Illinois Digitization Institute helped in
producing better digitization professionals.
Fortunately, there are many other suggested solutions to overcome challenges related to
staffing and relevant expertise. “Training is definitely a viable solution for lack of digitisation
skills as this will reap immediate benefits in terms of increased productivity and raised
59

confidence” (Tanner, 2001, p. 335). For instance, there is a need for training on converting audio
and video materials, as well as considering digital longevity and being prepared for this
challenge (Maroso, 2005). In fact, training library staff in digitization is cheaper than using the
outsourcing solution for a digitization project (Jagboro, et al., 2012). Supporting national
digitization training on a constant basis, either by training models that are appropriate profitmaking ones or seeking permanent funding for them, is recommended (Maroso, 2005).
Also, Alhaji (2007) suggested many recommendations such as staff training through
workshops, seminars, and conferences. Moreover, Rafiq and Ameen (2013a) recommended
providing the needed administrative and monetary supports for the staff to enhance human
resources, in addition to providing seminars and training sessions in digitization. Furthermore,
obtaining adequate ICT facilitates and building learning centers to enhance information access is
recommended, as is ensuring publicity through advocacy programs and producing newsletters for
digitization promotion and information dissemination (Alhaji, 2007).

2.1.8.4.

Copyright challenges and suggested solutions

Copyright issues in digitizing library materials was discussed by many researchers
(Anderson, 2001; Jones, 2005; Liu, 2004; Pandey & Misra, 2014). The Library of Congress
considered intellectual property as the fifth challenge encountered in building an efficient digital
library (Pandey & Misra, 2014). Based on US Copyright Law Section 108, making copies of
works, including the copyrighted ones by libraries and archives, is applicable under certain
conditions, additionally notice of copyright must be included by the library or archive, as well as
copies must not be made for commercial advantage (Liu, 2004).
60

Statements regarding copyright differ among institutions, although access and
downloading for educational purposes - but not for commercial usage - is allowed by majority of
those institutions (Liu, 2004). Nonetheless, solutions regarding copyright challenges were
suggested by the literature within various contexts. Since rules and regulations are not
standardized internationally, consulting a specialized copyright attorney in the area is
recommended before starting a digitization project (Liu, 2004). For instance, Anderson (2001)
mentioned that having copyright clearance for the selected materials is an essential step during
digitizing scientific articles.
Other solutions to solve copyright issues were found in the literature as well. For
instance, a copyright screening system, built within the digitization project The Making of
Modern Michigan (MMM) inventory system, was used to identify the copyright status of
selected materials for digitization based on United States copyright law (Jones, 2005). Moreover,
two training videos were produced by MMM staff to explain the basics of copyright law, and
examples of items from the Special Collections Division at Michigan State University were
provided (Jones, 2005). Another example was provided by researchers from different countries
regarding overcoming this challenge. For instance, (Ifijeh et al., 2015) mentioned that only
historical and out of print newspapers with expired copyrights are digitized by libraries in
developing countries to avoid violating publishers’ rights.
It became obvious that rules regarding copyright laws may differ among countries as
indicated by Liu’s (2004) earlier discussion. These laws must be understood and followed
carefully in order to avoid violating laws or the rights of parties involved in these materials. This
doctoral dissertation is not focusing solely on copyright challenges, instead it aims to examine
the overall challenges facing digitization projects. More information on copyright laws and
61

issues can be found through specialized external resources. Although copyright issues and
solutions from other countries are mentioned in this section, this doctoral dissertation aims to
examine digitization best practices and encountered challenges within the context of academic
libraries located in the United States.

2.2. Chapter Summary
This doctoral dissertation focuses on digitization best practices conducted by academic
libraries located in the United States. Thus, various aspects are related to the scope of this
doctoral dissertation, such as digitization guidelines, digitization process, access and
preservation. Earlier in this chapter, these aspects were discussed through an examination of
relevant literature. Initiating a discussion regarding these aspects by exploring the relevant
literature was achieved to establish a basic understanding.
Issues related to digitization took a place in this chapter. Many aspects related to
digitization were introduced and described for clarification. These aspects concern the
importance of digitization for access and preservation, the digitization process, digitization of
both static and non-static (audiovisual) media, and digitization guidelines. Finally, challenges
facing digitization were discussed. The chapter briefly provided a few solutions to some of the
described challenges.

62

Chapter 3 Research Methodology
Exploring the best practices applied to digitization within the context of academic
libraries in the United States is the main scope of this doctoral dissertation, as is examining and
comparing the levels of compliance, availability, and usefulness reported by academic librarians.
Challenges encountered in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media and solutions are
examined in order to gain a better understanding of both within the context of academic libraries
in the United States. Therefore, five research questions were developed, addressed in the first
chapter of this doctoral dissertation (Section 1.3.), in order to come up with satisfactory answers
after performing data collection and analysis. This chapter describes the adopted research
methodology based on mixed methods research, particularly the explanatory design.
Seeking IRB approval from University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee was essential prior to
gathering both quantitative and qualitative data. This research study has IRB# 18.148 from the
Institutional Review Board at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Gravetter and Forzano
(2012) defined an Institutional Review Board (IRB) as “a committee that examines all proposed
research with respect to its treatment of human participants. IRB approval must be obtained
before any research is conducted with human participants” (p. 127). Applying for IRB approval
must be completed before starting the research project, and determining the level of risk that may
affect participants’ social, physical, and psychological aspects represents the first step that must
be taken during the planning phase of obtaining IRB approval (Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009).
Moreover, it is important to inform the IRB that identifying information will be gathered during
the quantitative phase in order to facilitate the follow-up process (Creswell & Clark, 2011).

63

3.1. Research Design
This explanatory design aims to explore digitization best practices adopted by academic
libraries in the United States for both static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Compliance
levels with digitization guidelines reported by academic librarians are also examined.
Additionally, it aims to explore challenges academic librarians face in digitizing static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media, as well as comparing the challenges posed in digitization of the
different media types. Applied and suggested solutions regarding these challenges are also
investigated.
To put it in another way, this doctoral dissertation aims to survey digitization best
practices among academic libraries in the United States for both static and non-static
(audiovisual) media. Then, it compares the digitization guidelines, compliance levels, challenges,
and solutions related to digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. A mixed
methods design has been adopted, particularly an explanatory design through handling
quantitative and qualitative data within several stages. Regarding the explanatory design,
Creswell and Clark (2011) said “The data analysis procedures in the explanatory design involve
first collecting quantitative data, analyzing the data, and using the results to inform the follow-up
qualitative data collection” (p. 221).
Hence, the phases and steps of this doctoral dissertation are organized based on the
explanatory design. The chronological order of these steps are: 1) defining research questions, 2)
analyzing documents of digitization guidelines, 3) seeking IRB approval, 4) applying purposive
sampling for the quantitative phase, 5) collecting quantitative data through an electronic
questionnaire, 6) analyzing the quantitative data, 7) defining the questions for the semi-structured
64

interviews, 8) applying purposive sampling for the qualitative phase, 9) conducting the semistructured interviews, 10) analyzing the qualitative data, and 11) reporting the final results.
Strengths and weaknesses are associated with this methodology. Creswell and Clark
(2011) mentioned many strengths of the explanatory design. These strengths are: it can be
implemented and written in a straightforward way since it has two-phase structure, it has a strong
quantitative orientation at the beginning, and the gained experience from the first phase helps in
designing the second one (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Consequently, it is clear that this doctoral
dissertation has many of these strengths, all of which are mentioned in this paragraph.
Indeed, this dissertation follows the explanatory design, which means that it has two
sequential phases. The first phase is the quantitative one, using the questionnaire technique to
collect quantitative data. The second phase is qualitative, and using the techniques of both
document analysis and semi-structured interviews to collect qualitative data. Collecting both
quantitative and qualitative data adds considerable depth and richness to the final results. Also,
each phase can be handled separately on a sequential basis, providing the opportunity to design
the qualitative phase based on the quantitative results.
However, the specialized literature reported many challenges encountered in adopting the
explanatory design. Demanding a lengthy amount of time for conducting the study, determining
the quantitative results requiring additional examination, and determining the selection criteria of
participants for the qualitative phase are examples of some of these challenges (Creswell &
Clark, 2011). As a result, this dissertation has a time-frame for conducting both phases, so
quantitative data collection took place during spring 2018 semester. The electronic questionnaire
was activated online for 46 days during this time. Questionnaire responses were analyzed

65

electronically using IBM SPSS Statistics 25 and NVivo 11 for faster analysis. Then, semistructured interviews were conducted for 10 subjects during the same semester. NVivo 11 was
used to analyze the semi-structured interviews.
The qualitative phase examined specific themes such as: 1) digitization technical
specifications, 2) digitization guidelines, 3) levels of usefulness, availability, and compliance
with digitization guidelines, 4) digitization challenges, 5) applied solutions, 6) desired solutions,
7) comments, 8) suggestions for improving current digitization guidelines, and 9) suggestions for
improving digitization. Regarding selection of subjects for the qualitative phase, purposive
sampling was adopted. Diversity was a priority, and efforts were made to ensure that the study
was recruiting interviewees from different states, universities, and those using differing
digitization guidelines. This selection criteria helped in shedding light on digitization from
different perspectives in order to facilitate more a detailed examination.
In conclusion, it is assumed that an explanatory design is highly suitable for the scope of
this doctoral dissertation. It helps in collecting a rich amount of quantitative data, which
facilitates more accurate generalization for the final results. Also, the qualitative phase can be
designed after completing quantitative data collection and analysis. This means better treatment
for the missing quantitative data can be achieved. In other words, the qualitative phase can be
designed to seek information not collected in the quantitative phase. Moreover, exploring
digitization guidelines, compliance levels, encountered challenges, and appropriate solutions can
be systematically achieved by adopting the explanatory design. This design enables mainly
collecting the necessary information in the quantitative phase, whereas further examination can
take place in the qualitative phase.

66

3.2. Sampling
Creswell and Clark (2011) said regarding sampling in the explanatory design that
“sampling occurs at two points in this design: in the quantitative phase and in the qualitative
phase. In this design, the quantitative and qualitative data collections are related to each other
and not independent” (p. 185). Also, the participants in the qualitative follow-up phase must
have already participated in the quantitative data collection (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Obtaining
details from few cases is the reason leading researchers to use purposive sampling (Teddlie &
Tashakkori, 2009). Hence, recruiting subjects through purposive sampling was applied for both
the quantitative and qualitative phases. Purposive sampling was applied for the three data
collection techniques adopted in this doctoral dissertation, these are: 1) document analysis, 2)
electronic questionnaire, and 3) semi-structured interviews.
Regarding sampling for the document analysis technique, purposive sampling was
applied through determining many selection criteria to choose documents for analysis. Source,
location, content, and date represent the main selection criteria. First, identifying the source of
the document is the first step for evaluating it. Only national and regional digitization guidelines
issued by institutions located in the United States were selected, because the context of this
doctoral dissertation focuses on digitization best practices by academic libraries in the United
States.
These digitization guidelines may differ in their length, structure, and content. The
content of the digitization guidelines was another criterion for selection. Most digitization
guidelines contain a variety of topics related to digitization, such as digital preservation, quality
67

control, metadata, and so on. Only sections related to digitization technical specifications and file
formats were analyzed. Hence, a total of five digitization guidelines were analyzed for this
doctoral dissertation, with the time coverage of the selected digitization guidelines starting in
2004 and running until 2017.
Purposive sampling was applied for the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured
interviews to select subjects. Among other libraries, academic libraries in the United States
represent the majority of digitization projects for many reasons (Liu, 2004). Only doctoral
universities with the highest and higher research activity based on 2015 classifications issued by
The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education were selected. Doctoral
universities represent the institutions which awarded, during the update year, a minimum of 20
research or scholarship doctoral degrees with exclusion of professional practice doctoral-level
degrees like MD and JD; both the tribal colleges and special focus institutions are also excluded
(Carnegie Classifications | Basic Classification, 2017). This sampling technique was selected for
this dissertation because it was assumed that universities with high levels of research activities
are: 1) more likely to have active digitization projects, 2) have the availability of sufficient
funding for such projects, and 3) are in possession of larger collections that can be digitized.
The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education has three classifications
for doctoral universities based on their research activity: highest, higher, and moderate (Carnegie
Classifications | Listings, n.d.). However, universities classified as both highest and higher
research activity were selected for this doctoral dissertation. There are 115 doctoral universities
representing the highest classification for research activity (Carnegie Classifications | Standard
Listings, n.d.a). Also, there are 107 doctoral universities representing the higher classification for

68

research activity (Carnegie Classifications | Standard Listings, n.d.b). Hence, a total of 222
universities represent the sample selected for this doctoral dissertation.
The websites of the libraries of these 222 doctoral universities (hereinafter mentioned as
“universities” except if cited from a resource or explained) with the highest and higher research
activity were then visited to collect needed information about library staff engaged with
digitization efforts. For those websites not providing the needed information clearly enough,
phone calls were made as an alternative solution. Two universities were not included in this
study, because the study-required staff information was not obtained, although these two
universities were contacted by phone, and either email or webform.
After collecting the subjects’ information, the electronic questionnaire was sent by email
to the subjects at these 220 universities, with each subject from a different university. An email
invitation was designed for the electronic questionnaire (See Appendix B) with more details
about the study and participation requirements. One requirement was being a full-time staff
member working primarily on digitization at a library that has created a minimum of ten digital
collections. Although this selection criterion may reduce response rates, it was assumed that it
may help in collecting data from library staff more experienced in digitization.
The email invitation was customized for each subject by assigning a unique subject
number. This strategy helped in many aspects, such as sending electronic questionnaire
reminders and interview invitations, recruiting interviewees, and managing incentives. The letter
S and the associated subject number (e.g., S1) are used in referring to direct quote(s) from each
subject. However, after completing data collection, it was determined that seven subjects in the
electronic questionnaire had entered the IRB number (i.e., 18.148) instead of their subject

69

numbers. For that reason, the sentence “Unspecified Subject Number” is used to refer to quotes
from these subjects.
Receiving more responses for the electronic questionnaire helped in producing more
detailed and accurate results for the quantitative phase. Many strategies were taken in order to
increase the response rate of the electronic questionnaire, such as: 1) using an electronic
questionnaire to reach distant subjects, 2) assigning subject numbers instead of collecting
identifying information, 3) asking direct and main questions, 4) using simple and clear language,
5) allowing 46 days to collect responses, 6) sending five reminder emails, and 7) providing
incentives through a drawing in which ten winners were selected.
After sending the electronic questionnaire to 220 recipients, one subject was unable to
participate due to not meeting the participation requirements detailed in the invitation email. As a
result, the total sample of the electronic questionnaire was reduced to 219 subjects. Participation
in the electronic survey was voluntary, subjects were able to quit the electronic questionnaire at
any time. Questions regarding age, gender, and most recent academic degree were optional and
could be skipped by the subjects.
Regarding the received responses, subjects (N=78) who selected “Yes” on the consent
form of the electronic questionnaire were able to start answering the questions. Only two
responses were redirected to skip the electronic questionnaire, because they selected “No” on the
consent form. A total of eight responses only agreed to the consent form without answering any
more questions, whereas only two responses agreed to the consent form and responded to the
subject number question. By eliminating these 12 responses, the number reached 68 out of 219

70

subjects. In other words, the response rate for this electronic questionnaire is 31.05%. Table 3.1
shows the demographic data of the 68 subjects in the electronic questionnaire:
Table 3.1
Demographic Data of the Subjects in the Electronic Questionnaire (N=68)
Measurement

Count

Percentage

18-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70 or more

7
23
19
13
6
0

10.29%
33.82%
27.94%
19.12%
8.82%
0%

Female
Male
Other

49
19
0

72.06%
27.94%
0%

High School
Bachelor
Master
Doctoral
Other

1
11
53
3
0

1.47%
16.18%
77.94%
4.41%
0%

Age

Gender

Most Recent Academic Degree

Subjects were asked to indicate the state in which their academic university is located by
giving them 52 multiple choices. Only 64 subjects answered this question. Responses were
collected from all the different areas in the United States without being limited to selected
regions. Table 3.2 shows the states selected by the subjects in the electronic questionnaire:

71

Table 3.2
The States that Subjects’ Academic University is Located
State
AK
AL
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
IA
ID
IL
IN
KS
KY
LA
MA
MD
ME
MI
MN
MO
MS

Count Percentage
1
1.47%
2
2.94%
1
1.47%
1
1.47%
3
4.41%
4
5.88%
1
1.47%
1
1.47%
1
1.47%
2
2.94%
2
2.94%
0
0%
0
0%
0
0%
4
5.88%
1
1.47%
1
1.47%
2
2.94%
0
0%
4
5.88%
2
2.94%
0
0%
2
2.94%
1
1.47%
1
1.47%
2
2.94%

State
MT
NC
ND
NE
NH
NJ
NM
NV
NY
OH
OK
OR
PA
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VA
VT
WA
WI
WV
WY

Count
0
2
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
4
2
0
3
0
0
0
1
0
2
3
2
0
0
2
0
0

No Response

4

5.88%

Total

68

100%

Percentage
0%
2.94%
0%
0%
1.47%
0%
1.47%
1.47%
1.47%
5.88%
2.94%
0%
4.41%
0%
0%
0%
1.47%
0%
2.94%
4.41%
2.94%
0%
0%
2.94%
0%
0%

The sixth question in the electronic questionnaire asked the subjects to enter their current
job titles. A total of 68 responses were collected for this optional open-ended question. Open
coding for the collected qualitative data was conducted through using NVivo 11 to analyze the
main terms of these job titles. A total of 11 job titles included either the term “Archivist” or
“Archives,” whereas only two job titles from these 11 included the terms “Digital.” A total of
72

nine job titles included the phrase “Digital Collection,” whereas only 4 job titles included the
phrase “Special Collections.” A total of 23 Job titles included at least one of the following terms
“Digital Initiatives,” “Digital Library,” “Digital Production,” “Digital Projects,” “Digital
Scholarship,” or “Digital Services.” Also, the qualitative analysis investigated the occurrence of
the term “Digitization” and other similar words like “Conversion,” “Imaging,” “Reformatting,”
and “Scanning.” It was found that only nine job titles contained the term “Digitization,” whereas
other eight job titles included at least one of the following terms: “Conversion,” “Imaging,” and
“Reformatting.” Only two job titles included the term “Metadata,” whereas a total of ten job
titles included at least one of the following terms: “Associate,” “Head,” “Digital,” “Director,”
“Librarian,” “Officer,” “Specialist,” and “Systems.”
Subjects were asked about their years of experience working with digitization. Only 65
subjects answered this open-ended question. Table 3.3 shows a categorization for the collected
results:
Table 3.3
A Categorization for the Reported Number of
Years Working with Digitization
Number of Years

Count

5 Years or Less

21

6-10 Years

18

11-15 Years

13

16-20 Years

9

21-25 Years

3

26-30 Years

1

No Response

3

Total

68

73

Subjects were asked to rate their expertise in digitization using a 7-point Likert scale
question. Choosing 1 indicated Not At All Expert, whereas choosing 7 indicated Extremely
Expert. Table 3.4 shows a descriptive analysis based on the collected responses from the
subjects:
Table 3.4
A Descriptive Analysis of Subjects' Digitization Expertise Based on a 7-Point
Likert Scale
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count*

1.00

7.00

5.09

1.31

1.72

67

*One Subject out of 68 did not answer this question.

Figure 3.1 is a pie chart that shows the percentages of the selected choices by the subjects
for the same previous question regarding the subjects’ expertise in digitization:

74

7 (Extremely Expert)
10.29%

No Response
1.47%

1 (Not At All Expert) 2
1.47%
4.41%
3
5.88%
4
11.76%

6
30.88%

5
33.82%

No Response

1 (Not At All Expert)

2

3

4

5

6

7 (Extremely Expert)

Figure 3.1 A pie chart for the selected rating scales regarding subjects’ expertise in digitization

Purposive sampling was applied for the semi-structured interviews to recruit interviewees
based on the diversity of states, universities, and digitization guidelines. Two steps were taken to
recruit interviewees. First, the electronic questionnaire included a paragraph at the end inviting
the subject to participate in the qualitative phase of the study (See Appendix C). Second, two
interview invitation emails (See Appendix D) with approximately 7 days between each round
were sent to the subjects in the electronic questionnaire through tracking their subject numbers.
A total of ten interviewees was recruited for the semi-structured interviews, with each
interviewee from a different university. Table 3.5 shows the demographic data of the
interviewees:

75

Table 3.5
Demographic Data of the Subjects in the Semi-structured Interviews (N=10)
Measurement

Count

Percentage

18-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70 or more

0
5
3
2
0
0

0%
50%
30%
20%
0%
0%

Female
Male
Other

9
1
0

90%
10%
0%

High School
Bachelor
Master
Doctoral
Other

0
1
9
0
0

0%
10%
90%
0%
0%

Age

Gender

Most Recent Academic Degree

Table 3.6 shows the states where the interviewees’ academic university is located:
Table 3.6
The States where the Interviewees’ Academic University is
Located (N=10)
State

Count

Percentage

CA
GA
IL
KY
MA
MD
NY

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%
10%

76

OH
UT
WI

1
1
1

10%
10%
10%

Incentives were offered for the subjects to achieve an appropriate response rate for the
electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews. Regarding incentives for the electronic
questionnaire, there was a drawing for ten Amazon.com gift cards (each gift card equaled $50)
participating in the electronic questionnaire. Subjects were able to enter the drawing even if they
did not participate in the online survey by sending their names and email addresses to the
researcher's email address. Regarding incentives for the semi-structured interviews, each
interviewee received a $30 Amazon.com gift card after completing the semi-structured
interview.

3.3. Data Collection
Creswell and Clark (2011) mentioned, regarding the explanatory design, that quantitative
data is collected and analyzed, then followed by the follow-up qualitative data collection, which
is identified based on the analyzed results of the quantitative data. Sampling occurs twice: once
in the quantitative phase and again in the qualitative phase (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Figure 3.2
represents the chronological order of the three data collection techniques applied in this doctoral
dissertation:

77

1. Document analysis
(Qualitative)

2. Electronic
questionnaire
(Quantitative &
Qualitative)

3. Semi-structured
interviews
(Qualitative)

Figure 3.2 Chronological order of the data collection techniques applied in this doctoral
dissertation

3.3.1. Document analysis
Document analysis is the first data collection technique conducted at the beginning of this
doctoral dissertation. This technique helps in building a comprehensive understanding regarding
the needs of these academic libraries in practicing digitization. Examining digitization guidelines
issued by different agencies, archives, associations, consortia, and institutions aids in
understanding how digitization best practices are defined in different contexts. The goal of
selecting these digitization guidelines is to understand the digitization recommendations and
conduct document analysis (Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.) in the fourth chapter of this doctoral
dissertation.
78

There are many digitization guidelines, such as ISO/TR 13028:2010 “Information and
documentation - Implementation guidelines for digitization of records,” but restricted access and
cost were two reasons for excluding this document from being analyzed for this doctoral
dissertation. Instead, many other digitization guidelines were found on the internet, by using the
Google search engine (URL: https://www.google.com/), and through conducting several online
searches. Only national and regional digitization guidelines issued by institutions in the United
States were selected, since this study focuses exclusively on academic libraries in the United
States. Selecting these two types of digitization guidelines helped in examining guidelines that
might be more popular and more readily adopted than those published by local universities or
archives. This means that digitization guidelines issued by local states, universities, or archives
were not selected. As a result, the selected digitization guidelines had publication or revision
dates ranging from 2004 till 2017.
Digitization guidelines were intentionally chosen to reflect different contexts.
Digitization guidelines issued by different institutions were selected for document analysis. This
variation of contexts helped in understanding the needs of these contexts from digitization, as
well as creating a wider image regarding digitization implementation in different contexts. Also,
there remains a possibility that these different digitization guidelines might be adopted by the
examined universities. Most examined digitization guidelines contain sections related to different
digitization practices such as metadata, quality control, used software, and others. However, only
sections dealing with technical specifications and file formats were examined closely for this
document analysis. Other sections of those guidelines (e.g., file naming, metadata, quality
control, and software) are beyond the scope of this doctoral dissertation.

79

A total of five digitization guidelines issued by specialized institutions in the United
States were selected. One of the examined digitization guidelines (i.e., CARLI) has five
documents, so a total of nine documents were included in the document analysis. These
guidelines represent the selected sample for this study, but not the entire population. Also, it is
not guaranteed whether they are adopted by academic libraries in the United States. These
guidelines were analyzed, and briefly discussed in the fourth chapter of this doctoral dissertation
(Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.) as a first step of data collection process. The following list shows
the sources of the examined digitization guidelines arranged by alphabetical order, whereas the
titles of these documents are italicized:
1. ALCTS: Association for Library Collections and Technical Services (Minimum
digitization capture recommendations)
2. BCR’s CDP Digital Imaging Best Practices Working Group (BCR’s CDP digital imaging
best practices)
3. CARLI: Consortium of Academic and Research Libraries in Illinois (Guidelines for the
creation of digital collections: Digitization best practices for audio, Guidelines for the
creation of digital collections: Digitization Best Practices for Images, Guidelines for the
creation of digital collections: Digitization best practices for moving images, Guidelines
for the creation of digital collections: Digitization Best Practices for Text, and
Guidelines for the creation of digital collections: Digitization Best Practices for ThreeDimensional Objects)
4. FADGI: Federal Agencies Digital Guidelines Initiative (Technical guidelines for
digitizing cultural heritage materials: Creation of raster image files)

80

5. NARA: National Archives and Records Administration (NARA Technical guidelines for
digitizing archival materials for electronic access: Creation of production master files –
raster images)
More digitization guidelines were included in the electronic questionnaire designed for
this doctoral dissertation (Appendix C). For instance, Question 17 included a choice concerning
digitization guidelines from the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions
(IFLA) (referring to the Guidelines for Planning the Digitization of Rare Book and Manuscript
Collections from URL: https://www.ifla.org/files/assets/rare-books-and-manuscripts/rbmsguidelines/guidelines-for-planning-digitization.pdf). Also, Question 31 included a choice
regarding the digitization guidelines from the International Association of Sound and
Audiovisual Archives (IASA) along with other choices. The reason for providing more
digitization guidelines in the electronic questionnaire is that these guidelines might be adopted
by the examined academic libraries. Further, it was noted that static media digitization is
discussed by more guidelines as compared to non-static (audiovisual) media. Consequently, the
electronic questionnaire listed eight choices of digitization guidelines for static media, whereas
fewer choices were mentioned for non-static (audiovisual).
Document analysis has many strengths and weaknesses as a data collection technique. In
the context of this doctoral dissertation, identifying official digitization guidelines by various
institutions is a major strength. Hence, electronic documents that were published by specialized
institutions were examined to achieve a high level of authenticity. Several national and regional
digitization guidelines were analyzed during the document analysis process. Further, much
important information was contained in the examined documents, such as file formats, technical
specifications, digitization phases, and other topics.
81

Unfortunately, some weaknesses were also identified during the process of document
analysis. For instance, the examined five digitization guidelines for this doctoral dissertation
differ in their structure, scope, length, detail, and content. Consequently, a selective examination
was applied in order to achieve parallel analysis of all five digitization guidelines. In other
words, sections regarding file formats and technical specifications of those digitization
guidelines were purposively selected for the analysis process (Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2).
Furthermore, attention was paid to selecting the most recent versions of these digitization
guidelines where applicable in order to include the most current and updated information.

3.3.2. Questionnaire
There are many advantages to the questionnaire, among them: the mail questionnaire
collects “frank answers” (Powell, 1997, p. 90), facilitates easier collection and analysis of
quantitative data, and large amounts of data can be collected within a short time (Powell, 1997).
The electronic questionnaire is applied as a quantitative data collection technique in this doctoral
dissertation (see Appendix C). There are three reasons for using the electronic questionnaire in
this doctoral dissertation, which are: 1) reaching distant subjects located in different states, 2)
collecting the largest possible amount of data needed for descriptive and inferential statistics, 3)
addressing closed-ended and open-ended questions easily to facilitate faster and more accurate
data collection and analysis.
The electronic questionnaire was designed via Qualtrics Survey Software (URL:
https://www.qualtrics.com/). The link of the electronic questionnaire was sent by email invitation
(See Appendix B) to the 220 subjects; each subject was from a different university. Voluntary
82

participation was granted for the electronic questionnaire, which means that subjects could
withdraw at any time. Responses were collected from February 14, 2018 until March 31, 2018
(46 days). Five electronic reminders were sent through the email to the subjects approximately
every 7-10 days in an effort to increase the response rate.
The electronic questionnaire had three major sections: 1) Demographic & General
Information, 2) Digitization of Static Media, and 3) Digitization of Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media. The questions of the second and third sections were almost identical to draw comparisons
between these sections during the data analysis process. In general, the electronic questionnaire
had 44 questions distributed among all the sections. These questions were either mandatory (i.e.,
1, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 28, 35, 36, 38, 40, 42, and 43) or optional. The electronic questionnaire had
a combination of closed-ended and open-ended questions.
It was important to have closed-ended questions for most of the questions (e.g., Likert
scale, multiple choice, and check all that apply) to reach a higher accuracy and faster data
analysis. Teddlie and Tashakkori (2009) mentioned that Likert scale is a 5-point scale to examine
a respondent’s level of either agreement or disagreement towards several items related to a topic.
Instead, this doctoral dissertation used the 6-point and 7-point scales in the electronic
questionnaire to conduct inferential statistical analysis (e.g., the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test
[two-tailed]). Therefore, questions 19, 22, 24, 34, 37, and 39 in the electronic questionnaire were
designed based on the 6-point Likert scale, whereas the statements in questions 26 and 41 (e.g.,
“University staff need more professional training on digitization skills for static media” in
Question 26) were designed based on the 7-point Likert scale.

83

On the other hand, open-ended questions help in collecting qualitative data. For example,
there was an open-ended question asking the subjects to provide reasons for their compliance
with the selected digitization guidelines for static media. The open-ended questions were
distributed among the three sections of the electronic questionnaire to collect more in-depth
qualitative data. Also, the first section had a question that facilitates the possibility that subjects
who indicated that their universities have a digitization plan have the ability to upload that plan
into the electronic questionnaire. The last question in the electronic questionnaire asked the
subjects to share any further comments which may help in identifying related issues not covered
in the previous questions.
Questionnaires have many strengths, a reason researchers often favor them as a data
collection technique. Questionnaires tend to be inexpensive, measuring attitudes in a good way,
analyzing closed-ended questions easily, and turnaround quickly (Johnson & Turner, 2003). For
these reasons, Qualtrics Survey Software was used to distribute the electronic questionnaire to
the target sample, saving time and expenses. Also, subjects’ attitudes can be measured in a fairly
precise way, such as using the Likert scale to check subjects’ attitudes.
There are some drawbacks to using questionnaires as a data collection technique. For
example, personal contact between researcher and participant is absent, and qualifying answers
for unclear questions cannot be ascertained by the participant (Powell, 1997). Other drawbacks
include a low response rate, that they must be designed to be short, the possible occurrence of
missing data, missing responses to selective items, and that analyzing open-ended questions
consumes time (Johnson & Turner, 2003). For these reasons, the electronic questionnaire was
short and questions were consciously constructed to be simple as a way to avoid
misunderstanding. Also, five electronic reminders were sent via email to subjects on a regular
84

basis in an effort to maximize the response rate. Regarding missing data and responses,
interviews were conducted to collect missing data in the electronic questionnaire. Further, a
limited number of open-ended questions were addressed in the electronic questionnaire in order
to avoid difficulties and save time during data analysis.

3.3.3. Semi-structured interviews
Semi-structured interviews represent the third data collection technique used in this
doctoral dissertation. The main purpose of using semi-structured interviews is to collect in-depth
data not gathered through the electronic questionnaire. Interviews provide a great chance to
reveal complex information, whereas the personal contact encourages participants to fully
respond (Powell, 1997). Therefore, this data collection technique represents a perfect tool to
collect intensive data regarding specific themes that were addressed by this doctoral dissertation.
Asking open-ended questions during the semi-structured interviews helped in collecting
more data that may not have been collected by the electronic questionnaire. The semi-structured
interviews discussed different topics (See Appendix F) related to digitization, such as: 1)
digitization challenges, 2) applied solutions, 3) suggested solutions, and 4) suggestions to
enhance digitization guidelines for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Ten
interviewees were recruited for semi-structured interviews; each interviewee was from a
different university. Interviewees were located in different states, so were asked for their
preferences to conduct the semi-structured interview either online or over the telephone. A total
of nine semi-structured interviews were conducted over the telephone and one semi-structured
interview was conducted online over Skype.
85

Interviews have many strengths as a data collection technique. Interviews are adopted in
order to seek in-depth qualitative data, as well as to ask individuals about their opinions and
feelings regarding current situations and future predictions (Pickard, 2007). There are other
strengths of interviews, among them: the turnaround of telephone interviews is very fast,
reaching a high response rate, they are very beneficial for both confirmation and exploration, and
measuring attitudes in a good way (Johnson & Turner, 2003). Consequently, open-ended
questions were used when querying interviewees regarding important issues, particularly the
challenges of and solutions regarding digitization. These open-ended questions helped in
exploring other issues not covered earlier.
Although semi-structured interviews represent a powerful tool for collecting data, they
suffer from some weaknesses. For instance, Powell (1997) mentioned that it is easier for persons
interviewed by phone tend to end the interview before it is completed. Therefore, two steps were
taken to overcome the weaknesses of this data collection technique. First, appointments for
conducting these interviews were scheduled with the interviewees based on their convenience.
Second, open-ended questions were limited in number and clear in wording to keep the
interviewees interested.
There are also many limitations to interviews as a data collection technique. Some of
these weaknesses are: low perceived anonymity by the respondents, validation needed for
measurement, analyzing open-ended questions consumes time, and investigator effects are
possible (Johnson & Turner, 2003). Consequently, as many steps as possible were taken to avoid
these issues. Regarding anonymity, subject numbers were used for the interviewees in order to
protect their privacy (e.g., S1 mentioned the following suggestions to overcome digitization
challenges). Regarding improving validity, triangulation was applied by asking a colleague to
86

check the analysis of two interviews. Also, open-ended questions were addressed directly to the
interviewee to avoid investigator effects. Finally, NVivo 11, a data analysis software program,
was used to analyze the collected qualitative data.
In all, three data collection techniques were applied to collect data: document analysis, an
electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. Triangulation of data collection
techniques helped in collecting quantitative and qualitative data about the same concept in order
to acquire a more detailed understanding. For instance, digitization challenges and suggested
solutions were discussed in the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews. This
helped in examining digitization challenges and suggested solutions more closely. Triangulation
is discussed in greater detail in the section subtitled Internal and external validity (Section
3.5.1.).

3.4. Data Analysis
Regarding data analysis and interpretation in the explanatory design, Creswell and Clark
(2011) said “Key data analysis decisions relate to how to use the quantitative analysis to identify
participants to determine what results will be explained qualitatively, and to decide how the
qualitative results explain the quantitative results” (p. 221). Hence, there are two separate stages
of analyzing collected data for this doctoral dissertation, which concern both quantitative and
qualitative results.
Further, this dissertation is also a comparative study, which aims to compare the collected
data of the levels of compliance, availability, and usefulness of digitization guidelines reported
by academic librarians for static versus non-static (audiovisual) media. Additionally, it compares
87

the challenges facing digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media, as well as applied
and suggested solutions for exploring differences. Again, this dissertation follows the
explanatory design, where both quantitative and qualitative data collection techniques are
applied. Table 3.7 represents the applied techniques for data collection and analysis adopted for
this doctoral dissertation.
Table 3.7
Methods of Data Collection & Analysis
Research Questions

Data Collection
Techniques

1) How do academic libraries comply
1) Document Analysis
with digitization guidelines and
2) Questionnaire
associated reasons?
3) Semi-structured
A) What are the digitization
interviews
guidelines and technical
specifications adopted by
academic libraries for digitizing
static and non-static
(audiovisual) media?
B) To what extent do academic
libraries comply with digitization
guidelines and what are the
associated reasons?
C) To what extent is the availability
of the digitization guidelines and
what are the associated reasons?
D) To what extent is the usefulness
of the digitization guidelines and
what are the associated reasons?

Data Analysis
Techniques
1) Descriptive
Statistics
2) Open Coding

2) Are there differences in relation to
academic libraries’ reported
compliance with the static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media
digitization guidelines?

1) Questionnaire

1) Statistical Analysis
for Comparison
(Paired Samples
Test and Wilcoxon
Signed Ranks Test
[two-tailed])

3) What are the challenges that
academic libraries face in

1) Questionnaire
2) Semi-structured
interviews

1) Descriptive Statics
2) Open Coding

88

digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media?
4) Are there differences in the
challenges that academic libraries
face in digitizing static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media?

1) Questionnaire

1) Statistical Analysis
for Comparison
(Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks Test [twotailed])

5) What are the solutions that academic
libraries apply or suggest how to
overcome these challenges?

1) Questionnaire
2) Semi-structured
interviews

1) Descriptive Statics
2) Open Coding

This doctoral dissertation went through multiple stages of data collection and analysis.
Document analysis of digitization guidelines was the first step in the sequence of data collection
and analysis. This was followed by distributing the electronic questionnaire and then analyzing
the collected data in order to define the questions of the semi-structured interviews. Diversity of
states, universities, and digitization guidelines were all among the considerations in selecting
interviewees. Once selections were made, semi-structured interviews were conducted and
recorded to facilitate transcribing them via computer software Nuance Dragon
NaturallySpeaking Premium (Version 13), prior to analyzing the interviews. Different computer
software programs were used to assist in data analysis for the quantitative and qualitative phases
of this study. Both IBM SPSS Statistics 25 and NVivo 11 were used to analyze data collected in
the electronic questionnaire, whereas NVivo 11 was used to analyze the data collected during the
semi-structured interviews. Figure 3.3 represents this sequence of data collection and analysis
techniques:

89

Document
Analysis

Distributing
Electronic
Questionnaire

Analyzing
Electronic
Questionnaire

Designing and
Conducting
semistructured
Interviews

Analyzing
semistructured
Interviews

Figure 3.3 Sequence of data collection and analysis techniques

3.4.1. Quantitative data analysis
There are several statistical techniques for analyzing numeric data such as: descriptive
versus inferential statistics, and parametric versus nonparametric statistics (Teddlie &
Tashakkori, 2009). Quantitative data analysis starts from descriptive to inferential, whereas more
refined results can be achieved by following the various steps provided using inferential analysis
(Creswell & Clark, 2011). Generating interpretable tables and graphs, as well as a group’s
representation or scores are examples of summarizing numeric data using descriptive statistical
methods (Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009). Therefore, Qualtrics Survey Software helped in
providing descriptive statistics for the quantitative data collected by the electronic questionnaire.
For instance, Question 11 asked “Does your university have a DIGITIZATION PLAN?” so the
responses for each choice were calculated as percentages.
The majority of the collected quantitative data for the second and fourth research
questions do not have normal distribution based on the normality tests conducted using IBM
90

SPSS Statistics 25 (See Appendix G). The Paired Samples Test was applied only on specific sets
of quantitative data related to the second research question, because they had normal distribution.
Vaughan (2001) mentioned that the equivalent nonparametric test to the paired t test is the
Wilcoxon signed ranks test, and it can be used when the frequency distributions are very skewed.
Hence, statistical analysis for comparison (i.e., Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test [two-tailed]) was
applied for the two research questions of this doctoral dissertation to compare between static and
non-static (audiovisual) media. The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was used, because of the
interest in analyzing paired data collected from only one sample. The same subject answered
questions of static and non-static (audiovisual) media in the electronic questionnaire. A twotailed test was used, because at this moment there is no information that indicates which sample
(i.e., static and non-static [audiovisual] media) is better than the other.
Applying statistical analysis for the second research question helped in comparing the
reported compliance level with the static media digitization guidelines to the compliance level
with the non-static (audiovisual) media digitization guidelines. For instance, Question 19 in the
electronic questionnaire (see Appendix C) deals with compliance levels with static media
digitization guidelines, whereas Question 34 deals with compliance levels with non-static
(audiovisual) media digitization guidelines. These two questions were designed based on a 6point Likert scale from 0% “Not At All Complied” to 100% “Strongly Complied.” Then, the
subject rated his/her compliance level on a percentage scale from 0% to 100% for each listed
digitization guideline.
Hence, the Paired Samples Test and Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test (two-tailed) were
applied by using IBM SPSS Statistics 25 on parallel questions between the second and third
major sections of the electronic questionnaire. Comparisons were conducted between the levels
91

of compliance, availability, and the usefulness of digitization guidelines for static media (i.e.,
questions 19, 22 and 24) versus non-static (audiovisual) media (i.e., questions 34, 37 and 39) that
were mentioned in the electronic questionnaire. Similarly, comparisons were conducted to
compare the agreement levels of the challenges encountered in digitization of static media (i.e.,
Question 26) and those of non-static (audiovisual) media (i.e., Question 41) in the electronic
questionnaire. This statistical analysis helped in rejecting or failing to reject the 15 hypotheses
(Section 1.3.) with a significance level at 0.05.
Because the electronic questionnaire has 13 open-ended questions, they were handled
differently. A qualitative analysis by using open-coding was applied for these open-ended
questions. For instance, one of the open-ended questions in the electronic questionnaire (i.e.,
Question 27) asked about the top five challenges that subjects’ universities faced in digitizing
static media. Hence, anonymous examples were mentioned in the results (e.g., S1 mentioned this
issue as a digitization challenge encountered digitizing static media). Also, similar challenges
were grouped together to calculate their frequency. The following section (Section 3.4.2.)
provides a detailed explanation for the qualitative data analysis applied for this doctoral
dissertation.

3.4.2. Qualitative data analysis
Analyzing qualitative data is eclectic (Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009). Also, Flick (2014)
recommended recording and transcribing interviews to create a database for the analysis
procedure. Data coding, creating small units from the text via division, conducting label
assignment to the created units, then grouping the codes based on themes is achieved during
92

analyzing the qualitative data (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Generating emergent themes which
were evolved by examining particular pieces of information is adopted by the majority of
qualitative analytic techniques (Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009). Furthermore, Creswell (2013)
described open coding as “coding the data for its major categories of information” (p. 86).
Regarding open coding, Flick (2014) indicated that expressions can be classified by the
meaning’s units, which facilitate attaching both annotations and concepts. However, theoretical
saturation means that coding ends once no more theoretical insights are newly discovered (Flick,
2014). Therefore, saturation was used during the open coding analysis in order to avoid
information overload.
The questions of the semi-structured interviews were defined after analyzing the
quantitative data. These questions were open-ended and designed to gather more in-depth data
from the interviewees. Semi-structured interviews were conducted either online or over the
telephone, based on the interviewee’s preference. Only one semi-structured interview was
conducted online via a specialized platform (i.e., Skype), whereas nine interviews were
conducted over the telephone. The collected qualitative data were recorded and transcribed, then
analyzed based on the emerging themes. Open coding was performed for the transcribed
interviews to identify emergent themes and create the corresponding categories.
NVivo 11 computer software was used to analyze the collected qualitative data from the
semi-structured interviews. After conducting and transcribing the ten semi-structured interviews,
data were entered into NVivo 11 to start the analysis process. Categories were then created based
off the interviewees’ responses, in addition, labels were assigned to the generated categories.
Open coding has a positive impact on handling qualitative data, because it organizes the data into
categories. This organization facilitates ease in identifying main themes; moreover, classifying
93

responses into small units through open coding makes qualitative analysis easier and more
accurate.
Semi-structured interviews used open-ended questions to collect data (e.g., asking about
the suggested solutions for digitizing static media based on the interviewees’ perspectives) to
facilitate an open coding process during data analysis. For example, digitization challenges were
analyzed by applying open coding (Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2.). Similarly, both applied and
suggested solutions were analyzed using the same coding technique (Sections 4.5.1. and 4.5.2.).
However, a single statement might be coded under more than a single theme during data
analysis, because of its multiple meanings. For instance, S118 said “Grants for digitization
training” as a suggested solution to overcome the challenges facing digitization of static media,
so this statement was coded under two themes of Suggested Solutions (i.e., Funding and Staff
Awareness and Skills). Moreover, some general statements found in the qualitative data were
coded as static and non-static (audiovisual) media, because they did not directly refer to a
specific type of media. Tables 3.8-3.10 show the open coding analysis that is presented in the
fourth chapter of this doctoral dissertation.
Table 3.8
Challenges That Academic Librarians Face in Digitizing Static Media
Types of Challenges

Definitions

94

Table 3.9
Solutions That Academic Librarians Applied to Static Media Digitization
Types of Applied Solutions

Definitions

Table 3.10
Solutions That Academic Librarians Suggested to Static Media Digitization
Types of Suggested Solutions

Definitions

3.5. Validity and Reliability
3.5.1. Internal and external validity
Gravetter and Forzano (2012) defined external validity as “the extent to which we can
generalize the results of a research study to people, settings, times, measures, and characteristics
other than those used in that study” (p. 168). Determining the extent that allows applying the
results by the investigator to a larger population refers to the external validity (Creswell & Clark,
2011). There are strategies and procedures to assess qualitative validity such as memberchecking, and triangulation of data from many resources (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Similarly,
Creswell (2013) considered triangulation as one of the validation strategies, which aims on
corroborating evidence from variant sources in order to explain a theme. (Greene, Caracelli, &
95

Graham, 1989) said, regarding the purpose of applying triangulation, that it “seeks convergence,
corroboration, correspondence of results from the different methods” (p. 259).
Therefore, subjects involved in digitization from different universities all over the United
States were included in this doctoral dissertation. Having subjects from different states helped in
generalizing the findings. All subjects from these 222 universities were included without
applying any limitations to the subjects’ age, gender, years of experience, or academic status.
Furthermore, asking a colleague to check the results of two interviews helped in enhancing the
qualitative validity. Applying triangulation of data collection methods by using document
analysis, an electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews helped to increase the
qualitative validity as well.
On the other hand, Gravetter and Forzano (2012) said regarding internal validity “A
research study has internal validity if it produces a single, unambiguous explanation for the
relationship between two variables” (p. 170, emphasis original). The investigator’s ability to
determine the extent to which a cause and effect relationship between the variables can be
determined represents internal validity (Creswell & Clark, 2011). This doctoral dissertation has
one independent variable with two levels, which are static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
On the contrary, the levels of compliance, availability, usefulness, and challenges represent the
dependent variables. The Likert scale in the electronic questionnaire is adopted to measure the
dependent variables (i.e., levels of compliance [questions 19 and 34], availability [questions 22
and 37], usefulness [questions 24 and 39], and challenges [questions 26 and 41]). Adopting the
Likert scale helped in providing a more precise method to measure the participants’ perspectives
toward these aspects (i.e., levels of compliance, availability, usefulness, and challenges).

96

Additionally, triangulation in data collection helped in improving internal validity by
asking the same question using different tools. For instance, challenges facing digitization were
investigated by using the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews. In other words,
there were open-ended and closed-ended questions that asked about digitization challenges in the
electronic questionnaire; in addition, the semi-structured interviews also contained an openended question about digitization challenges.

3.5.2. Reliability
Having consistent and stable scores over time received from the participants represents
quantitative reliability (Creswell & Clark, 2011). Gravetter and Forzano (2012) defined
reliability of measurement this way: “The reliability of a measurement procedure is the stability
or consistency of the measurement. If the same individuals are measured under the same
conditions, a reliable measurement procedure produces identical (or nearly identical)
measurements” (p. 85, emphasis original). Nonetheless, error can cause inconsistency in a
measurement, while participant changes, environmental changes, and observer error represent
the most common sources of error (Gravetter & Forzano, 2012). Thus, the employment of a
procedure called inter-coder agreement in qualitative research, which consists of hiring several
individuals to code a particular transcript and determine whether they reached the same codes
and themes or not by comparing their work (Creswell & Clark, 2011).
Regarding quantitative reliability, all the doctoral universities with highest and higher
research activity mentioned by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education
(2015 classification) were included in this doctoral dissertation. In an effort to ensure qualitative
97

reliability, a colleague was asked to check the coding of two interviews and calculate the level of
agreement. Since 10 subjects were recruited for the qualitative phase, two interviews were
selected to check the inter-coder reliability. The total number of statements found in the coding
of the two interviews was 128. The researcher and colleague both agreed on the coding of 120
statements. Disagreement occurred on only eight statements out of the total number (i.e., 128
statements). Holsti’s method (C.R. = 2M/N1 + N2) was used to measure the inter-coder reliability
for the two interviews. This means the inter-coder reliability is 93.75%, is a satisfactory
percentage.

3.6. Chapter Summary
This chapter explained the applied methodology for investigating digitization best
practices adopted by academic libraries in the United States. This doctoral study adopted mixed
methods research approach, specifically an explanatory design. The sample for this doctoral
dissertation is doctoral universities with highest and higher research activity based on the 2015
classifications issued by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education.
Three data collection techniques were applied to collect both quantitative and qualitative
data, respectively. Document analysis of five digitization guidelines was performed to identify
official technical specifications and file formats. Then, an electronic questionnaire was
distributed to an academic library at each university of the defined sample. After that, purposive
sampling was applied in order to select 10 subjects for semi-structured interviews, chosen based
on an effort to gather information from diversity of states, universities, and digitization
guidelines.
98

Data analysis was applied in two separate steps during this doctoral dissertation.
Quantitative data collected by the electronic questionnaire were analyzed at the first step of data
analysis. Then, qualitative data collected by the semi-structured interviews were analyzed at the
second step of analysis. Moreover, many techniques were adopted to increase the validity of this
doctoral dissertation, such as triangulation and including all the subjects from the 222
universities without applying any limitations. Inter-coder agreement for two interviews was
applied through using Holsti’s method.

99

Chapter 4 Results
4.1. Adopted digitization guidelines and compliance
4.1.1. Data from Guidelines (Document Analysis)

Digitization best practices for digitizing analog media, both static and non-static
(audiovisual), were created by many associations, organizations, libraries, universities, consortia,
and archives. Only guidelines developed by institutions located in the United States were
selected, because this doctoral dissertation focuses on academic libraries located in United
States. Special attention was dedicated to the recommended technical specifications and file
formats. However, other topics (e.g., quality control and selection of materials) detailed in these
guidelines were not covered in this doctoral dissertation. More information is available on the
original sources of these digitization guidelines. Consequently, a total of five digitization
guidelines were analyzed during document analysis. These discussed either static and non-static
(audiovisual) media or one of two types. The following sections (Sections 4.1.1.1. and 4.1.1.2.)
consist of brief analysis for these guidelines based on their digitization technical specifications.

4.1.1.1.

Static Media

Five digitization guidelines were examined during the document analysis for this doctoral
dissertation, whereas all of them discussed static media digitization. Three documents from
CARLI were grouped together during document analysis. Table 4.1 shows the frequency of
digitization technical specifications among these seven digitization documents:

100

Digitization Technical Specifications

Citation

Source

Digitization Guidelines

Table 4.1
A Brief Matrix of Digitization Technical Specifications Found in the Examined Digitization
Guidelines for Static Media

Bit Depth
Color Mode
Color Space
Compression

ALCTS: Association
BCR’s CDP Digital
for Library Collections Imaging Best Practices
and Technical
Working Group
Services
(BCR’s CDP digital
(Minimum
imaging best
digitization capture
practices )
recommendations )

FADGI: Federal
NARA: National
CARLI: Consortium of Academic
Agencies Digital
Archives and Records
and Research Libraries in Illinois
Guidelines Initiative
Administration
(Guidelines for the creation of
(NARA Technical
digital collections: Digitization (Technical guidelines
for digitizing cultural
guidelines for
Best Practices for Images ) /
heritage materials:
digitizing archival
(Guidelines for the creation of
Creation of raster
materials for
digital collections: Digitization
image files )
electronic access:
Best Practices for Text) /
Creation of
(Guidelines for the creation of
production master
digital collections: Digitization
files – raster images )
Best Practices for ThreeDimensional Objects)

(Bogus, Blood, Dale, BCR’s CDP Digital
Leech, & Mathews, Imaging Best Practices
2013)
Working Group
(2008)




CARLI (2017b) / CARLI
(2017d) / CARLI (2017e)

FADGI (2016)

Puglia, Reed, &
Rhodes, 2004).

































File Format / Extensions
(Access/Derivative Files)
File Format / Extensions
(Master/Preservation Files)
Optical Character
Recognition (OCR)
Pixel Array / Spatial
Dimensions
Ratio



















Resolution














The frequency of each digitization technical specification among the digitization
guidelines in Table 4.1 was calculated on a percentage scale. For instance, if a specific
digitization technical specification (e.g., resolution) was discussed by all five digitization
guidelines, this technical specification (i.e., resolution) received 100%, because of its frequency
of occurrence in all the examined digitization guidelines. Table 4.2 shows the percentages of the
frequency of the digitization technical specifications found in selected digitization guidelines:

101

Table 4.2
Percentage of Frequency of each Digitization Technical Specification Discussed
by the Examined Digitization Guidelines for Static Media (N=5)
Digitization Technical Specification

Percentage

Bit Depth

100%

Color Mode

100%

Color Space

80%

Compression

80%

File Format / Extensions (Access/Derivative Files)

80%

File Format / Extensions (Master/Preservation Files)

80%

Optical Character Recognition (OCR)

80%

Pixel Array / Spatial Dimensions

100%

Ratio

60%

Resolution

100%

According to Table 4.1, some digitization technical specifications occurred more
frequently than others. Bit depth, color mode, and resolution were mentioned in all five
digitization guidelines examined for this study. Also, both file format / extensions
(access/derivative files) and file format / extensions (master/preservation files) occurred among
four digitization guidelines. This finding supports statements mentioned by Zhou (2010) and Xie
and Matusiak (2016) in the third paragraph of the section entitled Digitization of static media
compliance (Section 2.1.6.) of this doctoral dissertation. Zhou (2010) stated that resolution, color
mode, and file format affect the digitized document’s quality and file size, whereas Xie and
Matusiak (2016) mentioned that resolution, color mode, and bit depth directly affect the quality
of digital master files.

102

4.1.1.2.

Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

The document analysis for non-static (audiovisual) media conducted for this doctoral
dissertation found that only two digitization guidelines from the selected sample discussed audio
materials, and digitization guidelines about video and/or moving images materials were
mentioned by two guidelines. Tables 4.3 and 4.4 show the frequency of technical specifications
among these digitization guidelines for audio (Table 4.3), then for video and moving images
(Table 4.4). It is important to clarify that details of the accompanying audio were excluded from
Table 4.4, and that CARLI (2017c) discusses only moving images.

Digitization Technical
Specifications

Citation

Source

Digitization Guideline

Table 4.3
A Brief Matrix of Digitization Technical Specifications Found on the Examined Digitization
Guidelines for Audio
ALCTS: Association for
Library Collections and
Technical Services
(Minimum digitization
capture recommendations )

(Bogus, Blood, Dale, Leech,
& Mathews, 2013)



Bit Depth
Bit Rate
Channel
Compression
File Format / Extensions
(Access/Presentation/Derivative Files)
File Format / Extensions
(Master/Preservation/Archival Files)
Sample Rate

CARLI: Consortium of
Academic and Research
Libraries in Illinois
(Guidelines for the
creation of digital
collections: Digitization
best practices for audio )

CARLI (2017a)










103



Digitization Technical Specifications

Source
Citation

Digitization Guideline

Table 4.4
A Brief Matrix of Digitization Technical Specifications Found on the Examined Digitization
Guidelines for Video
ALCTS: Association for
Library Collections and
Technical Services
(Minimum digitization
capture recommendations )

CARLI: Consortium of
Academic and Research
Libraries in Illinois
(Guidelines for the
creation of digital
collections: Digitization
best practices for moving
images )

(Bogus, Blood, Dale, Leech,
& Mathews, 2013)

CARLI (2017c)

Aspect Ratio
Compression
Data Rate (Bit Rate)
Field Rate
File Formats / Extensions
(Access/Derivative Files)
File Formats / Extensions
(Master/Preservation/Archival Files)
Frame Rate
Resolution
Sample Size (Bit Depth)
Sampling Scheme
Scanning
Video Standard



















Tables 4.3 and 4.4 presented a brief matrix for audio and another one for video/moving
images. Among the selected digitization guidelines, only two discussed audio (Table 4.3). The
quantity of technical specifications for digitizing audio varied between these two guidelines.
Regarding video, only two digitization guidelines discussed digitizing video/moving images
materials (Table 4.4). Similarly, the amount of the discussed digitization technical specifications
for video/moving images materials in both guidelines varied as well.
104

4.1.1.3. Document Analysis Challenges
Although document analysis is a powerful tool for collecting information, it has some
challenges. Within the context of this doctoral dissertation, few challenges were experienced.
The digitization guidelines examined for this doctoral dissertation varied in content, structure,
date, length, detail, and many other aspects. For instance, some discussed digitizing both static
and non-static (audiovisual) media, whereas others discussed only one of them. Also, some of
these guidelines differed in the discussed pre-digitization and post-digitization activities along
with the technical specifications.
Furthermore, the structure of the document’s contents differed among the selected
digitization guidelines. Therefore, facing a variation in the contents and structures of these
digitization guidelines represented a challenge and weakness at the same time. Consequently,
determining specific elements for document analysis was an appropriate solution to effectively
address these differences. Technical specifications and file formats were, therefore, selected as
the elements of document analysis for this dissertation.
Another challenge of document analysis within the context of this doctoral dissertation
was the date of the selected documents. Some digitization guidelines had recent publication or
revision dates; other digitization guidelines may have had earlier dates. This concern raises the
question of whether or not there exists a newer version of the digitization guidelines in question.
Therefore, careful attention was paid, during performing online searches, to locate the newest
available version in an attempt to overcome this challenge.

105

4.1.2. Data from Practitioners (Electronic Questionnaire and Interviews)
The electronic questionnaire asked questions regarding subjects’ awareness of
digitization, such as training programs taken, the university’s digitization plan, as well as
identifying difficult and prioritized items selected for digitization. A total of 46 subjects
(67.65%) indicated that they had taken a training program on digitization, 21 subjects (30.88%)
indicated that they had not, and one subject (1.47%) did not respond to this question. Subjects
who indicated that they had taken a training program on digitization were able to choose the
nature of such training programs. Table 4.5 shows the nature of these training programs on
digitization:
Table 4.5
The Nature of Taken Training Programs
Training Program

Count

Conferences
Lectures
Onsite courses
Online learning
Seminars
Training sessions
Workshops
Other. Please, specify
Total

35
19
15
27
14
23
35
5
173

Regarding the eighth option “Other. Please, specify,” different answers were given by a
few subjects. These included “Webinars” (S62), “Internships/Apprenticeships” (S224), “MLIS
coursework” (S150), and “SAA's DAS and A&E certification” (S118).

106

Regarding the university’s digitization plan, 37 subjects (54.41%) indicated that their
universities have digitization plans, 19 subjects (27.94%) reported that their universities do not
have digitization plans, seven subjects (10.29%) indicated that they do not know, and five
subjects (7.35%) did not answer this question. Subjects who indicated that their universities have
a digitization plan were able to upload their universities’ digitization plans into the Qualtrics
survey. A total of 12 files were uploaded. After briefly analyzing these 12 files, it was noted that
the files differed in length, structure, contents, and level of detail. For instance, differences were
noticed in the lengths (number of pages) of these uploaded digitization plans, which leading to
variations in levels of detail regarding the discussed topics. Also, the contents of the uploaded
digitization plans lacked consistency among most of the uploaded files. These brief findings
indicated that lack of a unified design among these 12 digitization plans.
Questions number 13 and 14 in the electronic questionnaire asked about the types of
material selected for digitization at the subjects’ universities. Two themes, priority and difficulty,
were addressed through these two questions. Subjects were asked to select the three highest
priority items chosen for digitization, and were asked again to select the three most difficult
items chosen for digitization. Reported results in Table 4.6 show the following order of the three
highest prioritized items chosen for digitization as being: 1) photographs, 2) manuscripts, and 3)
rare books. On the other hand, the reported results in Table 4.7 show the order of the three most
difficult items chosen for digitization as being: 1) video, 2) other oversized documents, and 3)
three-dimensional objects. Tables 4.6 and 4.7 show descriptive analysis for these two questions:

107

Table 4.6
The Three Highest Prioritized Items Chosen for Digitization
Items

Standard
Minimum Maximum Mean Deviation Variance Count
(SD)

Non-rare books

1.00

3.00

2

0.67

0.44

9

Rare books

1.00

3.00

2.17

0.85

0.72

24

Manuscripts

1.00

3.00

1.59

0.73

0.54

41

Microform

1.00

3.00

2

0.82

0.67

3

Maps

1.00

3.00

2.42

0.64

0.41

12

Other oversized
documents

2.00

2.00

2

0

0

2

Posters

3.00

3.00

3

0

0

2

Photographs

1.00

3.00

1.78

0.75

0.56

46

Slides

2.00

3.00

2.75

0.43

0.19

4

Three-dimensional
objects

3.00

3.00

3

0

0

1

Audio

1.00

3.00

2.24

0.73

0.53

17

Film

2.00

3.00

2.43

0.49

0.24

7

Video

1.00

3.00

2.44

0.79

0.62

16

Other materials

1.00

3.00

1.75

0.97

0.94

8

108

Table 4.7
The Three Most Difficult Items Chosen for Digitization
Items

Minimum

Standard
Maximum Mean Deviation Variance
(SD)

Count

Non-rare books

1.00

2.00

1.67

0.47

0.22

3

Rare books

1.00

3.00

1.87

0.8

0.64

23

Manuscripts

1.00

3.00

2.17

0.69

0.47

6

Microform

1.00

3.00

1.88

0.78

0.61

8

Maps

1.00

3.00

2

0.96

0.92

13

Other oversized
documents

1.00

3.00

2.13

0.67

0.44

24

Posters

2.00

3.00

2.33

0.47

0.22

3

Photographs

3.00

3.00

3

0

0

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

Three-dimensional
objects

1.00

3.00

2

0.91

0.83

24

Audio

1.00

3.00

2.27

0.81

0.65

22

Film

1.00

3.00

1.77

0.79

0.63

22

Video

1.00

3.00

1.88

0.77

0.59

33

Other materials

1.00

3.00

2

1

1

2

Slides

4.1.2.1.

Static Media

A total of 64 subjects (94.12%) in the electronic questionnaire indicated that their university
digitizes static media (e.g., manuscripts, books, newspapers, maps, posters, and photographs),
whereas four subjects (5.88%) did not answer this question. Regarding the strategy for the

109

digitization process of static media at subjects’ universities, 37 subjects (54.41%) indicated that
only unique materials are selected for digitization, 25 subjects (36.76%) indicated that all the
materials are subject to the digitization process, and six subjects (8.82%) did not respond to this
question.
Subjects were asked about guidelines adopted by their universities for digitizing static media.
Table 4.8 shows the adopted digitization guidelines based on the responses given in the
electronic questionnaire:
Table 4.8
Adopted Guidelines by Subjects’ Universities for Digitizing Static Media
Digitization Guidelines

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library Collections & Technical Services

4

BCR's CDP Digital Imaging Best Practices Working Group

6

FADGI: Federal Agencies Digital Guidelines Initiative. Please, specify the
level of imaging (1, 2, 3, or 4 star)

28

IFLA: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions

0

NARA: National Archives and Records Administration

13

Consortium/Consortia digitization guidelines

11

University's own customized digitization guidelines

43

Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify

6

Total

111

Regarding the level of imaging for FADGI in Table 4.8, many different responses were
collected from the subjects. Two responses indicated 1 star level of imaging, another two
responses indicated 2 star, nine responses indicated 3 star, two responses indicated 3-4 star, three
responses indicated 4 star, one response indicated 2-4 star, and three responses indicated
110

different answers such as “varies” (S47). Moreover, only six subjects reported different answers
for other digitization guidelines, such as “We may scan at higher resolutions when we know
there will likely be requests for enlargements of photographic prints and negatives” (S134),
“https://old.diglib.org/standards/bmarkfin.htm” (S5), and “Western States Digital Imaging Best
Practices and NEDCC Handbook” (S114).
The electronic questionnaire asked subjects regarding the technical specifications that
they follow as their minimum requirements in those digitization guidelines of static media. Table
4.9 shows the count of each technical specification:
Table 4.9
Technical Specifications Subjects Follow as Their Minimum Requirements in
the Digitization Guideline(s) of Static Media
Technical Specifications

Count

Bit Depth

45

Color Mode

38

Color Space

22

Compression

40

Access File Format

43

Master File Format

53

Optical Character Recognition (OCR)

36

Pixel Array

12

Ratio

18

Resolution

54

Spatial Dimension

14

Other. Please, specify

3

Total

378

111

Regarding other technical specifications in Table 4.9, three responses were collected,
such as “File naming protocols” (S105), and “unknown - outside my area of expertise” (S139).
Based on the selected digitization guideline(s) for digitizing static media in the electronic
questionnaire, subjects were asked to indicate their compliance level (0% for Not At All
Complied, whereas 100% for Completely Complied) regarding the use of digitization guidelines
of static media on a 6-point Likert scale. Table 4.10 shows a descriptive analysis for the collected
responses from the subjects:
Table 4.10
A Descriptive Analysis for Compliance Level Regarding the Adopted Digitization
Guidelines of Static Media
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

6

2.92

1.98

3.91

24

BCR's CDP Digital Imaging Best
Practices Working Group

1

6

3.36

2.08

4.31

25

FADGI: Federal Agencies Digital
Guidelines Initiative

1

6

4.24

1.56

2.44

38

IFLA: International Federation of
Library Associations and
Institutions

1

6

2.83

1.95

3.80

23

NARA: National Archives and
Records Administration

1

6

3.53

1.86

3.45

30

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

3.74

1.99

3.97

27

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

5.21

1.15

1.33

48

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

6

4.43

1.59

2.53

7

Digitization Guidelines

112

Three answers were given for the option “Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify”
in Table 4.10, such as: “Department” (S105), and “in house” (S107).
Subjects were asked in the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews to
provide reasons for compliance with the selected guidelines for digitizing static media. After
conducting open coding for the collected responses, Table 4.11 shows the types and definitions
of the reasons for their compliance with the selected digitization guidelines:
Table 4.11
Reasons for Compliance with Guidelines for Digitizing Static Media
Types of Reasons

Definitions

Access and Preservation

Reasons of compliance that are related to user’s reach to
information and long-term storage considerations.

Consistency,
Standardization, and
Sustainability

Reasons of compliance that are related to the uniformity
and stability considerations.

Funding

Reasons of compliance that are related to financial
considerations.

Guidelines

Reasons of compliance that are related to the adopted
digitization guidelines and standards.

Hardware

Reasons of compliance that are related to the digitization
equipment considerations.

Physical Material

Reasons of compliance that are related to the tangible
media containing information.

Planning and Workflow

Reasons of compliance that are related to the design and
implementation of procedures in the digitization process.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Reasons of compliance that are related to staff knowledge
and expertise.

113

The frequency of the type of reasons for compliance with selected digitization guidelines
for static media in Table 4.11 were calculated as well for a better visualization. Figure 4.1 shows
the frequency of these types of reasons:

Reasons for Compliance with the Adopted Digitization
Guidelines for Digitizing Static Media
Consistency, Standardization, and Sustainability

31

Types of Reasons

Access and Preservation

15

Staff Awareness and Skills

12

Planning and Workflow

11

Guidelines

6

Hardware

4

Funding

3

Physical Material

1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Frequency

Figure 4.1 Frequency of the types of reasons reported by academic librarians for complying
with adopted guidelines to digitize static media

Table 4.11 shows that different types of reasons were explored for the compliance of the
academic librarians with the selected digitization guidelines. Subjects indicated their compliance
with digitization guidelines for many reasons that may refer to a variety of considerations
including access, preservation, hardware, funding … etc. The open coding analysis for the
collected responses revealed eight categories of reasons for compliance within the context of
static media. These categories are listed based on their frequency from highest to lowest, whereas
the name of each category is italicized in the following paragraphs.
114

Consistency, Standardization, and Sustainability is the first category of reasons explored.
This category compiles responses refer to at least one of these three concepts. An example of a
response coded in this category include: “To ensure a good digitization process and to promote
consistency across the department” (S62), which refers to the goal of achieving uniformity
within the digitization process. Another subject referred to the necessity of meeting other
guidelines and standards by saying “The University's guidelines were compiled so as to meet
requirements of consortial agencies, like HathiTrust, as well as archival best practices and
national and international standards” (S77).
The second category of reasons is related to Access and Preservation considerations.
Regarding preservation, S3 stated “Compliance is 100% for media designated for long-term
preservation”. Another subject said “Digital preservation is important we don't want to have to
digitize materials again” (S174), which aims to avoid duplication of effort through not digitizing
the same material more than once. On the other hand, access was emphasized as well by some
responses, such as: “Most items we digitize for both preservation and access” (S208), which
aims to ensure that the user can get to the digitized item.
A total of 12 responses were classified under the Staff Awareness and Skills category.
These responses refer to aspects related to staff, such as their awareness, knowledge, and skills.
For example, “I work primarily with the photo collection. As former professional photographer, I
digitized to professional standards” (S131), which refers to the effect of the respondent’s
previous expertise in photography on digitizing photographs. Another subject provided more
explanation related to the types of files incorporated with digitization projects by saying “I
comply with them because I understand the importance of having separate master copies vs.

115

access copies, and because I am not a digitization expert, I let the experts determine the
guidelines…” (S8).
A total of 11 responses were classified under the Planning and Workflow category,
because they indicated that their compliance with the selected digitization guidelines is related to
considerations regarding the design and implementation of the digitization process or to their
institution. For example, “They are reasonable for what we hope to accomplish with our
digitization program” (S45), which means that their compliance with such digitization guidelines
is compatible with the goals of their digitization programs. Another subject reported exploring
different best practices and implementing a particular method suitable for their institution by
saying “After researching across many institutes best practices we came up with a methodology
that works well for us and our collections” (Unspecified Subject Number).
Six responses referred to the adopted digitization guidelines and standards themselves;
these responses were grouped into the Guidelines category. The two responses in this paragraph
discuss two themes related to the digitization guidelines, which are popularity and flexibility.
“Seems to be the most popular guidelines used” (S59), revealing that the popularity of the
digitization guidelines could be a reason for complying with that particular set. Another example
is “FADGI guidelines provide the most flexibility” (S225), indicating that the flexibility of the
chosen digitization guidelines could be another reason for compliance.
Furthermore, four responses referred to digitization equipment as a reason for
compliance. They were grouped into the Hardware category. An example of a response coded
into this category is: “I find that the guidelines for static media are easy to follow and they’re
easy to achieve those recommendations and best practices based on the equipment that we have”

116

(S111), which implies that the necessity of digitization guidelines be compatible with the current
digitization equipment. A different subject said “We are also in the process of purchasing
equipment that will meet FADGI compliancy” (S146), which shows that certain digitization
guidelines might affect decisions related to purchasing equipment.
The Funding category includes responses pointing out that financial considerations
played a role in compliance with the selected digitization guidelines. For instance, “Some of the
guidelines like FADGI are requirements for implementing grants, we do have our own guidelines
for digital collections that are non-grant related” (S118). This response clarified that more than
one set of digitization guidelines can be adopted by the same institution, whereas financial
considerations may play a role in implementing certain digitization guidelines.
Only one response indicted that Physical Material plays a role in complying with the
adopted digitization guidelines. This category focuses on the physical material being digitized
and its effect on complying with the digitization guidelines. “It depends on the kind of materials
that we’re digitizing.…we optimize our camera to make sure that the device level target passes
the four-star rating…” (S150), which refers to the possibility of adjusting the adopted digitization
guidelines based on the physical material selected for digitization.
On the other hand, subjects reported different types of reasons for not complying with
selected digitization guidelines. After conducting open coding for the qualitative data, these
reasons were categorized into 13 categories based on their types. Table 4.12 shows these
categories and their definitions:

117

Table 4.12
Reasons for Non-Compliance with Guidelines for Digitizing Static Media
Types of Reasons

Definitions

Access and Preservation

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to user’s reach
to information and long-term storage considerations.

Copyright

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to copyright
and intellectual property issues.

Funding

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to financial
considerations.

Guidelines

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the adopted
digitization guidelines and standards.

Hardware

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to digitization
equipment considerations.

Metadata

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the
descriptive data of a digital object.

Physical Material

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the tangible
media containing information.

Planning and Workflow

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the design
and implementation of procedures in the digitization
process.

Software

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to computer
programs.

Staff
Staff Availability

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to staff
presence.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to staff
knowledge and expertise.

Staff Time

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the time
devoted for digitizing static media.

Storage

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to
considerations related to the capacity of the digital storage.

118

Furthermore, the frequency of each type of reason for non-compliance with the adopted
digitization guidelines was measured. Figure 4.2 shows the frequency of each type of reasons:

Types of Reasons

Reasons for Not Complying with the Adopted Digitization
Guidelines for Digitizing Static Media
Planning and Workflow
Hardware
Staff Awareness and Skills
Staff Time
Guidelines
Storage
Staff Availability
Software
Physical Material
Metadata
Funding
Access and Preservation
Copyright

13
12
9
7
7
5
4
4
4
3
3
3
1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Frequency

Figure 4.2 Frequency of the types of reasons reported by academic librarians for not
complying with adopted guidelines to digitize static media

Table 4.12 listed the 13 types of reasons arranged alphabetically for not complying with
selected digitization guidelines. Although these types are highly diverse, they applied a
restriction on complying with the digitization guidelines as understood from the collected
responses. The following paragraphs list these types of reasons based on their frequencies from
the most to least, whereas the name of each group of these types is italicized.

119

Responses related to Planning and Workflow resulted in this type of reasons being the top
category according to frequency. These responses mentioned different aspects falling under
planning and workflow of the digitization process. For example, “Initially we had some
workflow difficulties that prevented us from complying 100%. Now we need to revisit the
guidelines for additional improvements to our processes” (S192), which states that challenges
occurring at any step of the digitization process may decrease compliance levels with adopted
digitization guidelines. Another subject referred to following established institutional practices
for fulfilling digitization projects, saying “Institutional priorities dictated before I joined have
guided the digitization plan” (S224). However, the concept of compliance might not be an aim
due to other factors such as the type of the digitization project, a conclusion derived from S117,
who shared that, “Actually, I wouldn't say that we comply or attempt to comply with any
particular guidelines. How we decide to digitize something depends on the purpose of the project
(e.g. for preservation purposes, patron request, for a grant funded project, etc).”
Non-compliance with selected digitization guidelines might be affected by equipment. A
total of 12 responses indicated Hardware considerations as a factor in non-compliance. For
example, S54 answered “hardware limitations” as a direct response related to the restrictions of
digitization equipment. “Non-compliance is more so the lack of equipment to meet all standards”
(S132), referring to the absence of adequate digitization equipment compatible with the
standards. S162 discussed outdated equipment in reference to another obstacle with digitization
hardware, saying “Aging equipment and limited staff time to ensure compliance.”
A total of 20 responses pointed up staff issues that led to not complying with digitization
guidelines for static media. These responses were categorized into three groups (i.e., staff
availability, staff awareness and skills, and staff time) for more precise analysis. Staff Awareness
120

and Skills may lead to non-compliance as well. For instance, S45 said “I'm not aware of all of
these sets of guidelines,” indicating aspects related to staff knowledge and awareness. Seven
responses indicated reasons related to Staff Time. For instance, “avoiding some of the more time
and space consuming aspects of FADGI guidelines” (S186), which shows a relation between
certain digitization guidelines and the time necessary to implement the digitization process. S58
provided another explanation regarding time factors in digitization, saying that “Extensive
preparation of materials and devices as well as post-capture editing is time consuming and slows
overall production,” a statement indicating that activities such as preparation, adjusting
equipment, and the post-digitization phase may require plenty of time.
A total of seven reasons for non-compliance referred to digitization Guidelines. These
reasons provided many explanations for such avoidance to comply with the guidelines. For
instance, “Local guidelines contradict other standards” (Unspecified Subject Number), which
indicated conflicts between digitization guidelines. “The guidelines are largely duplicative.
FADGI and NARA benchmarks work toward the same goals, with the same approaches, but with
slightly variant emphases. ALCTS is too formulaic with regard to technical prescriptions” (S47)
in a reference to the existence of information duplication between different set of guidelines.
Another subject indicated the superiority of certain guidelines as compared to others, stating that
“The university's guidelines meet or exceed most of the others listed” (S77).
Reasons related to Storage considerations were also explored via open coding. This
category clarified how storage limitations may lead to avoidance in adhering to digitization
guidelines. For instance, “Either we don't have the server space or we don't have the technical
knowledge or it's just so time-consuming that we can't do it” (S107), referring to limitations in
digital storage capabilities. S197 said “Our budget in terms of recording equipment and storage
121

does not allow us to scan at the currently-recommended resolutions. We are a few years behind
in that regard” as a statement demonstrating the effect of financial issues on storage capabilities.
A total of four responses reported reasons related to Staff Availability. This category
focuses on the presence of staff needed for the digitization process. For example, S117 said
“…not really having someone devoted exclusively or even spending a lot of their time you know
exploring these guidelines…,” which explained the lack of having staff devoted to examining
digitization guidelines. S58 provided an example of challenges related to employing students in
digitization projects, saying “Use of students for digitization makes it difficult to teach and
ensure compliance with complicated and exacting standards.”
Responses related to Software considerations also identified as reasons for noncompliance with selected digitization guidelines. Subjects reported these reasons in different
ways to indicate non-adherence to digitization guidelines. For example, “…we do give some
allowance for imperfection and particularly with deskewing and correcting in the histogram in
postprocessing and also cropping” (S168), which refers to the possibility of human errors
occurring in post-digitization activities dealing with computer programs. S150 said “…we still
use some software straightening which is for FADGI four-star for manuscript materials are not
really supposed to do that…” to refer to some actions related to computer programs in
digitization that were applied although they were not recommended in the adopted guidelines.
The selected Physical Material may result in not complying with the adopted digitization
guidelines. A few respondents reported that the material itself affects adherence levels to
digitization guidelines. For example, “Some projects or materials do not require the highest
possible output or will not be saved for the long term” (S104), acknowledging that the condition

122

and type of material selected for digitization might affect adherence levels to adopted digitization
guidelines. S225 said “There needs to be a variable approach to scanning based upon the material
type, user expectations, and fragility” in a reference to the effect of the nature and condition of
physical material on scanning decisions.
Responses referring to Metadata issues were found. These indicated that the metadata
required for the digitization process is resulting in non-compliance with selected digitization
guidelines. For example, “Occasionally, NARA asks for more metadata creation than is
necessary for our Internet Archive and ContentDM scanning purposes” (S16), which emphasizes
that creating additional metadata beyond the needed amount is a challenge. Another challenge
related to metadata was also reported by S150, who said that “…with the FADGI guidelines for
static media we don’t at this point adopt their metadata practices which call for the embedding of
some metadata in your images.…we felt like its not really efficient. And also maybe there would
be some risks for, you know, embedded metadata is more vulnerable….”
Financial considerations still occur even for non-compliance with selected digitization
guidelines. The Funding category has a total of three responses that were coded as financial
considerations. For instance, “Our budget in terms of recording equipment and storage does not
allow us to scan at the currently-recommended resolutions. We are a few years behind in that
regard” (S197), which demonstrates how the effect of limitations in budget and financial
resources may lead to non-compliance with adopted digitization guidelines. Similarly, S174 said
“standards were developed when server space was at a premium. So we chose a balance between
best practice and costs for a large volume of images” to explain how digitization costs may affect
digitizing large collections.

123

Considerations related to Access and Preservation provided a restriction on such
compliance with the digitization guidelines. A total of three responses were coded into this
category. For example, “We place emphasis on access over preservation” (S225), which clarifies
how institutions may prioritize one goal (i.e., access or preservation) over another. Another
subject provided a similar response regarding prioritizing access over preservation by saying
“This institution saves money on vendor costs by digitizing media in non-preservation formats
that are designated for short-term access” (S3).
Copyright restrictions and limitations may affect the usage of material. Digitization
decisions are also affected because of copyright considerations. Only one response regarding
copyright restriction was provided as a reason for non-compliance. The response: “We may
digitize at lower resolution if the digital images are meant for online exhibit only, and if we do
not have the rights to the images” (S134), clarifies how copyright issues encountered during a
digitization project may impact scanning decisions.
Based on the selected guideline(s) for digitizing static media, subjects were asked
through the electronic questionnaire to indicate the availability level (0% indicates Not At All
Available, whereas 100% indicates Completely Available) of needed information from the
digitization guidelines of static media on a 6-point Likert scale. For this question, availability
means that the needed digitization recommendation for digitizing static media is available in the
digitization guidelines used. Table 4.13 shows a descriptive analysis of the availability levels
based on the collected responses:

124

Table 4.13
A Descriptive Analysis for Availability Level Regarding Adopted Digitization Guidelines
for Static Media
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

6

2.94

2.15

4.64

17

BCR's CDP Digital Imaging Best
Practices Working Group

1

6

3.00

2.03

4.12

16

FADGI: Federal Agencies Digital
Guidelines Initiative

1

6

4.97

1.70

2.91

32

IFLA: International Federation of
Library Associations and
Institutions

1

6

2.81

2.13

4.53

16

NARA: National Archives and
Records Administration

1

6

4.05

1.91

3.66

21

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

4.00

2.05

4.20

20

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

5.02

1.66

2.76

41

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

6

3.00

2.45

6.00

5

Digitization Guidelines

Regarding the option “Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify” Table 4.13, four
answers were given by the subjects, such as: “in house” (S107), and “Department” (S105).
Availability reasons were also investigated for this research study. The electronic
questionnaire contained a question asking subjects to provide the reasons that made them select
the availability percentage rating for the selected digitization guidelines of static media. Also, in
semi-structured interviews, interviewees were asked about availability reasons. Consequently,
different responses were collected from subjects. These responses were grouped into four main
categories: 1) Guidelines, 2) Hardware, 3) Institution, and 4) Staff Awareness and skills.

125

Open coding explored responses referring to reasons related to digitization Guidelines.
Reasons in this category may discuss different aspects of these guidelines, such as: accessibility
to guidelines, alternative guidelines, comprehensiveness of guidelines, difficulty or simplicity of
guidelines, and currency of the information. The following quotes are examples of the responses
coded into this category. For example, “I have printed documentation for the ALCTS guidelines,
FADGI guidelines, and our custom implementation guide, which are all available to all of my
employees” (S53), illustrating an example of accessibility to digitization guidelines. Also,
Unspecified Subject Number said “Because it is available online and is well organized with
sections containing scanning recommendations for various media,” implying the
comprehensiveness of the guidelines. An example for a response regarding the currency of the
guidelines is when S169 said “Many recommendations on these guidelines are outdated and
simply do not reflect realities of practice. They are used to inform but not as a rule to comply to.”
Regarding availability reasons related to Hardware, only one response was found. A
subject said “It is readily available. It is easy to use, easy to achieve or follow those guidelines
based on the equipment that we have” (S111), which shows that the needed guidelines are
available and compatible with their current equipment. However, a total of 14 responses
addressed reasons related to the Institution itself. For instance, “Our university doesn't have
guidelines but I make them for my projects” (S105) in reference to the absence of digitization
guidelines at a certain institution. Another example of this category was mentioned by S8, who
said that “The guidelines were passed down to me from my predecessor, and I have adapted
them somewhat, but they have been available to me from day 1. They are not, however, available
publicly,” confirming that these guidelines are only available to the staff of a particular
institution. Finally, Staff Awareness and Skills is the last category found. For instance, “Lack of
126

awareness of the 'not available' guidelines” (Unspecified Subject Number), which refers to the
lack of knowledge regarding some guidelines.
Based on the selected digitization guideline(s) by subjects in the electronic questionnaire
for digitizing static media, respondents were asked to select the usefulness level (0% indicates
Not At All Useful, whereas 100% indicates Completely Useful) regarding digitization guidelines
of static media used on a 6-point Likert scale. Table 4.14 shows a descriptive analysis of the
collected responses:
Table 4.14
A Descriptive Analysis for the Usefulness Level Regarding Adopted Digitization
Guidelines for Static Media
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

6

3.43

1.84

3.39

14

BCR's CDP Digital Imaging Best
Practices Working Group

1

6

3.80

1.83

3.36

15

FADGI: Federal Agencies Digital
Guidelines Initiative

1

6

5.13

1.36

1.85

30

IFLA: International Federation of
Library Associations and
Institutions

1

6

3.86

1.92

3.69

14

NARA: National Archives and
Records Administration

1

6

4.43

1.68

2.82

21

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

4.24

1.70

2.89

17

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

5.38

1.17

1.37

37

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

5

3.00

1.63

2.67

3

Digitization Guidelines

127

Only two responses were given for the option “Other digitization guidelines. Please,
specify” Table 4.14, these were: “Department” (S105), and “unknown - outside my area of
expertise” (S139).
Subjects provided reasons for the percentage rating of usefulness assigned to the selected
digitization guidelines. Also, semi-structured interviews collected qualitative data regarding the
usefulness reasons. Data analysis for the collected responses explored ten categories of reasons
related to the usefulness of the selected digitization guidelines for digitizing static media. These
categories are: 1) Access and Preservation, 2) Funding, 3) Guidelines, 4) Hardware, 5)
Institution, 6) Metadata, 7) Physical Material, 8) Physical Space, 9) Staff Awareness and Skill,
and 10) Storage. The following paragraphs are organized alphabetically, and the title of each
category is italicized.
The first category is Access and Preservation reasons. This category consists of one
response only. S3 said “The contortial guidelines are usually more rigorous and provide the bestpractices guidelines necessary for long-term preservation and access,” which shows how the
usefulness of guidelines can play a role in ensuring future access and preservation.
The second category is about reasons related to Funding. Only one response was coded
into this category. The respondent stated: “I think the information is available, but at times I
don't find it useful because we have resource limitations, money and space” (S107) to explain
how financial issues may reduce the level of usefulness.
Guidelines is a category containing many related aspects (i.e., the guidelines’
accessibility, comprehensiveness, difficulty or simplicity, currency, and familiarity with the
guidelines). For instance, “FADGI addresses clearly the attributes to address for digitization 128

including environmental attributes for the digitization space, strategies for equipment selection
and maintenance, etc. - very useful in all ways” (S215), referring to the simplicity of the
guidelines. In a reference to the currency of guidelines, S224 said “Both the consortia and local
guidelines are recently developed (within the last year) and still need to be updated occasionally
to reflect newly encountered issues.”
The Hardware category consists of a few responses referring to equipment in providing
reasons related to the usefulness aspect. For instance, “Our own guidelines are the most useful,
as they match our needs very well. The FADGI guidelines have more info than we can currently
use with our equipment and labor. A certain consortium's guidelines include information that is
not applicable to our processes” (S192). This response shows that their local guidelines are more
convenient to their institution than FADGI guidelines, because of their equipment and staff.
Regarding the Institution category, S36 said “The guidelines are useful in formulating
local digitization guidelines,” which represents that the usefulness of the guidelines is in
developing customized guidelines for the institution itself. Also, another subject provided a more
detailed response by saying “The high level of detail and technical jargon present in the NARA
and FADGI guidelines make them difficult to use as a regular part of our digitization workflow.
Our internal standards are much simpler and better suited for the undergraduate students that
conduct the actual scanning process” (S58), which explains why their local guidelines are more
suitable for their institution as compared to other guidelines.
The Metadata category had only one response. S8 said “Our guidelines are useful for the
amount of digitizing we do, but they are pretty basic and don't deal much with metadata or
metadata standards, or with digitizing our more complicated materials.” This response discusses

129

the usefulness and simplicity of their own guidelines, but at the same time it reports metadata
challenges due to adopting these guidelines.
Five responses were coded into the category Physical Material. Responses in this
category refer to the items being digitized. For instance, S62 said “Sometimes we have to update
the existing guidelines if we're scanning something we haven't scanned before,” which shows
that materials digitized for the first time require that the currently adopted guidelines be updated
and maybe improved.
Usefulness reasons concerning the Physical Space were found in the collected data. This
category refers to the location designed for the digitization process. For example, S215 said
“FADGI addresses clearly the attributes to address for digitization - including environmental
attributes for the digitization space, strategies for equipment selection and maintenance, etc. very useful in all ways,” emphasizing the usefulness and importance of providing information
related to the place dedicated for the digitization process.
A total of six responses were coded into the category Staff Awareness and Skills. This
category deals with staff knowledge and expertise. For instance, Unspecified Subject Number
said “The guideline do not necessarily come with plans for training and implementation,” which
clearly states the need for including a section in these guidelines to facilitate implementation and
staff training.
A reason related to Storage is the last of the reasons related to the usefulness of
digitization guidelines for static media. Only one response was coded into this category. S107
said “I think the information is available, but at times I don't find it useful because we have
resource limitations, money and space.” This response shows that storage limitations may render
130

the available information irrelevant, demonstrating a way in which usefulness levels might be
affected by other factors or reasons.

4.1.2.2.

Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

Only 36 subjects (52.94%) in the electronic questionnaire reported that their university
digitizes non-static (audiovisual) media (e.g., voice recordings and analog videos), 8 subjects
(11.76%) indicated that their University does not digitize this type of media, and 24 subjects
(35.29%) did not provide responses to this question. The strategy for the digitization process of
non-static (audiovisual) media at the subjects’ universities was investigated as well. A total of 30
subjects (44.12%) reported that only unique materials are selected for digitization; however, only
11 subjects (16.18%) reported that all the materials are subject to digitization, whereas 27
subjects (39.71%) did not answer this question.
Digitization guidelines adopted by the subjects’ universities for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media were investigated as well. Table 4.15 shows the counts of the adopted
digitization guidelines based on the collected data from the electronic questionnaire:
Table 4.15
Adopted Digitization Guidelines by Subjects’ Universities for Digitizing Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media
Digitization Guidelines

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library Collections & Technical Services

3

IASA: International Association of Sound and Audiovisual Archives

9

Consortium/Consortia digitization guidelines

6

University’s own customized digitization guidelines

24

131

Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify

16

Total

75

For the option “Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify” in Table 4.15, only 16
subjects reported other digitization guidelines. Examples cited were, “NINCH, Sound directions”
(S56), “Association of Recorded Sound” (S134), “NARA” (S215), “ARSC” (S104), and
“http://www.aes.org” (S47). However, other subjects indicated different answers, such as “We
send material to off-site digitization companies” (S8), “Vendor specification (for outsourcing)”
(S169), and “No guidelines are used” (S36).
Subjects were asked, in the electronic questionnaire, about the technical specifications
that they followed as their minimum requirements in those digitization guidelines of audio and
video media. Tables 4.16 and 4.17 show the count of each technical specification for each type
of media:
Table 4.16
Technical Specifications Subjects Follow as Their Minimum Requirements in
the Digitization Guideline(s) of Audio Media
Technical Specifications

Count

Bit Depth

22

Bit Rate

22

Channel

16

Compression

24

Access File Format

25

Master File Format

30

Resolution

23

Sample Rate

22
132

Other. Please, specify

7

Total

191

Table 4.17
Technical Specifications Subjects Follow as Their Minimum Requirements in
the Digitization Guideline(s) of Video Media
Technical Specifications

Count

Aspect Ratio

22

Compression

22

Data Rate (Bit Rate)

20

Field Rate

8

Access File Format

22

Master File Format

29

Frame Rate

21

Resolution

24

Sample Size (Bit Depth)

19

Sampling Scheme

9

Scanning

11

Video Standard

21

Other. Please, specify

7

Total

235

Regarding other technical specifications for audio media in Table 4.16 for the option
“Other. Please, specify,” seven responses were collected, such as: “PCM encoding” (S56),
“Depends on the item” (S16), “No specifications are used” (S36), and “We don't digitize—
someone else does according to their own specifications” (S197). On the other hand, a total of

133

seven responses were collected for technical specifications related to video media in the Table
4.17 for the option “Other. Please, specify.” For instance, “We have not done much video
digitization” (S166), “We do not digitize film in house. We outsource it. The checked options for
this question are specifications that we discuss with vendors” (S111), “We don't digitize” (S197),
and “not my area” (S47).
Subjects were asked, through the electronic questionnaire, to indicate their compliance
level with the selected digitization guideline(s) for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. The
compliance level was designed as a 6-point Likert scale (0% for Not At All Complied, whereas
100% for Completely Complied). Table 4.18 shows a descriptive analysis for the collected
responses:
Table 4.18
A Descriptive Analysis for Compliance Level Regarding Adopted Digitization
Guidelines of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

5

3.22

1.47

2.17

9

IASA: International Association
of Sound and Audiovisual
Archives

1

5

3.73

1.42

2.02

11

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

4.10

1.76

3.09

10

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

4.83

1.46

2.14

23

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

6

3.83

1.67

2.81

12

Digitization Guidelines

134

Only 8 responses were given for the option “Other digitization guidelines. Please,
specify” in Table 4.18. For example, “ARSC” (S104), “NINCH, Sound Directions” (S56), “Send
AV materials off site” (S8), and “Professional experience” (S131).
Moreover, subjects were asked about the reasons for compliance with digitization
guidelines for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media by asking open-ended questions. Many
responses were collected from the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews, then
coded based on their themes. A total of six types of reasons were explored as can be observed
from Table 4.19:
Table 4.19
Reasons for Compliance with Digitization Guidelines for Digitizing Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media
Types of Reasons

Definitions

Access and Preservation

Reasons of compliance that are related to user’s reach to
information and long-term storage considerations.

Consistency,
Standardization, and
Sustainability

Reasons of compliance that are related to uniformity and
stability considerations.

Guidelines

Reasons of compliance that are related to the adopted
digitization guidelines and standards.

Hardware

Reasons of compliance that are related to the digitization
equipment considerations.

Planning and Workflow

Reasons of compliance that are related to the design and
implementation of procedures in the digitization process.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Reasons of compliance that are related to staff
knowledge and expertise.

135

Figure 4.3 shows the frequency of the types of reasons indicated by academic librarians
for their compliance with selected digitization guidelines for digitizing non-static (audiovisual)
media:

Reasons for Compliance with the Adopted
Digitization Guidelines for Digitizing Non-static
(audiovisual) Media

Types of Reasons

Consistency, Standardization, and Sustainability

13

Access and Preservation

10

Planning and Workflow

7

Guidelines

5

Staff Awareness and Skills

4

Hardware

2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Frequency

Figure 4.3 Frequency of the types of reasons reported by academic librarians for complying
with the adopted digitization guidelines to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media

Table 4.19 shows the types of reasons for the academic librarians’ compliance with
selected digitization guidelines, whereas collected responses were coded into at least one of these
types. The groups of these types are listed based on their frequency, and the titles of these groups
are italicized in the next paragraphs.
A majority of responses were classified under the category Consistency, Standardization,
and Sustainability. This category includes responses concerning related themes. Achieving

136

consistency for digital preservation was derived from S134 by saying “For consistent
preservation of valuable materials.” Another subject introduced the aspect of interoperability
with others in the same community by saying “For interoperability, foundational guidance, and
participation with A/V digitization community efforts and directions” (S132).
Ten responses were coded into the Access and Preservation category. Responses in this
group referred to the aspects of access and/or preservation. An example of a response referred to
the access purpose is when S38 said “Ease of workflow and accessiblity [sic].” Another subject
provided an example for the other aspect of this category (i.e., preservation) by saying “Need an
external standard to guide us; need to create a reasonably high quality file for preservation,
reuse” (S215).
Another type of reason to comply with digitization guidelines refers to Planning and
Workflow. These may discuss any aspect of the digitization process starting from the institutions’
goals or needs. For example, S111 said “Our in house and consortia guides meet our needs,
especially for audio. We do not digitize film in house.” This example clarifies that the reason for
compliance is that the two types of digitization guidelines (i.e. in-house and consortia) are
compatible with the institution’s goals for the digitization project(s).
The fourth type of responses relate to Guidelines. Responses in this category indicated
that digitization guidelines were a reason for such compliance. For example, “As with static
media, we had no guidelines to start with when we began digitizing AV material, so we chose
the ALCTS guidelines because they are easy to understand” (S53). This response demonstrates a
lack of digitization guidelines for non-static (audiovisual) media at that institution, which led to
adopting a specific set of digitization guidelines (i.e., ALCTS) because of its simplicity.

137

The fifth type of reason refers to Staff Awareness and Skills. There, four responses
describe awareness and knowledge on the part of the academic librarians regarding digitization
guidelines. For instance, S207 said “Not a lot of knowledge or experience with sound & video
files. We've used 2-3 different vendors and have followed their guidelines,” which emphasized
an issue concerning lack of knowledge in this domain to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media.
Also, S107 said “we figured that these have been tested in other institutions or by other places.
And that we are not as much of experts as they are, so we should kinda listen to what they say.”
These two examples clarify that help and guidance were sought from external sources outside
their institutions.
Digitization equipment could be a reason, as well, to comply with digitization guidelines.
Only two responses were classified under the Hardware category. For example, “We want to
produce uniform files that are compliant with our access and archiving systems and playback
software and hardware, so that materials can be viewed and accessed consistently across
collections” (S168). Achieving compatibility between digital content and available equipment
were observed from this response, which implies the importance of considering current
equipment and software during the digitization process.
On the other hand, subjects were asked about the reasons that made them not comply
with the adopted digitization guidelines in cases of non-compliance. Many responses were
received from subjects through the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews.
Responses were categorized into 11 categories based on their types. Table 4.20 shows these
categories and their definitions:

138

Table 4.20
Reasons for Non-Compliance with Guidelines for Digitizing Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media
Types of Reasons

Definitions

Access and Preservation

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to user’s reach
to information and long-term storage considerations.

Funding

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to financial
considerations.

Guidelines

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the adopted
digitization guidelines and standards.

Hardware

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to digitization
equipment considerations.

Physical Material

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the tangible
media containing information.

Planning and Workflow

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the design
and implementation of procedures in the digitization
process.

Software

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to computer
programs.

Staff
Staff Availability

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to staff
presence.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to staff
knowledge and expertise.

Staff Time

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the time
devoted for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.

Storage

Reasons of non-compliance that are related to the capacity
of the digital storage.

139

Responses related to not complying with selected digitization guidelines were analyzed
based on the frequency of each of the types of reasons. Figure 4.4 shows this frequency:

Reasons for Not Complying with the Adopted Digitization
Guidelines for Digitizing Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

Types of Reasons

Hardware

10

Staff Awareness and Skills

8

Storage

8

Software

7

Guidelines

7

Funding

7

Planning and Workflow

6

Physical Material

6

Staff Time

5

Staff Availability

4

Access and Preservation

2
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Frequency

Figure 4.4 Frequency of the types of reasons reported by academic librarians for not
complying with adopted digitization guidelines to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media

Categories of the types of reasons were listed based on their frequencies, whereas their
titles were italicized in the next paragraphs. Also, examples were provided for more clarification.
Reasons related to Hardware were explored. These responses explained how equipment may
prevent them from complying with digitization guidelines. For example, “Sometimes, our
equipment and software does not allow us to fully comply with ALCTS guidelines, so we get as
close as possible within the scope of our understanding” (S53), which explains that limitations in
digitization equipment may prevent complete compliance with adopted digitization guidelines.
Another example was introduced by S56 and shows an issue with the current equipment by
140

saying “Difficulty with existing equipment and budget. Much easier to set the standards when
outsourcing.”
Reasons related to staff were categorized into three categories (i.e., Staff Availability,
Staff Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time) for better analysis as explained earlier. “Human error
happens” (S166) is an example of reasons related to Staff Awareness and Skills. This response
demonstrates that mistakes and errors caused by the staff is considered as one reason leading to
not complying with adopted digitization guidelines.
Storage is among the reasons found for not complying with digitization guidelines. A
total of seven responses indicated how storage affects compliance levels. For instance, “Size of
video files may determine capture specifications because of archival storage space restrictions”
(S95). Regarding the storage aspect mentioned in this response, it emphasizes that the limited
storage capacity has its impact on digitization decisions.
A total of seven responses were coded into the Software category for reasons of noncompliance. These responses indicated software issues either directly or indirectly. For instance,
the statement by S104 “Equipment and software limitations and lack of adequate training”
clarifies different issues that cause non-compliance, wherein software is one. Another example
was provided by S111, who cited “…limitations of the software, and the cost of some of the
software or equipment needed to digitize that kind of material,” which refers not only to
limitations of the software, but also to financial issues related to computer programs.
Reasons for non-compliance related to Guidelines were clearly observed in the collected
data. Most indicated that digitization guidelines themselves might be a reason for not complying
with them. For example, Unspecified Subject Number said “Our standards for master file
141

formats and derivatives are still in development,” which implies a current absence of available
guidelines for two types of file formats. Another subject provided more details regarding their
university not complying with the digitization guidelines by saying “It is particularly hard to
comply with all video digitization standards due to storage concerns and ability to maintain
software/hardware. We do not use lossless compressed preservation master files due to
compatibility issues” (S168), in referring to various difficulties complying with the guidelines to
digitize video materials.
Seven responses indicated that financial issues also have an effect that led to noncompliance. Reasons related to Funding were found within the data. For instance, S225 said
“Costs,” which represents a brief response for reasons to not comply with these digitization
guidelines. Another subject explained in greater detail how their financial situation led to such
non-compliance, saying that “Lack of compliance is based on environmental constraints of space
and funding” (S132).
Six responses indicated different reasons for non-compliance, and were coded into the
category Planning and Workflow. For instance, “Small digitizing jobs done on the fly might not
follow the guidelines closely” (S62), which implies that the lack of careful planning and
preparation for some digitization tasks may prevent complete compliance with the guidelines.
Another subject provided a response that shows how the absence of a digitization policy may
cause problems in complying with the guidelines to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media; this
response is “Because our institution has not yet implemented a library-wide non-static
digitization policy, nor do we have an official capability to do so (all digitization of non-static
items is for conservation/storage/access purposes)” (S16).

142

The materials selected for digitization may lead to not complying with the adopted
digitization guidelines. This type of response was grouped into the Physical Material category.
For instance, “Size of video files may determine capture specifications because of archival
storage space restrictions” (S95), which explains how file sizes created by certain type of
materials may affect digitization decisions due to storage limitations. S169 provided a different
reason for not complying, related to the value of the material itself, stating “Too resource
intensive or material does not merit the investment.”
The remaining two categories concerning staff are Staff Time and Staff Availability.
“Materials designated for short-term access do not necessarily comply 100% with the guidelines,
usually due to the short turn-around time required to deliver the digitized version to requestors”
(S3) is an example of a Staff Time category response, which states that lack of having an
adequate period of time to accomplish digitization activities may lead to incomplete compliance
with the guidelines. The response “Sometimes lack of time or resources such as staffing” (S56) is
an example of responses coded into the Staff Availability category. The latter example shows
another aspect related to staff, which is availability or presence. It revealed that not having
enough staff could also be considered as a reason for not complying with digitization guidelines.
Regarding Access and Preservation, responses in this category referred to restrictions that
may lead to non-compliance with adopted digitization guidelines. Subjects indicated how access
and preservation affect the level of non-compliance. For instance, “Standards for video are still
emerging and file preservation is expensive. We may digitize at lower standards (for access only)
so that archivists can appraise materials first, then outsource the digitization at higher standards
if archivists assign high value to the item” (S134). This response implies how digitization for

143

access and high costs of digital preservation may lead to avoid following high quality
recommendations to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media.
Furthermore, subjects were asked via the electronic questionnaire to indicate their rate of
level of availability of needed information from the selected digitization guidelines for non-static
(audiovisual) media. The rating scale was designed based on a 6-point Likert scale (0% indicates
Not At All Available, whereas 100% indicates Completely Available). For this question,
availability means that the needed digitization recommendation for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media is available in the digitization guidelines used. Table 4.21 shows a
descriptive analysis for the collected responses:
Table 4.21
A Descriptive Analysis for Availability Level Regarding Adopted Digitization Guidelines
for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

6

2.91

2.02

4.08

11

IASA: International Association of
Sound and Audiovisual Archives

1

6

3.43

2.23

4.96

14

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

3.38

2.27

5.16

13

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

4.33

2.03

4.14

24

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

6

3.55

2.06

4.25

11

Digitization Guidelines

For the last option “Other digitization guidelines. Please, specify” in Table 4.21, only
seven responses were given by the subjects. For instance, “Sound Directions: Best Practices for
Audio Preservation” (S111), “NARA” (S215), “not sure” (S5), and “We don't digitize” (S197).
144

The electronic questionnaire asked the subjects to answer a question about the reasons for
their percentage rating regarding availability of the selected digitization guidelines. Also, the
semi-structured interviews included a question about the availability of needed information in the
digitization guidelines. Open coding for the qualitative data revealed four different types of
reasons, which are: 1) Guidelines, 2) Hardware, 3) Institution, and 4) Staff Awareness and Skills.
The following two paragraphs show examples of responses in these categories.
The Guidelines category contains many aspects related to digitization guidelines (i.e.,
accessibility to guidelines, alternative guidelines, comprehensiveness of guidelines, difficulty or
simplicity of guidelines, and their currency). For instance, “There is not much available on AV
digitization as the majority is not done on-site at academic libraries” (S169), shows lack of
access and availability of needed information in guidelines to digitize non-static (audiovisual)
media. Regarding comprehensiveness, S104 said “Audio standards are well documented and
widely available, however video standards are often lacking or contradictory.” This response
speaks to availability and consistency issues concerning video digitization guidelines. However,
only one response was coded into the Hardware category, because it referred to the equipment
element in the digitization process. S111 said “…we are pretty good with sound. I would say
yeah, it is easy to do, easy to follow, and we are able to do that but not with film because we just
not have the equipment or expertise.” This response clarifies the ability to digitize audio
materials unlike film materials due to two issues, of which hardware is one.
Four responses were coded into the Institution category. This category means that the
reason is related to the institution itself. For instance, S218 said “Our institution doesn't have the
infrastructure to digitize non-static materials on a large-scale.” This response is providing a
reason related directly to the institution itself, which prevented large projects to digitize non145

static (audiovisual) media. However, “Lack of knowledge of these guideline and the level to
which we are complying when selecting an outside vendor” (Unspecified Subject Number) is an
example of the responses coded into the Staff Awareness and Skill category, because it refers to
the staff’s knowledge and awareness regarding the mentioned digitization guidelines.
Based on the selected digitization guideline(s) in the electronic questionnaire by subjects
for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media, they were asked to indicate usefulness level (0%
indicates Not At All Useful, whereas 100% indicates Completely Useful). The rating scale for this
question was designed based on a 6-point Likert scale. Table 4.22 shows a descriptive analysis of
the collected responses:
Table 4.22
A Descriptive Analysis for Usefulness Level Regarding Adopted Digitization Guidelines
for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Digitization Guidelines

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

ALCTS: Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services

1

6

2.91

1.83

3.36

11

IASA: International Association
of Sound and Audiovisual
Archives

1

6

3.85

2.03

4.13

13

Consortium/Consortia digitization
guidelines

1

6

3.82

2.21

4.88

11

University's own customized
digitization guidelines

1

6

4.50

2.02

4.07

22

Other digitization guidelines.
Please, specify

1

6

4.50

1.91

3.65

10

Again, only seven responses were given by the subjects for the option “Other digitization
guidelines. Please, specify” in Table 4.22. For example, “ARSC” (S134), and “Send off site”
(S8).
146

Subjects in the electronic questionnaire provided reasons for the usefulness level to the
rating given to the selected digitization guidelines. Also, the semi-structured interviews collected
data related to this aspect. Based on the themes of the collected responses, they were categorized
into six categories: 1) Guidelines, 2) Hardware, 3) Institution, 4) Physical Material, 5) Software,
and 6) Staff Awareness and Skills.
The Guidelines category included many related aspects (i.e., familiarity with the
guidelines, their accessibility, their comprehensiveness, their difficulty or simplicity, their
currency). Eleven responses referred to the guidelines in providing reasons of usefulness. For
example, “The ALCTS guidelines are completely useful because they are easy to understand,
and provide information to help our department better understand factors involved with AV
digitization” (S53), which emphasizes that simplicity of a digitization guideline could be
considered as a usefulness reason. Also, “The consortia are the most reliable resources that
reflect the latest research in the field” (S3), which explains currency of digitization guidelines as
an important aspect.
Reasons for usefulness related to Hardware were identified as well. For example, S168
said “…some non-expert vendors need very specific guidelines to create files compliant with
software and hardware,” representing an example of a usefulness reason related to the
equipment. Eight responses were coded into the Institution category, because they refer to the
institution’s context. For instance, “We find our guidelines useful no matter what degree we
choose to follow all that is in them” (S111).
Only four responses referred to Physical Material in providing reasons for usefulness of
the non-static (audiovisual) media digitization guidelines. For instance, S95 said “We usually

147

need to consult other guidelines for video,” which illustrates a need for using more guidelines to
digitize video materials. It is assumed that this might refer to different issues, such as a limitation
in the adopted digitization guidelines for videos, or to the complexity of the video material in the
digitization process.
Only two reasons referred to computer Software. For instance, “It's very important to
have specific guidelines for every aspect spelled out because…and having these spelled out and
knowing which software can check these standards in QC makes it easier for non-expert staff to
participate in the post-process portion of digitization.” (S168), which refers to the importance of
understanding the computer software involved in the digitization process as a usefulness reason.
Staff Awareness and Skills is the last category related to usefulness reasons of digitization
guidelines for non-static (audiovisual) media. This category had only four responses. For
instance, S168 said “It's very important to have specific guidelines for every aspect spelled out
because fewer staff and students are knowledgeable about a/v formats…,” showing the necessity
of having clear guidelines to overcome any lack of knowledge or awareness that the staff may
encounter in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.

4.2. Differences in compliance with the static and non-static (audiovisual) media
digitization guidelines
This research question seeks information as to whether academic librarians differ in their
compliance levels with adopted digitization guidelines. Six questions in the electronic
questionnaire were designed, based on a Likert scale, to explore the levels of compliance (i.e.,

148

questions 19 and 34), availability (i.e., questions 22 and 37), and usefulness (i.e., questions 24
and 39). Comparisons were made between these questions in both sections of the electronic
questionnaire, which are “Digitization of Static Media” and “Digitization of Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media.” In other words, levels of compliance were compared between static and
non-static (audiovisual) media. Similarly, levels of availability and usefulness between these two
sections were also compared. However, comparisons were made only to the digitization
guidelines mentioned in both sections (i.e., ALCTS, consortium/consortia digitization guidelines,
and university’s own customized digitization guidelines).
The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was chosen to compare paired data given by each
subject for both types of media in the electronic questionnaire. For example, the levels of
compliance given by a subject for “University’s own customized digitization guidelines” for
static media (i.e., Question 19) and non-static (audiovisual) media (i.e., Question 34) were
compared statistically. The Paired Samples Test was chosen to conduct statistical analyses for
quantitative data that had normal distribution (i.e., compliance levels for consortium/consortia
guidelines and usefulness levels of ALCTS guidelines). However, selecting paired data led to a
smaller amount of data used for the statistical analysis for this research question. Therefore,
drawing any conclusions or interpretations must be made carefully and with caution, because of
the small sample size used in the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests for this question. Tables of the
Paired Samples Tests (Tables 4.24 and 4.29) and Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests (Tables 4.23,
4.25-4.28, and 4.30-4.31) in the following sections (Sections 4.2.1.-4.2.3.) were based on the
tables generated by IBM SPSS Statistics 25.

149

4.2.1. Compliance Levels
Compliance levels reported by the subjects were calculated statistically. Table 4.23
shows the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test conducted for the comparison of compliance levels with
ALCTS digitization guidelines between static and non-static (audiovisual) media:
Table 4.23
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Compliance Level with ALCTS Digitization Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 4a
3.63
14.50
b
Positive Ranks 2
3.25
6.50
c
Ties
2
Total
8

Z
P Value
-.850

Compliance Level with
ALCTS for Non-static
.395
(Audiovisual) Media Compliance Level with
ALCTS for Static Media
a. Compliance Level with ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media < Compliance Level
with ALCTS for Static Media
b. Compliance Level with ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media > Compliance Level
with ALCTS for Static Media
c. Compliance Level with ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media = Compliance Level
with ALCTS for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the compliance level with ALCTS
digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual) media scores were not
statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −.850, 𝑝𝑝 = .395, so hypothesis 2.1.A is not rejected.
Several subjects rated their compliance levels with the consortium/consortia digitization
guidelines for static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Table 4.24 shows the Paired Samples
Test conducted for these two sets of data:

150

Table 4.24
Paired Samples Test for Compliance Level with Consortium/Consortia Digitization
Guidelines
Paired Samples Test
Sig. (2Paired Differences

t

df

tailed)

95% Confidence
Interval of the
Std.
Mean Deviation
Pair 1 Compliance Level with

-.286

1.254

Std. Error
Mean
.474

Difference
Lower
-1.445

Upper
.874

-.603

6

.569

Consortium Guidelines for
Static Media - Compliance
Level with Consortium
Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media

A Paired Samples Test indicated that the compliance level with consortium/consortia
digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual) media scores were not
statistically significantly different, 𝑡𝑡 = −.603, 𝑝𝑝 = .569, so hypothesis 2.1.B is not rejected.
The last comparison was made for compliance levels with the university’s own
customized digitization guidelines. Table 4.25 shows the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test
conducted for these two sets of data:

151

Table 4.25
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Compliance Level with the University’s Own Customized
Digitization Guidelines
Ranks
Z
P Value
-1.696

N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Compliance Level with
Negative Ranks 10a
6.85
68.50
b
University Guidelines for Positive Ranks 3
7.50
22.50
.090
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Ties
9c
Media - Compliance Level Total
22
with University Guidelines
for Static Media
a. Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media <
Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Static Media
b. Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media >
Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Static Media
c. Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media =
Compliance Level with University Guidelines for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the compliance level with the university’s
own customized digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual)
media scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −1.696, 𝑝𝑝 = .090, so hypothesis
2.1.C is not rejected.

4.2.2. Availability Levels
Availability levels of the needed information in selected digitization guidelines were
compared as well between static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Within the context of this
doctoral dissertation, availability means that the needed digitization recommendation is available

152

in the digitization guidelines used for digitizing static/non-static (audiovisual) media as
mentioned by questions 22 and 37 in the electronic questionnaire.
Availability levels of the needed digitization recommendations in the ALCTS guidelines
were analyzed. Table 4.26 shows the conducted Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the collected
data:
Table 4.26
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Availability Level of the Needed Digitization
Recommendation in ALCTS Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 1a
2.00
2.00
b
Positive Ranks 2
2.00
4.00
c
Ties
5
Total
8

Z
P Value
-.577

Availability Level of the
Needed Information in
.564
ALCTS for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media Availability Level of the
Needed Information in
ALCTS for Static Media
a. Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
< Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Static Media
b. Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
> Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Static Media
c. Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
= Availability Level of the Needed Information in ALCTS for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the availability level of needed information
in ALCTS digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual) media
scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −.577, 𝑝𝑝 = .564, so hypothesis 2.2.A is
not rejected.

153

The second Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was conducted for the collected data regarding
consortium/consortia digitization guidelines. Table 4.27 shows the statistical results:
Table 4.27
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Availability Level of the Needed Digitization
Recommendation in the Consortium/Consortia Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 2a
1.50
3.00
b
Positive Ranks 0
.00
.00
c
Ties
7
Total
9

Z
P Value
-1.342

Availability Level of the
Needed Information in
.180
Consortium Guidelines for
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media - Availability Level
of the Needed Information
in Consortium Guidelines
for Static Media
a. Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media < Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium
Guidelines for Static Media
b. Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media > Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium
Guidelines for Static Media
c. Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media = Availability Level of the Needed Information in Consortium
Guidelines for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the availability level of the needed
information in the consortium/consortia digitization guidelines for static media scores and nonstatic (audiovisual) media scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −1.342, 𝑝𝑝 =

.180, so hypothesis 2.2.B is not rejected.

154

The last Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was conducted for the availability levels related to
the university’s own customized digitization guidelines. Table 4.28 shows this statistical test:
Table 4.28
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Availability Level of the Needed Digitization
Recommendation in the University’s Own Customized Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 7a
4.93
34.50
b
Positive Ranks 2
5.25
10.50
Ties
12

Z
P Value
-1.433

Availability Level of the
Needed Information in
.152
University Guidelines for
c
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media - Availability Level Total
21
of the Needed Information
in University Guidelines for
Static Media
a. Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media < Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines
for Static Media
b. Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media > Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines
for Static Media
c. Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media = Availability Level of the Needed Information in University Guidelines
for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the availability level of the needed
information in the university’s own customized digitization guidelines for static media scores
and non-static (audiovisual) media scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 =
−1.433, 𝑝𝑝 = .152, so hypothesis 2.2.C is not rejected.

155

4.2.3. Usefulness Levels
Subjects were asked in the electronic questionnaire (questions 24 and 39) to rate the
usefulness levels for the selected guidelines to digitize static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
A Paired Samples Test was conducted for the usefulness level of the ALCTS digitization
guidelines. Two Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests were conducted for consortia/consortium and
university digitization guidelines. A Paired Samples Test in Table 4.29 was conducted to
evaluate the usefulness of the ALCTS guidelines in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual)
media:
Table 4.29
Paired Samples Test for the Usefulness Level of ALCTS Digitization Guidelines
Paired Samples Test
Sig. (2Paired Differences

t

df

tailed)

95% Confidence
Interval of the
Std.
Mean Deviation
Pair 1

Usefulness Level of

1.000

2.000

Std. Error
Mean
.816

Difference
Lower

Upper

-1.099 3.099 1.225

5

.275

ALCTS for Static Media Usefulness Level of
ALCTS for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media

A Paired Samples Test indicated that the usefulness level of ALCTS digitization
guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual) media scores were not statistically
significantly different, 𝑡𝑡 = 1.225, 𝑝𝑝 = .275, so hypothesis 2.3.A is not rejected.

156

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was conducted to determine usefulness levels of the
consortium/consortia digitization guidelines. Table 4.30 shows the results for this test:
Table 4.30
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Usefulness Level of the Consortium/Consortia Digitization
Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 1a
2.00
2.00
b
Positive Ranks 1
1.00
1.00
c
Ties
4
Total
6

Z
P Value
-.447
.655

Usefulness Level for
Consortium Guidelines for
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media - Usefulness Level
for Consortium Guidelines
for Static Media
a. Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media <
Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Static Media
b. Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media >
Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Static Media
c. Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media =
Usefulness Level for Consortium Guidelines for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the usefulness level of
consortium/consortia digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual)
media scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −.447, 𝑝𝑝 = .655, so hypothesis

2.3.B is not rejected.

The last Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for usefulness levels is related to the university’s
own customized digitization guidelines used to digitize static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Table 4.31 shows this statistical analysis:

157

Table 4.31
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Usefulness Level of the University’s Own Customized
Digitization Guidelines
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 5a
4.80
24.00
b
Positive Ranks 2
2.00
4.00
Ties
11c
Total
18

Z
P Value
-1.706
.088

Usefulness Level of
University Guidelines for
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media - Usefulness Level
of University Guidelines
for Static Media
a. Usefulness Level of University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media < Usefulness
Level of University Guidelines for Static Media
b. Usefulness Level of University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media > Usefulness
Level of University Guidelines for Static Media
c. Usefulness Level of University Guidelines for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media = Usefulness
Level of University Guidelines for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the usefulness level of the university’s own
customized digitization guidelines for static media scores and non-static (audiovisual) media
scores were not statistically significantly different, 𝑧𝑧 = −1.706, 𝑝𝑝 = .088, so hypothesis 2.3.C
is not rejected.

4.3. Challenges face digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media
Exploring the challenges academic librarians face in digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media is one of the main themes of this doctoral dissertation. Data regarding
digitization challenges were collected through use of an electronic questionnaire and semistructured interviews. The results obtained from the data analysis conducted on the collected data
158

are presented in two different sections (Sections 4.3.1. and 4.3.2.) to compare the challenges
between static and non-static (audiovisual) media, in addition, tables and figures are introduced.
After presenting the tables of the types of these challenges in both sections, the following
paragraphs are arranged based on the frequencies of the types of challenges, and the title of each
type is italicized.

4.3.1. Static Media
Subjects answering the electronic questionnaire were asked (i.e., Question 26) to rate
their agreement level (1 indicates Not At All Agree, whereas 7 indicates Extremely Agree) on six
statements concerning different types of challenges facing static media digitization. These types
of challenges concern: 1) budget, 2) external funding, 3) digitization equipment/hardware, 4)
digitization software, 5) staff digitization skills, and 6) the need for more professional training on
digitization. Table 4.32 shows a descriptive analysis for the collected responses:
Table 4.32
Agreement Levels with the following Statements Regarding the Challenges Faced in
Digitization of Static Media at the Examined Universities
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation
(SD)

Variance

Count

University has adequate long-term
budget for digitization project(s) of static
media

1

7

3.74

1.92

3.67

46

University has adequate funding from
external sources (other than the
university itself) for digitization
project(s) of static media

1

7

2.72

1.77

3.12

46

University has appropriate digitization
equipment/hardware for digitizing static
media

1

7

4.85

1.46

2.13

46

Statements

159

University has appropriate digitization
software for digitizing static media

1

7

5.22

1.40

1.95

45

University staff have adequate
digitization skills for digitizing static
media

2

7

5.35

1.35

1.84

46

University staff need more professional
training on digitization skills for static
media

1

7

4.41

1.75

3.07

46

Both the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews included open-ended
questions to ask the subjects about the challenges that they face in digitizing static media. The
qualitative data collected through the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews
were analyzed together by conducting open coding. Table 4.33 lists the types of these challenges,
along with their definitions:
Table 4.33
Challenges That Academic Librarians Face in Digitizing Static Media
Types of Challenges

Definitions

Copyright

Challenges concerning copyright and intellectual property
issues.

Funding

Challenges concerning financial issues (e.g., continuous
funding, digitization equipment, staff employment, software,
and storage).

Guidelines

Challenges concerning digitization guidelines and standards
(e.g., guidance, inflexibility of guidelines, and staff
awareness).

Hardware

Challenges concerning digitization equipment (e.g., lack of
equipment, oversized and/or particular materials, and staff
skills and/or training).

Metadata

Challenges concerning the descriptive data of a digital object
(e.g., metadata quality, and staff skills and time).
160

Physical Material

Challenges concerning the tangible media containing
information (e.g., binding, deterioration, equipment, oversized
and/or fragile materials, and staff skills and time).

Physical Space

Challenges concerning the digitization place or location (e.g.,
work space, space security, and storage environment).

Planning and Workflow

Challenges concerning the design and implementation of
procedures in the digitization process (e.g., strategic plans,
project management, prioritization, selection, handling
materials, backlogs, naming conventions, quality control, and
promoting collections).

Software

Challenges concerning issues related to computer programs
(e.g., digital asset management systems, digital preservation
systems, OCR, and staff training).

Staff
Staff Availability

Challenges concerning staff presence and/or employment.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Challenges concerning staff knowledge and/or expertise (e.g.,
training).

Staff Time

Challenges concerning the time devoted for digitizing static
media.

Storage

Challenges concerning storage issues (e.g., environmental
storage, digital preservation, and server space).

Figure 4.5 shows the frequency of these 13 types of challenges academic libraries face in
digitizing static media based on the collected data. These challenges are sorted from most to least
frequently occurring ones:

161

Types of Challenges

Challenges Face Academic Librarians in Digitizing Static
Media
Planning and Workflow
Funding
Hardware
Staff Availability
Staff Awareness and Skills
Software
Storage
Physical Material
Staff Time
Metadata
Physical Space
Copyright
Guidelines

53
43
41
35
29
24
24
23
16
8
8
6
5
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Frequency

Figure 4.5 Frequency of the types of challenges facing academic librarians in digitizing static
media

Table 4.33 shows 13 types of challenges that were explored through an open coding
process for the qualitative data. Responses with similar themes were grouped together into a
single category (e.g., Copyright, Funding, Guidelines, and Hardware), whereas each category
may include sub-themes that are related to each other. Types or categories of these challenges are
organized based on their frequencies in Figure 4.5, whereas the name of each category is
italicized in the following paragraphs. Examples are presented, as well, to clarify the meaning of
each type of challenge, but these examples may not refer to all aspects of each type of category.
Planning and Workflow is one of the main types of challenges reported by the subjects.
Responses falling into this category indicated several issues such as those related to strategic
planning, project management, prioritization, selection, naming conventions, quality control, or
162

promoting collections. For example, S47 said “Communicating a simple yet sophisticated set of
goals for a program of digitization that can be used to generate more support among senior
University administrators, faculty, students, and external funders (donors, foundations)” in a
reference to the necessity of having well-designed goals for digitization programs to enhance
cooperation between different groups of stakeholders. Also, “No defined digitization
prioritization plan” (S104), indicated that the absence of a plan for prioritization may create an
issue. S38 said “promotion of collections once they have been digitized and are available,” which
shows that steps needed to be taken after digitizing an item, such as promoting the newlydigitized content.
The second type of challenge is Funding, which contains many sub-themes including:
continuous funding, employing staff or even the cost of replacing some digitization equipment.
Although these responses referred to different aspects, all indicated the effect of funding on those
they mentioned. For example, S224 said “Inconsistent funding for workers & technology (mostly
through donations to library, which cannot be relied on)” to emphasize the effect of funding on
staff and technology. S134 said “Replacing equipment for the digitization of transparent media
(negatives). High end equipment is expensive” to clarify that replacing digitization equipment
for specific media is a challenge because of the expenses. Moreover, having funding could be not
an issue, but maintaining a continuous funding is a challenge, as S176 mentioned when raising
the issue of “Continued funding for large projects.”
Hardware is the third type of challenge that was explored during data analysis process.
This type concerns the challenges related to digitization equipment or even needed expertise to
use that equipment. Responses referred to different aspects such as: lack of equipment for
specific types of materials (e.g., oversized materials) and staff skills to work with the digitization
163

equipment. For instance, an Unspecified Subject Number cited “Access to capital for equipment
purchases” as an example of the impact of funding challenges on purchasing equipment.
Hardware issues may refer to issues with the equipment available in handling specific types of
formats as noted by S105: “Computers aren't powerful enough to manage large batches of
TIFFs.” Absence of suitable equipment to digitize large format materials could be challenging as
reported by an Unspecified Subject Number who said that: “We do not have the equipment to
digitize large format (>12x17) flat materials.”
Open coding revealed many responses addressing staff issues. However, these responses
were classified into three categories in order to better represent each type. They are: Staff
Availability, Staff Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. Responses related to Staff Availability
refer to the lack of available staff to conduct digitization. For example, “Not enough staff in
support of digitization projects” (S104), shows that lack of enough staff to conduct the
digitization process could be an issue. However, another challenge with staffing was reported by
S147 by saying “Staff turnover, especially with student workers” to emphasize that staff
shortages can be caused by those who leave digitization job, such as student employees. Also,
“Personnel - looking to fill a vacancy with a faculty-level position which would expand our
reach into digital scholarship” (S207), which shows the need for staff with specific
qualifications.
Staff Awareness and Skills is the second category of challenges concerning staff. This
category contains challenges related to the staff’s knowledge, awareness, expertise, and training.
For instance, S117 stated that “Lack of training and knowledge in digitization standards” to
reveal that needed knowledge and training regarding digitization standards are absent. Also, S87
noted “Lack of professional development opportunities,” which highlighted the absence of the
164

appropriate opportunities to professionally develop staff skills. Moreover, S146 said
“Interpersonal problems,” which implies issues concerning communication skills among staff
members.
Challenges related to software issues were grouped under Software. Responses in this
category discussed several issues concerning software, such as digital asset management, digital
preservation systems, OCR, and staff training related to software. For instance, “Inability for
systems to easily share data; (i.e. it is hard to output inventories from an archival system to reuse
for the digitization process)” (S169), referring to compatibility issues between different computer
systems. Also, some issues may occur because of software used in digitization of static media, as
S118 said “A more expedient OCR software for bulk materials. We use ABBYFineReader but
on instances can be inconsistent.” Moreover, responses indicated issues with staff skills in
dealing with software during the digitization process, as S134 said “Training and expertise
working with software for OCR and preparing files textual for later use.”
Storage challenges include responses concerning issues such as: server space,
environmental storage, and digital preservation. For instance, “Lack of a solid preservation plan”
(S95), which indicates the absence of a good plan to guide preservation procedures. Lack of
adequate digital storage space could be an issue as well; for instance, S105 said “Not enough
server support.” Although most storage issues referred to the digital environment, the physical
environment was mentioned as well; for instance, “These materials are housed in environments
that are not optimal and usually receive the least amout [sic] of attention or care” (S3).
Another type of challenge relates to the Physical Material itself. Many issues affect
physical material chosen for digitization, such as binding and deterioration. These challenges

165

include fragile and oversized materials as well. A total of 23 collected responses were grouped
under this type of challenge. For instance, S5 said “Large formats, brittle content, content that is
wavy or not flat,” which indicates that material may suffer from many issues that cause a
challenge during digitization. Also, condition of the physical material and lack of equipment may
cause another challenge as reported by S215 through saying “…we don't have necessarily a good
well book cradle or other method for effectively capturing a page image you know without a
shadow when it, when there's a tight binding….”
The third category of challenges related to staff issues is Staff Time. This type of
challenge indicated that staff time could be an issue in the digitization process. Responses
provided different examples of how time could be a challenge while digitizing static media. For
instance, “Time constraints on equipment use” (S36), which might emphasize limitations on both
time and equipment. Some materials may need more time during digitization than others; for
instance, “Digitizing small transparency formats can be time-consuming…” (S168). Also, S45
said “Performing mass digitization in a timely manner” to clarify that conducting digitization on
a given time frame may be a challenge as well.
Metadata is one of the types of challenges that academic librarians face in digitizing
static media. This type of challenge includes themes related to metadata such as the quality of the
metadata, or even the availability of a staff member for processing metadata tasks. For instance,
S169 said “Metadata backlogs ; enhancing metadata for large-scale digitization projects,” which
indicates ways in which handling metadata affects digitization workflow. Also, S207 said
“Filling other personnel positions, especially metadata experts” in reference to another challenge
facing static media digitization, which is the absence of specialized staff qualified in handling
metadata.
166

Physical Space is another type of challenge explored in the collected responses. This type
of challenge refers to the place designed for the digitization process. Collected responses referred
to issues related to this space including the storage environment, and space security. For
instance, “Space - finding a dedicated "digitization lab" or workstations” (S224), which reports
the absence of having a specialized place for digitization. Other types of spaces are needed as
well like the storage area as S150 said “…the money to maintain the storage environment that
you need…,” indicating that the conditions of the storage environment are also important.
Six responses were grouped under Copyright, as they referred to copyright issues. These
responses show that copyright could be a challenge in digitizing static materials at academic
libraries. Subjects provided responses to indicate this challenge in different ways. For example,
S36 stated “Management of Intellectual Property Rights” to refer to this issue in general. Also,
copyright issues might be connected with other aspects such as time, for instance; S208 said
“Time for copyright review” to emphasize the time devoted to this activity in the digitization
process.
Guidelines was the least frequently-occurring type of challenge reported by academic
librarians during data collection. This type of challenge refers to those related to guidelines such
as: inflexibility, complying with them, or staff awareness about them. For instance, S117 said
“Lack of training and knowledge in digitization standards” to emphasize the absence of
awareness or training concerning digitization standards. Although guidelines provide
recommendations to enhance the digitization process, following them might be a challenge as
reported by S58 who stated “Consistent adherence to digitization guidelines (image quality,
naming conventions, etc.).” Another subject S107 indicated their awareness of the guidelines, but

167

not the ability to comply with them due to storage restrictions, “… sometimes veer away from
the guidelines because we just don't have the server space to hold images that big….”

4.3.2. Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Subjects completing the electronic questionnaire were asked to rate their agreement
levels on six statements regarding challenges facing the digitization of non-static (audiovisual)
media (i.e., Question 41). The rating of these agreement levels was designed based on a 7-point
Likert scale (1 indicates Not At All Agree, whereas 7 indicates Extremely Agree). The statements
are concerning different challenges face digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media: 1) budget, 2)
external funding, 3) digitization equipment/hardware, 4) digitization software, 5) staff
digitization skills, and 6) the need for more professional training on digitization. Table 4.34
shows a descriptive analysis for the collected responses:
Table 4.34
Agreement Levels with the following Statements Regarding Challenges in Digitization of
Non-static (Audiovisual) Media at Examined Universities
Minimum

Maximum

Mean

University has adequate long-term
budget for digitization project(s) of
non-static (audiovisual) media

1

6

2.43

Standard
Deviation
(SD)
1.61

University has adequate funding from
external sources (other than the
university itself) for digitization
project(s) of non-static (audiovisual)
media

1

6

2.06

University has appropriate digitization
equipment/hardware for digitizing nonstatic (audiovisual) media

1

6

2.60

Statements

168

Variance

Count

2.59

35

1.22

1.48

35

1.52

2.30

35

University has appropriate digitization
software for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media

1

7

3.26

1.84

3.39

35

University staff has adequate
digitization skills for digitizing nonstatic (audiovisual) media

1

7

3.29

1.72

2.95

35

University staff need more professional
training on digitization skills for nonstatic (audiovisual) media

1

7

5.00

2.11

4.46

35

Qualitative data about the challenges facing the digitization of non-static (audiovisual)
media were collected from academic librarians through the electronic questionnaire and semistructured interviews. Academic librarians provided different responses regarding the challenges
they face in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. Responses with similar themes or concepts
were grouped into one category representing a type of challenge. A total of 14 types of
challenges were explored based on the conducted data analysis for the collected responses. These
types are organized based on their frequencies in the next paragraphs; their titles are italicized.
Examples of some aspects of each type are mentioned for more clarification. Table 4.35 contains
the types of challenges, alongside their definitions:
Table 4.35
Challenges Academic Librarians Face in Digitizing Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Types of Challenges

Definitions

Copyright

Challenges concerning copyright and intellectual property
issues.

Funding

Challenges concerning financial issues (e.g., costs of
digitization equipment, outsourcing, staff training, storage,
and transcribing).

169

Guidelines

Challenges concerning digitization guidelines and standards
(e.g., staff awareness, and variety and/or difficulty of
guidelines).

Hardware

Challenges concerning digitization equipment (e.g., lack of
equipment, oversized and/or particular materials, and staff
skills and training).

Metadata

Challenges concerning the descriptive data of a digital
object (e.g., staff skills and time).

Physical Material

Challenges concerning tangible media containing
information (e.g., equipment, format decay, oversized
materials, staff skills and training, software, storage,
variation of formats, and sticky shed syndrome).

Physical Space

Challenges concerning the digitization place or location.

Planning and Workflow Challenges concerning the design and implementation of
procedures in the digitization process (e.g., backlogs,
decision making, goals, prioritization, quality control, and
selection).
Software

Challenges concerning issues related to computer programs
(e.g., AV editing software, digital preservation systems, and
staff training).

Staff
Staff Availability

Challenges concerning staff presence and/or employment.

Staff Awareness and
Skills

Challenges concerning staff knowledge and/or expertise
(e.g., training).

Staff Time

Challenges concerning the time devoted for digitizing nonstatic (audiovisual) media.

Storage

Challenges concerning storage issues (e.g., digital
preservation, environmental storage, and server space).

Transcription

Challenges concerning creating textual content for the nonstatic (audiovisual) materials.

170

Figure 4.6 displays the frequency of each type of challenges that academic librarians face
in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media based on the collected data:

Challenges Face Academic Librarians in Digitizing Nonstatic (Audiovisual) Media
Hardware

39

Funding

33

Staff Awareness and Skills

31

Types of Challenges

Physical Material

30

Storage

27

Planning and Workflow

26

Guidelines

10

Staff Availability

10

Software

9

Staff Time

9

Copyright

3

Physical Space

3

Metadata

2

Transcription

1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Frequency

Figure 4.6 Frequency of the types of challenges academic librarians face in digitizing nonstatic (audiovisual) media

The most frequent type of challenge related to Hardware. Respondents reported some
issues that related directly in some way to digitization equipment or hardware. Subjects
mentioned different aspects such as: lack of equipment, or even the skills and training needed for
using such equipment. S104 said “Lack of training in using and maintaining hardware,” which
refers to the absence of needed training to handle equipment or hardware. S58 said “Variety of
different formats, each requiring specialized hardware” to show ways in which the differing
natures of physical materials cause hardware-related issues. Similarly, Unspecified Subject
171

Number said “We do not have enough A/V digitization equipment (we need professional cassette
decks, VHS VCR, U-Matic, 1/4" audio, and EIAJ VTR)” to emphasize that variations in
digitization equipment due to availability of different materials is a challenge.
Data analysis revealed that financial issues are still considered as one of the main types of
challenges. Funding challenges are connected to other aspects of the digitization process such as
costs of digitization equipment, outsourcing, staff training, transcribing, and storage. As a
reference to the impact of funding issues on other digitization aspects such as outsourcing and
equipment, S95 said “Lack of funding for either outsourcing or equipment for in-house
digitization.” Moreover, limited funding has an impact on opportunities for enhancing staff
skills; for example, “Skills required for digitization of film and video require regular and costly
training” (S134). Also, S166 said “…with the digital file we always need to have a transcription
and that is very time consuming or costly to outsource transcribing oral histories,” which
represents another impact of the funding issue, this one related to the creation of textual content
for non-static (audiovisual) media.
Responses concerning staff engagement in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media were
also reported. These responses were categorized into three categories: Staff Availability, staff
Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. Regarding Staff Awareness and Skills, this category
includes responses related to staff knowledge, expertise, or training. A total of 31 responses
indicated issues related in some way to this type of challenge. For instance, S53 said “Nobody in
our library, including myself, has any extensive professional background in AV digitization,”
which indicates a lack of professional knowledge in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.
Another example was introduced by S59, who stated that “We lack expertise in the audiovisual
arena about file formats or even media formats…” in referring to a lack of expertise in certain
172

areas related to non-static (audiovisual) media digitization. Regarding the effect of training on
staff skills, S134 said “Skills required for digitization of film and video require regular and costly
training,” emphasizing the high costs of training staff in digitizing film and video.
The Physical Material itself could be a challenge during the digitization of non-static
(audiovisual) media. This challenge includes many related aspects, such as: format decay,
needed equipment, oversized materials, staff skills and training, sticky shed syndrome, software,
storage, and variation of formats. “Necessity to digitize before formats can no longer be
accessed” (S36) is an example of how elapsed time has a negative impact on undigitized formats.
Some physical materials could be a target for other issues as well; for example, “Our AV
collections include problem items such as Umatic tapes with sticky shed syndrome. We are
physically equipped to deal with the problem, but not adequately trained” (S53). Also, the size of
some materials may prevent digitizing them as mentioned by S111 who stated that “We currently
cannot digitize audio reel-to-reel center on that are bigger than 7 inches diameter.”
Storage presents a significant type of challenge facing the digitization of non-static
(audiovisual) media as realized by the data analysis. Within this context, storage refers to many
aspects, such as: digital preservation, environmental storage, and server space. S3 provided an
example for the physical storage to store materials by saying “…basic environmental storage….”
On the other hand, capacity of digital storage was indicated by the collected responses. For
example, “…the storage space again because those files for sound and video are much much
bigger than static media…” (S111) in a reference to digital storage issues for this type of media.
Similarly, S95 said “Large file sizes for media and need to store and preserve them,” again
showing the problem with storing non-static (audiovisual) media.

173

Challenges regarding Planning and Workflow were explored during analysis of the
collected data. This type of challenge includes several aspects related to planning and workflow
of the digitization process, such as: backlogs, decision making, goals, prioritization, quality
control, and selection. Since these aspects are related to the entire digitization process and
workflow, they were grouped together into one category rather than having several smaller ones.
For example, “Lack of support from upper management” (S139) is one of the responses coded
into this category, which describes administrative and planning issues concerning digitization.
Regarding materials’ selection and prioritization for digitization, an example of a prioritization
challenge was introduced by S104 through saying “Lack of digitization prioritization process,”
whereas the selection challenge regarding selecting materials was introduced by S36 through
saying “Identifying appropriate materials for digitization.”
Many issues connected to Guidelines were found among the collected responses. This
type of challenge concerns either the guidelines themselves (e.g., their difficulty) or other related
aspects (e.g., staff awareness regarding digitization guidelines). Subjects reported different
responses that fell into these types of challenges. For instance, S58 said “Lack of background
and knowledge in AV digitization standards and workflows,” referring to staff awareness and
knowledge of standards and steps required for digitizing these types of materials. Digitization
guidelines for some materials may have issues in their contents; for example, S111 said “I found
that film or motion picture guidelines and best practices for digitization are not very well
developed, there is a lot of variety out there as far as file format, it is just complicated.”
Regarding Staff Availability, ten responses revealed issues related to availability and/or
employment of staff. “We outsource all non-static materials because we don't have the
equipment or staff” (S59), which shows unavailability of staff members as well as lack of
174

equipment. An example for the unavailability of staff members for certain tasks of the
digitization process was introduced by S107 by saying “…if they're looking for checksums, we
have a hard time implementing those because we just don't have the technical staff to be able to
do it.” However, staff shortages might occur because of the limited number of staff members; for
instance, S62 said “Although we have instructions floating around, only one or two people in the
department do the work regularly enough to perform tasks quickly and efficiently.”
Different responses were reported by subjects regarding types of Software engaged in
digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. Responses in this category concerned different types of
software such as AV editing, digital preservation systems, and staff training on software use. For
example, “Lack of training in using software” (S104) is a general example for staff skills in
dealing with software. However, S215 provided an example for a certain type of software by
saying “Training and skills to work with AV editing software,” which explains a challenge
encountered by staff in handling this type of computer program. Digital preservation systems
may cause issues as well, as indicated from S117 who stated that “…it does again take time to,
you know, put digitized content into some of these systems like our digital preservation system
or Omeka,” which emphasizes also the needed time to manage these computer programs and
systems.
The time element in the digitization process was reported by 9 responses, grouped
together into the Staff Time category. This category represents issues related to the staff time
devoted to digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. For instance, Unspecified Subject Number
said “Too much to digitize and not enough time” to clarify that the load of the materials selected
for digitization could cause time constraints. Also, the nature of these materials may require
plenty of time to digitize them; for example, “Real time playback required for most formats,
175

which is time consuming” (S58). Specific procedures or aspects of the digitization process may
consume more time than others; for example, “Time investment to train students” (S94).
Responses concerning Copyright issues were found during the open coding process.
Three responses revealed that copyright is considered a challenge in digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media. The first two examples used different terminology in their reference to
copyright issues, which are “Copyright issues” (S16) and “Intellectual property/rights
management issues” (S36). More explanation regarding the impact of the copyright challenge
was mentioned by S56 through saying “…we might have copyright issues that might lead to
some complexity and either preventing us from sharing it broadly…,” which shows a connection
between copyright issues and information sharing.
Physical Space was also reported as a challenge during digitizing non-static (audiovisual)
media. This challenge concerns the place used or needed for digitizing non-static (audiovisual)
media. For example, S166 said “Physical space,” which is a brief and direct way to refer to this
challenge. More explanation was provided by S111 about the lack of physical space to digitize
certain items through saying “…we have to go out of our way to digitize a vinyl or shellac record
that is rotate to 78 RPM.…We can digitize the 78s, but we got to go to a different building on
campus….” Also, S56 referred to the challenge of having a specialized physical place for
digitization that is not used for other purposes by saying “…used under the umbrella of a
different purpose like a student multimedia lab or public space that might prevent a long-term
project from happening.”
Subjects revealed Metadata issues in their responses. These issues discussed two major
themes: either the needed expertise or the time devoted to creating metadata. Only two responses

176

were coded into this type of challenge in digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media. S107 said
“…making metadata again for a very complex object and that can take a lot of staff time” in a
reference to the considerable time spent in creating metadata for this type of media. On the other
hand, S117 said “…finding the time and again expertise to have someone do that is a challenge,”
which shows how lack of time and experience may negatively impact creating metadata for nonstatic (audiovisual) media.
Only one response was reported regarding the challenge of Transcription within the
context of digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. This type of challenge was found only
during analyzing collected data for the non-static (audiovisual) media, because of the different
nature of this type of media. S166 reported this challenge as “…with the digital file we always
need to have a transcription and that is very time consuming or costly to outsource transcribing
oral histories,” which reveals that creating textual content for the non-static (audiovisual) media
requires adequate time and funding.
In working with this rich trove of information, it became clear that academic libraries
face challenges in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Although these challenges
differ, the majority occurred in digitizing both types of media (i.e., static and non-static
[audiovisual] media). Several differences were realized through comparing the digitization
challenges of static and non-static (audiovisual) media (Figures 4.5 and 4.6). First, financial
issues challenges (i.e., Funding) ranked second among other challenges for both static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media. This shows the strong impact of funding on digitization projects at
academic libraries. Second, the challenge related to digitization equipment/hardware (i.e.,
Hardware) was ranked first for non-static (audiovisual) media, whereas it was ranked third for

177

static media. This may imply that digitization equipment for non-static (audiovisual) media are
harder to acquire or handle as compared to that required for static media.
Third, the challenge related to staff knowledge and expertise (i.e., Staff Awareness and
Skills) ranked third for non-static (audiovisual) media; it was ranked fifth for static media. This
may point to the reality that digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media requires more knowledge
and skills as compared to those required to digitize static media. Fourth, the challenge related to
storage (i.e., Storage) ranked fifth for non-static (audiovisual) media, whereas it was ranked
seventh to static media. This may be a result of the large file sizes produced in digitizing
audiovisual materials, as understood from the collected data. Lastly, the challenge related to
guidelines (i.e., Guidelines) ranked last for static media, whereas for non-static (audiovisual)
media it ranked seventh. This may indicate that subjects face more difficulties in digitization
guidelines for non-static (audiovisual) media than they do for static media.

4.4. Differences in challenges facing digitization of static and non-static
(audiovisual) media
This research question aims to draw comparisons between the statements of challenges
that are encountered in digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Statistical
analyses for levels of agreement were performed to compare these two sets of statements in the
electronic questionnaire (i.e., questions 26 and 41). These statements referred to different aspects
of the digitization process, which are: 1) budget, 2) external funding, 3) digitization
equipment/hardware, 4) digitization software, 5) staff digitization skills, and 6) the need for more
professional training on digitization.
178

Only paired data were included for the statistical analyses to perform Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks Tests. Each statement in Question 26 was compared to its equivalent in Question 41. For
example, the collected data for the statement “University has adequate long-term budget for
digitization project(s) of static media” was compared statistically to data of the statement
“University has adequate long-term budget for digitization project(s) of non-static (audiovisual)
media.” IBM SPSS Statistics 25 software was used to perform the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests
comparing these two datasets, and Tables 4.36-4.46 are based on the tables generated by this
software.
Regarding whether the university has a long-term budget for digitization projects of static
media comparing to non-static (audiovisual) media, agreement levels given to the statements
“University has adequate long-term budget for digitization project(s) of static media” and
“University has adequate long-term budget for digitization project(s) of non-static (audiovisual)
media” were calculated statistically. Tables 4.36 and 4.37 show the conducted Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks Test for the budget aspect:
Table 4.36
Descriptive Statistics of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding the Budget
Descriptive Statistics

Agreement Level for Budget of
Static Media
Agreement Level for Budget of
Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

N
35

Mean
3.54

Std.
Deviation
1.900

35

2.43

1.632

179

Minimum Maximum
1
7
1

6

Table 4.37
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Statements Regarding Budget
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
21a
11.45
240.50
b
1
12.50
12.50
c
13
35

Z
P Value
-3.759
.000

Agreement Level for
Negative Ranks
Budget of Non-static
Positive Ranks
(Audiovisual) Media - Ties
Agreement Level for
Total
Budget of Static Media
a. Agreement Level for Budget of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media < Agreement Level for
Budget of Static Media
b. Agreement Level for Budget of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media > Agreement Level for
Budget of Static Media
c. Agreement Level for Budget of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media = Agreement Level for
Budget of Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level of budget for static
media scores were statistically significantly higher than the non-static (audiovisual) media
scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −3.759, 𝑝𝑝 = .000, so hypothesis 4.1 is rejected.
The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was calculated for the second two statements, which
are “University has adequate funding from external sources (other than the university itself) for
digitization project(s) of static media” and “University has adequate funding from external
sources (other than the university itself) for digitization project(s) of non-static (audiovisual)
media.” Table 4.38 shows the statistical analysis for these two statements:

180

Table 4.38
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Statements Regarding External Funding
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 15a
11.33
170.00
b
Positive Ranks
6
10.17
61.00
c
Ties
14
Total
35

Z
P Value
-1.921
.055

Agreement Level for
Funding from External
Sources for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media Agreement Level for
Funding from External
Sources for Static Media
a. Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media <
Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Static Media
b. Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media >
Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Static Media
c. Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media =
Agreement Level for Funding from External Sources for Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level of funding from
external sources for static media scores were not statistically significantly different from nonstatic (audiovisual) media scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −1.921, 𝑝𝑝 = 0.055, so hypothesis 4.2 is not rejected.
The third statements chosen for comparison are “University has appropriate digitization
equipment/hardware for digitizing static media” and “University has appropriate digitization
equipment/hardware for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.” A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks
Test was conducted for the given agreement levels by subjects for these two statements. Tables
4.39 and 4.40 show these statistics:

181

Table 4.39
Descriptive Statistics of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding the
Digitization Equipment/Hardware
Descriptive Statistics

Agreement Level for the
Digitization Equipment/Hardware
for Static Media
Agreement Level for the
Digitization Equipment/Hardware
for Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media

N
35

Mean
4.71

Std.
Deviation
1.405

35

2.60

1.538

Minimum Maximum
1
7

1

6

Table 4.40
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Statements Regarding Digitization Equipment/Hardware
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Negative Ranks 29a
17.40
504.50
b
Positive Ranks 3
7.83
23.50
c
Ties
3
Total
35

Z
P Value
-4.545
.000

Agreement Level for the
Digitization
Equipment/Hardware for
Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media - Agreement Level
for the Digitization
Equipment/Hardware for
Static Media
a. Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media < Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Static Media
b. Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media > Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Static Media
c. Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Non-static (Audiovisual)
Media = Agreement Level for the Digitization Equipment/Hardware for Static Media

182

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level of digitization
equipment/hardware for static media scores were statistically significantly higher than the nonstatic (audiovisual) media scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −4.545, 𝑝𝑝 = .000, so hypothesis 4.3 is rejected.
Regarding digitization challenges related to software, a Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was
conducted to compare the following two statements: “University has appropriate digitization
software for digitizing static media,” and “University has appropriate digitization software for
digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.” Given agreement levels by subjects for these two
statements were compared statistically to observe whether there is any significant difference.
Tables 4.41 and 4.42 show the conducted statistical analysis:
Table 4.41
Descriptive Statistics of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding the
Digitization Software
Descriptive Statistics

Agreement Level for the
Digitization Software of Static
Media
Agreement Level for the
Digitization Software of Nonstatic (Audiovisual) Media

N
34

Mean
5.06

Std.
Deviation
1.476

34

3.21

1.871

183

Minimum Maximum
1
7

1

7

Table 4.42
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Statements Regarding Digitization Software
Ranks
Z
P Value
-4.485
.000

N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Agreement Level for the Negative Ranks 26a
15.31
398.00
b
Digitization Software of Positive Ranks 2
4.00
8.00
c
Non-static (Audiovisual) Ties
6
Media - Agreement Level Total
34
for the Digitization
Software of Static Media
a. Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media <
Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Static Media
b. Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media >
Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Static Media
c. Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Non-static (Audiovisual) Media =
Agreement Level for the Digitization Software of Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level of digitization software
for static media scores were statistically significantly higher than the non-static (audiovisual)
media scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −4.485, 𝑝𝑝 = .000, so hypothesis 4.4 is rejected.
A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was conducted for both sets of paired data related to the
statements “University staff have adequate digitization skills for digitizing static media” and
“University staff has adequate digitization skills for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.”
Tables 4.43 and 4.44 represent the results of this test:

184

Table 4.43
Descriptive Statistics of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding Staff
Digitization Skills
Descriptive Statistics

Agreement Level for the
Digitization Skills for Static
Media
Agreement Level for the
Digitization Skills for Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media

N
35

Mean
5.34

Std.
Deviation
1.305

35

3.29

1.742

Minimum Maximum
2
7

1

7

Table 4.44
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding Staff Digitization Skills
Ranks
Z
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Agreement Level for the
Digitization Skills for Nonstatic (Audiovisual) Media
- Agreement Level for the
Digitization Skills for
Static Media

Negative Ranks 31a
Positive Ranks

0b

Ties

4c

Total

35

P Value

16.00

496.00

-4.908

.00

.00

.000

a. Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media <
Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Static Media
b. Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media >
Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Static Media
c. Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media =
Agreement Level for the Digitization Skills for Static Media

185

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level of digitization skills
for static media scores were statistically significantly higher than the non-static (audiovisual)
media scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −4.908, 𝑝𝑝 = .000, so hypothesis 4.5 is rejected.
A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was conducted for the statements “University staff need
more professional training on digitization skills for static media” and “University staff need more
professional training on digitization skills for non-static (audiovisual) media.” Tables 4.45 and
4.46 show this test:
Table 4.45
Descriptive Statistics of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding the Need for
more Professional Training on Digitization
Descriptive Statistics

Agreement Level for the Need of
More Professional Training on
Digitization for Digitizing Static
Media
Agreement Level for the Need of
More Professional Training on
Digitization for Digitizing Nonstatic (Audiovisual) Media

N
35

Mean
4.46

Std.
Deviation
1.615

35

5.00

2.142

Minimum Maximum
1
7

1

7

Table 4.46
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for Statements Regarding the Need for more Professional
Training on Digitization
Ranks
N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
Agreement Level for the Negative Ranks 9a
12.11
109.00
Need of More
Positive Ranks 18b
14.94
269.00
c
Professional Training on Ties
8
186

Z
P Value
-1.957
.050

Digitization for
Total
35
Digitizing Non-static
(Audiovisual) Media Agreement Level for the
Need of More
Professional Training on
Digitization for
Digitizing Static Media
a. Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional Training on Digitization for Digitizing
Non-static (Audiovisual) Media < Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional
Training on Digitization for Digitizing Static Media
b. Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional Training on Digitization for Digitizing
Non-static (Audiovisual) Media > Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional
Training on Digitization for Digitizing Static Media
c. Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional Training on Digitization for Digitizing
Non-static (Audiovisual) Media = Agreement Level for the Need of More Professional
Training on Digitization for Digitizing Static Media

A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test indicated that the agreement level for the need of more
professional training on digitization for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media scores were
statistically significantly higher than the static media scores, 𝑧𝑧 = −1.957, 𝑝𝑝 = .050, so
hypothesis 4.6 is rejected.

4.5. Applied or suggested solutions to overcome these challenges
Exploring solutions to the encountered digitization challenges adds another dimension to
this doctoral dissertation. Two types of solutions (i.e., applied and suggested) were investigated
for the challenges involving digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media at academic
libraries in the United States. Examining these solutions helps in improving understanding. Both

187

the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews collected qualitative data regarding
the solutions for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Again, these solutions were classified into two major categories, applied solutions and
suggested solutions. Applied solutions represent those already applied at the academic libraries
examined, whereas those suggested represent desired solutions that have not yet been applied.
Both applied and suggested solutions to static media are discussed in one section (Section 4.5.1.),
whereas the applied and suggested solutions regarding non-static (audiovisual) media are
discussed in another section (Section 4.5.2.). In each section, applied solutions are presented
first, followed by suggested solutions. Further, tables and figures are introduced in which the
paragraphs for the types of applied and suggested solutions are arranged based on the frequency
of the categories or types of solutions. Additionally, the title for each category of solution type is
italicized.

4.5.1. Static Media
Data collected from the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews regarding
applied solutions for digitizing static media were analyzed together. Table 4.47 shows the types
of applied solutions by academic librarians for digitizing static media, along with their
definitions:

188

Table 4.47
Solutions Academic Librarians Applied to Static Media Digitization
Types of Applied
Solutions

Definitions

Funding

Solutions applied to financial issues (e.g., raising funds,
outsourcing, and seeking grants).

Guidelines

Solutions applied to the issues of guidelines and standards
(e.g., compliance to guidelines, identifying standards, and
updating the adopted standards).

Hardware

Solutions applied to digitization equipment issues (e.g., book
cradle, hardware for large formats, outsourcing maps
digitization, purchasing equipment, and tethered capture).

Metadata

Solutions applied to the issues of the descriptive data of a
digital object (e.g., coordinating with metadata department,
DACS compliance, and preparing metadata).

Physical Material

Solutions applied to the issues of the tangible media contains
information (e.g., adjusting the standards, outsourcing
oversized materials, preparing fragile materials, and
prioritization).

Physical Space

Solutions applied to the issues of digitization place or
location (e.g., setting up a room).

Planning and
Workflow

Solutions applied to the issues regarding designing and
implementation of the procedures in the digitization process
(e.g., communication, documentation, fragile materials
assessment, and prioritization).

Software

Solutions applied to issues of the computer programs (e.g.,
ArchiveSpace, Confluence, OCR, and Trello).

Staff
Staff Availability

Solutions applied to issues regarding staff presence and/or
employment.

Staff Awareness and
Skills

Solutions applied to issues regarding staff knowledge and/or
expertise (e.g., communication, staff meetings, and training
program).

189

Staff Time

Solutions applied to issues regarding the time devoted for
digitizing static media.

Storage

Solutions applied to storage issues (e.g., digital preservation
and server space).

Figure 4.7 shows the frequency of types of applied solutions used by academic libraries
to overcome the challenges involved in digitization of static media. These frequencies represent
data collected from the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews:

Types of Applied Solutions

Applied Solutions to the Challenges Face
Academic Librarians in Digitizing Static
Media
Planning and Workflow
Funding
Software
Hardware
Physical Material
Storage
Staff Awareness and Skills
Metadata
Staff Availability
Guidelines
Staff Time
Physical Space

21
13
10
8
8
8
7
6
6
4
3
2
0

5

10

15

20

25

Frequency

Figure 4.7 Frequency of the types of solutions applied by academic librarians to overcome the
challenges of static media digitization

Subjects were asked about the solutions applied to overcome challenges in digitization of
static media. Different responses were collected through the electronic questionnaire and semi190

structured interviews. Collected data were classified into various categories of applied solutions
based on their themes. A total of 12 categories of applied solutions were identified regarding
static media digitization.
Planning and Workflow is the main category of applied solutions since 21 responses were
coded into it. This category describes solutions applied to challenges faced in planning and/or
workflow of the digitization process. It includes different aspects of the digitization process such
as fragile material assessment, prioritization, documentation, and communication among staff.
“We are in the process of writing an extensive Digital Workflow Process document in
collaboration with stakeholders from across the library: digital collections, special collections,
systems, metadata” (S146) is an example of an applied solution to the digitization workflow.
Also, S16 said “…the reference staff currently compile usage stats and then the curators use that
as a guide, their choices for next digitization projects,” which shows an example related to
planning and selection in the digitization process.
Subjects reported applied solutions related to Funding. This category contains responses
related to issues such as raising funds, outsourcing, and seeking grants. Few responses indicated
how funding helped with staffing issues in digitization projects; for instance, S16 said “We pay
student employees very well in order to promote longevity in this position (since the training
processes on scanning are very long and experienced students perform much faster than new
students).” Likewise, S224 said “We are trying to raise funds to endow a digital special
collections librarian,” another example of how funding helps in staff employment. Funding also
helped in outsourcing digitization as well; for instance, “We're moving to outsourcing the
digitization of some formats because digitization in-house is too costly” (S134).

191

Software category contains solutions that were applied to the digitization process of static
media. Responses discussed different types of software like ArchiveSpace, Confluence, OCR,
and Trello. For example, “…we use Trello which is like an online tool for, you know,
communicating our project which is not magic but it allows you to sort of put your tracking
documentation in one place…” (S150), which emphasizes the benefit of using a computer
program for communication and documentation purposes in the digitization process. S59 said
“… we are now using Golden Thread for color and and sharpness calibration and to check our
conformity to the FADGI star ratings” in a reference to using computer software to enhance
digitization.
Hardware is another category containing responses related to applied solutions for static
media digitization. Although this category contains different responses, they discuss one main
theme, which is digitization equipment/hardware. These responses may discuss book cradle,
purchasing equipment, or digitization equipment suitable for large format materials. For instance,
“…we have applied for capturing for example large-format materials are using photography high
pixel cameras and appropriate lenses….We've also purchased lighting and other sort of staging
materials for those large-format items in order to stage them in a way that allows us to capture
them as best we can” (S215), which clarifies that solutions were applied to digitization
equipment for oversized materials. An example was introduced by S150 about changing the
method of capturing images through saying “…we’ve switched to a tethered capture…and that
has been a big improvement for us and it has allowed for a better coordination….And so having
a more streamlined workflow has really helped us to be able to do that and to implement some of
the FADGI guidance on digitization….”

192

Subjects mentioned different responses related to Physical Material. These solutions were
dependent on the materials that are selected for digitization. Preparing fragile materials,
prioritization, and outsourcing oversized materials are examples of responses in this category. An
example of prioritization in digitizing materials was indicated from S107 who said, “We drew up
a list of endangered materials that were also highly used and so if we can digitize those first….So
we are prioritizing those materials in order to get the at-risk materials done first….” Regarding
handling fragile materials, S168 said “I require that our preservation staff assess fragile formats
and perform stabilization or rehousing in preparation for digitization.”
Applied solutions related to Storage issues were also found in the collected data. This type
of solution discusses themes related to storage, including digital preservation and server space.
For instance, “Administration continues to support expanded storage and digital preservation
measures actively; campus also provides reasonable and appropriate storage for digital assets”
(S215), which shows an applied solution to solve the storage challenge. Also, S107 said
“…instead of just applying the standards directly and just flatly for every object in hand, we are
looking at it and deciding…at what resolution we’re going to digitize, and at what bit rates we’re
going to do that in order to try and preserve our server space…,” which refers to adjusting the
adopted standards to maintain the storage issue.
The digitization processes depend on staff as well; hence, a total of 16 applied solutions
were found regarding staff issues. These solutions were classified into three categories for more
precise analysis, which are: staff Availability, Staff Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. The
Staff Awareness and Skills category discusses solutions applied to the awareness and skills of
staff, such as: staff meetings, training programs, and communication. For example, “I think we
have kind of a to-do for staff listed on the library intranet.…they've in one of the monthly staff
193

meetings about two years ago, they did demonstration and instructed everyone how to create
pick lists of items to digitize” (S16), which illustrates examples of staff communication and
awareness. An example for staff training was introduced by S59 through saying “…by
purchasing those equipment, the software were using can be used on both pieces even though
their different manufacturers, so were being more efficient and having to train our staff only on
one application versus multiple.”
Applied solutions related to Metadata issues were found also in the collected data. These
solutions discussed different themes such as establishing coordination with the metadata
department, or preparing the needed metadata. For example, S16 said “…we foster weekly
meetings with our metadata department in order to coordinate the, yeah the cataloging, the
cataloging aspect that comes after digitization” in a reference to cooperation with another
department to handle the metadata of digitized materials. Another example was introduced by
S166 for solving metadata issues by creating a computer database through saying “…we had our
IT department create a SQL-based database…that could be logged into and shared among all the
stakeholders…we will know which student created something because their login will be the one
associated with it, but they'll also have to put the file size which we want to have for our our
technical metadata, they’ll have to put the date digitized which is one of our metadata fields….”
Only six responses were related to the category Staff Availability. This category of applied
solutions relates to staff presence and/or employment. For instance, S56 said “We have had great
funding, I guess that would help because that a lot of have a full-time position and extra
equipment being added for short-term project” in a reference to employing staff for digitization
projects. Also, S117 said “…we do rely on student workers to help with some of the
workload…,” which shows that the university is employing students in the digitization process.
194

A total of four responses were coded into the Guidelines category, because of their
relation to this type of applied solution. During the open coding process, it was found that
responses in this category mentioned solutions such as updating the current standards, or
checking the status of a compliance to a standard. For example, “I plan to ask our curators to
come up with a percentage of their collections that are and are not DACS compliant” (S16),
which shows a solution regarding examining the standards’ adoption and compatibility. Updating
the current standards is another example of the applied solution as it was indicated from S168 by
saying “We’ve changed the standards probably once every 18 to 24 months in the time I’ve
worked for my institution, which is good.…we’re always adopting cleaner standards that are
going to produce better digital surrogates of the media.”
The last type of applied solution relating to staff issues is the Staff Time. The title of this
group provides a clear explanation of its theme. This category discusses solutions applied to
issues regarding the time devoted for digitizing static media. Only three responses were grouped
into this type of applied solutions. For example, “…we are prioritizing those materials in order to
get the at-risk materials done first, and also make the best use of our staff time…” (S107), which
explains how prioritization may help with staff time issues. Also, S150 said “…we have a phase
1 like camera-back and a reprographic camera, we have basically two operators to kind of use
that continuously rather than having say five student digitizing separate portions of a
collection…then have to all be re-collated together which was very time consuming and
confusing,” which shows that the digitization method affects staff time spent on digitizing items.
Physical Space was also considered by the subjects when they discussed applied solutions
for static media. This category of applied solutions focuses on the physical place or location used
for the digitization process. Only two responses were coded into this category of applied
195

solutions. For example, S215 said “…we make use of a of a room for to do the photography that
we have to reset every time…,” which refers to the lack of having a permanent and specialized
place for digitization.
Suggested solutions is the second type examined regarding digitizing static media. Both
the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews inquired about these types of
solutions. Table 4.48 shows the types of these suggested solutions and their definitions:
Table 4.48
Solutions Academic Librarians Suggested for Static Media Digitization
Types of Suggested
Solutions

Definitions

Copyright

Solutions suggested for copyright and intellectual property
issues (e.g., intellectual property rights management).

Funding

Solutions suggested for financial issues (e.g., advocacy,
increasing annual budget, and seeking grants).

Guidelines

Solutions suggested for guidelines and standards issues
(e.g., guidance and simplifying the guidelines).

Hardware

Solutions suggested for digitization equipment issues (e.g.,
equipment for oversized materials, purchasing equipment,
and training staff).

Metadata

Solutions suggested for the issues of descriptive data of a
digital object (e.g., DACS compliance and hiring metadata
staff).

Physical Material

Solutions suggested for the issues of tangible media
contains information (e.g., handling fragile materials,
nitrate films, and scanning oversized materials).

Physical Space

Solutions suggested for the issues of digitization place or
location (e.g., new building and renovation).

Planning and Workflow

Solutions suggested for issues regarding designing and
implementation of procedures in the digitization process
(e.g., developing workflows, documentation, institution's

196

commitment, quality checks, MPLP, preservation plan,
prioritization, renovation plan, and selection).
Software

Solutions suggested for issues related to computer
programs (e.g., federated sites and OCR)

Staff
Staff Availability

Solutions suggested for issues regarding staff presence
and/or employment.

Staff Awareness and Skills

Solutions suggested for issues regarding staff knowledge
and/or expertise (e.g., attending meetings, communication,
education, and training).

Staff Time

Solutions suggested for issues regarding the time devoted
to digitizing static media.

Storage

Solutions suggested for storage issues (e.g., checksums,
digital preservation, digital repository, and server space).

Based on data analysis of the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews,
Figure 4.8 shows the frequency of the types of solutions suggested by academic librarians to
overcome challenges faced in digitizing static media:

197

Types of Suggested Solutions

Suggested Solutions to the Challenges Face Academic
Librarians in Digitizing Static Media
Planning and Workflow
Funding
Staff Awareness and Skills
Staff Availability
Storage
Physical Material
Hardware
Guidelines
Software
Physical Space
Metadata
Copyright
Staff Time

51
28
28
22
14
13
11
10
9
7
6
3
3
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Frequency

Figure 4.8 Frequency of the types of solutions suggested by academic librarians to overcome
the challenges faced in static media digitization

Subjects provided suggested solutions to overcome challenges faced in static media
digitization. Data analysis for the collected qualitative data revealed of 13 types of suggested
solutions. Solutions suggested to Planning and Workflow are still the most frequent ones,
because this category contains 51 responses. These solutions discuss various aspects related to
planning and workflow of the digitization process. For example, S118 said “Training my own
staff on productivity, MPLP,” which refers to a way of increasing productivity in digitization.
Also, S192 referred to different aspects such as implementing quality control, referencing
“Frequent training, coaching, feedback, quality checks.” S146 said “Improving communication
by taking advantage of project management tools,” which refers to a solution for facilitating
better communication among staff.

198

Suggested solutions regarding financial issues were addressed as well. Funding is a
critical aspect of the digitization process, and these types of solutions may refer to advocacy,
increasing an annual budget, or seeking grants. For instance, “Identifying grants and other
funding sources intended specifically for purchasing and updating digitization equipment”
(Unspecified Subject Number), which clarifies how funding is important in obtaining,
maintaining and upgrading appropriate digitization hardware/equipment. Another subject
mentioned the necessity of investing in different aspects, citing “Investment in infrastructure
(staffing, equipment, etc.) to make it possible to incorporate into everyday processing
procedures; workflow development” (S218).
A total of 53 responses were coded as suggested solutions regarding staff issues.
However, these responses were classified into three sub-categories to attain a more precise
analysis: Staff Availability, Staff Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. Regarding Staff
Awareness and Skills, a total of 28 responses were coded into this category. For instance,
“Having ALL members of the team present during all meetings to avoid delays” (S146), and “Be
vigilant. Better communication among staff” (S62). The latter two examples refer to the
importance of communication between staff members. Regarding training staff, S224 said
“Mandatory group training enforced by management.”
Regarding Staff Availability, a total of 22 responses were coded into this category. For
instance, S162 said “Hiring professional staff,” which emphasized the need to employ more staff
for digitization. However, S38 mentioned a more detailed solution, specifically to “find
dedicated Digital Collections Librarian who can both project manage and promote collections” in
referring to the need of employing a staff member to manage specific digitization activities.

199

Suggested solutions concerning Storage is one type of the solutions discovered during
data analysis. These solutions were related to many aspects, such as digital preservation, digital
repository, and server space. For instance, “More file storage space” (S59), and “Designate
server support for digitization and project development” (S105) shows the need for more storage
capacity to handle digitization projects. On the other hand, S146 said “Our next huge step is to
create a digital preservation policy,” which refers to planning and designing for digital
preservation.
Subjects provided around 13 solutions suggested for issues related to Physical Material.
This category focuses on the physical material itself. Solutions coded into this category discussed
related aspects such as handling fragile materials, nitrate films, and scanning oversized materials.
For example, S94 recommended “Trainings on handling fragile materials and digitizing well the
first time” as a solution for appropriate handling and digitizing of fragile materials. Unspecified
Subject Number’s suggestion was to “develop guidelines/workflows for individual formats” as a
way of finding suitable methods to digitize different materials.
Hardware is one of the main categories found during the analysis of the suggested
solutions. This type of suggested solution discusses digitization equipment/hardware such as
purchasing equipment, suitable equipment for oversized materials, and training staff on
hardware. “We can avail ourselves of large format vendors, but would prefer to purchase
equipment we can use in-house” (Unspecified Subject Number), indicating that certain
equipment for digitizing large format materials is needed. Also, S105 said “Replace old
computers, not just scanners and camera stands” in reference to the need for more powerful
computers for digitization projects.

200

A total of 10 responses were coded as suggested solutions related to Guidelines. This
type of solution discusses issues concerning guidelines such as guidance and making guidelines
easier. For instance, “Creation of more user friendly internal guidelines to facilitate better user
training” (S58), which explained the need to make internal guidelines easier to understand.
Another subject indicated the need for more guidance, stating “Central administration (imaging
department) and clear guidance on institutional standards, blended with recognition of
departments' particular needs” (S218). Also, Unspecified Subject Number said “identify
standards for quality” in reference to the need for adopting quality standards.
During data analysis for suggested solutions, nine responses were coded into the Software
category. Digitization of static media may require different types of software. For example,
“Better library systems software” (S169) emphasizes the importance of having advanced and
enhanced computer programs. Also, S47 said “More registration of digitized resources to prevent
duplication of effort. More federated sites to promote sophisticated modes of inquiry and access:
a shared newspaper site; shared books site (Hathi); shared visual resources site (artSTOR?);
shared site for finding aids” as a solution to identify and manage the digitized items.
During data analysis for the collected responses, suggested solutions regarding Physical
Space were found as well. These solutions referred to the physical place or location. For
instance, “There is no additional space in the library. Everything could be solved with a new
building or relocation” (S131), which refers to two suggested solutions to address challenge of
lack of space. Also, S36 said “Providing additional workspaces for digitization” to emphasize the
need for more space to perform digitization projects.

201

Suggested solutions regarding Metadata were also found in the collected data. These
solutions discussed aspects related to metadata such as DACS compliance and hiring metadata
staff. For instance, “A desired solution would be a way to analyze finding aids to see if they’re
DACS compliant and they have the same item level description across the entire finding aid”
(S16), which clarifies the need for confirming finding aids’ compatibility and consistency.
Regarding the need for employing specialized staff in metadata, S207 said “Convincing our
administration that metadata personnel are needed to insure timely completion of projects.”
The Copyright category included only three suggested solutions related to the copyright
aspect, such as intellectual property rights management. One response mentioned the need for
more knowledge and expertise in this field, recommending “Additional legal expertise in
intellectual property rights management” (S36). Another referred to the need for more staff
training in this area, recommending “training on copyright issues” (S208).
Further, Staff Time is the third type of suggested solutions related to staff issues. Based
on the collected data, only three responses were coded into this category. For instance, “allow
more time for staff to spend on digitization activities” (S117) as a reference to the considerable
time needed for these digitization projects. S218 mentioned a solution for a better use of staff
time by saying “…cost-benefit analysis, i.e., recognition of the cost of wasted staff time doing
processing work because pulling files from the servers/storage space is a glacial process.”

202

4.5.2. Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Both the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews collected qualitative
data regarding the solutions to the challenges encountered in digitization of non-static
(audiovisual) media. Collected data were analyzed through an open coding method. The first
type of solutions explored were those applied to non-static (audiovisual) media digitization.
Table 4.49 shows these types of applied solutions and their definitions:
Table 4.49
Solutions Academic Librarians Applied to Non-static (Audiovisual) Media Digitization
Types of Applied
Solutions

Definitions

Funding

Solutions applied to financial issues (e.g., raising funds,
purchasing equipment, and seeking grants).

Guidelines

Solutions applied to the issues of guidelines and standards
(e.g., decision making and updating the adopted standards).

Hardware

Solutions applied to digitization equipment issues (e.g.,
outsourcing, providing equipment, and purchasing
equipment).

Metadata

Solutions applied to the issues of the descriptive data of a
digital object.

Physical Material

Solutions applied to the issues of the tangible media
contains information (e.g., 10-inch audio reel player,
outsourcing audio digitization, prioritization, and sticky
shed syndrome).

Physical Space

Solutions applied to the issues of digitization place or
location.

Planning and Workflow Solutions applied to the issues regarding designing and
implementation of the procedures in the digitization process
(e.g., documentation, grants writing, outsourcing,
prioritization, and quality control).
Software

Solutions applied to the issues of computer programs.
203

Staff
Staff Availability

Solutions applied to issues regarding staff employment.

Staff Awareness and
Skills

Solutions applied to issues regarding staff knowledge and/or
expertise (e.g., communication, consulting experts, grants
writing awareness, online research, and training program).

Storage

Solutions applied to digital storage issues.

Transcription

Solutions applied to issues regarding creating textual
content for the non-static (audiovisual) materials.

Based on the data collected by the electronic questionnaire and the semi-structured
interviews, Figure 4.9 shows the frequency of the types of the solutions that were applied by
academic librarians to the challenges they faced in digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media:

204

Applied Solutions to the Challenges Face Academic
Librarians in Digitizing Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Planning and Workflow

19

Funding

13

Types of Applied Solutions

Physical Material

11

Staff Awareness and Skills

8

Hardware

6

Guidelines

5

Storage

2

Metadata

1

Physical Space

1

Software

1

Staff Availability

1

Transcription

1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Frequency

Figure 4.9 Frequency of the types of solutions applied by academic librarians to overcome the
challenges they faced in non-static (audiovisual) media digitization

Data analysis revealed 12 categories of solutions applied for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media, whereas each category represents a certain type of applied solution.
Regarding the applied solutions for non-static (audiovisual) media digitization, Planning and
Workflow is the largest category explored during open coding. Responses in this category
referred to many aspects of the digitization process, such as documentation, outsourcing,
prioritization, and quality control. However, outsourcing digitization of non-static (audiovisual)
media was very frequent among the responses within this category. Regarding outsourcing
digitization of audiovisual materials at the examined libraries, S16 said “…we use commercial
digitization companies to do all non-static media.” Regarding documentation within digitization
205

workflow to have a better management for digitization projects, S215 said “…the other thing that
we've done for non-static materials is to create well-documented workflows and inventories to
keep track of those digital assets….”
Funding is one of the major categories that was explored. This type of applied solution
has many examples such as raising funds and seeking grants. Applied solutions regarding
funding may help in different aspects of the digitization process. For instance, “Outside grants
have helped with staffing” (S166), which indicates the ways in which grants played a role in
hiring staff to deal with digitization. Also, funding helped in other aspects of digitization
projects, such as outsourcing. For instance, S107 said “…we've been writing small grants as
much as possible in order to try to get the funding in order to outsource the digitization. And
we've been fairly successful in obtaining some small grants to do that,” illustrating how funding
helped in outsourcing digitization.
Collected data revealed solutions applied because of issues caused by the Physical
Material itself. These applied solutions were related to many aspects such as prioritization,
sticky shed syndrome, or digitizing a particular type of media. For instance, “We don't have the
equipment to digitized [sic] audio material in house so we outsource this” (S117), which shows
that the lack of equipment to digitize specific materials like audio was solved by outsourcing the
digitization process for that type of material. Regarding sticky shed syndrome, S168 said “…we
have so much sticky shed and acetate both magnetic and film actually.…the audio tape, reel tape
is so brittle that we were having to slice it almost every foot…” in a reference to a solution that
was performed to handle the affected materials by that syndrome.

206

A total of nine responses referred to the staff element in the digitization process. These
responses indicated solutions that were applied at some point of the process. Based on their
themes, they were classified as either Staff Availability or Staff Awareness and Skills. Responses
related to communication, consulting experts, and training programs were coded into the
category of Staff Awareness and Skills. Regarding consulting experts and staff training as
solutions that were applied at the examined libraries, S53 said that “We consult with local
experts to gain adequate training for dealing with problem archival AV material.” Regarding
enhancing and developing staff awareness to seek the needed funding to support digitization, S56
said “…we also sought grant funding although we did not get it, but we did through the
awareness of writing the grant….”
Responses related to digitization equipment or Hardware were also observed. This type
of response referred to the hardware element in the digitization process. For instance, “I bring
my own professional equipment. The department doesn't have the resources to purchase said
equipment. It's expensive stuff” (S131), which refers to a solution applied to overcome the lack
of digitization equipment. Also, S59 said “we do outsource that material because we don't have
the equipment here to digitize those items” to clarify that outsourcing digitization of specific
materials was an applied solution as a result of lacking the needed hardware. The previous two
examples presented the challenge of lack of equipment/hardware; two different solutions were
applied.
Applied solutions related to Guidelines were also observed during data analysis. These
solutions are related to many aspects including decision making and updating the already
adopted standards. For instance, S56 said “For video we don't, we haven't found any standards to
date, so we just kind try to do our internal best practices” to emphasize that adopting their local
207

guidelines solved the problem of not locating video digitization guidelines. Also, S168 said
“…we are actually changing those standards more frequently, for example we used to not
digitize in SD, we used to digitize only an SD and now we’re getting more into HD” to report
that updating the adopted standards on a frequent manner was applied as a solution.
Applied solutions related to Storage issues were also indicated from the collected
responses. These two responses were referring to digital storage. For instance, S107 said “We’ve
got a limited amount of space to store the materials,….we will take down the standards a little bit
and not digitize at quite high resolution when we know that the piece in hand is not particularly
of high quality” in a reference to handling limitation in storage capacity through adjusting the
adopted digitization guidelines based on the materials being digitized.
During the open coding process for the qualitative data, only one response indicated an
applied solution to the Metadata element in the digitization process of non-static (audiovisual)
media. S166 said “…recently started experimenting with OHMS (the oral history metadata
synchronizer) and that can actually replace old transcriptions so it can speed up the process…it's
like putting timestamps with it into the oral history about where certain thing is discussed instead
of doing a full transcription….” This response indicated that metadata issues were also
experienced during the digitization process, the solution was using OHMS to solve the metadata
issue.
Only one response was found related to Physical Space or location of conducting the
digitization process. This response explained that a solution was applied to the place dedicated
for digitization. “I am in the process of reorganizing our lab…” (Unspecified Subject Number),
which refers to organizing and enhancing the physical place or location to digitize materials.

208

Digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media incorporates the Software element in the
process as well. During the open coding process, only one response referred to software as an
applied solution that was utilized. S168 said “…we store all of our procedural documentation on
Confluence which is a wiki….And the wiki allows us to modify and update as needed, annotate
maybe for specific projects, so all of the staff have access to the same documentation.” This
response shows how adopting a computer program in the digitization process helped in
informing staff involved in digitization activities.
Staff Availability is the second type of solution related to the staff element in the
digitization projects. This category is focused on staff employment for digitization projects. Only
one response was coded into this category. S166 said “Outside grants have helped with staffing,”
which showed that a solution was applied by hiring the needed staff member(s) to do digitization
activities.
Finally, only one applied solution was related to Transcription. This solution indicated a
type of action taken to solve the problem of creating textual content for non-static (audiovisual)
media. S166 said “…recently started experimenting with OHMS (the oral history metadata
synchronizer) and that can actually replace old transcriptions so it can speed up the process…it's
like putting timestamps with it into the oral history about where certain thing is discussed instead
of doing a full transcription….” This shows how a solution was applied to overcome the
transcription issue for certain type of materials. Although this quote was coded earlier into the
Metadata category, it was coded again into this category (i.e., Transcription) because it referred
to both metadata and transcription aspects.

209

On the other hand, academic librarians suggested solutions to overcome the challenges
faced in digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media. The conducted data analysis for the
electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews revealed different types of solutions.
Table 4.50 shows different types of suggested solutions for digitizing non-static (audiovisual)
media and their definitions:
Table 4.50
Solutions Academic Librarians Suggested for Non-static (Audiovisual) Media
Digitization
Types of Suggested
Solutions

Definitions

Copyright

Solutions suggested for copyright and intellectual property
issues.

Funding

Solutions suggested for financial issues (e.g., purchasing
equipment and seeking grants).

Guidelines

Solutions suggested for guidelines and standards issues
(e.g., guidance and developing standards).

Hardware

Solutions suggested for digitization equipment issues (e.g.,
purchasing equipment).

Physical Material

Solutions suggested for the issues of tangible media
containing information (e.g., deterioration, oversized
materials, and VHS).

Physical Space

Solutions suggested for the issues of digitization place or
location (e.g., climate control and workstations).

Planning and Workflow

Solutions suggested for issues regarding designing and
implementation of procedures in the digitization process
(e.g., advocacy, communication, outsourcing,
prioritization, and project management).

Software

Solutions suggested for issues of computer programs.

Staff
Staff Availability

Solutions suggested for issues regarding staff employment.
210

Staff Awareness and Skills

Solutions suggested for issues regarding staff knowledge
and/or expertise (e.g., advocacy, education, patience, and
training).

Staff Time

Solutions suggested for issues regarding the time devoted
to digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.

Storage

Solutions suggested for storage issues (e.g., archival
storage, checksums, climate control, digital preservation,
and digital storage).

Figure 4.10 shows the frequency of the types of the suggested solutions by academic
librarians to overcome the challenges encountered in digitization of non-static (audiovisual)
media. The frequency was calculated based on the data collected by the electronic questionnaire
and semi-structured interviews:

Suggested Solutions to the Challenges Face Academic
Librarians in Digitizing Non-static (Audiovisual) Media

Types of Suggested Solutions

Planning and Workflow

31

Funding

27

Storage

17

Staff Awareness and Skills

14

Hardware

11

Staff Availability

10

Guidelines

10

Physical Space

7

Physical Material

4

Software

3

Staff Time

1

Copyright

1
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Frequency

Figure 4.10 Frequency of the types of solutions suggested by academic librarians to overcome
the challenges faced in non-static (audiovisual) media digitization
211

Open coding for the collected data revealed 12 types of suggested solutions regarding
digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. These solutions discussed many aspects related to the
digitization process. Planning and Workflow is the largest category of suggested solutions based
on the frequency of responses. This category discusses different aspects of the digitization
process such as advocacy, outsourcing, and project management. For instance, “prioritize nonstatic material for digitization” (Unspecified Subject Number), which refers to the importance of
prioritization in the digitization process. Another example from this category is about planning
and implementing digital preservation, S95 said “Working on preservation plan, which includes
long-term archival storage.” Regarding advocacy for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media,
S3 said “Continued advocacy for audiovisual materials.”
Solutions regarding Funding were still noted due to the number of suggested solutions. A
total of 27 responses were coded into this category. These dealt with different aspects, such as:
purchasing equipment, seeking grants, and storage. For instance, Unspecified Subject Number
stated “identify funding sources” in a reference to find sources for supporting digitization
projects financially. Regarding the need for financial support to provide more storage capacity,
S38 said “Continue to request funding for additional server space.”
Responses related to Storage suggested solutions about two types of storage, digital and
physical. These responses reported on many aspects within this context such as archival storage,
climate control, and digital preservation. For instance, “Continue to request funding for
additional server space” (S38), which refers to the need for more digital storage for digitization

212

projects. On the other hand, S56 said “…analog audiovisual needs more like cold storage…,”
referring to physical storage to store physical materials.
Suggested solutions regarding staff were indicated by the collected responses. These were
classified into Staff Availability, Staff Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. Staff Awareness and
Skills is one of the categories listed under suggested solutions related to staff. A total of 14
responses were coded into this category. These discussed several aspects, such as education,
advocacy, training, and knowledge. For instance, S139 said “Seek free online training whenever
it is available” to emphasize the importance of staff training to enhance staff knowledge and
expertise.
A total of 11 responses were coded into the Hardware category. These discussed many
aspects regarding this issue such as purchasing equipment. For instance, “Buy more equipment,
though this will likely need to come out of external funding sources” (Unspecified Subject
Number), which states the need for more digitization hardware to digitize non-static
(audiovisual) media. Similarly, another subject mentioned a solution about buying new
digitization hardware, S208 said “reviewing options for purchasing new equpment [sic]." Also,
S58 said “Purchase AV digitization hardware for most common formats (VHS, cassette)” as a
solution to overcome hardware challenges in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media.
The second category concerning staff involved in the digitization process was Staff
Availability. A total of ten responses were coded into this category. This category focused on
staff employment to carry out digitization projects. For instance, S94 said “Hiring more
staff/students” as a solution to overcome a shortage of staff members engaged in digitization

213

activities. Another subject said “Ability to hire new staff with appropriate skills” (S104), which
refers to the need for more staff members with specific expertise and skills.
Suggested solutions related to Guidelines were also found during the data analysis
process. These responses indicated different aspects related to the guidelines themselves. For
instance, “develop digitization standards” (Unspecified Subject Number), suggesting a solution
referring to the creation of digitization guidelines. Another subject suggested that guidelines
need to take into consideration limitations in storage capacity for audiovisual materials, stating
that “…a more realistic understanding of what the storage capacity is, and the and the ability to
really manage digital, non-or non-static media because the storage size for those materials can be
you know extraordinarily large which also makes it difficult to manage that size of a file on
regular computers…” (S215).
A total of seven responses were coded into the Physical Space category. These indicated
suggested solutions to overcome the issues faced in dealing with physical space or places, such
as climate control and workstations. For example, “…I also wish that we had better climate
control, so that we could hold these objects better…” (S107), referring to the need for an
enhanced climate control system. Also, S56 said “…analog audiovisual needs more like cold
storage…,” which refers to a certain type of storage for keeping and storing non-static
(audiovisual) media.
Suggested solutions related to Physical Material selected for digitization were observed.
This category focuses on the physical material itself, and suggested solutions related to this
aspect. Collected responses discussed different aspects such as deterioration, oversized materials,
and VHS. For instance, S139 said “Keep original materials stored under climate-controlled

214

conditions to halt or slow further deterioration,” in reference to a solution for addressing
deterioration of physical material. Regarding buying digitization equipment for specific
materials, S58 said “Purchase AV digitization hardware for most common formats (VHS,
cassette).”
Solutions were suggested to overcome challenges faced around Software incorporated in
the digitization process. This category contains only three responses that discussed this aspect.
For example, S59 referred to the need for a computer program to manage and organize the
digitization process, stating “We would like to have a digitization workflow tool, so some type of
a software system that allows us to manage the items that are coming in and the tasks that have
to be done and allows us to be able to track where things are in the process, and provide
statistics.” Moreover, S215 said “I don't think I'd I'd ever want to go to in-house digitization of
non-static media. We don't have the enough inventory to make that. You know, MAM a
reasonable solution so I think we actually have arrived at a pretty good solution…,” which
indicated using a computer program for the digitization process.
Only one response was coded into the Staff Time category. This is the third and last
category related to staff. S218 said “…cost-benefit analysis, i.e., recognition of the cost of
wasted staff time doing processing work because pulling files from the servers/storage space is a
glacial process,” which shows a solution to avoid wasting staff time.
The last type of suggested solutions concerns Copyright. This category is related to the
aspect of copyright and intellectual property. Only one response was coded into this category.
S16 said “None, except to digitize old items and educate curators on the loopholes to the Sonny
Bono law,” a reference to enhance staff awareness and knowledge about this copyright law.

215

4.6. Chapter Summary
The following paragraphs briefly discuss the five research questions and some of their
significant findings.

Adopted digitization guidelines and compliance
Answering this research question depended on the collected data from the three data
collection techniques (i.e., document analysis, electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured
interviews). The explored results were reported in two major sections, which are Data from
Guidelines (Document Analysis) (Section 4.1.1.) and Data from Practitioners (Electronic
Questionnaire and Interviews) (Section 4.1.2.). This separation of results helped in exploring and
realizing the differences between the theoretical and practical aspects of the digitization process.
Differences were noticed among the analyzed digitization guidelines in many aspects,
such as their contents and technical specifications. It was noticed that different digitization
guidelines were adopted by the investigated academic libraries to digitize static and non-static
(audiovisual) media. Also, differences were noticed in the reported percentages of technical
specifications found on the adopted digitization guidelines.
Compliance levels with the adopted digitization guidelines were reported by the subjects
for static and non-static (audiovisual) media. A noticeable variation was recognized in these
reported levels. However, the option “University's own customized digitization guidelines”

216

received the greatest means’ scores among the other options in both contexts (i.e., static and nonstatic [audiovisual] media). The two most frequent types of reasons for compliance within the
contexts of static and non-static (audiovisual) media were related to Consistency,
Standardization, and Sustainability and Access and Preservation. On other hand, the two most
frequent types of reasons for not complying with digitization guidelines were Planning and
Workflow and Hardware for static media, whereas Hardware and Staff Awareness and Skills
were identified this way for non-static (audiovisual) media.

Differences in compliance with the static and non-static (audiovisual) media
digitization guidelines
Only digitization guidelines occurring within the sections of static and non-static
(audiovisual) media in the electronic questionnaire were examined quantitatively. A total of three
digitization guidelines (i.e., ALCTS, consortium/consortia digitization guidelines, and a
university’s own customized digitization guidelines) were included in the statistical analyses.
The Paired Samples Test and Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test were selected for the collected
quantitative data to compare levels of compliance, availability, and usefulness.
A total of two Paired Samples Tests and seven Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests were
conducted to explore the differences of these levels between static and non-static (audiovisual)
media. The results of the Paired Samples Tests and Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests for these three
guidelines reported no significant differences between static and non-static (audiovisual) media
regarding compliance, availability, and usefulness.

217

Challenges face digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media
Quantitative data in the form of agreement levels (a 7-point Likert scale) regarding six
statements (i.e., budget, external funding, digitization equipment/hardware, digitization software,
staff digitization skills, and the need for more professional training on digitization) were
collected through the electronic questionnaire. The first two statements (i.e., statements about
budget and external funding) in the tables of the agreement levels (Tables 4.32 and 4.34) have
the lowest mean scores among the entire statements. This shows the significant impact of
financial issues on digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Lower means’ scores
were reported for the third, fourth, and fifth statements (i.e., digitization equipment/hardware,
digitization software, and staff digitization skills) within the context of non-static (audiovisual)
media comparing to static media. The statement regarding staff need for more professional
training on digitization skills received a higher mean score within the context of non-static
(audiovisual) media comparing to static media.
Qualitative data were collected through the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured
interviews to answer this research question. Open coding was applied to explore the types of
challenges reported by the collected responses. Most of these types were found within the
contexts of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The three most frequent types of challenges
for static media digitization were: Planning and Workflow, Funding, and Hardware. However,
the three most frequent types of challenges for non-static (audiovisual) media digitization were:
Hardware, Funding, and Staff Awareness and Skill.

218

Differences in challenges facing digitization of static and non-static
(audiovisual) media
This research question draws a comparison of the challenges that face academic libraries
between digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Six statements were designed in a 7point Likert scale to estimate agreement levels between static and non-static (audiovisual) media
digitization. These aspects are: 1) budget, 2) external funding, 3) digitization
equipment/hardware, 4) digitization software, 5) staff digitization skills, and 6) the need for more
professional training on digitization.
The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test was applied for these statements to explore differences.
A total of six Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests were applied to compare one statement in the
context of static media to its equivalent in the context of non-static (audiovisual) media. For
example, the statement regarding budget within the context of static media was compared to its
equivalent in the context of non-static (audiovisual) media. Based on the conducted tests, five
null hypotheses were rejected (i.e., 4.1, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, and 4.6). However, hypothesis 4.2 was not
rejected. This shows that there were significant differences (except to hypothesis 4.2) between
digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media.

Applied or suggested solutions to overcome these challenges
Exploring solutions to the encountered digitization challenges plays a main role in
enhancing the digitization process in general. This doctoral dissertation explored different types
of digitization challenges encountered by academic libraries in digitizing static and non-static
219

(audiovisual) media. Therefore, solutions to overcome such challenges were collected from the
subjects through the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews.
The collected qualitative data regarding solutions for digitization of static and non-static
(audiovisual) media were classified as applied or suggested solutions (Sections 4.5.1. and 4.5.2.).
Applied solutions refer to those already applied to overcome the encountered challenges,
whereas suggested ones refer to desired solutions that have not yet applied. It was found that
responses including solutions related to Planning and Workflow and Funding were the most two
frequent types of applied and suggested solutions to static and non-static (audiovisual) media
digitization.

220

Chapter 5 Discussion
Digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media at academic libraries in the
United States is the main theme of this doctoral dissertation. Exploring related themes (e.g.,
digitization guidelines, compliance with the adopted digitization guidelines, and encountered
challenges) helps in building a proper understanding about digitization of materials at academic
libraries. Based on the results obtained from this study (Chapter 4 Results), three types of
implications were realized. The following sections (Sections 5.1.-5.3.) discuss the theoretical,
practical, and methodological implications for this study.

5.1. Theoretical Implications
Theoretical implications of this doctoral dissertation deal with Digitization Guidelines
and Compliance (Section 5.1.1.), and Digitization Challenges (Section 5.1.2.). Analyzed data
helped in understanding the most commonly adopted digitization guidelines in the area of
academic libraries. Compliance levels with the selected digitization guidelines for static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media were examined as well. This examination was revealing in gaining a
greater understanding of the reasons of complying and not complying with selected digitization
guidelines. These theoretical implications offered insights for practical implications as well
(Section 5.2.).

221

5.1.1. Digitization Guidelines and Compliance
A digitization plan could be the first step in starting a digitization project. The
IFLA/UNESCO Survey on Digitisation and Preservation by Ebdon et al. (1999) examined
libraries worldwide (including national, university, governmental libraries and archives)
regarding digitization programs and policy; they found that 48% of them have a program to
digitize collections, whereas 52% do not have such a program. Also, The Institute of Museum
and Library Services (2006) reported many hindrances to digitization activities in academic
libraries such as the lack of having established: digitization plans, digitization policies, and
quality standards. The results reported in this doctoral dissertation (Section 4.1.2.) indicated that
only 54.41% of the responses mentioned that their universities have digitization plans, 27.94%
do not have such plans, and 10.29% do not know.
This doctoral dissertation found that lack of a digitization plan is still significant within
the context of academic libraries. Although 54.41% is more than the half of the examined sample
for this dissertation, it is still considered a serious challenge concerning availability of a
digitization plan to guide digitization projects. Document analysis for the 12 digitization plans
uploaded to the electronic questionnaire by the subjects revealed that these plans differ in
structure, contents, and level of detail.
Academic libraries are digitizing different materials. This study (Section 4.1.2.) found
that the most three prioritized items for digitization are: 1) photographs, 2) manuscripts, and 3)
rare books. The survey by Ebdon et al. (1999) investigated the types of documents that are being
digitized and the percentage of the examined libraries or archives digitizing those documents,
concluding that the most three digitized materials are: rare books (49%), photographs (44%), and

222

manuscripts (39%). Hence, the top three selected items for digitization reported in this doctoral
dissertation and the survey by Ebdon et al. (1999) are similar regardless of their order. However,
The Institute of Museum and Library Services (2006) mentioned that the three highest
digitization priorities are: historical documents or archives as a top priority to 38.7% of the
surveyed academic libraries, course material as a top priority to 33.9% of them, and photographs
prioritized by 24.2% of them. However, the electronic questionnaire used in this doctoral
dissertation (i.e., Question 13) didn’t use the term “historical,” so it is not clear during data
analysis whether respondents were referring to historical manuscripts and rare books in the
process of answering this question.
The main scope of this dissertation examined digitization of static and non-static
(audiovisual) media at academic libraries in the United States. The selected sample for this
doctoral dissertation consisted of doctoral universities only with highest and higher research
activity based on the 2015 classification issued by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of
Higher Education. This dissertation focused on different angles regarding digitization guidelines,
such as: the most frequently adopted guidelines, and additionally levels of and reasons for
compliance, availability, and usefulness. The significance of this doctoral dissertation lies in the
exploration of the adopted digitization guidelines by academic libraries in the United States, as
well as levels of and reasons for compliance, availability, and usefulness.
Further significant contribution of this doctoral dissertation is the comparison element,
which focuses on comparing the adopted digitization guidelines between static and non-static
(audiovisual) media within the context of academic libraries. Levels of compliance, availability,
and usefulness were compared between static and non-static (audiovisual) media as well. The
collected data for this doctoral dissertation reported many significant findings related to the
223

digitization guidelines and compliance with those guidelines. The following paragraphs in this
section report some of the key findings.
The digitization guidelines adopted for static and non-static (audiovisual) media varied as
indicated from the results. Certain types of digitization guidelines were more frequently adopted
by the examined sample. University, FADGI and NARA digitization guidelines were the three
most frequently adopted for static media (Table 4.8), whereas university, other, and IASA
digitization guidelines were the three most frequently adopted for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media (Table 4.15). This shows that university digitization guidelines occurred
among the top three selected by subjects for both static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Compliance levels for the selected digitization guidelines were analyzed statistically.
Paired Samples Test or Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test outcomes were calculated for the three
digitization guidelines (i.e., ALCTS, consortium/consortia, and university) referenced in the
previous chapter (Section 4.2.1.). No significant differences were found in the compliance levels
for these digitization guidelines between static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Similarities were found among types of reasons for compliance with the selected
digitization guidelines between static and non-static (audiovisual) media (Tables 4.11 and 4.19).
Only six types of reasons occurred in both contexts: 1) Access and Preservation, 2) Consistency,
Standardization, and Sustainability, 3) Guidelines, 4) Hardware, 5) Planning and Workflow, and
6) Staff Awareness and Skills.
The frequency of each type of compliance reasons category was calculated for static and
non-static (audiovisual) media (Figures 4.1 and 4.3). The Consistency, Standardization, and
Sustainability category ranked first in the contexts of static and non-static (audiovisual) media,
224

whereas the Access and Preservation category ranked second in both contexts. The Staff
Awareness and Skills category ranked third for static media, while it was ranked fifth for nonstatic (audiovisual) media. Reported compliance reasons by subjects for static and non-static
(audiovisual) media (Sections 4.1.2.1. and 4.1.2.2.) addressed relatively similar aspects such as
consistency, digital preservation, and following experts’ recommendations.
On the other hand, types of reasons for not complying with the selected digitization
guidelines were almost similar between static and non-static (audiovisual) media. However,
Copyright and Metadata types of reasons for non-compliance existed only in the static media
context. Regarding the frequency of types of reasons for not complying with the selected
digitization guidelines (Figures 4.2 and 4.4), it was found that Hardware and Staff Awareness
and Skills were among the top three categories for static and non-static (audiovisual) media.
Based on the frequency for each type of reasons, it was found that the Hardware category ranked
second for static media, but first for non-static (audiovisual) media. The Staff Awareness and
Skills category ranked third for static media, whereas it ranked second for non-static
(audiovisual) media. Reported reasons for not complying with digitization guidelines by the
subjects (Sections 4.1.2.1. and 4.1.2.2.) for static and non-static (audiovisual) media for these
two categories (i.e., Hardware and Staff Awareness and Skills) were similar, such as the lack of
appropriate hardware/equipment and staff knowledge. This might indicate that reasons related to
hardware/equipment (i.e., Hardware) and staff knowledge (i.e., Staff Awareness and Skills)
could be considered as main barriers to comply with digitization guidelines.

225

5.1.2. Digitization Challenges
Many studies discussed funding within the digitization context (Conway, 1994; Lampert
& Vaughan, 2009; Maroso, 2005; The Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2006). Funding
issues affect many aspects related to the digitization process at academic libraries. The Institute
of Museum and Library Services (2006) reported that the lack of both staff time and funding
were indicated as examples of the greatest obstacles face digitization by academic libraries. Also,
Conway (1994) mentioned that digital imaging technology needs continuous funding to support
many aspects such as additional storage capacity and the necessary labor. This doctoral
dissertation reported funding challenges in academic libraries’ efforts to digitize static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media. Reported results (Sections 4.3.1. and 4.3.2.) in this doctoral
dissertation indicated that funding challenges ranked second based on the frequency of collected
responses within the contexts of digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Both tables
illustrating the types of challenges (Tables 4.33 and 4.35) mentioned the effect of funding on
storage as well. This confirms what was mentioned by Potter and Holley (2010) that costs or fees
for computer storage are created by digitization.
This doctoral dissertation (Section 4.1.2.2.) found that 52.94% of universities examined
digitize non-static (audiovisual) media (e.g., voice recordings and analog videos) based on
collected responses from the subjects. A survey by Ebdon et al. (1999) reported that 50% of
examined libraries or archives digitize sound recordings, whereas only 25% of examined
libraries or archives digitize film or video. This doctoral dissertation did not ask about the
digitization of audio and video/film separately in the electronic questionnaire, but it is assumed
that the 52.94% includes audiovisual materials such as voice recordings and/or analog videos.
Although these two studies differ in their contexts, the results reported in this doctoral
226

dissertation show a significant increase in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media at academic
libraries.
Academic libraries may face challenges related to technological issues. These can refer to
any technology-related aspect, such as hardware and software. The lack of adequate equipment
and/or software is one of the obstacles to digitization activities in academic libraries (The
Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2006). This doctoral dissertation reported challenges
related to digitization hardware/equipment and software faced in digitization of static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media at academic libraries. Findings of this doctoral dissertation revealed
the existence of these types of challenges within both contexts (i.e., static and non-static
[audiovisual] media).
Descriptive Analyses reported on in this doctoral dissertation for agreement levels in
Tables 4.32 and 4.34 reflected different means for statements about digitization hardware (i.e.,
“University has appropriate digitization equipment/hardware for digitizing static media” and
“University has appropriate digitization equipment/hardware for digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media”). It was realized that the statement regarding digitization
equipment/hardware for static media received a higher agreement level (𝑀𝑀 = 4.85) than the
level (𝑀𝑀 = 2.60) for non-static (audiovisual) media.

Similarly, agreement levels for statements about software (i.e., “University has
appropriate digitization software for digitizing static media” and “University has appropriate
digitization software for digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media”) in Tables 4.32 and 4.34 have
different means. The mean of the agreement level (𝑀𝑀 = 5.22) of the statement about digitization
227

software for static media was higher than the mean of agreement level (𝑀𝑀 = 3.26) for non-static
(audiovisual) media.

Statistical analyses (Section 4.4.) indicated significant differences of digitization
hardware/equipment and software between static and non-static (audiovisual) media (Tables
4.39-4.42). Regarding digitization hardware, the reported means by the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks
Test for digitization equipment/hardware in Table 4.39 stated a higher mean for static media
(𝑀𝑀 = 4.71) than the mean for non-static (audiovisual) media (𝑀𝑀 = 2.60). Therefore, a

statistically significant difference in the agreement levels was found between static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media according to Table 4.40 (z= −4.545, 𝑝𝑝 = .000).
Likewise, the conducted Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for digitization software (Tables
4.41 and 4.42) showed a difference between static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Table 4.41
reflected a higher mean for digitization software of static media (𝑀𝑀 = 5.06) as compared to the
non-static (audiovisual) media (𝑀𝑀 = 3.21). Hence, Table 4.42 of the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks
Test revealed a statistically significant difference between static and non-static (audiovisual)
media regarding digitization software (𝑧𝑧 = −4.485, 𝑝𝑝 = .000).
Collected qualitative data for this doctoral dissertation reported types of challenges
related to digitization hardware and software (Sections 4.3.1. and 4.3.2.), as well as their
frequencies. Hardware category is one type of the challenges discovered. Figures 4.5 and 4.6
stated that this category (i.e., Hardware) was ranked third for static media, whereas it was ranked
first for non-static (audiovisual) media. This might imply that digitization challenges concerning
hardware/equipment have a more negative impact on digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media as
compared to static media. However, the Software category was ranked sixth for static media
228

based on the frequency of collected responses, whereas it was ranked ninth for non-static
(audiovisual) media. Descriptive analysis (Sections 4.1.2.1. and 4.1.2.2.) revealed that 64
subjects (94.12%) indicated that their universities digitize static media, whereas only 36 subjects
(52.94%) reported digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media. Since static media is digitized by
more universities, this might explain the reason behind ranking Software challenge higher for
static media than non-static (audiovisual) media.
Qualitative data in Tables 4.33 and 4.35 confirmed the existence of digitization
challenges related to hardware and software for digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual)
media. Moreover, descriptive and statistical analyses (i.e., the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests)
about digitization equipment/hardware and software confirmed differences between static and
non-static (audiovisual) media. Based on both types of analyses (i.e., descriptive and statistical),
digitization equipment/hardware and software represent more serious challenges in digitizing
non-static (audiovisual) media as compared to static media. Both applied and suggested solutions
in the fourth chapter of this doctoral dissertation (Sections 4.5.1. and 4.5.2.) discussed the
hardware/equipment and software aspects. Although a limited number of solutions were
mentioned in both sections, they might assist in providing some insights for dealing with such
challenges (i.e., Hardware and Software).
The availability of staff dedicated to digitization projects is very important. Lampert and
Vaughan’s study (2009) found that lack of enough staffing was the most common response
received for the survey question about the biggest challenge facing the digitization program at
the respondents’ institutions. This doctoral dissertation reported three types of challenges related
to staff involved in digitization based on Tables 4.33 and 4.35, which are: Staff Availability, Staff
Awareness and Skills, and Staff Time. These were found in digitizing static and non-static
229

(audiovisual) media. The Staff Availability challenge is about staff presence and/or their
employment for digitization projects.
Moreover, the frequencies of responses concerning Staff Availability (Figures 4.5 and
4.6) were calculated for both static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The Staff Availability
category regarding digitization challenges was ranked fourth for static media, whereas it was
ranked eighth for non-static (audiovisual) media. On the other hand, suggested solutions by
academic librarians in Tables 4.48 and 4.50 included Staff Availability categories. Responses
collected from subjects (Sections 4.5.1. and 4.5.2.) concerning suggested solutions revealed the
need to hire more staff for digitization projects in both contexts (i.e., static and non-static
[audiovisual] media). This confirms that having enough staff to perform digitization projects is
still a serious challenge.
According to this doctoral dissertation, it was realized that Staff Awareness and Skills was
the third most frequent type of challenge for non-static (audiovisual) media (Figure 4.6).
Furthermore, results from the statistical analysis (Tables 4.43 and 4.44) showed a serious
challenge regarding staff skills in digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media as compared to static
media. Hence, results of the statistical analysis (Tables 4.45 and 4.46) reported a significant need
for more professional training on digitization to digitize non-static (audiovisual) media. Maroso
(2005) concluded that training should not be limited to digital imaging only, but that there is a
need to provide training on converting audio and video. Similarly, the findings of this doctoral
dissertation indicate that digitizing non-static (audiovisual) media is still a challenging domain
for staff, and more professional training is needed to enhance staff skills in digitizing non-static
(audiovisual) media.

230

This doctoral dissertation closely examined digitization challenges that face academic
librarians in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. The qualitative results (Sections
4.3.1. and 4.3.2.) reported many different types of digitization challenges. Static and non-static
(audiovisual) media share the same types of digitization challenges, with the exception of
Transcription, which was reported only for non-static (audiovisual) media. Since this is a
comparative study, comparisons were drawn between six statements regarding different aspects
of the digitization process (Section 4.4.). Agreement levels assigned to the six statements about
the challenges of digitization in the electronic questionnaire (i.e., questions 26 and 41) were
analyzed statistically. The Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests showed that there are significant
differences between digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media in terms of: budget
(Tables 4.36 and 4.37), digitization equipment/hardware (Tables 4.39 and 4.40), digitization
software (Tables 4.41 and 4.42), staff digitization skills (Tables 4.43 and 4.44), and the need for
more professional training on digitization (Tables 4.45 and 4.46). However, the Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks Test did not show a significant difference between digitizing static and non-static
(audiovisual) media regarding external funding (Tables 4.38).
Again, the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests were conducted for these five aspects: 1)
budget (Tables 4.36 and 4.37), 2) digitization equipment/hardware (Tables 4.39 and 4.40), 3)
digitization software (Tables 4.41 and 4.42), 4) staff digitization skills (Tables 4.43 and 4.44),
and 5) the need for more professional training on digitization (Tables 4.45 and 4.46). Except for
the aspect of the need for more professional training on digitization, statistical analyses (Tables
4.36, 4.39, 4.41, and 4.43) for the remaining four aspects revealed that agreement levels of the
calculated means for static media have higher means as compared to non-static (audiovisual)
media. Statistical analysis regarding the need for more professional training on digitization
231

(Table 4.45) has a higher mean for the agreement levels of non-static (audiovisual) media as
compared to static media. This may imply that digitization of non-static (audiovisual) media is
more difficult compared to digitizing static media within the context of the examined academic
libraries.
Only one aspect did not show a statistically significant difference between static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media based on the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test (Table 4.38). This was
adequate funding from external sources for digitization projects. Regarding external funding,
descriptive analyses (Tables 4.32 and 4.34) reflected the lowest mean scores for static (𝑀𝑀 =

2.72) and non-static (audiovisual) media (𝑀𝑀 = 2.06) among other statements in both tables.
These results may imply a low agreement level concerning funding from external sources
regarding digitization projects of static and non-static (audiovisual) media.

5.2. Practical Implications

Practical implications derived from this doctoral dissertation contain two dimensions
based on the analysis of the collected data. The first dimension is providing suggestions and
insights to enhance the design of digitization guidelines; the second is reducing the effect of
digitization challenges. The following two sections (Sections 5.2.1. and 5.2.2.) discuss these two
practical implications in further details.

232

5.2.1. Enhancing the Design of the Digitization Guidelines
The designs of the digitization guidelines were closely examined during document
analysis conducted for this doctoral dissertation. Document Analysis for the five digitization
guidelines (Sections 4.1.1.1.-4.1.1.3.) and the 12 digitization plans uploaded by the subjects into
the electronic questionnaire (Section 4.1.2.) revealed that there is a lack of a unified design
among these guidelines. Although subjects reported on various digitization guidelines adopted by
their universities, this section might help in general to enhance digitization guidelines through
providing insights that could inform their design. The following suggestions and insights might
be limited, as they were produced based on the data analysis performed within the context of this
study.
There were differences in the terminology used for the titles of the analyzed digitization
guidelines. Terms like “guidelines” and “best practices” were used to refer to these documents.
Selecting a term to be used in the titles of the documents of these digitization guidelines based on
their contents (e.g., static or non-static [audiovisual] media) or contexts (e.g., academic libraries)
might help in achieving greater consistency regarding the terminology used. Consistent
terminology should be used for titles of these documents, as well as for their contents. This might
be helpful in locating and understating these digitization guidelines, especially by non-experts in
this area.
Digitization guidelines varied in their contents, from discussing only the technical
specifications to more topics regarding pre-digitization and/or post-digitization activities (e.g.,
selection or metadata). Further, some digitization guidelines provided references/resources to
other information sources. Some of these topics or sections in the digitization guidelines might

233

be more important than others. The importance of these sections might be determined according
to many considerations (e.g., goals of the digitization project, digitized materials…etc.). Creating
a basic design for digitization guidelines may help in enhancing them to ensure that the
minimum amount of important information is available.
Again, the designs and contents of digitization guidelines may differ based on several
factors such as, but not limited to, goals of the digitization projects or digitized materials. Based
on the scope of this doctoral dissertation and the conducted document analysis, it is
recommended to include main sections in digitization guidelines. Suggested main sections could
be: 1) definitions or glossaries for the used technical terms, 2) an explanation of the digitization
concept and related technical specifications, 3) suggested technical specifications and file
formats for each type of material, 4) a suggested digitization workflow, 5) file naming
conventions, 6) metadata, 7) quality control, and 8) helpful resources.
It is suggested that this basic design should define the most important sections essential
for inclusion in any digitization guidelines’ document. Other sections might be supplementary or
optional. These supplementary sections might be included or excluded based on the objectives or
goals of the digitization project(s). Also, it is suggested to provide simpler language and
explanations/clarifications (e.g., list of terminologies or the concept of a topic) in each needed
section of these guidelines. This might help to make digitization information easier to understand
by readers. Additionally, using different ways for displaying digitization information (e.g., charts
and figures) instead of plain text may help in providing more clarification regarding the topics
discussed.

234

Paying attention to the type of media in designing these digitization guidelines is
important. Creating a basic design for digitization guidelines of static media and another for nonstatic (audiovisual) media could be helpful. These designs may specify the basic and optional
contents/sections for digitization guidelines based on nature of the material (i.e., static and nonstatic [audiovisual] media). The collected data revealed that there is a serious challenge
concerning digitization guidelines of non-static (audiovisual) media. Understanding the nature of
audiovisual materials is more challenging as compared to static material. Therefore, a careful
explanation for this type of materials and associated digitization recommendations might be
helpful in enhancing readers’ perceptions regarding digitizing these types of materials. Also,
digitization guidelines may refer to optional training tutorials, lessons, or sources to explain the
digitization process, particularly digitizing complex types of media (e.g., video, film, and
oversized materials). These might help in enhancing the application of these digitization
guidelines more easily and successfully.

5.2.2. Reducing Digitization Challenges
Digitization is an activity not limited to a single, rather, different aspects and actions are
incorporated together in order to have an item be digitized. Specific preparations, actions, and
skills are needed to digitize materials successfully. These preparations, actions, and skills might
differ according to the nature of the materials (i.e., static and non-static [audiovisual] media)
selected for digitization. Different types of challenges may occur at any step of the digitization
process, including copyright, funding, guidelines, staff awareness and skills, and storage (See
Sections 4.3. and 4.4. for more digitization challenges).

235

This doctoral dissertation explored many challenges that academic librarians encounter in
digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media at academic libraries. Quantitative and
qualitative analyses revealed many types of these challenges, as well as their frequencies. Based
on the collected and analyzed data for this study, this section (Section 5.2.2.) provides
suggestions on how to reduce some of these challenges and their impacts on the digitization
process.
This doctoral dissertation reported different types of challenges that face academic
librarians in digitizing static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Challenges may refer to
different aspects, such as budget, funding, equipment/hardware, software, staff digitization skills,
copyright, physical material, transcription, and storage. Awareness of these different types of
challenges may help in making better preparations for the future digitization projects. This may
help during the planning stages in being attentive to some of these challenges and of the
solutions needed to be applied.
The need for careful and thoughtful planning is one suggestion to reduce digitization
challenges. This demands a realistic understanding of the current environment and situation in
the academic library. It means being aware of what is available and/or needed for establishing a
successful digitization project. This includes knowledge of and familiarity with the materials
owned by the academic library, determining the materials that are worth being digitized, and
deciding whether prioritization is needed or not. Based on this awareness, a digitization plan
might be prepared. Important aspects should be considered in the planning stage, such as realistic
goals, types of materials selected for digitization, clear and detailed steps, and a proposed
timeline for each step/phase. Careful planning helps in providing clear guidance for staff
involved in the digitization process. It is suggested that the proposed digitization plan clearly
236

discusses all important aspects of the digitization process, such as selection, prioritization,
scanning recommendations, file naming, metadata, quality control, and storage. Such guidance
may help in avoiding any future challenges and speeding up the digitization process.
Applied and suggested solutions (Sections 4.5.1. and 4.5.2.) were discussed to overcome
challenges faced in digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media. Solutions were
classified either as applied or suggested in order to differentiate between already applied and
desired solutions. These solutions might provide useful insights for academic libraries facing
similar challenges. Applied solutions at one academic library could be considered as suggested
solutions for another. Also, suggested solutions might be considered and discussed as to whether
they could be helpful or not if applied.
Funding issues for digitization projects is one of the key findings of this doctoral
dissertation (Sections 4.3.1., 4.3.2., and 4.4.). It was realized that financial issues affect other
aspects of the digitization process, such as hardware, staff training and employment, storage, and
transcription. Financial issues may result in challenges or limitations that affect digitization
projects. Therefore, finding appropriate solutions, either to reduce or avoid the funding challenge
may help in having successful digitization projects. One of the solutions suggested is to seek
funding from the administration of the academic library by explaining the importance of the
digitization project, providing a detailed plan and goals, and reasons for seeking more funding.
Another suggested solution is seeking external funding and grants from sources interested in
digitization other than the university itself in order support digitization projects at academic
libraries.

237

Another suggestion is related to staff skills needed for digitization projects. These
projects may deal with different materials, such as rare books, photographs, maps, video, audio,
oversized documents, and three-dimensional objects. The skills required to digitize each type of
these materials might differ widely, since digitizing some materials could be simpler than others.
The results reported in this study (Sections 4.3.1., 4.3.2., and 4.4) show issues related to staff
training. Providing adequate staff training on digitization may help in improving staff awareness,
knowledge, and skills regarding digitizing materials. Also, training programs on digitization
could improve the digitization projects and/or overcome some of the current challenges. The
nature (e.g., conferences, lectures, onsite courses, online learning, seminars, training sessions,
and workshops) and topics of these training programs on digitization for library staff could be
defined based on the need(s) of each academic library or digitization project.

5.3. Methodological Implications
This doctoral dissertation examines major themes concerning digitization of static and
non-static (audiovisual) media within the context of academic libraries in the United States. One
of the major themes is exploring the digitization guidelines adopted by these academic libraries
and their compliance level with these chosen guidelines. Another major theme is exploring the
challenges that academic libraries are facing in digitizing both types of media, as well as applied
and suggested solutions. Further, comparing the results of different aspects regarding digitization
of static and non-static (audiovisual) media is another major theme. Studying these interrelated
themes related to digitization facilitated a more comprehensive understating.

238

This doctoral dissertation follows a mixed methods research design; specifically the
explanatory design. Selecting subjects was based on purposive sampling for both quantitative
and qualitative phases to obtain more accurate findings. Both quantitative and qualitative
techniques for data collection and analyses were adopted on a sequential basis. Quantitative data
were collected and then analyzed in the first phase of the study, whereas the second phase dealt
with collecting and analyzing qualitative data. However, document analysis of five digitization
guidelines (a total of nine documents) was conducted prior to starting both quantitative and
qualitative phases, which helped in preparing for the questions on the electronic questionnaire.
The electronic questionnaire was a powerful tool in collecting quantitative data from
distant subjects. Analyzing this type of data helped in understanding the general status of
digitization, as well designing the interview questions to collect more in-depth data. Semistructured interviews added a second layer of clarification to the preliminary findings of the
quantitative phase. It was found that the qualitative phase supported the quantitative phase and
added more depth to the final results, because many themes were investigated through the
electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews.
This doctoral dissertation applied triangulation through the use of three data collection
techniques: document analysis, electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. This
variation of data collection techniques helped in collecting more data about the same concept.
For example, both the electronic questionnaire and semi-structured interviews collected data
about digitization challenges. Both quantitative and qualitative data were collected and analyzed
for this doctoral dissertation, which helped in providing more detailed results. For instance,
quantitative and qualitative data about digitization challenges were analyzed to facilitate
increased understanding about this concept.
239

5.4. Limitations
This doctoral dissertation examined the adopted digitization guidelines for static and nonstatic (audiovisual) media, challenges encountered, and two types of solutions. Although
considerable effort was expended in designing this study, several limitations were experienced
beginning in the design phase. Understanding these limitations helps in understanding the scope
and significance of this study more clearly and precisely.
The first set of limitations relates to the concept and sampling of this dissertation. This
study only examines digitization guidelines adopted by academic libraries in the United States,
whereas other type of libraries such as public or special libraries are not investigated. Sampling
methodology is based on selecting only doctoral universities with highest and higher research
activity based on the 2015 classification issued by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of
Higher Education. In the case of a single university with more than one library, only one of those
libraries was selected. In other words, only one subject was selected from each university. This
methodology led to a limited number of subjects that were included in this study.
The second set of limitations concerns aspects of the digitization process. Since
digitization involves the coordination of many activities, it is inapplicable to discuss all these
activities within this study. Instead, the five research questions in the first chapter of this doctoral
dissertation (Section 1.3.) explain the scope of this study. Other digitization aspects do not fall
within the defined scope, such as: digitization software, born digital materials, metadata, quality
control, selection criteria, digital storage, copyright, and project planning.

240

The third set of limitations concerns the examined digitization guidelines for this doctoral
dissertation. A limited number of national and regional digitization guidelines were analyzed,
and only particular sections within these guidelines were included in the analysis process. These
guidelines have a relatively limited time range based on their publication or revision dates (i.e.,
2004-2017). The sampling methodology for selecting these guidelines focused on publicly
available ones, which were accessible online. Selected sections from these guidelines were
analyzed during the document analysis process. These analyzed sections related to file formats
and technical specifications.

5.5. Chapter Summary
This doctoral dissertation examines digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual)
media at academic libraries in the United States. It focuses on different themes concerning the
digitization process. Exploring the digitization guidelines adopted by these academic libraries is
one of the major themes of this dissertation. Further, compliance levels with these guidelines are
investigated to attain a better understanding. Examining the digitization challenges facing these
academic libraries represents another theme. Thus, this chapter provides a discussion addressing
three implications: 1) theoretical, 2) practical, and 3) methodological.
The theoretical implications focus on two main aspects: Digitization Guidelines and
Compliance and Digitization Challenges. The practical implications address the following two
aspects: Enhancing the Design of the Digitization Guidelines and Reducing Digitization
Challenges. The methodological implications discuss adoption of the explanatory design,
purposive sampling, and triangulation of the three data collection techniques (i.e., document
241

analysis, electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews). Finally, it reports on three
sets of limitations.

242

Chapter 6 Conclusion
This doctoral dissertation investigated digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual)
media at academic libraries in the United States. Related aspects were investigated, such as
adopted digitization guidelines, digitization technical specifications, compliance levels,
availability levels, usefulness levels, digitization challenges, and applied and suggested solutions.
A mixed methods research design (i.e., explanatory) was adopted to answer the five research
questions. Document analysis, an electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews were
applied to collect data. Different data analysis techniques were adopted to analyze the collected
quantitative and qualitative data. This doctoral dissertation (Chapter 4 Results) provided results
of answers to the five research questions. The following sub-sections (Sections 6.1. and 6.2.)
offer insights to and explanations for the Contributions of this doctoral dissertation (Section 6.1.)
along with suggestions for Future Research (Section 6.2.).

6.1. Contributions
This doctoral dissertation examined several aspects regarding digitization of static and
non-static (audiovisual) media at academic libraries in the United States. Five research questions
were designed to collect the information needed about digitization of these two types of media at
academic libraries. These questions discussed the main aspects of this doctoral dissertation,
dealing with the following: 1) adopted digitization guidelines and technical specifications, 2)
levels and reasons of compliance, availability, and usefulness, 3) differences in levels of
compliance, availability, and usefulness between static and non-static (audiovisual) media, 4)

243

digitization challenges, 5) differences in challenges faced by academic libraries in digitizing
static and non-static (audiovisual) media, 6) applied solutions, and 7) suggested solutions.
Results were reported using different data collection techniques: document analysis,
electronic questionnaire, and semi-structured interviews. Results revealed that digitization
guidelines differ in their designs and contents. This dissertation suggested some solutions to
enhance the development and design of digitization guidelines, such as consistent terminology
being used and suggesting that main sections be considered for inclusion when designing these
guidelines.
Digitization challenges were examined by this doctoral dissertation. Different types of
challenges faced in digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media at academic libraries
were explored. It is assumed that advance awareness of these challenges may help in enhancing
current or future digitization projects. Further, applied and suggested solutions were reported by
the sample examined for this doctoral dissertation. These reported solutions may help in
reducing, addressing or solving digitization challenges face academic libraries.

6.2. Future Research
One of the main scopes of this doctoral dissertation was to examine the digitization
guidelines adopted by academic libraries in the United States. The selected sample was limited to
only doctoral universities with highest and higher research activity based on the 2015
classification issued by The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. This
means other universities not mentioned by this classification were not included in the selected

244

sample. However, future research may include a larger sample size by examining more
universities and academic libraries. A larger number of subjects may help in collecting more data
regarding digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media at academic libraries. Further,
future research may examine digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual) media at smaller
institutions that have limited resources to determine whether they face similar challenges.
Moreover, this dissertation found that the most adopted digitization guidelines are the
university’s own customized guidelines. Future research may examine the reason(s) that make
academic libraries develop their own digitization guidelines instead of adopting national
guidelines that are publicly available. This examination may include investigating whether the
university digitization guidelines are developed based on existed guidelines (e.g., national or
regional guidelines).
Document analysis for this doctoral dissertation examined only national and regional
digitization guidelines. A limited number of guidelines were analyzed. Only five digitization
guidelines (a total of nine documents) were selected for document analysis. This analysis did not
include the entire document of the digitization guidelines, rather only specific sections of these
guidelines were examined. Future research may include analyzing a larger number of digitization
guidelines and the entirety of their contents. Analyzing a greater number of guidelines may help
in providing more suggestions to enhance their designs. In addition, conducting a document
analysis for local digitization plans at academic libraries might be considered as well for future
research.
Different types of challenges faced in digitization of static and non-static (audiovisual)
media were examined in this doctoral dissertation. Challenges faced in digitization at academic

245

libraries may differ in their types. Copyright, funding, guidelines, hardware, and metadata are
examples. Tables 4.33 and 4.35 provided more types of digitization challenges explored in this
dissertation. Future research may discuss digitization challenges for a specific type of media in
order to reveal more detailed results. Also, future research may examine a single type of
digitization challenge at academic libraries in more detail to gain a better understanding.

