LEARNING THE RULES OF ENGAGEMENT: EXPLORING FIRST-GENERATION
STUDENTS’ ACADEMIC EXPERIENCES THROUGH ACADEMIC RESEARCH
ASSIGNMENTS
Amanda L. Folk, PhD
University of Pittsburgh, 2018

Despite efforts to improve retention and degree completion rates, American higher education
suffers from a persistent social-class achievement gap (Stephens, Hamedani, and Destin, 2014).
This gap is often explored quantitatively through the examination of academic outcomes of firstgeneration college students (i.e. students who parents have not completed a college degree) in
comparison to their continuing-generation peers. This approach has resulted in a deficit approach
to first-generation college students, focusing on ways in which they need to be remediated, rather
than an interrogation of the ways in which academic, disciplinary, and institutional cultures may
present barriers to success for this student population.
The purpose of this hermeneutic phenomenological (van Manen, 1990, 2014) study was
to explore the ways in which first-generation students navigate collegiate academic culture
through the lens of a specific and ubiquitous academic experience—the research assignment.
Thirty first-generation students, who were in at least their third year of study at two regional
campuses of a large research university, were selected to participate in semi-structured
interviews using maximum variation sampling (Patton, 1990). A unique combination of the

iv

community of practice concept (Lave & Wenger, 1991), social capital (Bourdieu, 1986),
academic literacy, and information literacy formed the study’s conceptual framework.
Four key themes emerged from the data. First, students perceived their initial
positionality within the community differently based on their success in applying the skills and
strategies they had developed in high school to their new college environment. Second, students’
perceptions of their initial positionality within the community were related to the nature and
frequency of early interactions with faculty and the development of an academic support
network. Third, when given the opportunity to do so, students used their prior knowledge, lived
experiences, interests, and identities to select topics for their research assignments. Finally, many
students seemed to employ the same checklist approach to evaluating and using information in
research assignments they learned in high school throughout their college career, rather than
demonstrating the development of critical thinking related to information use.

BACKGROUND, PURPOSE, AND OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY

All students must learn how to do college and to perform as college students (Collier & Morgan,
2008; Demetriou, Meece, Eaker-Rich, & Powell, 2017; Graff, 2003; Tapp, 2015; Walker, 2006).
Learning how to do college includes interpreting how the collegiate environment operates and
determining what the expectations are for performance as a college student. In college,
professors expect that students will identify and develop the skills and dispositions—such as
critical thinking, problem solving, curiosity, and reflexivity—that the academy values and then
demonstrate those skills and dispositions in their academic work (Elmborg, 2006a). Even
students who have been exposed to a rigorous, college-preparatory curriculum in high school
might not be prepared to decipher the implicit values and expectations of college-level academic
work as first-year students (Conley, 2005; Graff, 2003), particularly if their secondary education
focused on memorizing facts or formulas in preparation for high-stakes standardized testing.
Upon entering college many students will be transitioning from a banking model of education to
an educational model that moves toward the development of critical consciousness (Freire,
1970), in which students are expected to think critically, routinely ask questions, and
problematize what they believe to be true. This shift in educational models may be a liminal
space for many undergraduate students, in that the structure they once knew may be gone but
they may not have yet figured out how to navigate the new educational environment and develop
strategies for successful performance as a college student.
1

Meeting admission requirements and gaining entry to college does not result in equity
among students; undergraduate students are not entering the collegiate academic environment on
a level playing field. Some students come to college better prepared to transition from the role of
high-school student to that of college student based on their academic preparation and their
social network (Bowen, Chingos, & McPherson, 2009; DeAngelo & Franke, 2011; Lareau, 2011;
Warburton, Burgarin, Nuñez , & Carroll, 2001; Yee, 2016). Students from families with a higher
socioeconomic status (SES) typically have had access to rigorous, college-preparatory curricula
in high school, as well as social networks that aid them in decoding collegiate academic culture
(Delpit, 1988; Lareau, 2011). On the other hand, lower-SES students, including some firstgeneration students, are less likely to have had access to these resources, which could make it
more difficult for them to transition into the role of college student (DeAngelo & Franke, 2011;
Warburton et al., 2001). These differences contribute to a social-class achievement gap
(Stephens, Hamedani, & Destin, 2014), in which lower-SES students typically have lower grades
and lower degree completion rates than students who come from higher-SES families (Bowen et
al., 2009; DeAngelo & Franke, 2011). Admission to college does not always prevent the cycle of
social reproduction for lower-SES students, including first-generation students, even though they
may have had to overcome more obstacles than many of their continuing-generation peers.
Rather, this academic achievement gap enables social reproduction and stratification, in that the
haves continue to do well and achieve more and the have-nots are often left with debt and no
degree.
In this study, I explored the academic experiences of first-generation college students in
order to understand what informs or influences their undergraduate academic outcomes. Using
Lave and Wenger’s (1991) community of practice heuristic, I viewed undergraduate students as

2

being in a continual state of transition as they progress through their coursework and interact
with their peers and institutional agents. As students gain entry into their major field(s) of study
they move from the periphery of the community toward the center, demonstrating the necessary
level of learning to complete a degree in their major field(s) of study. I focused on firstgeneration students’ experiences with one common practice within the undergraduate academic
community of practice—the academic research assignment. Academic research assignments,
including term papers or capstone projects, are ubiquitous (Head & Eisenberg, 2009), and, as a
reification of the academic community’ values and expectations for participation, professors
expect students to consume and synthesize scholarship and apply concepts and vocabulary from
a discipline to which they are just gaining entry.

1.1

1.1.1

FIRST-GENERATION COLLEGE STUDENTS

Defining first-generation college students

A first-generation college student is typically defined as a student whose parents have attained a
high school diploma or less (Nunez & Cuccaro-Alamin, 1998). However, in research and in
practice, the first-generation college student category may be defined in different ways and
parental education levels of first-generation students can vary, including parents who never
finished high school, have a diploma or General Equivalency Diploma (GED), have completed
some higher education, have completed a certificate program, or have attained an associate’s
degree. When the existing literature is pulled together, the operationalization of first-generation
college student category consists of a spectrum of parental experiences with higher education
3

(Jehangir, Stebleton, & Deenanath, 2015). Holding student background characteristics constant,
Bowen et al. (2009) found that there is little difference in outcomes for students whose parents
have never attended college and students whose parents have some college education. In this
study, first-generation college students are defined as students whose parents have not completed
a four-year college degree.
The first-generation college student population is diverse, and many of these students
have complex identities that extend beyond their categorization as first-generation (Jehangir et
al., 2015). First-generation college students are more likely to be students of color, be
nontraditional in terms of age, have family obligations, be foreign-born, have financial concerns,
work full-time, go to school part-time, live off campus, have unmet financial need, and start in
two-year or for-profit colleges (Engle & Tinto, 2008; Jehangir, 2010; Terenzini, Cabrera, &
Bernal, 2001). However, these complexities are not always recognized by scholars and
practitioners, and first-generation college students “often find themselves labeled or identified in
ways that undermine their complexity” (Jehangir, 2010, p. 148). Wildhagen (2015) critiques the
categorization of first-generation college students, arguing that institutions have constructed this
category within the past couple of decades in order to create a discourse that seeks to advance
institutional interests. In addition, Wildhagen found that not all first-generation college students
identify with this categorization, nor do they necessarily find it to be meaningful to their
collegiate experiences.
The prevalence of first-generation students enrolled in colleges and universities has
ebbed and flowed over the past several decades. According to longitudinal data collected by the
Cooperative Institutional Research Program’s (CIRP) The Freshman Survey (TFS), almost 39
percent of incoming first-year students in 1972 were first-generation students, which dropped to

4

16 percent in 2005 (Saenz, Hurtado, Barrera, Wolf, & Yeung, 2007). Greenwald (2012) reports
an increase in the percentage of first-generation students in the past decade. First-generation
students accounted for about 17 percent of incoming students in 2007 and almost a third of
incoming students in 2012. According to 2014 data from CIRP, fully 24 percent of first-year
students reported that their mothers had a high school diploma or less and 28.5 percent had
fathers with a high school diploma or less. Despite the differences in these numbers over the
years, the number of first-generation students in colleges and universities is not trivial.

1.1.2

First-generation college students and academic outcomes

The social-class achievement gap (Stephens et al., 2014) is quite real for first-generation
students. Previous research using National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) datasets has
found that first-generation college students are less likely to persist after their first (Engle &
Tinto, 2008) and second years of college (Ishitani, 2006). Even if first-generation students persist
beyond their first and second years of college, they are less likely than their continuinggeneration peers to complete their degrees in four years (DeAngelo, Franke, Hurtado, Pryor, &
Tran, 2011; Ishitani, 2006), and this completion gap remains when examining six-year
completion rates (DeAngelo et al., 2011). The difference in overall completion rates between
first- and continuing-generation students is striking, especially when family income is taken into
account. Engle and Tinto (2008) found that only 11% of low-income, first-generation students
attained a bachelor’s degree, whereas 55% of non-low-income, continuing-generation students
attained the same degree. However, even when first-generation students complete their degrees,
their academic performance, in general, is lower than their continuing-generation peers’
performance (Chen & Carroll, 2005).
5

These statistics suggest that many first-generation students must overcome obstacles that
their continuing-generation peers may not face in order to complete a college degree.
Longitudinal data collected from the CIRP surveys indicate that first-generation students report
spending less time studying in high school and having lower high school GPAs and SAT scores.
In addition, Saenz et al. (2007) found that first-generation students have “lower expectations for
their college GPAs, and rate themselves lower on intellectual self-confidence, math ability, and
writing ability” (p. 32). Previous research indicates that first-generation students are less likely to
have taken rigorous high school courses (DeAngelo & Franke, 2011; Lohfink & Paulsen, 2005;
Warburton et al, 2001), which is an indicator of collegiate academic success (DeAngelo &
Franke, 2011). Furthermore, first-generation students are more likely to take remedial courses in
college (Engle & Tinto, 2008; Warburton et al., 2001). Academic preparation and the number of
remedial courses a student takes during his or her first year of college are inversely related, thus
affecting the student’s ability to academically succeed in college (An, 2013; Warburton et al.,
2001). Despite these concerning statistics, scholars have recognized that there is a paucity of
research about first-generation students’ academic experiences (Soria & Stebleton, 2012).
Two seminal quantitative studies provide some evidence for understanding firstgeneration students and collegiate academic experiences (Pascarella, Pierson, Wolniak, &
Terenzini, 2004; Terenzini, Springer, Yaeger, Pascarella, & Nora, 1996). Using data from the
National Study of Student Learning (NSSL), Terenzini et al. (1996) investigated whether or not
first-generation college students have different precollege characteristics and first-year
experiences than their continuing-generation peers, and if these differences have ramifications in
terms of cognitive development. In terms of academic skills, the results indicated that firstgeneration students had lower reading, math, and critical thinking skills than continuing-

6

generation students, although their gains in math and critical thinking were not different. In
addition, first-generation students reported lower degree aspirations, spending less time speaking
with teachers in high school, expecting to need more time to complete a degree, spending less
time studying, completing fewer credit hours, and were “less likely to participate in an honors
program” (p. 10). Pascarella et al. (2004) extended this initial study by exploring outcomes for
first-generation students through their second and third years of college using NSSL data. The
results showed that first-generation students continued to have lower grades through the third
year of college, completed fewer credit hours, worked more hours per week, and were more
likely to live off-campus.

1.2

ACADEMIC RESEARCH ASSIGNMENTS

In this dissertation, I investigated one potential contributor to the social-class achievement gap
for first-generation college students—academic research assignments. For the purposes of this
study, academic research is defined as the process of selecting and defining a topic of inquiry
and searching for, retrieving, evaluating, and using information for a course assignment. It does
not mean, though could be related to, conducting an experiment or other kinds of empirical
research. Project Information Literacy (PIL) indicates that research assignments are quite
common in higher education; 67 percent of college students surveyed by PIL report that they had
to complete an argumentative paper requiring them to find, evaluate, and use information in the
previous academic year (Head & Eisenberg, 2009). More than 35 percent of the surveyed
students reported completing an interpretive reading, a historical analysis, or a literature review

7

in the previous academic year, all of which required them to find, evaluate, and use outside
information sources.
The ubiquity of academic research assignments suggests that knowing how to find,
evaluate, and use information for college-level coursework not only influences students’
academic performance, but can also serve as a demonstration of their understanding of academic
culture, including its expectations for consuming and synthesizing information to support an
argument or answer a question. Head (2013) found that many of the 35 undergraduate students
interviewed in her study reported using and then modifying the research strategies they
developed in high school, meaning that students’ pre-college academic preparation likely plays a
role in how they approach research assignments in college. In general, students reported four
ways that college-level research differs from high school-level research, including both the vast
amount and diversity of information sources and expectation of independent, intellectual
exploration. Although many students reported being excited about college-level research, they
also described it as “nerve wracking,” “foreign,” “intimidating,” and “terrifying” (Head, 2013, p.
12).
Even though information consumption has shifted from a print-focused to a digitalfocused environment and students are consistently inundated with information, many of their
information-seeking and information-use strategies have not changed. Fister (1992) found that
one of the most difficult and time-consuming parts of research was defining and narrowing a
topic, and many students reported experiencing frustration at this stage. A recent PIL study found
that students still find topic definition to be one of the most difficult and frustrating parts of
research assignments (Head & Eisenberg, 2010b). In a different report, Head and Eisenberg
(2010a) noted that the majority of the 191 research assignment handouts they analyzed did not

8

convey information related to defining and focusing a research strategy (p. 2). If teaching faculty
assume that students are learning how to do this in another course or before they enter college,
the expectations related to these two critical tasks may remain tacit for many students.
While information is more accessible now than when Fister’s (1992) study was
conducted, contemporary students report using some of the same strategies to evaluate
information for inclusion in their assignments. Undergraduates report using timeliness, authority,
scholarly appearance, and relevance as evaluation criteria (Head & Eisenberg, 2010b; Logan &
Pickard, 2012). Despite students’ acknowledgment of the importance of using quality
information and their ability to provide appropriate evaluation criteria, some students report
using information that is convenient to access and easy to read (Connaway, Lanclos, & Hood,
2013; Logan & Pickard, 2012). In other words, students sometimes sacrifice using the most
appropriate and relevant sources for their assignments for those that are easy to retrieve and
understand.
Given first-generation students’ differences in academic preparation and academic
outcomes, I explored the possibility that academic research assignments contribute to the social
class achievement gap for first-generation students. Academic research assignments, including
term papers or capstone projects, are a reification of the academic community’s values and
expectations, as students must develop appropriate lines of inquiry, synthesize scholarship, and
apply concepts and vocabulary from a discipline into which they are just gaining entry. First-year
college students often start with strategies that worked for them in high school and then modify
them based on their new collegiate environment (Head, 2013), which may be problematic for
student populations who tend to be less academically prepared for college-level academic work.
In addition, faculty may develop expectations for these assignments that are rooted in years of

9

disciplinary training and may take for granted what undergraduate students do or do not
understand in terms of these expectations (Leckie, 1996). Therefore, expectations for developing
and refining a topic or line of inquiry and then evaluating, synthesizing, and using information to
support an argument may remain tacit for some students.

1.3

PURPOSE OF THE STUDY

In order to explore the potential contribution of academic research assignments to the socialclass achievement gap, I combined two lines of inquiry that have historically remained
separate—research about first-generation students’ academic experiences and outcomes,
primarily rooted in the field of education, and research about undergraduate students’
experiences with academic research assignments, primarily rooted in the field of library and
information science (LIS). Although a handful of studies in LIS have made initial attempts at
combining these lines of inquiry (Logan & Pickard, 2012; Pickard & Logan, 2013; Soria,
Nackerud, & Peterson, 2015), they have not combined theoretical and conceptual frames in a
way that intentionally solidifies the relationship between the two. In this dissertation, I used the
dominant conceptual frame in the LIS literature—information literacy—and joined it with
theoretical and conceptual frames that are frequently used in educational research—communities
of practice and social capital. Academic literacy, a concept that has emerged from writing
studies, was used to connect information literacy with the community of practice heuristic and
social capital. This combination of theoretical and conceptual frames provides a new way of
thinking about the role academic research assignments play in first-generation students’
academic experiences and outcomes.
10

Existing research indicates that there is an academic achievement gap between firstgeneration students and their peers; however, relatively little is known about the academic
experiences that contribute to this gap (Soria & Stebleton, 2012). Critical social theories that
allow for the examination and identification of how educational institutions and institutional
agents contribute to social reproduction have not played a role in LIS research examining
students’ information literacy (Elmborg, 2006a) and their approaches to and experiences with
research assignments. Despite an established and growing body of research that explores
students’ approaches to research assignments and the application of information literacy skills to
these assignments, first-generation students’ experiences with research assignments have
remained largely unexamined. The use of critical social theories to explore first-generation
students’ experiences with academic research assignments will expand what is known about
first-generation students’ academic experiences, in order to better understand what contributes to
the reproduction of the social-class achievement gap.
An established yet growing body of research that explores various facets of how students
approach academic research assignments and develop their information literacy already exists.
The use of the community of practice heuristic, which allows undergraduate students to be
viewed in a continual state of transition, provides a new dimension to this body of research.
Existing research has provided descriptions of the processes or approaches students take to
completing a particular task or assignment. While useful, this research has only delivered a
snapshot of students’ experiences with research assignments at a single point in time. In this
study, I asked first-generation students to not only describe their experiences, but also to reflect
on their transition from being first-year students to becoming novice members of a discipline as
upper-level students and how they figured out what they were expected to do in these

11

assignments as they became more established members within the undergraduate academic
community of practice. In other words, I sought to understand how first-generation students’
approaches to academic research assignments evolve as they move through their coursework and
interact with peers and institutional agents, rather than simply capturing their experience with or
approach to a specific assignment.
Finally, I employed an equity cognitive frame (Bensimon, 2005), which posits
institutional responsibility for students’ outcomes and is critical of the ways in which institutions
alienate or marginalize student populations based on background characteristics such as race and
SES. Participants were asked to reflect on their journey within the undergraduate academic
community of practice, including how expectations for participation were communicated to
them, which has helped in understanding how institutional agents (i.e. faculty, administrators,
librarians, and other academic support staff) may reinforce structural barriers to success for all
students. As established members of the undergraduate academic community of practice,
institutional agents hold a lot of power in providing access to information about expectations for
successful participation and performance within the community, and, in some cases, determining
what those expectations are and evaluating student performance against them. An equity
approach is diametrically opposed to viewing first-generation students as deficient or in need of
remediation. Rather, the use of an equity cognitive frame provides the foundation for exploring
the ways in which institutional agents can meet students where they are in order to mobilize
institutional resources to help them succeed, while simultaneously being aware of the ways in
which institutions promote systemic marginalization of particular student populations.

12

1.4

OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY

In this dissertation, I explored first-generation students’ progression toward full participation in
the undergraduate academic community of practice through their experiences with academic
research assignments and how first-generation students make sense of what is expected of them
in terms of selecting a topic and finding, evaluating, and using information in these assignments.
The following research questions guided this exploration:
•

How do first-generation students describe the process of figuring out expectations for
performance within the academic domain at the undergraduate level?
o How do first-generation students describe making sense of what is expected of
them in terms of selecting a topic and satisfactorily finding, evaluating, and using
information for academic research assignments?
o How do their strategies for making sense of what is expected of them change as
they progress through their coursework?

•

How do first-generation students describe the purpose of academic research assignments
in their undergraduate academic experience?

In this dissertation, a research assignment is defined as any assignment that requires students to
form an argument or develop a question about a topic and use at least three information sources
to support their argument or to answer their question. Students were asked to reflect on
assignments that they completed individually when possible. The phrase “doing research”
includes finding, selecting, and using information sources for a research assignment.
I used hermeneutic phenomenology as the research methodology (van Manen, 1990,
2014), which is appropriate for examining what it is like for an individual to experience a
common phenomenon. Hermeneutic phenomenological studies seek to fully describe, to the
13

extent that it is possible, the reflections of lived experience. I conducted one-on-one, semistructured interviews with 30 first-generation students in order to learn more about what is was
like for them to transition within the undergraduate academic domain by reflecting on their
experiences with academic research assignments as first-year students and as upper-level
students, as well as learning more about the meanings they make of those experiences. I
conducted this study at two four-year regional campuses of a public research university located
in the Mid-Atlantic, each of which has a student enrollment of less than 2,000. Study participants
were traditionally aged (i.e. 18 to 24 years old), full-time (i.e. at least 12 credit hours) firstgeneration students who are in at least their third year of study at these two campuses.
In the next chapter, I explore the theoretical and conceptual foundations that I use in this
dissertation, as well as reviewing relevant research to support this investigation.

14

2.0

THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS AND LITERATURE

In this dissertation, I combine theoretical and conceptual frames from the fields of education,
writing studies, and library and information science (LIS) to examine what it is like for firstgeneration students to navigate and participate in the undergraduate academic domain. I use the
dominant conceptual frame in the LIS literature—information literacy—and situate it within and
connect it to theoretical and conceptual frames that are often used in educational research—
communities of practice and social capital. Academic literacy, a concept that has emerged from
writing studies research and literature, is used to solidify the relationship among the other
theoretical and conceptual frames. In this chapter, I introduce the theories and concepts that
frame this study and describe their relationship with each other. Next, I review relevant literature
related to expectations for academic performance in college, and how those expectations are
communicated to and received by students. Finally, I review literature related to educationally
and economically challenged (EEC) students’ (Walpole, 2007) feelings of legitimacy in the
undergraduate academic domain.

15

2.1

2.1.1

THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS

Communities of practice

This study uses Lave and Wenger’s (1991) concept of community of practice as a heuristic for
exploring the experience of participating in collegiate academic culture and how first-generation
students develop academically based on their experiences. The community of practice concept
views learning as both a social and individual process, in which a new member, or legitimate
peripheral participant, learns the sociocultural practices of the community and develops her
identity to become a full participant within that community. In the community of practice, new
members are considered legitimate for two reasons—they have made the decision to enter that
community, and established members, or full participants, have recognized them as a novice
member of their community. They are peripheral because as new members they are still outsiders
in terms of the community’s culture, values, and practices. Lave and Wenger acknowledge that
there may be several paths to becoming a full participant in a community and some new
members will move toward full participation more quickly than others. The progression from
legitimate peripheral participant to full participant is tied to situated learning theory, in which
peripheral participants learn relevant skills or acquire knowledge about acceptable ways of
communicating and behaving through participation in the community. In situated learning,
peripheral participants move towards full participation through acculturation, or the adoption of
the community’s sociocultural traits and patterns, through active participation in the community
(Contu & Willmott, 2003).
There are two ways in which Lave and Wenger’s (1991) community of practice concept
has been applied to teaching and learning contexts in higher education—as a heuristic and as an
16

educational model (Lea, 2005). Lea notes that recent literature, especially literature related to
online education, treats the community of practice concept as an educational model that is used
to “build or foster what is designed as a community of practice, a learning community” (p. 188).
This approach relies primarily on Wenger’s (1998) follow-up work, which focuses on applying
the community of practice concept to educational design and generally disregards issues of
power related to situated learning in communities of practice. However, the heuristic approach,
which is used in the present study, “enables exploration of the ways in which learning does or
does not take place and foregrounds not just success but constraints on learning and full
participation in a community’s practices” (Lea, 2005, p. 188). In other words, the heuristic
approach allows one to maintain a critical stance toward the structure, values, expectations, and
discourse(s) of the community and how those elements can serve to marginalize or alienate some
legitimate peripheral participants as they attempt to move towards full participation.
In this dissertation, I examine the undergraduate academic community of practice and
how first-generation students move toward full participation in this community by reflecting on
their experiences with a common reification of the community’s values—academic research
assignments. In this study, legitimate peripheral participation in the undergraduate academic
community begins with college enrollment and continues through the completion of a
culminating research experience such as a capstone or senior research project. In these
culminating research experiences, students must build on the foundations formed in general
education courses and introductory courses in their major(s) to develop relevant lines of inquiry
and apply the appropriate theories, vocabularies, research methods, and citation standards for
their discipline (Keup, 2013). The capstone experience is an opportunity for the institution to

17

ensure that students have been socialized and acculturated into their discipline and the
undergraduate academic community.
The use of the community of practice heuristic adds a new dimension to existing research
related to undergraduate students’ experiences with academic research assignments in two ways.
First, existing research provides a snapshot of students’ information-seeking and use behaviors,
including decision-making, problem-solving, and critical thinking, for academic research
assignments (Fister, 1992; Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2009, 2010a, 2010b; Logan &
Pickard, 2012; Pickard & Logan, 2013). The community of practice heuristic, however, permits
the exploration of students’ transformations related to these behaviors as they spend more time in
the undergraduate academic domain. Because of that, students can also be asked to reflect upon
the culmination of their experiences and what role these assignments have played in their
undergraduate educational experience. Second, as will be discussed in the following sections, the
community of practice heuristic encourages a critical stance toward power dynamics within the
community, and how those power dynamics can serve to engage or alienate legitimate peripheral
participants aspiring to become full participants.
Although I use college enrollment as the beginning of legitimate peripheral participation
in the undergraduate academic community, I believe that first-generation students’ academic
preparation and high-school experiences with academic research assignments play a role in
moving towards full participation in the undergraduate academic domain. Lave and Wenger
(1991) write, “the key to legitimate peripheral participation is access by newcomers to the
community of practice and all that membership entails” (p. 100). Because the community of
practice concept as a heuristic allows one to critically examine the structural elements of the
community, including issues of power, exclusion, and alienation, I argue that information

18

acquired through social capital accumulated prior to enrolling in college, combined with
academic preparation, is one way the first-year students begin to access the accepted values,
expectations, and discourse(s) of the undergraduate academic community of practice. Social
capital accumulated in college may also serve to create differential experiences with the
academic domain and its practices.

2.1.2

Social capital

Social capital provides students with information about how to act within or navigate an
educational institution. Bourdieu (1986) defines social capital as “the aggregate of the actual or
potential resources which are linked to possession of a durable network of more or less
institutionalized relationships of mutual acquaintance and recognition—or, in other words, to
membership in a group” (p. 248). Social capital is both productive and induces action; however,
it is less tangible than other forms of capital, because it exists in social relationships (Coleman,
1988). Bourdieu’s (1986) conceptualization of social capital is critical of underlying structural
and social barriers rooted in status competition that encourage inequality between different social
classes. Social capital can reinforce social reproduction and stratification as the dominant class
uses the accumulation of social capital to remain dominant. As such, social capital and cultural
capital, a complementary theory, have been used to explore how educational institutions and
experiences with them contribute to social stratification and social reproduction (Beasley, 2011;
Stuber, 2011; Walpole, 2003), although the literature investigating social stratification in higher
education is not as abundant as the research investigating social capital in K-12 educational
settings (Stuber, 2006). Social capital helps to explain how and why social class is reproduced

19

across generations, because it illuminates how information about acting or participating in the
dominant social class’s culture is or is not disseminated.
Social capital has been used as a theoretical foundation for examining the educational
experiences and outcomes of student populations who tend to be marginalized based on race,
ethnicity, or socioeconomic status in an attempt to understand why these student populations’
experiences and outcomes are often different than white, middle-class students’ experiences and
outcomes. Stanton-Salazar and Dornbusch (1995) connect social capital to status attainment
theory, which has been used to predict occupational attainment based on a variety of factors,
including educational attainment. While status attainment models have accounted for
individuals’ social networks, they typically have taken a “role modeling” or “cheerleading”
approach (p. 116). Stanton-Salazar and Dornbusch problematize these approaches arguing that
access to information and opportunities are critical, particularly for students of color and EEC
student populations like first-generation students. The development of relationships with
institutional agents—“those individuals who have the capacity and commitment to transmit
directly or to negotiate the transmission of institutional resources and opportunities” (p. 117)—is
critical for first-generation students’ educational success, since, for them, “supportive ties are
mainly found outside the family” (p. 117). In terms of first-generation students, the role that
institutional agents play in helping to accumulate social capital can be approached in a
compensatory manner—the assumption that first-generation students are somehow deficient by
virtue of their family backgrounds. I do not argue for a compensatory approach; rather, I
acknowledge that the role institutional agents play in helping students to accumulate social
capital in the academic domain is important for exploring institutional-level barriers to academic
success, particularly for first-generation students.

20

Social capital informs behavior because it provides individuals with information about
how to act within a particular community, and so the accumulation of social capital is powerful
for membership within that community. In terms of social stratification and reproduction, one
way that dominant classes maintain their position of power is through their habitus. Habitus is
the “set of socialized dispositions, which unconsciously incline people (agents) to ‘act or react’
in certain ways in particular social spaces” (Burke, 2012, p. 40). The habitus of the community
includes its cultural values, expectations, discourses, and preferences for communication and
behavior, and it is internalized by the community’s participants as they move from the periphery
toward full participation. The values and preferences embedded in the community’s habitus
often remain tacit to outsiders, and the ways in which participants behave can signal who belongs
to that community and who does not.
Lave and Wenger (1991) acknowledge that power dynamics affect membership within a
community of practice, because full participants can control what information they share and
with whom they share it. The academic community is not immune to these dynamics since
educational institutions are not neutral spaces. Delpit (1988) expands on power relations within
educational settings, particularly for students who tend to be marginalized based on their race or
their families’ economic circumstances. Delpit outlines five aspects of what she calls “the culture
of power” within education. These aspects include the recognition that power issues are inherent
in classrooms, that there are “codes or rules for participating” in the classroom, which are a
reflection of the dominant culture (p. 282). In addition, for students who are not a part of the
dominant culture, being told what the rules are can help them to succeed, but those who are in
power are not always aware of—or are the “least willing to acknowledge”—the cultural power
differential (p. 282). Education reproduces existing social stratification, because it “reflects

21

liberal, middle-class values and aspirations” (p. 285), which often remain tacit for students who
are not part of that social class. Therefore, students who are part of middle- or upper-class
cultures already know or embody the cultural expectations and understand the rules of the game.
Delpit (1988) argues that middle- and upper-class students are more comfortable, and
ultimately more successful, in an educational system that privileges their culture, because they
have “internalized its codes” (p. 285). In other words, they have cultivated the accepted habitus
of their class and of the educational system through the accumulation of privileged social capital
(Lareau, 2011). In an educational culture of power that does not recognize the need to make the
rules of the culture explicit to all participants, students who are not from the dominant social
class are accountable for meeting expectations that might not have been communicated to them
(Delpit, 1988). Despite the desire to actively and fully participate in the educational community,
some students might be kept from full participation by virtue of power structures inherent to the
community.
Social capital relates to this study in two ways. First, situated learning requires legitimate
peripheral participants to interact with established full participants in order to learn relevant
skills and appropriate ways of participating in the community (Lave & Wenger, 1991). In other
words, social capital accumulated through participation in the community provides legitimate
peripheral participants with access to information about the community’s habitus—its culture,
values, expectations, and discourse(s)—on their journey toward full participation. Firstgeneration students might have a more difficult time accumulating social capital, because they
likely have not been taught the tacit expectations for participation in the undergraduate
community of practice that established full participants tend to privilege (Delpit, 1988; Lareau,
2011; Stanton-Salazar & Dornbusch, 1995). Full participants may take these expectations for

22

granted, since they have already internalized the community’s habitus through years of
participation within the community. Likewise, some continuing-generation students will also
take these expectations for granted, as they have been raised in such a way that they have been
prepared to participate in the culture of educational institutions (Delpit, 1988; Lareau, 2011).
Second, completing an academic research assignment is an inherently social process,
since it is a reification of the undergraduate academic community of practice’s values and
discourse(s). Faculty develop and communicate the requirements and expectations for successful
completion of the assignment they have created, and students interact with information that was
produced and disseminated by others, such as academics or journalists, in order to complete the
assignment. At some point along the way, students must learn how to locate, evaluate, and use
information in a way that is acceptable to the academic or disciplinary context for which they are
completing the assignment (Leckie, 1996; Valentine, 2001). Moreover, a student’s social
interactions during the learning process influences how she looks for, evaluates, and selects
information for use in academic research assignments (Connaway, Lanclos, & Hood, 2013).
First-generation students might not have immediate access to information sources related to
expectations for academic assignments (Collier & Morgan, 2008), and faculty might not be
explicit or transparent about their expectations (Leckie, 1996; Raven, 2012; Valentine, 2001;
Winklemes, 2013). This creates potential for a situation in which a common practice within the
undergraduate academic community of practice could frustrate or, even worse, alienate particular
student populations.

23

2.1.3

The undergraduate academic community of practice

In order to help explain the relationship between Lave and Wenger’s (1991) community of
practice heuristic and social capital as they relate to this study, I have diagrammed their
relationship

Figure 1. Diagram of Theoretical Frames

In this diagram, first-year students are positioned at the periphery of the undergraduate academic
community of practice. At the core of this community of practice is its habitus—the fundamental
values that determine acceptable ways of participating in the community—which are enacted by
full participants in the community. There are two related factors that contribute to the students’
movement from the periphery toward the habitus—the academic curriculum and accumulated
24

social capital. Social capital accumulated through social interactions, both inside and outside the
classroom, with faculty, other institutional agents, peers, and family before and during college
help students to access information about expectations for academic performance in college and
in their major field(s) of study.
In terms of the academic curriculum, first-year students begin with general education and
introductory courses that expose them to college-level academic expectations and provide them
with broad exposure to a variety of disciplines. As they move through their general education
requirements, students begin to enter their major field(s) of study and are introduced to specific
expectations for participation within a discipline. As students take advanced courses in their
major(s), they are expected to apply the discipline’s vocabulary, theories, methodologies, and
methods of communication to their academic work at a level that is appropriate for a novice
member of the discipline. Prior to graduation, students may need to demonstrate their ability to
participate in the community as a full participant through the completion of a culminating
research experience (i.e. capstone or senior research project), in which the student reflects their
understanding of the community’s core values, its habitus.

2.2

2.2.1

CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATIONS

Academic literacy

The concept of academic literacy provides the foundation for understanding the habitus of the
undergraduate academic domain, which students access through both their academic preparation
and social capital accumulated through interactions with peers, family members, faculty, and
25

other institutional agents. Academic literacy includes the academic skills, attitudes, and practices
(Stierer, 2000) that students are expected to demonstrate as they progress from being a first-year
student to becoming an upper-level student. Tapp (2015) writes that academic literacy is
“embedded in specific academic contexts that include particular ways of constructing meaning,
making judgments, and determining what counts as valuable knowledge reflecting tacit beliefs
and values” (p. 712). Because academic literacy validates certain forms of knowledge, critical
analysis, and knowledge practices, students who have not been exposed to the skills, attitudes,
and competencies that are valued in the undergraduate academic community, through no fault of
their own, are sometimes viewed as “intellectually inferior” or “lacking ability” (Burke, 2012, p.
193).
Graff (2003) argues that one of the primary facets of academic literacy in the United
States is “Arguespeak” or argument literacy, which includes developing an argument and
synthesizing existing research to support that argument. However, Graff believes that faculty
make the skills, attitudes, and competencies related to argument literacy more dense than they
need to be, which leads to academic cluelessness or befuddlement on the part of undergraduate
students. Graff (2003) and Conley (2005) argue that high schools do not adequately prepare
students for college, so they must be socialized into academic culture, in which students are
required to constantly problematize and analyze topics or issues. Some students resist these
academic expectations, because they feel like they are asked to overanalyze everything they read,
watch, hear, or discuss. Because faculty have internalized argument literacy through their
socialization and acculturation in the academy, they might not realize that these expectations
might feel foreign to many undergraduate students (Brown. Collins, & Deguid, 1989; Tobias,
1992-1993).

26

The use of academic literacy as the habitus for the undergraduate academic community
allows for the examination of how learning is situated, by exploring the social and cultural
contexts in which institutions and their agents privilege certain kinds of knowledge (Lea, 2005).
Lea notes that the academic community’s practices have a gatekeeping effect that determines
who is able to become a full participant in the community and who is alienated or marginalized
in the process of becoming a full participant. As a reification of the academic community’s
values, academic research assignments require students to reflect academic literacy
competencies, including Graff’s (2003) “Arguespeak,” and may signal who belongs to the
community and who does not.
Mann (2001) offers a theoretical exploration of how the concepts of alienation and
engagement might help us to understand students’ internalization of academic literacy (i.e. the
community’s habitus). Mann uses the Oxford English Dictionary’s definition of alienation—“the
state or experience of being isolated from a group or an activity to which one should belong or in
which one should be involved” (p. 8). Two of Mann’s seven theoretical explorations directly
relate to academic literacy. First, Mann notes that students are joining an academic discourse
that, in many cases, has been in existence for decades, which can be particularly disempowering
and alienating for new students. Second, Mann argues that many students, particularly those who
are not part of the dominant social class, come to higher education as outsiders and feel that they
must somehow transform their identities in order to fully immerse themselves into their new
community. When the theoretical constructs Mann (2001) discusses and the definition of
alienation she employs are taken together, one can begin to see how students who have a more
difficult time decoding the values and expectations embedded in academic literacy might
experience alienation from or marginalization within the community. Both Mann (2001) and Lea

27

(2005) note that some students choose to remain on the periphery of the community and resist
fully participating in the community’s practices to preserve their identity and to “retain
power…in the learning process” (Lea, 2005, p. 190).
Institutions create or reinforce barriers that prevent access to the competencies and
expectations embedded in academic literacy, particularly when these competencies and
expectations are not interrogated or critically examined. In an essay about her experience
teaching a basic writing course, Marinara (1997) discusses the ways in which academic literacy
marginalizes working-class students. Although colleges and universities report that they have
done a lot to make higher education more accessible for EEC student populations, they have not
changed “the ways of thinking that the academy sees as culturally valuable” (p. 6). Despite the
fact that many EEC students bring a long list of skills and experiences with them, they are often
labeled as remedial. Marinara argues that colleges and universities should recognize the
experiences and skills that students who are not part of the middle- or upper-classes bring to their
postsecondary education.
Both Graff (2003) and Lea (2005) critique the structure (or the lack of structure) of the
curriculum and its role in academic alienation. Graff (2003) argues that “curricular pluralism”
often provides students with an incoherent, disconnected series of courses, rather than promoting
critical thinking and exposure to diverse perspectives. He writes that “the student becomes a kind
of volleyball, batted back and forth in an intellectual game whose rules change without notice
from course to course” (p. 66). Lea (2005) refers to this problem as “course switching,” which
she connects explicitly to the intersection of academic literacy and writing practice. She argues
that students have a difficult time truly understanding the expectations for writing in higher
education, because they are exposed to different disciplines with different instructors who each

28

have their own preferences and requirements. In other words, a lack of interconnectedness or
coordination within the curriculum and differences in instructors’ expectations can prevent
students from gaining a holistic understanding of what is expected in terms of their academic
performance.
To successfully participate in the undergraduate academic community, students must be
able to locate, evaluate, and use various forms of information that are considered appropriate for
the academic or disciplinary context (Elmborg, 2006a; Nicholson, 2014). In this dissertation, I
focus on one facet of academic literacy that is related to the information-seeking and use
behaviors required to complete academic research assignments—information literacy. Because I
argue that information literacy is embedded in the undergraduate academic community of
practice’s habitus (i.e. academic literacy), the community of practice heuristic and social capital
will permit the examination of how students make sense of expectations related to developing a
line of inquiry and using information for these assignments as they move from the periphery of
the undergraduate academic community of practice toward full participation.

2.2.2

Information literacy

The Framework for Information Literacy in Higher Education defines information literacy as
“the set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective discovery of information, the
understanding of how information is produced and valued, and the use of information in creating
new knowledge and participating ethically in communities of learning” (Association of College
& Research Libraries, 2015, p. 3). In order to facilitate the integration of information literacy
into the curriculum, the Framework outlines six information literacy threshold concepts (see
Table 1), each with related knowledge practices and dispositions. According to the Framework,
29

“threshold concepts are core or foundational concepts that, once grasped by the learner, create
new perspectives and ways of understanding a discipline or challenging knowledge domain” (p.
3). Threshold concepts recognize that learning is transformative; how students make sense of the
world or particular phenomena changes after they have passed through a conceptual portal
(Meyer & Land, 2005). The six information literacy threshold concepts outlined in the
Framework identify key concepts that students should begin to grasp as they participate in the
undergraduate academic community of practice, regardless of their chosen major field(s) of
study. The dispositions and knowledge practices associated with each threshold concept in the
Framework intend to help make these abstract, intangible ways of thinking more concrete.
Table 1. Information Literacy Threshold Concepts

Information Literacy Threshold Concepts
(Association of College & Research Libraries, 2015)
Authority Is Constructed and Contextual
Information Creation as a Process
Information Has Value
Research as Inquiry
Scholarship as Conversation
Searching as Strategic Exploration

However, naming or identifying the privileged knowledge practices and disciplines does
not automatically result in more transparency for students. Pawley (1998) offers some
perspective on how the conceptualization of information literacy historically has contributed to
social reproduction and stratification. On the one hand, information literacy as a concept can be
empowering (i.e. teaching students to become ‘good’ information consumers). On the other
hand, information literacy can also reinforce the existing habitus of the academy by favoring the
use of certain kinds of information (empirical research data, scholarly articles) over other kinds
of information (blogs, self-published materials). Not only might this favoritism seem irrational to
30

some undergraduate students, academic discourse is difficult for undergraduate students to
consume given the use of technical or disciplinary jargon and the assumption of prior knowledge
of a scholarly topic. Indeed, others have referred to the process of understanding and
participating as a process of reacculturation (Bruffee, 1993; Elmborg, 2006a).
In this study, I explore how first-generation students develop academically through their
experiences in determining how they are expected to develop a topic or line of inquiry and then
locate and evaluate information to support their argument. Only a handful of studies have
examined first-generation students and information literacy (Logan & Pickard, 2012; Pickard &
Logan, 2013; Soria, Nackerud & Peterson, 2015). In addition, to my knowledge, there are no
empirical examinations of the transformative aspects of information literacy; that is, empirical
examinations have not focused on how students perceive the development of their information
literacy throughout their undergraduate educational experience. This study examines how firstgeneration students make sense of what they are expected to do in terms of research (i.e.
developing a line of inquiry and information seeking, evaluation, and use) for these assignments,
using information literacy as defined in the Framework as a conceptual frame and how that
changes as they move further into the community of practice. As a reification of the
undergraduate academic community’s habitus, these assignments require students to become
members of the scholarly conversation by reading and synthesizing what other scholars, experts,
or professionals have written in order to make their own argument about a topic. Given the
ubiquity of academic research assignments in the undergraduate community of practice (Head &
Eisenberg, 2009) the tacit expectations for interacting with and using information in these
assignments could be a potential site of alienation that contributes to the lower academic
outcomes of first-generation students.

31

2.2.3

Summary of theoretical and conceptual frames

When combined, the theoretical and conceptual frames provide a unique way to explore firstgeneration students’ academic experiences as they transition from first-year students at the
periphery to becoming full participants within the undergraduate academic community. In the
diagram (see Figure 2), academic literacy is the habitus—the core set of values embedded into
the undergraduate academic community of practice—and is accessed as one progresses through
the academic curriculum and accumulates social capital. Information literacy, a facet of
academic literacy, is situated within this core.
As a reification of the community’s core values, academic research assignments require
students to demonstrate the accepted dispositions and knowledge practices embodied in the
concept of information literacy. The community of practice heuristic helps to frame the
expectation that students will develop more sophisticated ways of interacting with and using
information within academic research assignments as they move from general education and
introductory course work, such as a college composition course, to more advanced, disciplinespecific courses and culminating research experiences in their major field(s) of study. Situated
learning and social capital indicate that students must interact with other members of the
community of practice, faculty in particular, to demonstrate competencies related to academic
literacy, including information literacy, in their academic research assignments. In addition,
faculty serve as gatekeepers to the community through the evaluation of performance on these
assignments based on both explicit requirements and implicit expectations. These performance
evaluations are indicators of who they believe legitimately belongs to the community and who
does not.

32

Figure 2. Diagram of Theoretical and Conceptual Frames

Previous research examining the academic research experiences of undergraduate
students has only provided a snapshot of their experiences in developing a line of inquiry and
finding, evaluating, and using information for academic assignments. As mentioned in chapter
one, the findings of this research have been useful in gaining a general understanding of
students’ research practices, but they have not demonstrated how students develop their
information literacy as they move from being first-year students to joining their major field(s) of
study as upper-level students. This is a significant gap in the empirical literature, because
threshold concepts frame the development of information literacy as being transformative, in that

33

grasping a threshold concept creates a shift in the students’ perspective in which they start to
think like a novice member of their discipline (Meyer & Land, 2005). Through the use of these
theoretical and conceptual frames, I will provide a new perspective of how first-generation
students negotiate collegiate academic culture and what is like for them becoming full
participants in academic disciplines at the undergraduate level, in order to provide a foundation
for understanding if and how academic research assignments and information literacy contribute
to first-generation students’ lower academic outcomes.
This unique conceptual framework is a reflection of both my personal and professional
experience. Having been a professional librarian working primarily with undergraduate students
for more than a decade, I have witnessed students’ attempting to make sense of the feedback that
they have received from their professors or attempting to determine their professors’
expectations for performance. Many students are aware that they can bring their pre-college
experiences and prior knowledge to bear in their collegiate academic work; however, many also
realize that the expectations are somewhat different. In addition, I personally witnessed my
domestic partner, a non-traditionally aged, low-income, first-generation student, attempting to
navigate academic culture as I was learning about critical social theories in my doctoral
coursework, including Bourdieusian theories. The intersection of this personal experience with
my scholarly endeavors helped me to reflect upon the ways in which academic culture can
enable or constrain success for students whose identities have been traditionally been
marginalized in higher education. The use of communities of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991)
and social capital provided an opportunity to explore power dynamics related to participation in
academic culture, and academic literacy and information literacy provided me with the

34

conceptual foundation to articulate some of the privileged modes of thinking in academic culture
that may remain tacit for many students.

2.3

REVIEW OF RELEVANT LITERATURE

In this section, I review two different strands of literature that, when combined, are important for
understanding how first-generation students participate in the undergraduate academic
community practice. The first strand focuses on how expectations for participation and
performance in the undergraduate academic community are communicated to and received by
students. The second strand focuses on empirical findings related to first-generation students’
academic experiences, including their experiences with academic research assignments. The final
section will combine these two strands of literature to discuss how information about
expectations for participation and performance accumulated through interactions with faculty is
important for first-generation students’ perceptions of legitimacy as a participant in the
undergraduate academic community of practice.

2.3.1

Expectations for academic performance

Social capital accumulated through interactions with peers, family, faculty, and other
institutional agents helps students to move from the periphery of the undergraduate academic
community of practice toward full participation. However, this is only true if these interactions
help to make tacit expectations for participation more transparent for students and help students
to feel like they are engaging with the community. Faculty hold a lot of power in the
35

undergraduate academic community of practice, because they are charged with determining the
expectations for participation and evaluating performance against those expectations. Not
surprisingly then, research has demonstrated that students’ interactions with faculty can yield
positive academic results (e.g. DeAngelo, 2014; Fuentes, Alvarado, Berdan, & DeAngelo, 2014;
Kuh & Hu, 2001; Lamport, 1993; Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005; Woodside, Wong, & Wiest,
1999) including for first-generation students (McKay & Estrella, 2008; Posselt & Black, 2012).
However, the existing literature has shown that students and faculty do not always share the
same expectations for participation and performance, because they approach the academic
domain from different points of view.
Based on her experience as a librarian who works with undergraduate students, Leckie
(1996) argues that the development of research assignments is often approached from an expert
researcher perspective. Characteristics of the expert researcher perspective, include “in-depth
knowledge of the discipline, awareness of important scholars working in particular areas,
participation in a system of informal scholarly communication, and a view of research as a nonsequential, non-linear process with a large degree of ambiguity and serendipity” (p. 202). The
expert researcher approach to developing a research assignment then includes many assumptions
about what students have been prepared to do in terms of developing appropriate lines of inquiry
for a topic that is new to them, being able to select the best sources for background information,
understanding the role of scholarly literature within the discipline, and analyzing various
scholarly works to identify and critique different arguments made about a topic. For Leckie, it is
not that the students intellectually are not capable of performing these tasks, but they have not
received the years of training that their professors have received. What seems natural to the
faculty is quite foreign to the students.

36

Empirical research has provided evidence of a gap between what faculty expect students
to be capable of and what they are actually prepared to do, particularly in terms of information
literacy and academic research assignments. Through interviews with undergraduate students,
Valentine (2001) found that students put forth “legitimate effort” in completing their academic
assignments while balancing other demands. In order to determine what a legitimate effort might
look like for a given assignment, students attempted to determine what the professor’s
expectations and requirements were for the assignment or, as Valentine phrases it, “what the
professor wants (WPW).” Valentine found a gap between what the professor actually wants and
students’ interpretation of those expectations. Interviews with faculty revealed that many of their
expectations were implicit or “intangible” (p. 110). Faculty wanted to give students the
opportunity to practice writing within the discipline, as well as “thinking for themselves, finding
things for themselves, collating information, and, even more so, beginning to do analysis in the
research paper, [by asking themselves]: ‘What can I conclude from the research? How do
scholars work?’” (p. 110). However, students were more concerned with understanding the
explicit or tangible requirements of the assignment, such as page length, citation style, number of
sources, and types of sources. In some cases, this led to disappointment for both the faculty and
the students. The faculty expected more from the final product, and students were disappointed
in the grade they received if they believed that they were marked down for subjective or tacit
reasons.
Students sometimes have inflated perceptions of their preparation and information
literacy when compared with their professors’ perceptions. Raven (2012) investigated the
differences in perceptions of preparation between faculty and first-year students. The majority of
first-year students (about 59%, n=317) indicated that they were somewhat prepared to do

37

college-level research; whereas, 87% of faculty (n=75) believed that incoming students were not
very prepared. Just under half of the first-year students believed that it was the professors’
responsibility to teach them the research skills they needed to be successful, but less than a
quarter of the faculty believed that they were responsible for teaching these skills to the students.
In addition, students underestimated the time that it would take for them to do research (i.e.
searching for, evaluating, and selecting information) for their assignments (Raven, 2012;
Valentine, 2001). Raven (2012) found that more than half of the first-year students thought it
would take them less than five hours, but almost half of the faculty thought it would take
students 10 or more hours to do research for an assignment.

2.3.1.1 Communicating expectations
Research about how expectations are both communicated and received can be divided into two
categories—methods of communicating expectations for or requirements of academic work (i.e.
syllabi, assignment handouts) and direct responses to students’ success in meeting expectations
(i.e. written feedback).
Communicating course and assignment requirements
The course syllabus is one method that faculty use to communicate expectations for performance
based on academic culture (Danielson, 1995). In a descriptive study of the purpose(s) that faculty
assign to syllabi, the top-rated purpose was as a mechanism for communication (Fink, 2011).
However, faculty do not always place much emphasis on the role that syllabi can play in helping
students to better understand the academic environment or tacit expectations for performance.
Doolittle and Siudzinski’s (2010) analysis of 1,000 syllabi confirms this. These authors found
that the most common syllabi components are basic course information, including the professor’s
38

contact information, course name and number, required reading, and a schedule of assignments.
Doolittle and Siudzinski combine the findings of previous research (Becker & Calhoon, 1999;
Garavalia, Hummel, Wiley, & Huitt, 1999) to highlight the differences in how faculty and
students view the information included in syllabi. From the faculty perspective, students should
focus on the descriptive information about the course’s goals and objectives and assignment
descriptions, when included. Students, however, look for the production information, such as the
schedule of assignments and assessments (i.e. tests and quizzes) and the attendance policy. Even
if faculty are including more in-depth description about expectations for performance, students
may overlook these descriptions if the faculty do not take care to emphasize their importance.
The requirements and expectations for academic research assignments can be
communicated formally in a variety of ways, including in syllabi, in assignment handouts, and
through verbal communication in the classroom. Head and Eisenberg (2010a) conducted content
analysis on almost 200 assignment handouts from almost 30 colleges and universities in the
United States in order to learn more about how faculty communicate requirements and
expectations for research assignments to students. Head and Eisenberg found, in general, that
assignment handouts focused more on the “mechanics of preparing a research assignment” than
on selecting a topic, developing a research statement or question that is of an appropriate scope,
finding background information to gain a better understanding of the topic, and evaluating
information sources. Although the majority of the handouts suggested that students should
consult the library, only 14 percent of the handouts provided guidance related to identifying
specific information tools (e.g. online databases with scholarly articles) in order to locate
relevant information.

39

Responding to students’ performance
In addition to assigning grades, written feedback is another way that faculty provide students
with information about how they are performing in relation to expectations, particularly on
written assignments. Written feedback serves as a direct response to a student’s success in
meeting academic expectations and can be viewed as an indication of their legitimacy within the
undergraduate community of practice. Indeed, Murphy (2000) argues that written feedback
should be understood as a sociocultural practice and uses Lave and Wenger’s (1991) community
of practice concept to support this argument.
Several studies have investigated the content of written feedback that instructors provide
to students, since “students may not share membership in the discourse communities we expect”
(Murphy, 2000, p. 86). Research on written feedback has found that the correction or
highlighting of spelling and grammar errors are the most common form of feedback given
(Connors & Lunsford, 1988; Stern & Solomon, 2006), rather than substantive feedback that
helps students to develop as participants in the undergraduate academic community. Connors and
Lunsford (1993) examined 3,000 papers to explore instructors’ global comments—“general
evaluative comments found at the end or the beginning of papers” (p. 206). Almost two-thirds of
the papers included global comments, and, of these, almost half began with positive comments
and ended with negative comments. Almost a quarter included only negative comments and less
than 10% included only positive comments. In general, global comments were used to support
the grade assigned to the assignment, rather than focusing on the development of the students as
legitimate participants within the undergraduate academic community or as novice members of a
discipline.

40

Related to helping students refine their understanding of academic discourse and culture,
14 percent (n=598) of the papers that Stern and Solomon (2006) examined “contained comments
that addressed the sufficiency or quality of the evidence, supporting ideas, or thought that were
used to back up a claim” (p. 35). In addition, 6 percent of the papers examined included
comments related to scholarly advice, including “references to additional sources of information”
and “advice on how to continue on with a line of research” or inquiry (p. 36). Written feedback
that directly responds to students’ academic work is an opportunity to help the students learn
more about expectations for participating in undergraduate academic culture; however, much of
the feedback analyzed in research studies indicates that students are not using written feedback in
this way.
Receiving responses to academic performance
Writing almost 20 years apart, Knoblauch and Brannon (1981) and Murphy (2000) both argue
that more research is needed examining the ways in which students understand or respond to the
feedback that they are given. Existing research suggests that students value written feedback on
their work, especially if it is explicit, specific, and explanatory (Hayes & Daiker, 1984; Land &
Evans, 1987; Lynch & Kleman, 1978; Straub, 1997; Weaver, 2006; Ziv, 1984). In other words,
students want faculty to explain why something in the student’s writing is considered good or
problematic. Although some studies have found students like praise and positive feedback
(Hayes & Daiker, 1984 Straub, 1997), other studies have found that students do not find generic
praise to be helpful in developing their writing skills (Land & Evans, 1987).
Hayes and Daiker (1984) videotaped and subsequently analyzed students’ verbal
reactions to written feedback they received on papers for a freshman composition course in order
to better understand “what goes through their [students’] minds when they received graded
41

essays” (p. 1). Interestingly, 15 of the 17 students reviewed the written feedback prior to looking
at the grade their work had been assigned, which indicates that many students might find the
written feedback even more important than the grade assigned to their work. However, most of
the students in the sample had a difficult time understanding the written feedback they had been
given, even comments that were seemingly clear such as “you need to include analysis of the
text” and “fragment, but it works stylistically quite well in fact” (p. 3). The student who received
these comments interpreted the former comment to mean that he needed to provide more
summary and the latter comment to mean that his content was relevant but misplaced within the
text. Hayes and Daiker indicated that these interpretations exemplified the other students’
reactions, writing “students often spend considerable time and effort trying to understand it [an
unclear comment]—and frequently fail” (p. 3). Even though students seem to want to learn from
their professors’ feedback and professors intend to help students learn and develop through
feedback, differences in acculturation and socialization can lead to misinterpretations or
frustration for students.
Using a questionnaire illustrating different categories of written feedback on a writing
assignment, Straub (1997) investigated first-year students’ perceptions of and preferences for
different styles of providing written feedback. Confirming the findings of previous studies,
Straub found that students preferred and “enthusiastically expressed their appreciation for”
feedback that was both specific and elaborate, particularly if that feedback was framed as advice,
as an explanation, or as an open question. Students were not opposed to receiving criticism;
however, they had negative responses to comments that they interpreted as judgmental and harsh
or made them feel like the professor was attempting to take control of their writing or their
arguments. Straub’s study indicates that students might be sensitive to the feedback that they are

42

receiving and that particular kinds of feedback might not encourage students to engage in the
community’s discourse and practices. Just like Collier and Morgan’s (2008) finding that both
first-generation and continuing-generation students found it most helpful when faculty were
explicit and specific in communicating course and assignment expectations, so too do students
find specific and elaborate responses to their performance to be most helpful in developing as
members of the community.

2.3.2

First-generation students and the academic domain

Much of what we know about first-generation students and the undergraduate academic domain
focuses on particular outcomes (i.e. GPA, persistence, time to completion), and most of these
studies use quantitative methods to provide higher education practitioners and scholars with
basic information about which factors likely influence these outcomes. Several studies seek to
complement these quantitative studies, exploring the behaviors, motivations, and experiences
that inform these outcomes from the first-generation students’ perspectives (e.g. Collier &
Morgan, 2008; Jehangir, 2010; McLoughlin, 2012; White & Ali-Khan, 2013; Yee, 2016). These
studies use qualitative methods in order to develop detailed descriptions of students’ experiences
and the meanings they make of those experiences.
Although all students must decipher faculty expectations for academic performance,
research has found that first-generation students might struggle more than their peers in
understanding faculty expectations. Collier and Morgan (2008) investigated the differences in
first-generation and continuing-generation students’ understanding of faculty expectations, and
they found several challenges that were unique to first-generation students. Both groups of
students wanted faculty to be upfront about expectations, but first-generation students wanted
43

faculty members to be explicit about expectations, particularly in terms of assignment
description and formatting expectations. In addition, first-generation students did not understand
the purpose of the syllabus and often relied on “information they acquired from hearing,
observing, and interpreting the actions of professors” rather than consulting the syllabus (p. 437).
First-generation students underestimated how much time they would need to spend on
schoolwork outside of the classroom and tended to overcommit themselves to other activities.
White and Ali-Khan (2013) also found that first-generation students often struggled to decode
faculty expectations and took test directions literally, which often resulted in diminished
academic outcomes. Yee (2016) explored the academic engagement strategies of first-generation
and continuing-generation students, finding that continuing-generation students were more likely
to interact with their professors and felt more entitled to use academic support resources to help
them to succeed academically. First-generation students, on the other hand, preferred an
independent strategy and believed that in college they were “on their own to succeed” (p. 845).
Differences in academic preparation could influence students’ understanding of expectations and
performance in their academic work. White and Ali-Khan (2013) conducted case studies of four
first-generation minority students at a predominantly White public university who were
struggling academically in college. Although the four students in this study performed relatively
well in high school, their high school experiences did not provide them with adequate study
skills, note-taking skills, or the ability to read an academic text as something different from a
popular text. Even though the students felt they were different from their peers, they could not
articulate which skills or knowledge they needed to acquire.

44

2.3.2.1 First-generation students and academic research assignments
Despite evidence that first-generation students differ in terms of academic performance and
outcomes, there is little research related to the academic information-seeking and informationuse habits of this student population. Eighteen years ago, Tyckoson (2000) wrote an introduction
for academic librarians to the challenges that first-generation college students face regarding
their social and academic integration and what that means for their research and library skills,
most of which is speculative and based on his own experience working with first-generation
students. Although Tyckoson does not provide a rigorous exploration of first-generation college
students, the library, and the research process, he does provide an early account of academic
librarians' realization that first-generation college students' relationships with the library might be
different than their continuing-generation peers.
Soria, Nackerud, and Peterson (2015) combined CIRP data collected from first-year
students at a large public university with institutional data related to library usage to examine the
relationship between SES and library use, which included first-generation students.

First-

generation students were less likely to have checked out a print book and/or to have used
academic journals. First-generation students were more likely to use online reference services
and peer consultations. These findings seem somewhat contradictory, because the use of
reference services and peer consultations should result in increased usage of traditional scholarly
information sources like print books and academic journals.
Logan and Pickard (2012) produced one of the first empirical studies to focus on firstgeneration students and their approach to research for academic research assignments. Logan and
Pickard interviewed 18 self-identified, first-year, first-generation students at the University of
Illinois-Chicago about their research habits. For their college assignments, all of the students

45

reported searching for information online because it was the easiest way to find information, but
they were not able to distinguish between the tools they used to find information (e.g. databases)
and the information source itself (e.g. scholarly journal article). The authors were also interested
in how the students selected sources to include in their course research projects and found that
there were three criteria: relevance, scholarly appearance, and if the student could understand the
information (p. 118). In order to determine how many sources to use in their assignments, these
students reported using instructors' explicit requirements, or in the absence of those
requirements, the belief that they had enough sources to support their argument. When these
students needed help with their research, they most frequently turned to instructors/teaching
assistants and friends.
Pickard and Logan (2013) conducted a follow-up study, which explored the academic
research habits of first-generation seniors at the University of Illinois-Chicago. The authors
found that the seniors did all of the searching online, like the freshman sample, but the seniors
seemed "more informed" (p. 412) in that they could name specific library databases that they
used. The seniors acknowledged that research is an iterative process and seemed to understand
the value of manipulating search terms to get the appropriate information. The authors found that
seniors used mostly the same methods to determine how many sources to use, but were a bit
more exhaustive in their approach. The seniors had a "more complex and specific understanding
of source evaluation" (p. 404), reporting that relevance and authority were the primary factors.
These seniors sought help less frequently than the freshman sample, but when they did seek
research help they consulted with instructors, peers, and librarians.

46

2.3.3

First-generation students’ perceptions of legitimacy

Evaluative feedback from faculty that directly responds to a student’s performance on an
assignment can be powerful in helping students to see themselves as legitimate participants
within the community. Kaufman (2014) argues that the perceptions other members of the
community have of a participant are important for feeling as if one is a legitimate member of that
community, writing that “one’s personal identity will not stick unless it is certified by having
others reflect that identity back to the individual” (p. 38). The process of learning how to do
college and become a full participant within the undergraduate academic community of practice
can be different for various student populations, because power and identity issues are inherent
to the sociocultural learning process related to participation in a community (Lave and Wenger,
1991). Lave and Wenger write, “Learning thus implies becoming a different person with respect
to the possibilities enabled by these systems of relations. To ignore this aspect of learning is to
overlook the fact that learning involves the construction of identities” (p. 53). Kaufman (2014)
suggests that low-SES students must undergo an identity transformation in order to be
academically successful in college, and Posselt and Black (2012) make the same argument for
first-generation students.
This identity transformation can be more difficult for first-generation students, because
they may not have been raised with the white, middle-class values reflected or promoted in
education (Delpit, 1988; Lareau, 2011). Jehangir (2010) notes that for many first-generation
students “there is a sense of being an impostor in one world and a traitor to the other” (p. 42).
London (1989) found that some first-generation students had family members who were
supportive of their college enrollment, but others felt or were made to feel like they were
forsaking their role in the family or their family’s culture. Students who feel like they are forced
47

to assume a new identity sometimes choose to remain at the periphery of the community in order
to preserve their pre-college identity (Lea, 2005; Mann, 2001).
Moreover, some first-generation students feel like they are imposters within higher
education (Demetriou et al., 2017). Stebleton and Soria (2012) define imposter syndrome as a
state in which some “students may never feel confident, grounded, or socially connected to their
academic experiences on campus” (p. 15). Hellman and Harbeck (1997) use academic selfefficacy to frame imposter syndrome as the fear that others will perceive one as being
academically incapable. In addition to entering a culture with a value system that may be
different from the one in which they were raised, Mann (2001) points out the difficulties of
jumping into academic discourse as an undergraduate and how that can be a marginalizing or
alienating experience for many students.
The qualitative studies of first generation students’ academic experiences provide
evidence of these feelings. White and Ali-Khan (2013) found that “fears of appearing ‘stupid’ or
‘ignorant’” kept students from actively participating in the classroom (p. 30). Students reported
that they believed the perceived differences in vocabulary, discourse, and even regional accent
would make them appear stupid to their peers (McLoughlin, 2012; White & Ali-Khan, 2013).
Other low-income, first-generation students were aware of the differences in academic
preparation and felt that they had catching up to do in the classroom, both in terms of skills and
cultural awareness. One student noted that others would make literary jokes that they just did not
understand, and another student reported that she was always lagging behind academically
(McLoughlin, 2012). However, some students are able to successfully overcome these feelings.
Another student in McLoughlin’s study noted that they had gained more confidence by the end
of their freshman year.

48

Participation in the classroom, including participation in class discussion, is important for
academic outcomes and feelings of illegitimacy may prevent students from engaging in these
discussions. Filkins and Doyle (2002) found that low-income, first-generation students benefit
from classroom and educational practices that require students to present in class or collaborate
with their classmates. These students also benefited from interactions with faculty, which can be
difficult for first-generation students who may feel like imposters in the undergraduate academic
community of practice. Not all first-generation students experience these feelings, and some who
do are able to overcome them (McLoughlin, 2012; Stuber, 2011). However, there are nontrivial
consequences related to academic performance, persistence, and degree completion for those
students who feel like they are imposters and are not able to overcome those feelings to actively
engage with the community as a legitimate participant.

2.4

CONCLUSION

In this dissertation, I combine theoretical and conceptual frames from three different disciplines
in order to provide a new way to think about how students make sense of undergraduate
academic culture and its expectations for performance as they move from the periphery of the
community as first-year students to becoming upper-level students and moving toward full
participation. The use of Lave and Wenger’s (1991) community of practice heuristic permits the
exploration of power issues inherent in learning how to become a full participant within a
community, and social capital provides a frame for exploring the potential power dynamics
inherent in the student-faculty dynamic. Academic literacy forms the core of the community’s
values and expectations for participation, which often remain tacit for many students.
49

I focus on examining academic research assignments as a particular practice that could
contribute to the social class achievement gap for first-generation students (Stephens, Hamedani,
& Destin, 2014). Research assignments are ubiquitous in the undergraduate academic
experience, and, as a reification of the undergraduate academic community’s values, require
students to demonstrate their understanding of the community’s expectations for participation.
Research assignments often require students to develop a line of inquiry or argument about a
particular topic, and then find, evaluate, and use appropriate sources of information to support
their line of inquiry or argument. Information literacy, a particular though not exclusive set of
skills, knowledge practices, and dispositions related to academic literacy, permits the
examination of expectations for performance on research assignments and how students make
sense of those expectations.
The combination of these theoretical and conceptual frames permits exploration of firstgeneration students’ experiences with engaging and performing in the undergraduate academic
community of practice from an equity perspective (Bensimon, 2005), in which institutional
barriers to success for first-generation students will be investigated and challenged. An equity
perspective toward information literacy is also important, as discourse related to information
literacy and undergraduate students often takes a deficit tone (Foster, 1993; Owusu-Ansah,
2005). In this dissertation, I seek to understand obstacles that first-generation students encounter
in figuring out the expectations for participation in the undergraduate academic community of
practice, specifically in terms of completing academic research assignments. My purpose is not
to identify ways in which the students can be fixed; rather, I intend to identify ways in which
institutional agents can change their practices to empower first-generation students.

50

3.0

RESEARCH METHODS

The purpose of this study was to explore first-generation students’ progression toward full
participation in the undergraduate academic community of practice through their experiences
with academic research assignments and how these students make sense of what is expected of
them in terms of selecting a topic and finding, evaluating, and using information in these
assignments. In this dissertation, I neither assessed students’ information literacy skills nor
simply asked them to describe their research processes; rather, I asked students to think about
what it was like for them to transition from being a first-year student to becoming an upper-level
student in terms of academic expectations for performance. Using hermeneutic phenomenology,
I explored the following research questions:
•

How do first-generation students describe the process of figuring out expectations for
performance within the academic domain at the undergraduate level?
o How do first-generation students describe making sense of what is expected of
them in terms of selecting a topic and satisfactorily finding, evaluating, and using
information for academic research assignments?
o How do their strategies for making sense of what is expected of them change as
they progress through their coursework?

•

How do first-generation students describe the purpose of academic research assignments
in their undergraduate academic experience?
51

For the purposes of this dissertation, a research assignment is defined as any assignment that
requires students to form an argument or develop a question about a topic and use at least three
information sources to support their argument or to answer their question. Students were asked to
limit their reflections to assignments that they completed individually when possible, rather than
assignments they completed with a partner or a small group. The phrase “doing research”
includes finding, selecting, and using information sources for a research assignment.

3.1

EPISTEMOLOGICAL AND ONTOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS

A researcher’s ontological and epistemological views influence the questions that she asks,
which, in turn, influences the research methodology selected to frame her inquiry. My personal
ontological stance in terms of social phenomena is that there can be several interpretations of or
ways of experiencing reality that can be either individual or shared. However, I do not believe
that reality is simply an ephemeral social construct; reality exists independently of our shared or
diverging interpretations of it. My epistemological stance regarding social phenomena is that the
meanings people make of their experiences can never be fully known and that these meanings
can change over time with new experiences. Despite this, I do find value in learning about how
people make meaning of their experiences, even if their reflections and interpretations of their
experiences are only partially accessible because these imperfect reflections and interpretations
help us to make sense of how individuals experience the world around them.
Critical realism is the philosophical perspective that best fits my ontological and
epistemological views as they relate to social science research. According to Maxwell (2012),
critical realists
52

retain an ontological realism (there is a real world that exists independently of our
perceptions, theories, and constructions) while accepting a form of epistemological
constructivism and relativism (our understanding of this world is inevitably a
construction from our own perspectives and standpoints). (p. 5)
Critical realism acknowledges that the researcher “is socially constructed, shaped by historically
specific discourses of culture and science” (Sprague, 2016, p. 46), and that the researcher shapes
what is known through the use of interpretive frameworks.
A critical realist perspective is compatible with the use of Lave and Wenger’s (1991)
community of practice heuristic for examining the undergraduate academic experience. The
argument framing this study is that the undergraduate academic domain has particular
sociocultural values and expectations that students decode to be successful and move from
peripheral participation to full participation within the community. Maxwell (2012) notes that
critical realists believe that “a culture is a system of individuals’ conceptual/meaningful
structures (minds) found in a given social system, and is not intrinsically shared, but participated
in; although sharing is one possible form of participation, it is not the only one” (p. 28). This
means that students do not necessarily have to feel at home within undergraduate academic
culture, but they do have to participate in the culture to be considered members in that
community. Therefore, I am not arguing that students must change their own cultural values to
be successful, but they are expected to at least demonstrate an understanding of the
undergraduate academic community’s values through certain practices, such as academic
research assignments, in order to successfully participate in that community.

53

3.2

HERMENEUTIC PHENOMENOLOGY

Hermeneutic phenomenology is a research methodology that allows the researcher to study and
interpret reflections of lived experiences and the meanings made of those experiences, in order
“to construct a possible interpretation of the nature of a certain human experience” (van Manen,
1990, p. 41). The primary purpose of phenomenology is to understand the experience of a
phenomenon, not the individuals who are experiencing that phenomenon. Hermeneutic
phenomenology combines the philosophical concept of phenomenology—understanding the
essence of phenomena or experiences—with the theory of hermeneutics—the interpretation of
texts; therefore, hermeneutic phenomenology is both descriptive and interpretative (van Manen,
1990). Hermeneutic phenomenology is descriptive, because “it wants to let things speak for
themselves” (p. 180). In other words, it seeks to fully describe, to the extent that it is possible,
the reflections of lived experience. It is interpretive, because the researcher, the participants, and
the readers of the study are all interpreting the reflective meaning made of the experience. With
this in mind, van Manen writes that the phenomenological question asks what it is like to
experience a particular phenomenon. The broad phenomenological question driving this study
asks what it is like to transition into and within the undergraduate academic domain, which is
reflected in the research questions.
Hermeneutic phenomenology requires a process of reflecting on the descriptions,
reflections, and meanings of the lived experiences of a phenomenon (i.e. the data) in order to
make “explicit the structure of meaning of the lived experience” (van Manen, 1990, p. 77) using
the epoché and the reduction. The epoché, which is sometimes referred to as bracketing, requires
the researcher to identify her assumptions, biases, and presuppositions of the phenomenon, in
order to put them aside. This suspension opens the researcher to the participants’ meanings of the
54

phenomenon, so that she may fully describe them. According to Moustakas (1994), the epoché is
a process that allows the researcher to experience a phenomenon “as if for the first time” (p. 85).
The reduction requires the researcher to draw on her own experiences with the phenomenon to
help make sense of and ultimately interpret the data and reduce it to themes (Moustakas, 1994).
The reduction and epoché are both complementary and opposing, since they simultaneously
require the researcher to both remove and insert herself into the analytic process (van Manen,
2014). The balance between these two processes allows the researcher to accomplish the
phenomenological reduction, which is to “get to the meaning structures of our experiences” of
everyday, taken-for-granted phenomena” (van Manen, 2014, p. 215).

3.3

RESEARCH SITES

Data collection for this study was conducted at two regional campuses of a public research
university located in the Mid-Atlantic. Throughout this study the campuses are referred to by
their pseudonyms—Springfield and Manchester.

3.3.1

Springfield campus

The Springfield campus is located in a former industrial city, and it recently celebrated its fiftieth
anniversary. The Springfield campus’ Carnegie Classification is Baccalaureate College: Arts &
Science Focus (Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, 2015), and the
campus offers 26 majors, 19 minors, and several relocation programs (i.e. students begin their
studies at this campus and transfer to the main campus to complete their degrees). According to
55

2013-14 IPEDS data, the campus enrolled almost 1,500 full-time undergraduate students and 100
part-time undergraduate students. The campus is exclusively undergraduate and just under half
of its students reside on campus. Almost 80% of enrolled students identify as white and fully
90% were age 24 and younger. Sixty-eight percent of students receive financial aid, and half of
students receive Pell grants. The campus’ six-year graduation rate is just over 50%, with threequarters of students being retained from the first to the second year.

3.3.2

Manchester campus

The Manchester campus is fairly remote, located a couple of hours away from a metropolitan
area. Like the Springfield campus, it also recently celebrated its fiftieth anniversary. The
Manchester campus’ Carnegie Classification is Baccalaureate Colleges: Diverse Fields (Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, 2015), and the campus offers 40 majors and
50 minors and pre-professional programs, as well as four professional master’s programs through
partnerships with the main campus. According to 2013-14 IPEDS data, the Manchester campus
enrolled almost 1,400 full-time undergraduate students and just over 100 part-time undergraduate
students, which includes students seeking both associate’s and baccalaureate degrees. Almost
three-quarters of the students identify as white, and almost 90% were age 24 or younger. Almost
90% of students received financial aid, and just under half received Pell grants. The campus’ sixyear graduation rate is just over 50%, with almost three-quarters of students being retained from
the first to the second year.

56

Table 2. Campus Characteristics

Undergraduate academic
programs
Undergraduate enrollment
% of non-white students
% of students 24 year of age
or younger
% of Pell Grant recipients
% of students retained from
first to second year
Six-year completion rate

3.3.3

Springfield
26 majors, 19 minors

Manchester
40 majors, 50 minors

1,477 full-time
101 part-time
21%
92%

1,385 full-time
114 part-time
27%
89%

52%
76%

44%
72%

53%

52%

Academic requirements

The Springfield and Manchester campuses share two academic requirements that are relevant to
the application of the community of practice heuristic for the exploration of first-generation
students’ experiences with academic research assignments. The first requirement is that students
must pass an intermediate-level college composition course that focuses on how to research,
write, and present a term paper (Manchester campus website). The Springfield campus’ website
offers a bit more description about the composition course, indicating that students will learn
how select a topic of appropriate scope; find, evaluate, and use different kinds of information
sources; synthesize those sources in such a way that the student can make an original argument;
appropriately use direct quotations, paraphrasing and summarizing; and properly use MLA
documentation to cite the information sources used in the paper. The purpose of these
intermediate-level composition courses is to introduce all students to the expectations of collegelevel academic research assignments, so they have a foundation for completing more advanced

57

academic research assignments within their major field(s) of study. Based on their high school
preparation and their abilities, students can place into the required course or they may first need
to a take a basic-level course that develops their writing and grammar skills.
The second requirement is the completion of a capstone experience or culminating
research experience. Although the requirements of the capstone experience vary from discipline
to discipline, these courses are designed such that students demonstrate their ability to develop
and complete a scholarly research project within their major field(s) of study at the
undergraduate level. The American Association of Colleges & Universities (AAC&U; n.d.)
designates the capstone experience as a high-impact educational practice that requires students to
demonstrate what they have learned. In other words, students must build on the foundation
provided in the intermediate-level college composition course to develop relevant lines of
inquiry and to apply the appropriate theories and vocabularies, research methods, and citation
standards for their discipline. In terms of moving toward full participation in the academic
community of practice, Keup (2013) notes that the capstone experience is “the last chance [for
faculty] to instill the competencies that the institution hopes they [the students] achieve.” That is
to say that the capstone experience is the last point at which the institution can ensure that
students have been socialized into their discipline and the undergraduate academic community.

3.3.4

Prevalence of academic research assignments

According to institutional reports publicly available, both the Manchester and Springfield
campuses have used a proprietary information literacy assessment instrument, the HEDS
Research Practices Survey, with first-year students and seniors. This tool not only assesses
students’ information literacy skills, but it also gathers information related to students’ research
58

experiences and behaviors. Based on data gathered through this instrument, academic research
assignments are quite common for students at these campuses both at the end of high school and
at the end of college. Both incoming first-year students and seniors were asked how many
assignments they had completed within the past year that required them to cite at least three
sources. In Fall 2014, 49 percent of incoming first-year students (n=601) at these two campuses
reported that they had completed four or more of these assignments within the past year, and
another 39 percent reported that they had to complete one to three of these assignments. In spring
2015, almost 35 percent of seniors (n=82) reported that they had to complete 10 or more of these
assignments within the past year, with an additional 41 percent reporting that they had to
complete four to nine of these assignments.

3.4

PARTICIPANT RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION

Hermeneutic phenomenology does not provide much guidance in terms of participant selection,
except that participants must be willing to discuss their experiences with the phenomenon under
exploration and that there should be some diversity among the participants in order to understand
the phenomenon from multiple perspectives (van Manen, 2002). Participants in this study
included 30 traditionally aged (i.e. 18 to 24 years old), full-time (i.e. at least 12 credit hours)
first-generation juniors and seniors 1 at the Manchester and Springfield campuses, including 18
students from the Springfield campus and 12 students from the Manchester campus.

1

Each of the campuses used the terms juniors and seniors to categorize students based on the number of credits
hours they have accumulated in the institutional data I was able to obtain, so I have chosen to retain use of these
terms in this section despite their patriarchal connotations.

59

3.4.1

Sample recruitment

I used institutional data from both campuses to identify potential participants. I negotiated
permission to access and use this data with the President and the Vice President of Academic
Affairs at the Springfield campus and with the Dean and the Associate Dean of Academic
Affairs at the Manchester campus. However, because the two campuses are structured slightly
differently, I worked with different departments at each campus to obtain the data—TRIO
Student Support Services at the Manchester campus and Institutional Research at the Springfield
campus. In addition to the names and email addresses of all juniors and seniors who are firstgeneration students, I received their date of birth, major field(s) of study, sex, and race/ethnicity.
After receiving the data, I removed students who were not of a traditional college-going age (i.e.
18 to 24 years old) and students who were not enrolled full-time.
In total, 278 students were identified as potential participants in the study—156 students
at the Manchester campus and 122 students at the Springfield campus. Using these lists, I
emailed potential participants to explain the research study, solicit interest in participation, and
inform them of the participation incentive—$25 for a completed 60-75 minute interview.
Students who expressed interest in participating were asked to answer a brief, pre-interview
questionnaire that confirmed their eligibility (i.e. first-generation status, at least 18 years of age)
and their demographic information (i.e. race, sex, major field(s) of study).
I used maximum variation sampling (Patton, 1990) to recruit the participants in service of
identifying common themes or patterns across the academic experiences of a small but
heterogeneous group of participants. According to Seidman (2009), maximum variation
sampling “should allow the widest possibility for readers of the study to connect to what they are
reading” (p. 56), because it attempts to gather a variety of perspectives related to experiencing
60

the phenomenon being studied. Three characteristics were used to recruit a heterogeneous
sample—major field(s) of study, sex, and race/ethnicity—with priority given to major field(s) of
study. For sample selection, I categorized major field(s) of study broadly as behavioral and social
sciences, biological and health sciences, communication and the arts, management and
education, and physical and computational sciences. Given the demographics of each campus, I
intended to recruit at least two non-white students from each campus, since first-generation
students, in general, are more likely to be students of color.
It is important to note that maximum variation sampling is not intended to assemble a
representative sample so that inferences or generalizations can be made about the population of
first-generation college students who are completing academic research assignments. Maximum
variation sampling enables the researcher to gather data related to a variety of experiences and
perspectives in order to craft a better interpretation and description of the phenomenon of interest
so that readers make naturalistic generalizations (Stake, 1995), in which they read the findings of
the study through the lens of their individual experiences to determine if the findings are
congruent with those experiences. In other words, maximum variation sampling helped me to get
a more complete description of how first-generation students experience the phenomenon.
In order to assemble a varied sample, I divided students into groups of 30 for email
solicitation at each campus. Each group contained six students from each of the five major
field(s) of study categories. Both males and students of color were oversampled in the initial
groups, with four of the six students in each major field of study being male, a student of color,
or both. White, female students were sorted initially by their major field(s) of study and placed
into a solicitation group using a random number generator. Students received a maximum of two
emails soliciting participation which were sent approximately one week apart. Due to a low

61

response rate among males and students of color, some Springfield students received a third
follow-up email. I sent an individual Doodle poll to each student who expressed interest in
participating in order to schedule the 60 to 75-minute interview.

3.5

PARTICIPANTS

The sample for this study includes 18 students from the Springfield campus and 12 students from
the Manchester campus. Of the 30 participants, seven students (23%) were in the Behavioral and
Social Sciences, eight (27%) were in the Biological and Health Sciences, five (17%) were in
Communication and the Arts, six (20%) were in Management and Education, two (7%) were in
Physical and Computational Sciences, and two (7%) had cross-divisional majors. Twenty of the
students identified as female and 10 identified as male. Two-thirds of the sample (20 students)
identified as white, six (20%) identified as Black/African-American, two (7%) identified as
Asian/Asian-American, one (3%) identified as Hispanic/Latina/o/x, and one (3%) identified as
Pacific Islander. The majority of the students (18 students; 60%) identified as seniors, although
one had graduated approximately one month prior to the interview.

3.6

DATA COLLECTION

Semi-structured, in-depth, one-on-one interviews are commonly used to collect data in
hermeneutic phenomenology. I used a modification of Seidman’s (2009) phenomenological
interviewing to collect data for this study. Seidman (2009) offers a three-interview approach to

62

phenomenological interviewing, which addresses the participants’ background in light of the
phenomenon being explored, their “present lived experience” (p. 21) with the phenomenon, and
then asks the participants to reflect on the meaning of their experiences with the phenomenon.
According to Seidman, the focus on describing past and present experiences helps the
participants to reflect on the meaning of those experiences.
Rather than conducting three separate interviews with each participant, I used Seidman’s
(2009) three-interview approach to structure an open-ended, semi-structured interview protocol
for a single 60 to 75-minute interview with each participant (see Appendix A). In addition to
asking participants to describe their experiences in transitioning from high-school to collegelevel coursework, I also asked each participant to describe their first experiences with completing
a college-level research assignment, including what they remembered about figuring out what
they were expected to do, what strategies they used to develop their topics and to find and
evaluate information to use in the assignment, and what feedback they received on the
assignment. Using similar questions, each participant was then asked to describe their most
recent experience with a research assignment within their major field(s) of study. Participants
were asked to describe their understanding of what it takes to be a successful college student;
how their confidence in completing academic research assignments had changed, if at all; how
their strategies for figuring out what the expectations for performance had changed; and what
role they believe academic research assignments played in their undergraduate education.
To understand the participants and their college experiences, I asked them to fill out a
brief questionnaire at the end of the interview (see Appendix B). In addition to questions about
demographic information, they were asked if they transferred to that campus from a different
school; if they lived or had lived on campus; and if they worked, including how many hours a

63

week. First-generation students are more likely to start their collegiate careers at two-year
colleges (Choy, 2001; Horn & Nunez, 2000; Nunez & Cuccaro-Alamin, 1998). Transferring
from another institution could influence the introduction to college-level research and writing
that students received. Twenty-seven percent of the participants in the study transferred into the
Manchester or Springfield campus. The number of hours that students work is negatively related
to students’ GPAs (Astin, 1993) and could influence how much time students spend engaging in
academic activities. Eighty-three percent of the participants reported working; almost 50% of the
sample reported working between five and 20 hours a week and 33% of the sample reported
working more than 20 hours a week. DeAngelo (2014) found that living on campus had
significant implications for academic engagement outside of the classroom, such as discussing
coursework and content with peers, which had a relationship with persistence from the first year
to the second. Fifty percent of the sample reported that they had always lived on campus. Only
10% of the sample reported that they never lived on campus.
I recorded each interview using my laptop and saved each audio recording to an external
hard drive for long-term storage. A professional transcription service was used to transcribe the
interview recordings for analysis.

3.7

DATA ANALYSIS

In hermeneutic phenomenology, the reduction and epoché are critical components of analyzing
and interpreting the data in order to develop phenomenological descriptions (van Manen, 1990,
2014). The epoché and reduction were addressed in two ways, one of which is journaling. I kept
a journal throughout the study, particularly during data collection and the initial phases of data
64

analysis, in which the first entry identified my own experiences with research assignments as a
student and as a practitioner in order to bracket them as I began identifying potential themes and
coding the data. I also used the journal to record my reflections and reactions to the students’
interviews in order to keep them separate from the data collected but to keep these reflections
and reactions available as I analyzed and interpreted the data. Journaling served both the epoché
and the reduction, since it allowed me to keep my own beliefs separate from those of the
participants’ but also made them available for data analysis and interpretation.
Memo writing is the second way in which I addressed the epoché and reduction. van
Manen (2014) offers several genres of memo-writing appropriate for phenomenological studies,
of which I used the experiential and thematic genres. In the experiential memos, I constructed a
narrative of each of the participants’ experiences transitioning into and within the undergraduate
academic community based on the audio recording of the interview. The purpose of these
experiential memos was to transform the interview data into a coherent narrative describing each
of the participants’ reflections on their experiences. These memos helped me to be open to the
participants’ lived experiences and aided in the process of identifying themes that cut across
multiple interviews that could be used for the first phase of coding.
Thematic memos complement experiential memos, in that they are meant to identify and
expand on themes that the researcher detects in the experiential narrative (van Manen, 2014).
The content of the thematic memos helped me to address the overall phenomenological
reduction—interpreting the participants’ experiences with the phenomenon and making meaning
structures of their experiences—and were the initial intersection of the epoché and reduction.
Thematic memos were used to explore patterns, themes, or categories that emerge from the data
and how these patterns, themes, or categories intersect with my own experiences and beliefs, as

65

well as what is known about first-generation students, the undergraduate academic domain, and
academic research assignments from existing research. These thematic memos served as the
foundation for the final interpretive analysis that is presented in this dissertation.

3.7.1

Analytic process

The analytic process began during the data collection phase, in which I recorded my observations
and reactions immediately following each interview, so these thoughts could be bracketed as I
returned to the data to write experiential memos and code interview transcripts. Before receiving
the interview transcripts, I listened to each interview and wrote an experiential memo for each
participant. In these memos, I constructed a coherent narrative of each student’s experience
transitioning into and within the undergraduate academic domain. Although my construction of
narrative is inherently interpretative, I attempted for this to reflect the students’ experiences as
conveyed in the interviews without inserting my own interpretive observations. After writing all
30 experiential memos, I sent each student the narrative that I had constructed for feedback.
As I constructed the experiential memos, I began to record themes that were emerging to
be used for an initial round of coding. In total, I identified 18 codes, including themes related to
the study’s research questions and conceptual framework and themes that emerged from the
interviews, for the initial round of coding. Using Microsoft Word and Excel, I read through each
interview transcript and applied these preliminary codes to the transcripts and copying and
pasting portions of the transcripts into an Excel spreadsheet. After coding each transcript, I
returned to the Excel spreadsheet and read the passages for each of the 18 codes. At this point, I
identified salient themes to create a more detailed coding schema for a second round of analysis.
At this point, I identified 171 codes. I used Dedoose, a web-based application, to facilitate the
66

second round of coding. In addition, I created several descriptors that were applied to each
transcript, such as campus, academic standing, mother education, and capstone status, to
facilitate analysis by participants’ individual demographic information and characteriscs with
specific codes.
For the second round of coding, I uploaded each of the transcripts into the Dedoose and
applied the codes to each of the 30 transcripts. Similar to the first round of coding, I did this
passage by passage, rather than line by line, so I would have the full context of a participants’
statement readily available when conducting a more fine-grained analysis. To best facilitate the
second round of coding, I grouped the transcripts into six groups—Black/African-American
students, non-black students of color, white male students, white female Manchester students,
and white female Springfield students. During the second round of coding, I continued to write
thematic memos, and when I completed the second round of coding for each group identified
above, I wrote memos for that group of students based on the study’s research questions. After
writing these thematic memos, I began to map the relationship(s) between the emergent themes
and connected these themes to the study’s conceptual framework, which provided the foundation
for the findings presented in the next chapter. To facilitate this, I examined passages with
specific codes to explore potential patterns or categories that emerged across several participants’
descriptions and reflections. I also used the “analyze” feature in Dedoose to identify interesting
code co-occurrences, such as “topic selection” and “prior knowledge,” or codes that were applied
to participants with a specific characteristic, such as “prior knowledge” [code] and “self-reported
race/ethnicity” [descriptor]. I used Dedoose to help identify representative participant quotations
to provide examples of the emergent themes.

67

3.8

TRUSTWORTHINESS

I used member checks to ensure the trustworthiness of this study. Conducting member checks, or
respondent validation, is a common method used to solicit feedback on initial findings or
interpretations from participants (Merriam, 2009). In terms of hermeneutic phenomenology and
data analysis, member checks are related to the epoché, in that they help to ensure that I am
suspending judgement based on my own experiences and biases. Each participant was asked to
review the experiential memo for their individual interview and invited to comment on my
understanding of their experience. In addition to providing verification that I did not
misunderstand or misinterpret their experiences, this was also an opportunity to provide more
detail about their experiences, if necessary. Eight participants (27%) responded to my email
invitation to provide feedback, each affirming that the experiential memo I had constructed was
representative of their experience.
As mentioned previously, I kept a journal throughout data collection and initial analysis,
in particular, in which I described my reactions and thoughts to the research process. I also
reflected on how my own experiences and assumptions might influence how I made sense of the
descriptions and interpretations of the participants. Reflexivity on the part of the researcher is
particularly important in qualitative research, since the researcher is the primary instrument for
collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data. This journal was helpful for maintaining the balance
between the epoché and reduction required in hermeneutic phenomenology.

68

3.8.1

Confidentiality

I assigned a pseudonym to each of the participants and was careful to select quotations that likely
would not reveal the identity of a particular student, as participants might not feel comfortable
speaking freely or honestly about their experiences if they believe they could be identified.
Participants’ honesty was critical to exploring their experiences with academic research
assignments. Data and documentation that contains the names of the participants has been
maintained in secure locations—print materials are locked in a cabinet in my office and
electronic materials are password-protected and saved in Box, a secure, online file storage
product provided through the University.

3.9

REFLEXIVITY

One hallmark of qualitative research is that the researcher is often the primary data-collection
and data-analysis instrument, which can be both a strength and a weakness of qualitative studies.
Critical realism recognizes that the researcher is shaped by sociocultural discourses, which
means that she likely brings her individual experiences and prejudices into the design of the
study as well as the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. Hermeneutic phenomenology
requires the researcher to put aside her experiences and prejudices, as much as is possible, as
well as incorporate them into the phenomenological description.
I attended a highly respected, private, four-year liberal arts college as a traditionally aged,
full-time, middle-class, continuing-generation student. Although my mother never attended
college and my father completed college in his late thirties, I was raised in such a way that
69

attaining a college degree was never questioned. At that time, I took for granted the socialization
that I had received from my parents and from my peers at a wealthier, predominantly white high
school with a high college-going rate. However, within the past several years, I witnessed my
significant other enroll and complete a degree at the local community college as non-traditionally
aged, part-time, low-SES, first-generation college student. Growing up in a low-SES and
working class family, he was encouraged to learn a trade and attended the local vocational high
school to study auto body repair. Going to college was not encouraged, as it was not viewed as
an opportunity for a prosperous career, and was not really thought of as a realistic option. During
this time, it became abundantly clear to me that family background affects students’ collegiate
experiences. My partner did not have access to information that I took for granted as a college
student, such as information about applying for financial aid, completing general education
requirements, and selecting a major field of study. Witnessing the differences in our experiences
is what provided the inspiration for this research study.
I have been an academic librarian who serves primarily undergraduate students for a
decade, which means that my work regularly involves thinking about how to help undergraduate
students develop in terms of information literacy. I do believe there are specific skills and
attitudes related to information consumption and use that students need to cultivate for their
academic endeavors, for their personal life (e.g. researching health information), and for
participating in the nation’s democracy as a citizen. As an academic librarian, I value curiosity
and inquisitiveness that is coupled with a critical and contemplative disposition and seek to help
students cultivate these characteristics. However, I also believe that academic research
assignments can be alienating for many students, since I often witness a gap between what the
faculty think students should be able to do and students’ understanding of the expectations of

70

academic culture (e.g. Leckie, 1996; Valentine, 2001). Therefore, I strive in my work with
undergraduate students to help make academic culture more transparent, so that students can feel
more comfortable operating in a world that might seem foreign to them.

3.10

RECIPROCITY

Administrators at both the Manchester and Springfield campuses remarked that the findings of
this study should be useful to their campuses in learning more about the academic experiences of
students who could be marginalized based on their parents’ educational attainment and economic
situation. I intend to write up an executive summary of the findings for each of the campuses and
offer to meet with interested stakeholders about the findings of this study. In addition, I will
provide them with recommendations for practice based on the findings.

3.11

LIMITATIONS

Although this study did not seek to recruit a sample that was representative of the entire firstgeneration student population, the demographics of the Manchester and Springfield campuses
present a limitation. Nationally first-generation students tend to be more diverse in terms of
race/ethnicity; however, the Manchester and Springfield student bodies are predominantly white
(73% and 79%, respectively). Despite this, the sampling strategy I employed resulted in
overrepresentation for students of color. Students of color made up 24% of the eligible

71

participant pool. Of the participants in the study, 33% identified as students of color, which is
aligned more with national trends.
My former professional role at one of the two campuses included in this study might also
present a limitation. I was a librarian at one of the two campuses for six years, including during
the data collection phase for this study, and helped many students with their research
assignments through formal or informal teaching activities. While my teaching role diminished
over time, the participants located at that campus may have worked with me as first- and secondyear students. This means that they might have chosen to participate in the study based on
previous interactions with me or they may not have felt they could be entirely honest during the
interview (i.e. the assumption that there is a correct way to answer the questions). The fact that I
took a job with different responsibilities at a new institution during the data analysis phase meant
that I was no longer immersed in the daily life and culture of that campus. These new
responsibilities in a new environment may have shaped the ways in which I interpreted and made
meaning of the data.

72

4.0

FINDINGS

In this chapter, I report the findings that emerged from the data collected in the participants’
interviews and relate them to the conceptual framework previously described. Themes emerged
from the data related to four key areas. First, students perceived their initial positionality within
the community differently based on their success in applying the skills and strategies they had
developed in high school to their new college environment. Second, students’ perceptions of
their initial positionality within the community were related to the nature and frequency of early
interactions with faculty and the development of an academic support network. Third, when
given the opportunity to do so, students used their prior knowledge, lived experiences, interests,
and identities to select topics for their research assignments. Finally, many students seemed to
employ the same checklist approach to evaluating and using information in research assignments
they learned in high school throughout their college career; only a few students demonstrated the
development of the more critical, reflective, and analytical modes of thinking related to
information literacy. In the sections below, I report the themes related to each of the four key
areas.

73

4.1

ENTERING THE COMMUNITY

The participants in this study, all of whom were in at least their third year of college at the time
of the interviews, described and reflected on their experiences transitioning into the
undergraduate academic community as first-year students. Two themes emerged related to how
these first-generation students positioned themselves within their new community, and their
success in applying the skills and strategies they had developed in high school to their new
environment shaped their perceptions of this process. Just over one-third of the participants
shared that they did not believe their high school experiences had prepared them for college-level
academic work; the remaining students reported either feeling fully or mostly prepared for
college. Students who felt prepared described perceiving themselves as insiders within the new
community, even in their first year, while students who felt underprepared seemed more aware of
their peripheral status in the community. The conceptual framework positions first-year students
as legitimate peripheral participants in the undergraduate community of practice. Although most
of the participants viewed themselves as legitimate within the new community, some students’
transition experiences were characterized more by their perceived legitimacy in the community
and other students’ transition experiences were characterized more by their perceived
peripherality in the new community.

4.1.1

Feelings of peripherality

As they reflected upon their transition into college, the reflections of students who felt they were
underprepared for college were characterized by feelings of peripherality. In chapter two,
peripherality is defined as being an outsider in terms of the new community’s cultural values and
74

practices, meaning that expectations for participation in the community may be tacit to new
participants. With one exception, students who perceived their peripherality within the
community felt they were legitimate members of the new community, but as they reflected on
these experiences, they shared that they did not have the knowledge they needed to meet their
professors’ expectations when they first arrived at college, despite having been successful
academically in high school. Emily’s experience with her first college-level chemistry course is
representative of this. She reflected,
I did have some issues with classes. They were a lot more difficult than high school. I
went to [local school district], which is one of the better high schools academic-wise. I
took AP [Advanced Placement] chemistry. I failed my first chemistry class.
Sydney also reported failing a class when she first arrived at college, sharing, “Failing a test, you
just can’t do, especially whenever you’re graded on three tests as semester. Failing a class and
realization you have to change your ways helped myself.” As Sydney’s reflection indicates,
learning how to successfully participate in the community was a trial-and-error process. Despite
having been academically successful in high school, the students who perceived their
peripherality felt unprepared to meet the expectations of college-level academic work. This
generated a feeling of being outsiders, or peripheral participants, in their new community.
Research assignments were particularly a source of anxiety. All but one of the
participants had completed research assignments in high school; however, students who felt
peripheral described college-level research assignments as “daunting,” “tedious,” “intimidating,”
“a big struggle,” and “overwhelming.” They applied the skills and strategies that they
successfully used in high school, but reported struggling to meet their professors’ expectations.
For example, Emily had been accused of plagiarism on the scientific paper she wrote for her

75

introductory biology laboratory course. She reflected, “It’s just it was new and hard, and
apparently, I didn’t know what I was doing.” She said,
I think it was just in high school, we were taught if you wanna take a sentence exactly,
you just use the quotations and cite it behind it. Well, they didn’t want that. They want
you to put it in your own words, but you still have to cite it.
Similar to other students who positioned themselves at the periphery, Emily applied the skills
and strategies she had successfully used to complete high school research assignments when she
first arrived at college. She felt this paper was the best paper she had ever written and was
“proud” of herself, so she was “heartbroken” to learn that she had plagiarized. Other students
described similar experiences. They had worked hard to meet their professors’ expectations for
performance but fell short.
Victoria also encountered a shift in expectations related to acceptable conventions for
writing papers, though her professor was explicit about her expectations. She said,
[My composition professor] did tell us, “Don’t say words verbatim.” When you write
your conclusion, and your intro paragraphs, you’re not supposed to pull sentences
directly out of your body paragraphs, and put them in a conclusion, and just be like, “I’m
done.” That’s what’s taught in high school, so that was a lot different.
Similarly, Kimberly shared, “We didn’t have to do index citations in high school…. I mean, I
guess I would have but you didn’t have to, back then.” Even though she may have been exposed
to citation styles in high school, Kimberly was able to be successful without having practiced or
mastering this skill, one that would be necessary in college.
Students who initially perceived their peripherality in the community could upon
reflection articulate the ways in which their high school experiences did not provide them with

76

the knowledge of the undergraduate academic community’s expectations for participation, which
they learned through a process of trial and error.

4.1.2

Feeling like an insider

Whereas students who reported that they were underprepared for college felt peripheral in the
course of their transition experiences, those who reported feeling prepared described relatively
smooth transitions into the academic community. They felt like insiders despite being new
members of the community. These students effectively leveraged the strategies and skills they
developed in high school for success in their college-level academic work. They considered the
college environment to be similar to their high school environment. For example, James
explained,
My high school, they tried to make it like college…. I had exams, all that stuff. I knew
what I was expecting, what college was like. I thought it was pretty similar to what they
tried to make me do in high school. High school was a smaller scale of it, but it wasn’t
really difficult for me at all.
At the same time, for students who felt prepared, differences were welcome. Alexis valued the
independence she had in college. She reflected,
Whereas in high school, they kind of would take you every step of the way, which, for
me, was super annoying…it’s just too slow for me to go step-by-step and do research in
the library this class period and the next class period. That’s not how I work.
Alexis appreciated that she could learn at a pace that was comfortable for her. Jade agreed. As
she said,

77

I think the classroom environment’s different [in college], just cuz a lot of the times it’s
more student-led. There’s not as much structure. I think that’s nice.… I think the fact that
you don’t necessarily have to raise your hand to contribute in class. You don’t have [to]
get permission to go to the bathroom.
Students like Alexis and Jade appreciated the opportunity to take an agentic role in their learning.
The sense of being prepared gave them confidence to see independence more as an opportunity
than as a challenge.
Research assignments completed early in college did not induce anxiety in students who
felt like insiders. They reported that college-level research assignments were of a different
“magnitude,” but the skills and the strategies they had developed in high school enabled them to
meet their professors’ expectations for performance on these assignments. For example, Michelle
shared, “My high school did go over thoroughly how you cite the works cited page, and do
everything correctly as far as that. It wasn’t much different, in my opinion, when I came here.”
Because their experiences with research assignments when they first got to college validated
their preparation for college, the descriptions that students who positioned themselves as insiders
shared about their feelings towards these assignments were relatively neutral. James said, “It
[research assignments] wasn’t really difficult for me at all,” and Malik said that it “wasn’t
anything too difficult for me or too out of the ordinary of my comfort zone.” Josh described both
assignments and the process as “familiar,” saying he knew he just had to “keep going and push
through to get it done.” For students who positioned themselves as insiders, early college
research assignments seemed like a continuation of what they were expected to do in high
school, which made their experiences with early college-level research assignments fairly
unremarkable.

78

Students who felt like insiders emphasized that they felt prepared to find trustworthy and
reliable information through library resources. Almost all of the students who explicitly reported
using article databases in high school were students who positioned themselves as insiders.
While the quantity and sophistication of the databases that students had access to increased in
college, the experience of using databases in high school helped them to acclimate to this new
environment. For example, based on his experience using article databases in high school,
Matthew reported using science databases to find articles when he was working on an honors
biology project in his first year of college. Even though he only had access to four databases in
high school, he knew that he could translate his high school experience with databases to finding
appropriate information sources in the expanded offering of databases for this research project.
Laila shared that when she was working on an honors sociology project in her first year of
college, she went to the library website and thought, “Databases. Oh, this helps. Oh, I remember
what I did [in high school].” She found that the college library had a database she had used
extensively in high school and she was able to use it again. These students recognized that their
information environment was different, but they felt confident because of their experiences in
high school.
Whether students could apply the strategies they used in high school was related to how
they retrospectively described their academic transition experiences and their positionality within
the new college community. Research assignments in particular separated those who felt
prepared from those who felt they were missing critical pieces of information about their
professors’ expectations for academic participation. Students who felt peripheral gained this
knowledge through a trial and error process. As the next section outlines, feeling peripheral also

79

made it difficult to build social capital at college in the way that students who felt like insiders
did not experience.

4.2

BUILDING SOCIAL CAPITAL IN THE COMMUNITY

This section will discuss two aspects of study participants’ social capital building: connecting
with professors and the role of the college major in providing a context for social capital building
with both faculty and peers. A student’s perceived positionality seemed to be related to their
approach to interacting with faculty. Students who positioned themselves as insiders reported
reaching out to their professors to help fill knowledge gaps and to begin acquiring social capital
when they first arrived at college. However, students who perceived their peripherality were less
likely to reach out to their faculty early in their college careers, sharing that they were unaware
that this was available to them or being too intimidated by the status of their professors to initiate
an interaction. Regardless of how they perceived their initial position within the community,
students indicated that their college major(s) provided them a home within the undergraduate
academic community in which they began to develop, and in some cases deepen, relationships
with their professors. Although students who perceived their peripherality in the new community
demonstrated the benefits of these relationships, only students who positioned themselves as
insiders described the development of mentoring relationships that provided opportunities for
higher levels of achievement.

80

4.2.1

Early interactions with faculty

The analysis of the data suggests that the way in which students perceived their position in the
new community was related to the frequency and nature of early interactions with faculty.
Feelings of intimidation were reported by students who felt peripheral and students who felt like
insiders. However, students who felt like insiders were able to overcome those feelings, which
was not evident in most of the experiences of students who perceived their peripherality within
the new community. Students who positioned themselves as insiders reported reaching out to
their professors for help more frequently and met with professors face to face, whereas students
who felt peripheral were more likely to use email if they contacted their professors at all.
Students who perceived their peripherality became more comfortable interacting with faculty
through required interactions in lower-level general education courses, such as college
composition courses.

4.2.1.1 Students who positioned themselves as insiders
Students who positioned themselves as insiders in the new community, for the most part,
reported reaching out to and interacting with faculty early in their college careers. Although they
may not have felt entirely comfortable interacting with their professors, these students seemed to
know that making an effort to interact with their professors would help them to be successful in
their new community. For example, Alexis thought that some of her professors “were a lot
scarier than her [high school] honors teachers,” but she reached out to them and met with them in
office hours nonetheless. She and other students who felt like insiders recounted cues given on
campus tours, in the classroom, or on syllabi that indicated that professors were willing to

81

interact with them. They saw such interactions as a key way to address knowledge gaps and to
establish their reputations as good students.
Some of the students who positioned themselves as insiders shared how they knew that
they could and should reach out to their professors. In addition to statements in syllabi about how
to reach out for help, Matthew said that this was covered in his campus tour. He shared, “Then
when you take a tour of the school, they show you how they have the office hours pinned to [the
professor’s] door. That helped a lot. That really helped.” Despite this, Matthew still felt like he
was bothering his professors in seeking their help when he first got to college. Yet when he
expressed this, “[My professors] were like, ‘This is my job. I love doin’ this. This is what I
studied for.’ After that, then that reaffirmed everything. I was okay with doin’ it.” Similarly,
Brooke shared, “For chemistry, as long as—any time during his office hours, he said that we
could go in and [get] help—and he would help me with five or six problems. He didn’t mind, I
don’t think.” Alexis said that her professors created an environment that suggested the faculty
wanted students to reach out to them. She said, “They made it open that you can come talk to
them. You can ask questions…I kind of felt like okay, if you’re telling me to do it, then I’m
gonna do it.” Both outright statements of willingness to help and positive responses confirmed
that these kinds of interactions were both normal and encouraged.
When students who felt prepared for college encountered knowledge gaps, they sought
help from their professors. For example, Laila said that she had minimal experience with
microscope slides in high school and that she found it challenging. “I kept going to [my biology
professor’s] office to try to figure out ways that I could do better,” she explained. Garrett saw
visiting office hours as an easier alternative than continuing to try and decipher his biology
textbook. He shared,

82

It's harder to read about that particular topic than it would be to just ask the professor and
be, like, hey, this is what I’m doing, but it doesn’t seem to be working. [The professor]
can tweak a little thing in your steps and, my God, I got it fixed.
Students who positioned themselves as insiders seemed to understand that they may need help as
they encountered new or more complex content in their courses and they should reach out for
help when they needed it.
While all of the students who interacted with faculty were building social capital, some
who felt like insiders did so strategically. For example, Alexis explained, “If I didn’t understand
something. I would just go ask. Obviously, professors like their students that actually cared about
their grades. That’s what helped me establish a little bit of myself.” Laila shared a similar
sentiment: “I think [my professors] were happy that I did ask and not just…be concerned about it
but tried to do better. It showed that I cared.” Both Alexis and Laila reached out to their
professors to address a knowledge gap, but they were aware of the goodwill they were generating
with their professors. Matthew was even more systematic about it:
The biggest thing I did was go to college professors’ office hours. I would just sit with
each one for an hour. Just every class. I think I was taking five classes in my first
semester. I [would] go to each office hour for an hour every time they had one.
Although he reported getting help during these interactions, filling knowledge gaps seemed to be
secondary to relationship building. In these ways, some of the students who positioned
themselves as insiders in the new community used interactions with faculty early in their college
careers to build their academic support network and establish their reputations as good students.

83

4.2.1.2 Students who felt peripheral
Like students who felt like insiders, students who felt peripheral were intimidated by professors;
however, they were more hesitant to reach out to or interact with their professors when they first
got to college. For example, Emily said, “Sometimes it’s actually a little scary. I don’t know why
it was scary to go and talk to your professor, versus my high school teachers…. They were
professors, like doctors. That was very intimidating.” A couple of these students indicated that
they did reach out to their professors for help, but they reported using email as the method of
communication, rather than the face-to-face interactions that students who positioned themselves
as insiders seemed to prefer. For example, Sydney reflected, “In high school…I was able to ask
questions face to face. College is definitely all emails.” For the rest of the students who
perceived their peripherality, some of them did not know that their professors were there to help
them outside of the classroom and expected students to reach out to them. Others were simply
uncomfortable interacting with professors because of professors’ educational attainment and
professional status, as demonstrated in Emily’s quote.
A few of the other students who perceived their peripherality reported avoiding
interactions with professors due to their position as peripheral participants in the community.
These students were intimidated by the fact that they were new to the community or by
professors’ educational attainment and professional status. Marissa spoke explicitly about the
signals of her professors’ attainment and status:
My roommates and I always made a joke that if anyone of this campus is called doctor,
you feel twice [as] intimated by that, because they correct you. With good reason. You
worked for it. You want to be called by that.

84

Emily, on the other hand, pointed specifically to her professors’ professional attainment as it
related to her own status in the community. She shared,
I wasn’t used to being around people who had—like my one professor, he worked for
NASA and stuff like that. You were afraid to ask a stupid question, because they seemed
so much more set in their life. You’re still tryin’ to figure things out.
In these examples, students perceived the difference in status between them, as peripheral
members of the community, and their professors.
A few of the students who perceived their peripherality were not aware that they could
and should reach out to their professors for help or to ask questions; they were not aware that
students’ success mattered to professors. Cheyenne, who transferred to Springfield, interpreted
the behavior of her professors at the local community college to mean that they did not want
their students to ask for help. She said, “I felt like the teachers there didn’t really care. You were
just another face in their classroom, and they were just trying to get by.” Cheyenne brought this
interpretation with her when she transferred to the Springfield campus and continued to avoid
interacting with professors. Dylan, however, was an exception. He noted, office hours are key in
college…. I didn’t know that when I first came, but as the semester went on, I really utilized that
if I really needed anything.” After learning from his peers that he could reach out to his
professors, he became aware that his professors wanted to support him. He continued, “They’re
here to help us. They’re not here to fail us, just wanna watch us burn. They’re here to help.
They’re here to teach you, so they will answer anything.” Both of these examples demonstrate
how some students who felt peripheral were unaware that they could and should reach out to
their professors when they first arrived at college.

85

Required interactions, particularly in general education courses, were important for
teaching peripheral students that they were expected to reach out to and interact with their
professors. It was common for lower-level courses in college composition and public speaking to
require students to meet with their professors or other learning support staff as they developed
their projects, whether they were comfortable doing so or not. For example, the Manchester
campus requires students enrolled in composition courses to visit the campus writing center at
least once during the research process. Madison initially thought this requirement was to benefit
her professor, “so she wasn’t reading completely botched essays and everything from
everybody.” However, she soon realized the benefits she received from this support. She
explained, “It helped a lot in my English 1 class, so I figured it would still help in English 2.”
Once Madison had experienced the support of professors and tutors in the writing center through
her course requirement, she sought out this help again. Gabrielle also shared that the requirement
to go to the writing center helped her to develop supportive relationships with professors. She
shared, “That was the biggest thing, go to the Writing Center, because that’s my biggest help…. I
met my next professor [a professor from which she subsequently took a class] in there because I
went in there so many times.” For students who felt peripheral, these kinds of required
interactions, either with faculty or academic support staff, demonstrated that they could and
should build an academic support network to help them be successful in their new community.

4.2.2

The role of the college major

More than half the students in both groups mentioned without prompting that selecting a major
had given them access to a smaller community. Students who felt peripheral in the college
community felt a sense of belonging in this community. Whereas early experiences with
86

interacting with professors—or avoiding interactions with professors—sharply distinguished
students who felt peripheral from those who felt like insiders, students’ comments about the
community they built around their major did not show these distinctions. For example, Lauren,
who felt like an insider, shared,
Manchester [is] very good at—because it’s so small, we all have our own little
community, especially once you get into your classes and the major. You know
everybody…You know each other, and we kind of—you build your own family that way,
too, I guess.
Jesse, who felt peripheral, said that in his major, performing arts,
We’re just very small, so we can be personal on that level. We go to Dr. Jones’ house
every year and have a performing arts gathering to talk about what’s going on in the
performing arts area. We’ve just all grew very close together just through experiences
like that.
While Lauren felt like an insider and Jesse felt peripheral, they had similar feelings about the
roles of their college major in helping them establish a major.
In their major(s), students felt that professors wanted to get to know them as a person, not
simply as a student enrolled in a course. Lauren describes this duality, sharing,
It’s not like a, “I’m on this side of the desk. You’re on this side.” It’s more of a let’s learn
together type thing… We’ll go sit in their offices and just talk to them. It has nothing to
do with class or school or grad school or anything else. You go just go like, “Hey, how’s
life. What you doin’?” You know them more as just like, “Oh, that’s the guy that talks to
me for 50 minutes every day.”

87

Similarly Dylan shared, “My advisor for my major, ‘cause I’m a broadcast major. He’s a pretty
open person. We joke around with him all the time.” Alexis said that her faculty advisor:
knows everything that goes on in my life, just because I’ve had him since my freshman
year. Like I just got a dog in August. He’ll be like, “Oh, how’s [Bingo]? I’m like, “Oh,
he’s great.” It’s just like I finally built up to that.
Alexis valued the trusting relationship she was able to establish over time. While Jasmine, who
felt peripheral, had not known the professors she built a relationship with quite as long as Alexis,
majoring gave her the opportunity to take multiple classes with the same professors: “I start[ed]
having the same three professors. Those are the professors that I'm actually close with, and we
have a type of relationship outside.” Gabrielle, who felt herself peripheral, only discovered that
faculty were invested in her success after she declared her major. She shared, “It was like, ….
‘You’re gonna go to grad school, right?’ It’s not like you’re asking me. It’s like you’re telling
me, ‘You’re gonna go to grad school.’” Regardless of their initial positionality, being part of this
smaller community helped students to move from supportive interactions to building
relationships with their professors.

4.2.3

Benefitting from accumulated social capital

In general, students accrued benefits from the social capital they accumulated through
interactions with faculty. However, the two groups benefited differently. Students who initially
felt peripheral experienced feelings of increased confidence and a shift to feeling more like
insiders within the community. Some of the students who initially positioned themselves as
insiders benefited from the development of mentoring relationships and additional opportunities
for achievement.
88

4.2.3.1 Students who felt peripheral
Students who had felt peripheral reported turning to their professors more often for support after
they learned through their major that they could and should. For example, Elizabeth said that she
“didn’t wanna be like that kid that the teacher bothered all the time,” when she first got to
college. However, as she developed a relationship with her faculty advisor her feelings changed
and she reported reaching out to him to better understand his expectations. Elizabeth shared,
I remember I stayed after class a lot to talk to [my professor]…and I was like, “Okay.
Hate crimes is my topic, but there’s so much on it. Can I just focus on this and this?”
Then, we talked about if I limited my research, the pros and cons, basically, and how
comprehensive my paper and my presentation would be. I think that helped out a lot as
far as knowing his expectations. Then, I could go off of, okay, well, [my professor] said I
could do these two topics and just make sure I covered this, this, and this within each.
Jasmine demonstrated a similar shift as she became comfortable with the faculty in her
major and felt more like an insider in the community. Similar to Elizabeth, Jasmine reported that
she initially avoided interactions with faculty. As she was working on her capstone project,
Jasmine reached out to her professor for help preparing for interviews for her capstone project
and her professor’s support made the difference: “I felt real professional [doing the interviews],”
she explained. This suggests that Jasmine felt differently in a positive way about the work that
she was producing, because the supportive interactions with her professor helped her to
understand how to behave as a professional within the field. Indeed, Jasmine shared that after
completing the capstone experience, “you just feel like a real adult.” These examples
demonstrate the shift that students who initially positioned themselves at the periphery of the
community experience in terms of their academic work and their identities as they began to feel

89

more like insiders within the community. These supportive interactions with faculty resulted in
increased confidence, as is evident in quotes from Elizabeth and Jasmine, because students had a
better understanding of how to productively channel their effort so their work would lead them to
success.
The negative feelings students had toward research assignments when they first arrived at
college had begun to shift for students who felt peripheral. Not only did this mean that their
feelings were more similar to those students who felt like insiders had from the beginning; it also
made them feel more like insiders themselves. Cheyenne, for example, had gone from
considering research assignments a “big struggle” to feeling “like a breeze” at the end of her
capstone experience. She attributed this shift to her interactions with her professor:
The meetings that I had with [a professor in her major] really did help me at least get a
grasp of public policy and my topic. She really did break it down and talk it out and
everything…. She took the time out of her day to discuss the different topics with us.
The investment of her professor’s time was meaningful to Cheyenne as a signal that the
professor was invested in Cheyenne’s success on the assignment. This experience, which a few
other students who felt peripheral shared, suggests that negative experiences with research
assignments early in a student’s college career do not have to tarnish their experiences with
future research assignments. Seeing their professors as supportive partners in the learning
process made all the difference.

4.2.3.2 Students who felt like insiders
About half of the students who initially positioned themselves as insiders had either completed or
were working on their capstone projects at the time of their interview. Half of those students
were able to leverage the social capital they had accumulated into opportunities for mentoring
90

and higher levels of achievement. The other students who had initially felt like insiders and had
completed or were working on their capstone experience did not seem to have access to these
opportunities for mentoring or higher levels of achievement, either because of the absence of a
relationship with their capstone professor or the perception that the capstone experience was not
as relevant to their future careers.
Laila, Alexis, and Brooke were able to leverage the social capital they had accumulated
with faculty in their major to access opportunities for mentoring and higher levels of
achievement. In Laila’s case, this meant that she got to work on her capstone professor’s
research project for her capstone experience. Laila had not known much about the focus of her
professor’s research but her capstone professor invited her to work on inhibitors, describing Laila
as one of her “best students.” Laila was happy to agree, and she explained “If you ever wanna
publish a paper or even in graduate school, that looks good on your resume.” Alexis had
developed a close relationship with her faculty advisor, which resulted in a personal investment
in helping her to develop a capstone topic that she would find both interesting and useful. She
said, “Just because if this does work, I have a possible chance of being published as an
undergrad. Yeah, so that was something that he had to put on the table.” Similarly, Brooke’s
advisor pushed her to present her capstone work at a professional conference, because it would
be a good experience for her. “He told me and my friend that he doesn’t care if we win, he just
wants us to go to get the experience of presenting in front of people.” She said that giving the
presentation made her feel like an expert in her capstone topic, because the other conference
attendees, including other professors, “know a lot of the microbiology techniques and stuff, but
they didn’t know about the specific topic that I’ve been working on.” Students who had felt
themselves peripheral did not gain such opportunities through the capstone project. Thus

91

although they gained confidence from the process they were behind those who had felt
themselves to be insiders in the community from the start.
Jade, James, and Josh were also working on their capstone projects at the time of the
interview, but had not reaped the same potential benefits as Laila, Alexis, and Brooke. Although
Jade reported being keenly interested in her capstone project’s topic, she did not feel that she had
developed a relationship, a connection, or even rapport, with her capstone professor. Jade
reported feeling “frustrated” with her capstone experience, because her professor did not provide
the students in her class with a lot of structure, including regular milestone assignments and
check-ins. She shared, “We can always go ask for help, but we’re self-guided… I feel like it’s
not very helpful. I think different deadlines throughout this semester would help keep everybody
on track. I wish the class was more structured.” Jade seemed to interpret this lack of structure as
the professor’s disinvestment with the students and their success. James and Josh both described
good relationships with their capstone professors, but they both did not seem to perceive the
usefulness of the capstone experience for their intention to go into law enforcement and they saw
their capstone projects as basically irrelevant. Josh believed the writing skills that he was
practicing would be important as a law enforcement officer, but he offered a fairly weak
explanation of the connection with the research process. He said, “Definitely just try to maybe
map out what kinda crimes happen in what areas and things like that.” James said he did not
enjoy doing research assignments and felt that a hands-on experience would have been better for
him and his career goals. He shared,
I’d rather do hands-on things rather than research, cuz I want be a law enforcement
officer. I want to do hands on and learn more about cops and stuff, rather than research,

92

but I get it…. I can get why you do papers and stuff, to get a better understanding of
certain topics and ideas. It’s just not what I like to do.
Thus the benefits of feeling themselves to be insiders with respect to making the capstone project
into an opportunity did not accrue in the same measure to all students.

4.3

PARTICIPATING IN THE COMMUNITY THROUGH RESEARCH
ASSIGNMENTS

As discussed in chapter two, situated learning is critical for progressing from legitimate
peripheral participation to full participation within a community of practice. Situated learning
requires new members to participate actively in their community to learn relevant skills or
acquire knowledge about acceptable ways of communicating and behaving in their community.
In this study, I argue that research assignments are opportunities for situated learning within the
undergraduate academic community of practice.
All of the participants had to complete research assignments as undergraduates, though
some majors emphasize research less than others, with profession-based majors such as
accounting, education, and broadcast communication requiring the least such assignments. In
general, participants described research assignments of accelerating intensity as they moved from
required composition and general education courses through their major’s methods course, if
offered, to the capstone project. Several themes emerged in the data related to students’
understanding of the purpose of research assignments, some of which suggest that students
perceived research assignments as situated learning experiences. As participants reflected on
their experiences with research assignments, they reported that, when given the opportunity to do
93

so, they drew upon their interests, prior knowledge, lived experiences, and identities to select
topics for these assignments. Two different orientations to this strategy were evident—a
performance orientation and a learning orientation. While both approaches seemed to help
students succeed in the community, the learning orientation may have implications for the
students’ development of their information literacy.

4.3.1

Perceived purpose of research assignments

Participants were asked about the purpose of research assignments in college, including why they
believed professors assigned these assignments. The participants described several purposes to
non-capstone research assignments in college, including the assessment of learning, the
opportunity to learn more about topics related to the course, the demonstration of critical
thinking skills, opportunities to challenge students, and preparation for post-college life. In
addition, about half of the students believed that research assignments they completed early in
college were intended to give them practice with completing research assignments later in
college and served as stepping stones on the path to completing their capstone project. For
example, Michelle said the research experience in her intermediate composition course “taught
me everything I need to know for future papers.” Gabrielle provided a bit more elaboration,
reflecting,
All throughout my three and a half years, four years being here. It’s all been research and
papers, so without [composition]—I was like, no wonder why they started me off in 100
because it’s a lot that you need to know, especially with these research papers.
Alexis made an explicit connection between the smaller assignments that she encountered when
she first got to college and the capstone experience. She shared,
94

I think the smaller ones are to lead us up to what’s expected of us our upperclassmen
years. Trying to get as meshed into the college world, coming from high school. Doing it
a little but more gradually than just throwing a big, huge project at us.
Just as students reported that many of their professors broke larger research assignments into
smaller assignments to help them progress toward completing the larger assignment in a
particular course, many students perceived scaffolding within the curriculum. This purpose, in
particular, suggests that some students perceive non-capstone research assignments as a medium
for situated learning within the community, in that pre-capstone assignments help them to
develop and build the skills and knowledge they will need to complete their capstone project.
With respect to the capstone project specifically, students saw it as an opportunity to
demonstrate what they have learned in college and/or to prepare them for life after college. For
example, Garrett believed that the capstone experience made “the stuff you’ve learned come full
circle,” and Laila said that the capstone tied together everything students have learned in college.
Cheyenne focused specifically on learning within the major, explaining,
I guess that’s what they want to see, if we learned what they taught us, if we were paying
attention to what they were teaching. Yeah, the capstone’s really throwing everything that
I’ve learned from all the communication professors into one thing.
Thus students saw the capstone experience as an opportunity for students to synthesize what they
have learned through their college experiences and apply that to a project serving as a summative
assessment of learning. Gabrielle concurred with this sentiment, explaining, “What have you
learned all the way up to now that you can take from this?...Providing that you passed it, you’re
ready. You’ve done your job here, pretty much. You’ve learned everything that you needed to
know.” These perceptions of the purpose of the capstone experience indicate that students are

95

aware that learning is cumulative, and they are expected to demonstrate how much they have
learned throughout college. In other words, successful performance on the capstone project was
indicative of successful participation in the community.
Almost half of the participants believed that the capstone project was meant to prepare
them for their post-college lives, which often overlapped with the assessment of learning. For
example, Lauren said, “I’ve learned something. I can go out in the world and do this,” meaning
complete research similar to that which she completed for the capstone project. Thus she thought
it would help her to be successful in her post-college life. Other students mentioned specific
types of skills they were developing that they could draw upon in their post-college lives. Malik
addresses the development of time management skills and self-regulation, explaining,
How well they can manage their time and how well that they can do the work that's
required of them to do. Then when they get in the real world, if they have a project or an
assignment that their supervisor gives them, how well can you take the time out of your
day to do what you need to do to get this done in the allotted time period I give you.
Madison focused specifically on the relationship between finding reliable information and
successfully communicating with her future colleagues. She surmised,
I’m most likely gonna be writing emails…to companies saying my company wants to do
this and I have to have specific facts and background research saying the revenue’s gonna
raise this much in so many years and I need to have reasons why and facts why that
would happen.
Madison saw the capstone project as useful experience for this future. Jasmine and Josh
referenced benefits to writing skills in describing the point of the capstone projects. Even though
students believed they were expected to demonstrate the disciplinary knowledge they had

96

accumulated in the major in their capstone projects, for the most part, these were not the skills
that students believed that were developing that could be transferred to their post-college lives.
Rather, students reported that the capstone project helped them to develop and practice
transdisciplinary skills, such as time management, self-regulation, and communication skills,
which they would be able to draw upon in their post-college lives.

4.3.2

Approaches to research assignments

Students understood that they needed to take responsibility for their own learning and success.
Most students reported selecting topics for research assignments that were interesting or
meaningful to them when they were given an opportunity to do so. Two different orientations to
this strategy emerged in their comments—a performance orientation and a learning orientation.
The performance orientation seems to be focused on staying engaged and motivated to complete
the assignment and meet the professor’s expectations. In other words, it is a response to an
extrinsic motivation and a method. Students who exhibited a learning orientation used research
assignments as opportunities to channel an intrinsic motivation to learn more about a topic.
These approaches were not mutually exclusive, in that some students exhibited different
orientations in relation to different research assignments. While students described both of these
approaches as successful, the learning orientation may have implications for the development of
students’ information literacy abilities, as discussed at the end of this chapter.

4.3.2.1 Performance orientation
Students who exhibited a performance orientation to research assignments seemed to be
responding to an extrinsic motivator (i.e. a required assignment on which they would be
97

evaluated and graded) and used their interests, prior knowledge, and lived experiences to help
them remain engaged and motivated to successfully complete the assignment. Josh and James
were, perhaps, the most open representatives of the performance orientation. Josh bluntly shared
that he felt research assignments were something that “you just gotta get through.” He chose to
write a paper for his intermediate college composition course on the causes of lung cancer, since
his grandparents had died from the disease and it was “near to [his] heart.” He shared, “It’s
always hard to do somethin’ where you really don’t care. When you wanna do somethin’, like
write it, it makes it easier, or when you have a purpose to do something, it makes it easier.” Even
though he was generally interested in his topic, Josh primarily used this strategy to make the
experience more enjoyable. In a response to a question about the purpose of research
assignments, James stated, “it’s a grade.” He explained, “[The professor] want[ed] to see what
students thought, what they were interested in…he liked discussions, so he always wanted to
know our opinions of stuff, to see what we liked and didn’t like, or what we felt passionate
about.” James did not perceive that learning was the primary purpose for the assignment. As
these examples demonstrate, students who exhibited a performance orientation typically used
this strategy as a way to stay motivated and engaged with the assignment on which they wanted
to perform well. While they may have found their topics interesting, choosing a topic that was
interesting was simply a means to an end.
Other students were not as explicit about their performance orientation, but their
reflections on how they selected topics for research assignments suggested that they were
drawing upon a performance orientation. In some cases, this strategy helped students to lower the
barrier to participating in the undergraduate academic community, since it gave them the
opportunity to draw upon their prior knowledge. For example, Elizabeth selected baseball as the

98

topic for her public speaking course, realizing that she already knew “a lot about this topic”
having played softball for more than a decade. Ultimately, Elizabeth reflected that “research
ended up not being that bad.” As a student who had felt peripheral to the community, Elizabeth
drew on her prior knowledge to lower the barrier to participation. Similarly, Madison decided to
develop a hypothetical rock climbing equipment company for her marketing course because “I
knew which target market to do…because I rock climbed and I got to see all the different types
of people that rock climb.” These examples do not suggest the primary purpose in selecting these
topics was learning; rather, this was a strategy to apply the prior knowledge and interests to
successfully complete the assignment.

4.3.2.2 Learning orientation
The ways in which students who exhibited a learning orientation to a research assignment
described their experiences with these assignments suggest a bigger purpose than successfully
fulfilling a course requirement. Rather, these students used research assignments as opportunities
to channel an intrinsic motivation to learn more about a topic related to their identities or lived
experiences. Two themes related to this orientation emerged from the analysis of the data—selfeducation and educating others. Almost all of the students who exhibited a learning orientation to
a research assignment were in the peripheral group. In addition, all of the students who expressed
a desire to educate others were students whose identities were minoritized beyond their first
generation status vis-à-vis their race or sexual orientation. Finally, students in the sciences often
did not have the same opportunity to select their topics as other students. Despite this, many of
them seemed to take a learning orientation to research assignments and tended to view research
assignments as a way to develop knowledge or expertise within their major.

99

Self-education
A few students used research assignments to satisfy their curiosity related to their observations of
their environments or to explore issues that were relevant to their personal lives. Laila is
representative of the students who used questions related to their daily observations to select a
topic for a research assignment. Laila used her observations about other student athletes’
behavior in study hall to develop a topic for an honors sociology research project in her first year
of college. Laila shared,
Whenever I was in our mandatory study hours, I would look around at the different
athletes. I’d be like, “That person does this,” and, “Hmm, they’re not doing homework.”
“This person plays this”…So you’re like, “Okay, what’s going on here?”
Laila designed a research project for a sociology course around the patterns she observed, which
had made her interested in the existing literature about student-athletes’ academic outcomes. The
project had been an opportunity to apply what she was learning in her sociology course to
understanding what she was observing in these study halls. It also provided an opportunity for
Laila to challenge herself. She said that her professor had told her, “This is gonna be really
good…but it’s gonna be really hard,” and that her response was, “I know, but go big or go
home.” Whereas other students picked topics where they felt they had an advantage, Laila picked
a topic that she felt would teach her something. Students like Laila described selecting topics
they knew would be challenging, and they welcomed the opportunity for learning they would
gain in the process.
A few students used a research assignment to explore meaningful issues related to their
communities about which they wanted to learn more. Cheyenne was wrestling with a tragedy
that happened at her high school—an incident of violence between students, which received

100

heavy coverage in the local news outlets, including the debate about whether the perpetrator
should be tried and sentenced as a minor or as an adult. Cheyenne shared,
At the time when I picked that topic, they were still trying to decide if they were going to
try him as an adult or keep him in juvenile court. I think that’s kind of what made me
want to focus on that. At the time, I wanted—I had one opinion on it…. That’s why I
chose the topic.
Cheyenne states that she had an opinion about this topic and implies that the research assignment
in her rhetoric and public policy course provided her with the opportunity to explore her opinion
and engage in the debate that was unfolding around her. Jasmine was also attuned to debates
happening in her community, sharing that she her family were discussing the school-to-prison
pipeline and its presence in her hometown. She said,
[My aunt will] talk about [the issue], so I'm just like “Maybe I should pay more
attention.” I remember her saying something about the same people that own the school
districts also own prisons, so that struck my mind, and I was just like “I'm definitely
gonna do this.”
Jasmine purposely selected this topic to fill a knowledge gap about an issue that was meaningful
to her community, much as Cheyenne had.
Educating others
Four students, three of whom were in the peripheral group, used their identities and lived
experiences to select topics for research assignments as a way to educate others. Like the
students who sought primarily to educate themselves, these students knowingly selected a
difficult topic. All of these students reported minority race or sexual identities.

101

Gabrielle and Elizabeth both used a research assignment to explore issues relevant to
their identities and lived experiences with the goal of being able to educate others. Elizabeth’s
interest in hate crimes committed against LGBTQ people was initially related to her
identification as a lesbian and her desire to learn about issues related to the LGBTQ community.
Elizabeth perceived that heterosexuals were unaware of how “spiteful and hateful people can be”
to her because of her sexuality, and she established a goal of helping others to understand her
experiences. She shared, “I feel like research makes me happy when I know that I can teach
other people or let them in a little glimpse of something else that they might not know about.”
Gabrielle drew upon her identity as an African-American female for her capstone experience.
Gabrielle was one of several Black/African-American students enrolled in her capstone course,
which focused on racism in the United States. She did not understand how some of her peers of
color were “tired of talking about racism,” saying, “How could you be tired of talking about it
when you’re living in it?” Gabrielle shared,
I didn’t just wanna leave out of the class and not take nothing from it, so what I did was I
got a small group together, and we actually sat down and just talked about it… Like,
“Tell me something that you don’t know, and I’ll tell you something that I don’t know,
and we’ll try to educate each other.” Because I’m not gonna lie, sometimes it does get
frustrating to continuously keep talking about it, but it’s always gonna be there, so you
gotta try to at least educate someone else about it that doesn’t know.
Gabrielle explicitly states that it was important for her to learn something in this course that
would have a broader application than in that specific course context and was willing to commit
to a challenging topic because she believed it would have positive implications that extended
beyond the limits of that research assignment.

102

Malik and DeShawn viewed their research assignments as an opportunity to share what
they had learned in their lived experiences as Black/African-American men. Both students had
first-hand experiences with their topics—gentrification and racism, respectively. DeShawn
shared that he expected to need to educate some of his peers about the experiences of AfricanAmerican students when he decided to attend a predominantly white, rural campus. When one of
his intermediate college composition classmates casually used a racial slur on the second day of
classes in his first year, he felt his expectations had been validated. DeShawn reflected,
The thing with this is, I saw this as an opportunity for me. I could either (a) run and go to
a different college or (b) stand my ground and educate people... an opportunity to educate
the white populace who really don’t understand what it is or what it means to be an
African-American student.
DeShawn felt that he had an opportunity to educate his classmates during the presentation
portion of his assignment, which focused on different genres of music, and he incorporated
music by Kendrick Lamar and Kanye West. He wanted to provoke his classmates to think about
these songs and their lyrics and how they were representative of the African-American
community, a community with which he believed many of his peers were not familiar.
Malik had written a paper and presentation about gentrification for his intermediate
college composition assignment. He shared,
That was a topic that I really felt passionate about, that I really wanted to make a
presentation about, and that a lot of people, which I was surprised about, thought that
gentrification was a myth or a hoax, or it was bound to happen in lower downtrodden
areas. This was the one instance I saw it happen with my own eyes. I saw the changes
that occurred because such and such had happened… I just really wanted to do a project

103

on this particular instance cuz I feel like a lot of people don't really know that
gentrification's happening in lower developed areas such as where I was from.
Like DeShawn, Malik viewed the presentation in particular as a mechanism to educate their
classmates whose backgrounds were different from their own.
Developing expertise
Students with science-related majors rarely had the opportunity to select their topics for research
assignments, which included laboratory reports and capstone projects. However, their interest in
science seemed sufficient motivation to address assigned topics in their majors. Unlike the
students who exhibited a performance orientation to a research assignment, many of the students
with science-related majors reported that they were interested in learning more about their topics
because they viewed research assignments as opportunities to develop disciplinary expertise. For
example, Matthew seemed to be excited by the opportunity to learn about a topic about which his
professor had expertise. He said, “I consulted with my professor. He was an ecology expert….
That was right up his alley. That’s what he recommended…. I was totally onboard with it…. I
was totally interested in that.” For Matthew the opportunity to work closely with an expert on the
topic made it interesting, although he did not express an inherent interest in the topic. In
Brooke’s case, none of the biology professors at the Manchester campus were doing research
that directly aligned with her own interests, so she was not initially interested in her capstone
advisor’s research agenda. As she started to learn more about his research, however, she
ultimately gained a sense of expertise and authority about the topic when she would present on it
at conferences. She said, “Even after I started reading those papers, it became even more
interesting to me. Now, I’ve read so many papers about it and given presentations on it, it’s like I

104

just—it’s almost like I’m an expert.” The knowledge that she was developing expertise was a
motivator for Brooke.

4.4

INFORMATION LITERACY

In the conceptual framework used in this study, I argue that the habitus of the academic
community includes academic literacies, including information literacy. Tapp’s (2015) definition
of academic literacy is helpful in thinking about the modes of thinking that these academic
literacies encompass—“particular ways of constructing meaning, making judgments, and
determining what counts as valuable knowledge” (p. 712)—all of which, Tapp argues, can
remain tacit to students. I contend that as students move from legitimate peripheral participation
toward full participation in the community they are expected to develop critical, reflective, and
analytical modes of thinking and incorporate those modes of thinking into their academic work.
Information literacy, through its articulation of threshold concepts, knowledge practices, and
dispositions, requires that students apply these modes of thinking to their information evaluation
and use them for research assignments.
Although students were able to articulate the differences in the intensity of and the
expectations related to research assignments between high school and college, many students did
not demonstrate a commensurate evolution or transformation in their critical thinking skills
related to information use. Instead, students described a process of searching for, evaluating, and
selecting information using a checklist approach rather than describing the application of the
critical, reflective, and analytical modes of thinking related to information literacy. Students who
exhibited a learning orientation to a research assignment, however, provided some evidence for
105

the modes of thinking related to information literacy at a basic level. In general, regardless of the
students’ orientation to their research assignments, the data suggest that students perceive that
faculty emphasize the final product over the demonstration of critical thinking related to
information use.

4.4.1

The checklist approach

Most students were aware that their professors would expect different kinds of sources than their
high school teachers had expected. As Dustin said, “High school, it was credible. [The sources
we used] were real, not fake ones, but never official scholarly stuff.” Kimberly said, “Like, dotcom, dot-org, those things were fine in high school but in this it’s like you need either dot-gov or
an article or a book.” Kayla, who reported being aware of this shift in her first semester of
college, elaborated,
In high school you had just Googled and found some. I knew definitely not to use
Wikipedia or something like that, but I mean sometimes you’d grab a book. I mean you
would just look it up and if it looks like a legitimate source then it was okay. College and
I think definitely because of just the audience that we were writing for and how not
necessarily serious, but I mean it’s not a joke anymore. It’s college. It’s a real research
paper.
Other students, such as Elizabeth and Jesse, became more aware of this shift in expectations once
they began taking advanced courses in their major. Elizabeth shared,
I don’t think that I knew to the extent of what it was until, I think, I took my junior
seminar. Then, we were told that scholarly articles were the standard we were to be held

106

at, basically. Yeah. I think that was probably the first, I guess, solidifying moment for
scholarly articles.
By their third year of college, most students reported being aware that they were being held to a
higher standard for information use, namely the importance of scholarly and/or peer-reviewed
articles. However, scholarly or peer-reviewed, for many of the participants, became another
criterion on their existing evaluation checklist.
Students’ comments did not suggest an evolution in critical, reflective, and analytical
modes of thinking related to information literacy. Most students reported being taught the same
basic set of evaluation criteria in high school, and they relied on these criteria when they first got
to college. These criteria include looking at a website’s domain (e.g. .org, .gov, .edu), avoiding
Wikipedia, looking at the author and publication date, and fact-checking a source by looking at
other sources. The ways in which students described applying these criteria suggested that they
approached information evaluation as a process of checking off boxes on a list. Brandon’s
reflection on his high school research experiences demonstrates this, as he was quite literally
required to fill out a form and check off criteria as he evaluated his sources. He explained,
I remember in high school we had…different colored papers. One website was one
color…. I remember if you could fill out that page, as long as…it had an author or
something. Even the company, if you were lookin’ up something and it had from an
actual organization, stuff like that. I know the ending of a web address. We learned if it’s
dot net it’s not—Wikipedia is not good, stuff like that.
Though other students had not used a literal checklist, they used figurative ones. For example,
Michelle shared,

107

I know they would teach us to look up the endings of a website. In other words, a dotcom wouldn’t be as credible as, maybe, a dot-gov, or something like that. I guess they
would also say, “Check the facts.” Like see if something’s a fact by looking at other
websites to see if that information’s the same across the board, and not just take one
website’s word for it.
One criterion that was notably absent from the participants’ high school experiences with
evaluating information was determining the relevance of the source to their topic, argument, or
research question, and the role a source could play in strengthening their work. In other words,
students did not report learning how to think critically about the relationship between the
information sources they were finding and the contextual nature of their information needed in
high school.
This same checklist approach was evident in the ways that students reflected on their
approaches to evaluating information for college-level research assignments, including for
capstone projects. James and Emily’s approaches to finding and evaluating information for their
capstone projects are representative of this. James shared,
I try to find recent ones. If it’s in the 1970s or something, I probably wouldn’t use those,
but I try to find ones within the last five years, maybe ten years…. I’ll read the article the
day beforehand. I’ll try to find unbiased articles and stuff like that, so you gotta to do
that, and then depending on where it’s from, even when I go on [the online catalog] I’ll
search something [to confirm the facts from information] that’s from a website that’s a
new site, rather than a university.
Emily’s explanation is representative of how many students responded to this question. She said,

108

I just used Google. I was much more aware of what sites were reputable. What research
papers were okay to use. I knew what to look for in them. I knew as long as they had—
usually if they had other sources at the bottom, that was always a good paper.
When asked about how they would approach finding sources for more recent research
assignments, many students simply reported that they knew they needed credible sources,
primarily scholarly or peer-reviewed sources, and described a checklist orientation similar to the
evaluation strategies they reported learning in high school. Critical reflection on the relevance of
the source to the students’ work and intentionality in how the source could be used to strengthen
their research assignment remained notably absent from their evaluation criteria.

4.4.2

Critical thinking and information use

There is some evidence, however, that students who used research assignments to explore and
learn about issues that were meaningful to their identities exhibited some of the dispositions and
knowledge practices related to information literacy. These students were primarily students who
were members of racial, ethnic, or sexual minorities. In particular, these students provided some
evidence that they were aware of an existing discourse related to their topic, approaching
research as inquiry, and considering the contextual nature of authority.
One of the six information literacy threshold concepts indicates that learners who are
developing their information literacy recognize that scholarship is a conversation, and they are
engaging in this conversation through their academic work. Students who exhibited a learning
orientation to a research assignment indicated an awareness of discourses related to their topic to
which they were intending to respond or contribute. For example, Cheyenne alluded to the
conversations that were unfolding in the local media and in her community about the sentencing
109

of a juvenile perpetrator of school violence. Cheyenne shared, “I think that’s kind of what made
me want to focus on that. At the time…. I had one opinion on it, and I wanted him to go to adult
facilities and all that kind of stuff.” She sought to use the research assignment in her rhetoric and
public policy course to engage in and contribute to the discourse in her community and in the
media about this incident. Likewise, Malik identified the discourse about gentrification in Black
popular culture, pointing to its presence in the popular film Boyz n the Hood. He shared,
There was a scene in that movie where Furious Styles explains to everyone in Compton,
California, the effects of gentrification and how it was affecting their area in Long Beach
or Compton or wherever they live. He was explaining to them how the property value
would increase as they moved more of the black people out by putting a gun store and a
liquor store on each corner of the neighborhood and have the blacks kill themselves or
make themselves even poorer just so that they can get moved out of the area and then
watch their home value increase.
Here Malik demonstrated an interest in combining his lived experience with gentrification and
the discourse found in Black popular culture to educate his peers at the predominantly white
Manchester campus about this issue. These examples reveal that students who exhibited a
learning orientation to research assignments demonstrated an awareness that their research was
not happening in a vacuum. They identified relevant and specific sources of the discourse,
particularly in the media or in popular culture, and exhibited a desire to engage with the
discourse through their research assignments.
The Framework also posits that learners who are developing their information literacy
approach research as inquiry and apply appropriate investigative methods to explore research
questions. Laila and Gabrielle are representative of students who viewed research assignments as

110

opportunities to probe their observations or lived experiences using the theories or methods that
they were learning in their courses. For example, Laila demonstrated this quite explicitly when
she described the observations she was making about her peers’ behavior in the student-athlete
study halls during her first year of college, stating that she wondered “Ok, what’s going on
here?” Laila recognized an opportunity to use the research methods she was learning in her
honors sociology course to make a connection between what she was learning in her courses and
her broader social environment. As the Framework notes, learners who are developing their
information literacy “seek multiple perspectives during information gathering and assessment,”
and, in turn, they continue to ask questions when they receive conflicting information. Gabrielle,
for example, makes gathering multiple perspectives on her topic a priority in her capstone project
related to racism. Gabrielle explained,
I was just like, maybe I should just go around and ask people, not a big group like that,
but actually ask questions and then see what they know, and then see if they know stuff
that they can give back to me…. I wanted to make sure that I had an equal amount of
color in the room. I wanted people that was Puerto Rican. I wanted people that was
White. I wanted people that was Black. I wanted people that was Asian because I wanted
to see exactly how they interacted and how they felt about answering those questions.
Gabrielle implies that speaking to other people about racism was not enough to develop her own
understanding of the topic; rather, it was critical for her own learning to engage students of
varying races and ethnicities who may share multiple and differing perspectives on this topic.
Students who exhibited a learning orientation to a research assignment, such as Laila and
Gabrielle, were intrinsically motivated to learn about their topics, which helped them to

111

investigate their observations and lived experiences and intentionally seek multiple perspectives
on their topics.
Finally, some of these students indicated that they considered the contextual nature of
authority when evaluating and selecting information sources to use in their research assignments.
Despite scholarly or peer-reviewed journal articles being the gold standard for sources in college,
these students did not rely solely on that category of information sources to determine whose
voices needed to be incorporated into their research and moved beyond a checklist approach to
gathering appropriate information sources. For example, Jasmine prioritized interviews with
people who were witnessing the school-to-prison pipeline in her hometown first-hand to get a
more complete picture of her topic. She shared, “[A news article] was also factual…. It was just
telling you what happened and what's going on, but…I wasn’t trying to get a biased opinion from
other people [the news sources].” Jasmine recognized that news sources typically convey factual
information, but that factual information may only present one side of the story. However, she
recognized the authority and credibility of first-hand witnesses. Malik’s discussion of the film
Boyz n the Hood is also indicative of the recognition of contextual authority. Malik attributed
authority to the film, because he believed it demonstrated how salient gentrification is to
predominantly Black urban communities. While these students incorporated sources that are
traditionally considered authoritative into their research assignments, they also spoke about
leveraging sources that were closer to the communities affected by the topics they were
exploring.

112

4.4.3

Perceived reinforcement of the checklist approach

In general, the ways in which students described their experiences with research assignments in
college, regardless of the orientation they exhibited toward an assignment, suggest that they did
not perceive that the development of more sophisticated modes of thinking related to
information-seeking and use was important to participate successfully in the undergraduate
academic community. This can be inferred from the descriptions of feedback they received from
professors. Many students perceived the emphasis to be on their writing skills, including both
grammar and style. For example, when asked about feedback he received on one of his first
research assignments in college, James reflected, “I guess he checked a lot of my grammar and
punctuation stuff, but he didn’t really go through sources and stuff like that. That was all okay to
him.” Brooke shared a similar experience in her intermediate composition course, saying,
I think mostly it was grammar and spelling, and then I know she focused a lot on using
different types of sentence structure. She would try to get us to change our sentences so
we weren’t using all the same. I don’t think [sources] was really a big thing.
When students did receive feedback on their sources, particularly written feedback, they reported
it was mostly related to correcting errors in their citations, not necessarily about the sources
themselves. In general, the fact that students perceived that the written feedback they received
from their professors emphasized writing skills, rather than their ability to find and select the best
information sources for the context and their topic, suggested that they did not need to further
develop critical thinking or analytical skills in this area.
However, a couple of students did describe one-on-one conversations about the
importance of sources for the research assignment. Dylan’s intermediate college composition
professor wanted him to find more “reliable” sources for the paper he was writing.
113

A couple of ‘em, she was like, “Oh, this isn’t really a reliable source, so cut the things
you found from it.” Well, you can keep ‘em, but you have to find ‘em in a different
article, type of deal, and find a better source.
Dylan explained that his professor wanted him to use reputable news sites rather than sources
like Wikipedia, on which “anyone can post anything.” Even if Dylan’s professor was attempting
to help him develop or refine his critical thinking skills, Dylan interpreted this feedback using a
performance orientation, stating that he need to either “cut the things you found from it” or “find
‘em in a different article. This feedback did help Dylan to refine his understanding of
expectations for performance, but it did not seem to push Dylan’s information-seeking and use
behaviors beyond the checklist approach. Victoria had a similar interaction with her intermediate
college composition professor, and she was able to articulate a more sophisticated understanding
of the role sources could play in strengthening her argument. In addition, her professor
encouraged her to place her argument within a larger discourse about gender and the young adult
fiction industry.
She told me to talk about how many figures they made… or how many books they sold.
J.K. Rowling was rejected from several publishers because they didn’t believe that a
woman could write Harry Potter. S.E. Hinton was told by her own publisher that, “Hey,
you know that girls aren’t supposed to write fiction like this, right?” She published under
her initials, and essentially launched the young adult fiction industry into what it is now. I
needed to say that, but in order to get the point across properly, I had to state why is this
important. It’s because J.K. Rowling ended up selling how many books, and became the
first author to become a billionaire. S.E. Hinton launched an entire industry, and they

114

were told that they couldn’t do it. I had to find an outside source to actually have that
information there.
Even though she was focusing on a particular young adult fiction author, her professor
encouraged her to find sources that would allow her to demonstrate a pattern of sexism in the
industry that was larger than this single incident. Victoria’s professor was not only encouraging
her to find information sources that would strengthen her argument; she was also helping
Victoria to develop her scholarly voice by placing her work within a larger context. These were
the only two conversations that students described in which faculty gave specific feedback about
the appropriateness of information sources.
In addition to the lack of emphasis on the relationship between critical thinking and
information-seeking and use behaviors, several students reported that faculty often gave them
sources to use, especially as they moved toward or were working on their capstone projects. For
example, Brooke said,
I think [my capstone professor] gave me one or two, and then he told me specific
keywords to look up in the databases. I found 25 of them. I think we have to have 25
resources for our Capstone paper. I have over that. I found those all on my own.
In Brooke’s case and others, faculty provided students with an example of what kinds of sources
they need to find, as well as how to start searching for additional sources. In other cases, students
reported that faculty gave them sources that they thought would be helpful. Elizabeth said, “He
would always just email and be like, ‘Hey look. Actually, I found this source. It might be better
than the one from blah, blah, blah. Here, try to see if you like this one more.’” Elizabeth said that
she found this “helpful,” because it “helped clarify what he expected out of my research.” On the
one hand, this is a form of academic socialization, as it is normal for scholars to share sources

115

with their colleagues or their advisees. In addition, students viewed this as a form of support and
as an investment in their success. For example, Cheyenne said she found this practice helpful,
because it helped her locate sources she might not have otherwise. Nonetheless, the practice
deprives students of an opportunity to think strategically about the kinds of information they
need for their assignments, where to find that information, and how to evaluate the information
they are finding for relevance and reliability.

4.5

CONCLUSION

The data suggests that students’ perceptions of their positionality in the community as new
members played an important role in how students felt about research assignments and engaged
with their professors when they first arrived at college. Students who felt they were insiders
within their new community were more successful in applying the skills and strategies they
developed in high school, were more confident in their abilities, were less hesitant to reach out to
professors for help, and described a smoother transition to college and to college-level research
assignments. Students who felt peripheral shared relatively negative feelings, both in general and
in terms of research assignments, and were less likely to reach out to and interact with their
professors when they first arrived at college. However, required supportive interactions with
faculty and entry into the major demonstrated to the students who felt peripheral that faculty are
invested in their success and want to help students to succeed. When given the opportunity to do
so, students chose topics for research assignments that drew on their identities, prior knowledge,
lived experiences, and interests either to stay engaged and motivated or because they were
intrinsically motivated to learn more about that topic.
116

Many of the participants in this study did not articulate the development of more
sophisticated critical thinking and analytical skills related to information over the course of their
collegiate careers. In general, many students reported using a checklist approach to information
evaluation that they relied on in high school and modified that checklist to meet the expectations
for information evaluation in college. Overall, this suggests a performance orientation to research
assignments, in which students are simply trying to meet both the requirements of the assignment
and professors’ expectations rather than developing a particular skill set. However, students who
exhibited a learning orientation to a research assignment, most of whom had extra-minoritized
identities, did articulate some of the modes of thinking and behaviors related to information
literacy at a basic level. These findings are significant because a product-driven approach to
finding information, as opposed to a process-driven approach, may have implications for
students’ post-college lives in that they may not have developed a transferrable process related to
information use that can be employed in multiple contexts regardless of the specific product.

117

5.0

IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION

The purpose of this study was to explore first-generation college students’ academic transitions
into and within college through their experiences with research assignments. While the nature of
research assignments varies from discipline to discipline, research assignments are a common
undergraduate academic experience (Head & Eisenberg, 2009). Because of their ubiquity and
their connection with students’ academic outcomes, an exploration of first-generation students’
experiences was warranted given the existing social-class achievement gap in higher education
(Stephens et al., 2014). Prior to this study, relatively little was known about first-generation
students’ experiences with specific academic practices, such as research assignments, and how
these experiences may contribute to the achievement gap. In this study, I begin to fill this gap by
exploring first-generation students’ experiences with a common academic practice and discuss
the potential implications of those findings relative to the social-class achievement gap.
The conceptual framework developed for this study brought together a unique
combination of theories, which provided a foundation for exploring students’ entry into and
engagement with academic culture and the values and expectations of which may remain tacit for
students who do not come from middle-class or upper middle-class backgrounds (Burke, 2012;
Delpit, 1988; Lareau, 2011). Using hermeneutic phenomenology (van Manen, 1990), I explored
what it was like for first-generation students to experience research assignments throughout their
college careers through semi-structured interviews with 30 first-generation students who were in
118

their third, fourth, or fifth years of study at two regional campuses of a large research university.
In this chapter, I discuss the major findings of the study and their contribution to what we know
about first-generation students’ academic engagement, as well as share recommendations for
practice and further research.

5.1

5.1.1

MAJOR FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS

Strategies for determining expectations

The findings suggest that the first-generation participants employed two different strategies for
determining expectations for performance—a social approach and an individual approach. These
strategies may have a relationship with how students positioned themselves within the
undergraduate academic community when they first arrived at college. Students who initially
positioned themselves as insiders in the community appeared to be more likely to interact with
their professors to fill knowledge gaps, receive clarification on assignments, and to begin
developing relationships, thus emphasizing the social nature of situated learning (Lave &
Wenger, 1991). Students who perceived their peripherality, however, appeared to be less likely
to initiate interactions with their professors and did not begin to proactively build their academic
support networks until they entered their college major(s), thus emphasizing the individual
nature of situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991). The latter finding is consistent with previous
research about first-generation students’ academic engagement strategies; however, the presence
of the social approach challenges the findings of previous research (see Collier & Morgan, 2008;
Yee, 2016), which suggests that first-generation students primarily rely upon the individual
119

approach. In addition, these findings provide a more nuanced understanding of first-generation
students’ academic engagement strategies than previous research, which has typically sought to
understand these students’ strategies in comparison to continuing-generation students (see
Collier & Morgan, 2008; Soria & Stebleton, 2012; Stebleton & Soria, 2012; Yee, 2016).
Findings of these past studies generally indicated that first-generation students behave one way
and continuing-generation students behave in a different, typically more desirable, way. At best,
this continued emphasis on comparison has resulted in a superficial understanding of firstgeneration students’ academic engagement strategies. At worst, this comparative emphasis has
resulted in an inaccurate, monolithic understanding of this diverse student population and has
established the continuing-generation students’ behaviors and experiences as normative and the
lens through which first-generation students’ behaviors and experiences should be understood.
For example, the relationship between participants’ approaches to determining expectations and
their perceived positionality suggests that the ways in which first-generation students engage in
the academic domain is likely more complex than previous research has indicated.
In addition, the findings indicate that most participants exhibited a social approach as
they transitioned into their major field(s) of study and moved toward full participation, regardless
of their initial approach. This suggests that first-generation students’ engagement strategies may
be dynamic, changing or evolving as they become more established within the undergraduate
academic community. This finding extends what was previously known about first-generation
students’ academic engagement strategies as they transition within the undergraduate academic
community, as first-generation students in their final years of undergraduate study have been
largely neglected in research examining their engagement strategies. Previous research has
focused on first-generation students’ first two years of college (see Soria & Stebleton, 2012;

120

Stebleton & Soria, 2012; Terenzini et al., 1996; Yee, 2016), resulting in an inadequate
understanding of first-generation students’ engagement strategies as they transition to upperlevel courses within their major field(s) of study and the longer-term implications of these initial
approaches to academic engagement. In the current study, only participants who relied on a
social approach when they first arrived at college seemed to have access to opportunities for
mentorship (Crisp & Cruz, 2009) and higher levels of achievement, particularly related to their
capstone experience, which is consistent with existing research (Fuentes et al., 2014) about the
implications of early faculty interactions for mentorship. Although these mentoring experiences
were evident only in a small portion of the overall sample, it is notable that these kinds of
opportunities were not evident in the experiences shared by students who relied on an individual
approach when they first arrived at college. By focusing on the reflections on both the transition
into and within college, the findings have uncovered both the shift in engagement strategies and
the longer-term implications for students’ initial engagement strategies.

5.1.2

Approaches to research assignments

The participants in this study indicated that they often turned to their identities, lived
experiences, prior knowledge, and interests to select topics for their research assignments when
given the opportunity to do so. This finding suggests that research assignments could serve as
opportunities for students to integrate their lived experiences, prior knowledge, and identities—
their funds of knowledge (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & González, 1992)—into their academic work
and may serve as academic engagement opportunities. This is noteworthy, as the incorporation
of students’ funds of knowledge provides students with the opportunity to leverage their lived
experiences and identities into knowledge construction, transferring learning from one context to
121

another, and academic success (Eodice, Geller, & Lerner, 2017; Kiyama, Rios-Aguilar, & DeilAmen, 2017), meaning that research assignments that encourage students to draw upon their
funds of knowledge may have positive implications for narrowing the social-class achievement
gap.
Students’ motivation to incorporate their funds of knowledge into their research
assignments was not uniform; this strategy had two manifestations—a performance orientation
or a learning orientation. Although students reported using both of these strategies successfully,
the orientation a student exhibited seemed to be related to the ways in which they described
finding, evaluating, and using information in that assignment, regardless of their class standing.
Students who exhibited a performance orientation to their assignment mostly described a
checklist approach to finding, evaluating, and using information, whereas some of the
dispositions and knowledge practices related to information literacy were present in the
reflections of students who exhibited a learning orientation. This finding suggests that a student’s
goal orientation (Dweck, 1999) may be important in students’ development and demonstration of
the dispositions and knowledge practices related to information literacy. In general, students who
subscribe to a performance goal orientation focus on demonstrating competence and achieving a
particular grade, and students with a mastery goal orientation emphasize the development of
competence through learning (Dweck, 1999; O’Keefe, Ben-Eliyahu, & Linnenbrink-Garcia,
2013). Based on the findings of the current study, a performance goal orientation may allow
students to be successful on research assignments (i.e. receiving a passing or acceptable grade),
but it does not seem to allow for or encourage the development of more sophisticated
information literacy skills as outlined in The Framework for Information Literacy for Higher
Education (Association of College & Research Libraries, 2015). Given that previous research

122

indicates that students who reach out for help with finding, evaluating, and using information for
their research assignments often do so with a performance goal orientation in mind (Folk, Safin,
& Williford, 2017), this finding might suggest that a performance orientation to research
assignments may be more common than a mastery orientation.
The findings of this study indicate that faculty may be reinforcing and rewarding these
strategies. Students rarely reported receiving feedback on their information sources and how
their sources were being integrated in the assignment. In addition, some students reported
receiving information sources directly from their professors, even as they were working on more
rigorous research assignments in research methods and capstone courses. Although students
perceived the latter to be an indication of support, with both of these practices faculty may be
signaling that critical engagement with the information sources students are using in their
assignments neither is necessary nor desired. This is consistent with previous research related to
the development of critical thinking, research, reading, and writing skills in college (Arum &
Roksa, 2011; Lea & Street, 1998, 2006; Manarin, Carey, Rathburn, Ryland, & Hutchings, 2015).
The ways in which instructors communicate and reward these behaviors, or their failure to do so,
likely have implications for the strategies that students apply to successfully completing their
research assignments. Because of this, students may not perceive the development of dispositions
and knowledge practices associated with information literacy as being important for their success
and instructors may not be effectively communicating the expectation that students develop and
apply the critical, reflective, and analytical modes of thinking related to information literacy
(Valentine, 2001).
A particularly noteworthy finding is that participants of color in this study more directly
drew upon their funds of knowledge, exhibit a learning orientation to research assignments, and

123

describe the dispositions and knowledge practices related to information literacy, regardless of
their initial positionality within the undergraduate academic community. This is noteworthy
because past research indicates that first-generation students of color, in particular, may feel
alienated or isolated within the undergraduate academic community (Jehangir, 2010), because
their own experiences and identities are not present nor valued in their academic work. In
addition, students of color are often approached through a deficit lens, meaning that they must
somehow be remediated to be successful in academic culture (Bensimon, 2005). The finding that
students of color were more likely to describe the complex modes of thinking related to
information literacy suggests that this student population has unrecognized strengths that they
bring to their collegiate academic experience, which is consistent with the findings of existing
research (Carpenter & Peña, 2017; Castillo-Montoya, 2017). This finding lends further support
to existing research in this area, suggesting that the first-generation students of color may be
more advanced in developing and demonstrating the critical, reflective, and analytical modes of
thinking related to information, and provides a potential practical opportunity for institutions and
instructors to surface and develop these unrecognized strengths through carefully designed
research assignments.
A glaring omission from participants’ reflections on their experiences with research
assignments, regardless of their orientation to a particular assignment, was a discussion of an
information source’s relevance to their research question, argument, or thesis statement. This
suggests that students do not perceive the application of critical or close reading skills to be
important for doing research and completing research assignments (Marain et al., 2015).
Students’ potential avoidance of critical reading is not surprising, as reading critically is
cognitively demanding (Broussard, 2017, p.2). It requires the reader to go beyond skimming an

124

information source and grapple with the evidence, interpretations, and arguments being made in
relationship to their goals for research and writing. In addition, students may be unprepared to
read scholarly or technical texts on topics with which they have little familiarity (Broussard,
2017). One may expect students who drew upon their funds of knowledge to select a topic,
particularly those who exhibited a learning orientation, to discuss the ways in which they used
sources to support their investigations or arguments, but this was only present in the reflection of
a single participant. Regardless of their orientation to a research assignment, if students have not
been taught critical or close reading skills as an essential component of successful research and
writing, and if faculty are reinforcing a check-list approach to information use, then students may
not perceive these skills as being important to successfully completing research assignments in
college.

5.1.3

The purpose of research assignments in college

In past research, students’ reflections on the purpose of research assignments have been absent
despite the ubiquity of these assignments in the undergraduate academic experience. Roughly
half of the participants believed that non-capstone research assignments were intended to prepare
them for their research assignments in upper-level courses, including their capstone experience,
which suggests that these students perceived non-capstone research assignments as situated
learning (Lave & Wenger, 1991) experiences within the undergraduate academic community of
practice. However, students’ situated learning experiences were different depending on how they
initially positioned themselves within the undergraduate academic community. Students who
positioned themselves as insiders were able to apply the skills and strategies they developed in
high school to be successful and felt comfortable reaching out for support, but students who
125

initially perceived their peripherality in the community learned about the expectations and
accepted conventions for research assignments through a trial-and-error process and relied on
feedback and required interactions with professors to gain information related to expectations for
performance. The process of learning about the community’s core values and how those values
should be applied to or incorporated into research assignments seemed to be a slower process for
the students who initially perceived their peripherality.
In general, participants perceived that the capstone experience was intended to be a
demonstration of what they had learned in college, as well as an opportunity to develop or
deepen skills they would need in their post-college lives. Both of these perceived purposes are
consistent with Keup’s (2013) argument that the capstone experience is “the last chance [for
faculty] to instill the competencies that the institution hopes [the students] achieve.” Lave and
Wenger (1991) do not elaborate on the nature of full participation; however, based on their
discussion of the process leading to membership in a community, I argue full participation is
achieved when a participant perceives their membership in the community and other established
members accept and validate the newer participant’s membership. The perception that the
capstone experience is intended to validate students’ demonstration of what they learned
throughout college suggests that the participants perceived the successful completion of a
capstone project as an indication that they had achieved full participation in the community. In
addition, findings indicate the importance of the major for helping students to develop
relationships with their faculty, and the students who were working on or had completed their
capstone projects indicated a high level of interactivity with their professors, which they seemed
to perceive as an investment in the students’ success and membership in the major. The
movement from supportive interactions to the development of supportive relationships with

126

faculty seems to help all students, regardless of their initial positionality, perceive themselves as
full participants within the undergraduate academic community.

5.2

MAJOR FINDINGS AND THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

In general, the findings suggest the conceptual and theoretical foundations underpinning the
conceptual framework presented in chapter two are appropriate for exploring first-generation
students’ experiences transitioning into and within the undergraduate academic community. The
use of the community of practice concept as a heuristic provided a foundation for exploring how
first-generation students transition into and within the undergraduate community of practice,
which has resulted in a more nuanced understanding of their academic engagement strategies
throughout college. In addition, the inclusion of both the academic curriculum and accumulated
social capital aided the exploration of research assignments as sites of situated learning,
including the ways in which students gain information about expectations for performance in the
community. However, the findings suggest that the relationship between full participation in the
community and the core values contained within the community’s habitus may not be as clearly
defined as initially suggested. In this section, I discuss the findings as they relate to the elements
of the proposed conceptual framework.

127

5.3

THE REVISED CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

Figure 3. Revised Diagram of Theoretical and Conceptual Frames

The findings of the study provide a more complex and nuanced understanding of the role
of social capital within first-generation students’ experiences transitioning into and within the
undergraduate academic community. In the initial conceptual framework, I implicitly defined the
social capital that students brought with them from high school to college as positive
relationships they developed with their high school teachers. However, most students reported
developing positive relationships with their high school teachers, and this did not seem to
influence students’ overall transition experiences or how they initially perceived their initial
128

positionality in the undergraduate academic community. The findings indicate that the “college
knowledge” students derive from these relationships and their pre-college academic experiences,
as well as students’ success in transferring and applying that knowledge in the undergraduate
academic community, are important to how students perceive their initial positionality in the
community. This suggests that accumulated pre-college social capital may play an indirect role
in students’ transition experiences. Although the findings of this study provide a more nuanced
understanding of the role of accumulated pre-college social capital, they cannot provide
definitive understanding of its relationship to first-generation students’ experiences transitioning
into the undergraduate academic community and should be considered in future research. In the
revised framework, students’ pre-college academic experiences and accumulated social capital
intersect with students’ entry into the undergraduate academic community, because participants’
reflections indicate that students bring these both to bear on their engagement with courses,
assignments, and faculty early in their collegiate careers.
The findings also provide a more nuanced understanding of the accumulation of social
capital within the undergraduate academic community, in that this accumulation may have a
relationship with students’ perceived positionality when they enter the community and as they
transition within the academic curriculum. The applicability of the college knowledge derived
through pre-college social capital seems to be related to students’ accumulation of social capital
in college, a relationship which appears to be mediated by students’ initial perceived
positionality in the community. Students who successfully transferred and applied the college
knowledge they gained in high school were more likely to position themselves as insiders in the
new community and quickly began developing an academic support network. In addition, the
findings suggest that the academic curriculum not only serves as a mechanism to introduce

129

students to a community’s cultural values, it also is a mechanism by which students develop
“institutionalized relationships of mutual acquaintance” (Bourdieu, 1986, p. 248) and accumulate
social capital within the undergraduate academic community. Students’ entry into their college
major(s) seemed to indicate a shift from supportive interactions, which could either be voluntary
or required, to the development of relationships with faculty. In addition, research assignments,
as sites of situated learning, throughout the academic curriculum, presented opportunities for
students to accumulate social capital through voluntary or required supportive interactions with
faculty about their academic performance. In the revised diagram, I demonstrate the shift from
interactions to relationships with faculty through experiences with research assignments, the
accumulation of social capital, and movement from lower-level courses to upper-level courses in
the college major.
In the initial diagram of the undergraduate academic community, the habitus was a single
layer that included the core academic literacies valued in the community that students needed to
develop and demonstrate in their work to reach full participation. The findings indicate that the
relationship between full participation in the community and the core values contained within the
community’s habitus may not be as clearly defined as initially suggested. Lave and Wenger
(1991) do not elaborate on the nature of full participation; however, based on their discussion of
the process leading to full participation in a community, I implicitly surmised that full
participation was achieved when peripheral participants incorporate the community’s core values
(embodied in the habitus of the community) into their participation in the community and
established members validate the newer participants’ membership. However, the findings
suggest that peripheral participants may not have to incorporate the community’s core values in
their participation to be accepted as full participants. Because of this, the revised diagram

130

includes two layers of full participation. The outer layer, acceptable full participation, indicates
that students may not have completely developed and incorporated the academic literacies
contained within the community’s habitus into their participation. A student who successfully
completed their capstone experience by relying on a checklist approach to finding, evaluating,
and using information is representative of acceptable full participation. Ideal full participation,
however, resides fully in the habitus of the community. The permeable boundary between
acceptable and ideal full participation indicates that students may demonstrate the academic
literacies within the community’s habitus in their participation; however, the demonstration of
these literacies may not be consistent and it may not manifest in their capstone experience.
Faculty and other institutional agents, such as administrators or librarians, may have idealized
expectations for the characteristics and dispositions that students develop throughout their
collegiate experiences. However, the findings of this study suggest that, in practical terms,
students do not necessarily achieve the ideal before becoming full participants in the community
and “good enough” or acceptable may suffice.
A students’ goal orientation to situated learning experiences (i.e. research assignments)
and their ability to draw upon their funds of knowledge are not adequately accounted for in this
revised framework. A student’s goal orientation to a research assignment, which may have a
relationship to the incorporation of a students’ funds of knowledge, seemed to be important for
both the development and demonstration of the dispositions and knowledge practices associated
with information literacy, which is contained within the community’s habitus. This may be
critically important for students with extra-minoritized identities, who may feel that they are
navigating two distinct cultures—their home culture and academic culture (Jehangir, 2010).
However, students’ goal orientations were inconsistent across research assignments and goal

131

orientation appears to be highly dependent on the particular assignment. Nor was goal orientation
associated with students’ progression toward full participation, as participants could demonstrate
a mastery goal orientation for an assignment in their first year of college and a performance goal
orientation for their capstone experience. Despite its apparent relationship with the
demonstration of the academic literacies in the community’s habitus, the irregular and
inconsistent application of goal orientations throughout a student’s college academic experience
makes it difficult to adequately represent in the revised conceptual framework.

5.4

5.4.1

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE

Academic engagement

The findings challenge the underlying assumption of this study that academic research
assignments may serve as sites of academic isolation or alienation, as many participants reported
experiences in which they were able to incorporate their funds of knowledge into research
assignments throughout their collegiate careers. Institutions should reevaluate the role that
required general education courses, such as college composition courses, could play in engaging
first-generation students and other minoritized student populations through the explicit
incorporation of students’ funds of knowledge in assignments (Jehangir, 2010). Although each
student’s curricular experience is unique, general education courses, particularly college
composition courses, tend to target students in their first two years of collegiate study. Research
indicates that first-generation students are less likely to be retained after their first (Engle &
Tinto, 2008) and second (Ishitani, 2006) years of college, so early opportunities for academic
132

engagement is critical for persistence through degree completion and closing the social-class
achievement gap.
This recommendation is consistent with previous research which suggests that the
incorporation of students’ funds of knowledge into their academic assignments may have
positive implications for students’ engagement and learning. For example, the Meaningful
Writing Project study (Eodice, Geller, & Lerner, 2016) found that students identified writing
projects as meaningful when they had the opportunity to incorporate their interests and identities,
and these meaningful projects reportedly helped students to develop their agency, to engage with
faculty and peers, and make connections between their personal and academic lives. This was
true regardless of how academically prepared a student felt in general or specifically related to
research assignments, which suggests that students who feel peripheral and students who feel
like insiders could benefit from this approach. First-generation students may feel like they are
straddling and balancing two different cultures—their home culture and academic culture
(Elmborg, 2006b, Jehangir, 2010). Research assignments that allow students to bring their
identities, communities, interests, or lived experiences—their funds of knowledge—to bear can
help first-generation students to combine what may feel like two separate identities.
Although the importance of supportive interactions between students and faculty and/or
academic support staff has been well-documented (e.g. Fuentes et al., 2014) and has been
integrated into various student success models (e.g. Tinto, 1993; Weidman, 1989), neither the
higher education nor LIS literature have directly considered research assignments in required
general education courses as opportunities to foster these kinds of interactions. In addition to a
programmatic funds-of-knowledge approach to assignments in required composition or writing
courses, instructors should consider requiring students to interact with faculty or

133

learning/academic support staff (i.e. librarians, writing center staff) as they work on research
assignments. Research assignments can typically be scaffolded as students make progress toward
the final product, thus providing multiple opportunities for supportive and formative interactions
related to students’ performance and learning. The participants in the current study often had
difficulty recalling specific written feedback that they had been given related to research
assignments, even for recent assignments. However, they could share details about face-to-face
conversations they had with their faculty and often spoke positively about these interactions,
even when they pertained to a negative event, such as accusations of plagiarism. Based on these
findings, institutions should consider requiring early interactions with faculty and learning
support staff as students work on research assignments, particularly in required general education
courses. Consistent with other research on academic socialization, the findings of the current
study suggest that these interactions may have a particularly strong effect on students who may
be struggling with their transition into the community and are slower in building their academic
support network.
Routine academic assignments, which have the ability to reach a larger student
population than special programs, have been overlooked as a potential tool for academic
engagement in service of retention and persistence, as indicated by their absence from the
academic engagement and student success literature. Instead, many colleges and universities
facilitate the transition of first-generation students, as well as other minoritized student
populations, into the undergraduate community and promote engagement through special
programs or initiatives, such as summer bridge programs or learning communities (i.e. Jehangir,
2010). While there may be positive outcomes for students who participate in these kinds of
programs, research suggests mixed results with regard to their longer-term benefits (e.g. Barnett,

134

Bork, Mayer, Pretlow, Wathington, & Weiss, 2012; Cabrera, Miner, & Milem, 2013; Walpole,
Simmerman, Mack, Mills, Scales, & Albano, 2008). In addition, these programs and initiatives
can be expensive, and their cost(s) may limit the number of students who can participate or be
prohibitive to implement altogether. Students may not identify with the first-generation label
(Wildhagen, 2015) and may not see these as opportunities intended for them. Students must
choose to participate in these programs, so students who are more likely to be engaged may be
the students who are self-selecting to participate and students who could benefit the most may
not choose to participate. Finally, past research has shown that first-generation students are more
likely to have a number of factors that may prevent them from participating, such as being
enrolled part-time, working full-time, living off campus, or being the head of a household or a
care giver (Engle & Tinto, 2008; Jehangir, 2010; Terenzini, Cabrera, & Bernal, 2001). I am not
suggesting that special programming or initiatives targeting first-generation students be
abandoned; instead, I am recommending that institutions leverage the findings of the current
study and consider the ways in which the general education curriculum, in particular, can be
revised in service of academic engagement for minoritized student populations.

5.4.2

Reframing composition and writing courses

Based on the finding that students primarily focus on a checklist approach to evaluating and
using information and that faculty may be rewarding this approach, institutions should consider
reframing required writing or composition courses as inquiry courses, in which developing
information literacy, critical reading, and writing skills are equally emphasized. These courses
typically intend to introduce students to the accepted academic conventions for research and
writing in college and give students practice with developing research questions, finding and
135

evaluating information, and writing prior to entry into the college major. However, participants
in the study perceived the primary emphasis to be on writing, receiving less feedback and
guidance from their instructors related to research. In addition, the findings suggest that the
participants either lacked critical or close reading skills or did not perceive these skills to be
essential to research and writing, which may have constrained their development of the critical,
analytical, and reflective modes of thinking associated with information literacy. This
recommendation is consistent with Arum and Roksa’s (2011) finding that the first two years of a
student’s collegiate experience is foundational for developing critical thinking skills.
Ideally these inquiry courses would be co-taught by instructors with expertise in
information literacy, critical reading, and writing, but that likely is not feasible for many
campuses given resource constraints. Rather, institutions should consider a collaborative
redesign of required writing or composition courses at the program level, in which expertise in
these three areas is present. Course objectives should explicitly cover information literacy,
critical reading, and writing, drawing upon relevant frameworks, such as The Framework for
Information Literacy for Higher Education and the Framework for Success in Postsecondary
Writing, and students should be given regular oral and written feedback on their development
within each of these three areas. All three of these essential competency areas extend beyond
discrete skills or behaviors and require students to develop complex, critical, and reflective
modes of thinking, which can be difficult to both teach and assess. This may also require a
reconsideration of the traditional research or term paper that these courses typically require with
a new emphasis on the process that leads to a completed research paper, rather than performance
on the final product.

136

The development of a foundational inquiry course, one that emphasizes relatively equally
the development of information literacy, critical reading, and writing skills, also provides
institutions with the opportunity to develop related learning objectives that extend beyond the
general education curriculum into a student’s college major. Critical modes of thinking related to
information literacy, critical reading, and writing cannot be mastered through one or two
semester-long courses early in a student’s college career; these skills needs to be nurtured,
practiced, and refined in more advanced, discipline-specific contexts. Depending on both the
institution and a department’s requirements, students may or may not have to take additional
research- or writing-intensive courses prior to completing a culminating research experience, and
students may experience a gap between their foundational course and the culminating research
experience. If institutions require departments to consider a road map for explicitly and
intentionally nurturing the development of students’ information literacy, critical reading, and
writing skills, then students may perceive their importance to their success in college. Institutions
may want to consider incentivizing the development and assessment of learning outcomes in
these three competency areas at the departmental level in collaboration with librarians, writing
center and writing across the curriculum staff, educational developers, and learning specialists.

5.4.3

Building metacognition into the curriculum

Institutions must offer, and potentially incentivize, opportunities for professional development
for faculty related to teaching information literacy, critical reading, and writing skills, as well as
the intentional development of students’ metacognitive abilities. The findings of this study and
previous research (Folk et al., 2017) suggest that many students emphasize performance on the
final product rather than mastering the process that produces the final product. Some of the
137

participants in this study were able to articulate the ways in which they have grown, but
participants did not provide evidence that this kind of reflection on learning and modes of
thinking had been integrated into their coursework, even in capstone courses. Faculty may
assume that students’ have developed these competencies in high school or in other courses, or
they may feel ill-equipped to tackle the transdisciplinary competencies within their courses
(Saunders, 2012).

Professional development programming based on the Decoding the

Disciplines model (Pace & Middendorf, 2004), which is applicable to a range of disciplines,
might provide instructors with structured opportunities to critically and reflectively interrogate
how they communicate, model, and reward expectations for learning and mastering
competencies both within and beyond their course(s). Faculty cannot motivate a student to
exhibit a learning orientation to assignment; however, faculty can build structures that reward
critical and reflective thinking in the process that leads to a final product.

5.5

5.5.1

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

First-generation students and academic engagement

First-generation students’ identities are complex and intersectional (Engle & Tinto, 2008;
Jehangir, 2010; Terenzini, Cabrera, & Bernal, 2001), and much of the existing research has not
acknowledged the complexities of this student population in terms of academic engagement.
Previous research about first-generation students’ academic outcomes and engagement has
primarily focused on comparing first-generation students to their continuing-generation peers
(see Collier & Morgan, 2008; Soria & Stebleton, 2012; Stebleton & Soria, 2012; Yee, 2016),
138

which has resulted in a monolithic portrait of first-generation students that repeatedly focuses on
their academic weaknesses rather than surfacing the strengths they bring with them to their
collegiate academic work. Future research must recognize that the value in exploring firstgeneration students’ academic experiences and outcomes does not reside solely in comparing
them to continuing-generation students. The findings of the current study challenge the findings
of previous comparative studies, which have indicated that first-generation students largely
exhibit an individual approach to joining their new academic community. These findings
advance our understanding of first-generation students’ academic engagement strategies as they
transition into and within college, demonstrating that there is within-group variation in term of
their academic engagement strategies and the implications of these strategies for the academic
experiences as they move toward degree community. In addition, by placing the focus solely on
first-generation students, the findings of this study reveal strengths that students bring with them
to college—their funds of knowledge—which is consistent with an emerging line of research
focusing on minoritized students’ strengths rather than their weaknesses (Carpenter & Peña,
2017; Castillo-Montoya, 2017; Jehangir, 2010; Kiyama & Rios-Aguilar, 2017).
Future research must also give as much attention to first-generation students’ academic
experiences as they approach degree completion, rather than focusing solely on their academic
experiences within the first two years of college (see Soria & Stebleton, 2012; Stebleton & Soria,
2012; Terenzini et al., 1996; Yee, 2016). Previous research indicates that first-generation
students’ first two years of college are indeed critical for persistence through degree completion
(Engle & Tinto, 2008; Ishitani, 2006); however, little is known about how academic experiences
in the first two years shape experiences in first-generation students’ final years of study. The
findings of the current study suggest there may be implications for access to mentoring (Crisp &

139

Cruz, 2009) related to the academic engagement strategies first-generation students employ when
they transition into college (Fuentes et al., 2014). Future research needs to explore the
relationship between first-generation students’ initial engagement strategies and their access to
opportunities for mentoring and higher levels of academic achievement.
Future research should also consider the exploration of first-generation students’
experiences with sites of situated learning, such as research assignments, rather than or in
addition to exploration with the academic domain more generally (e.g. Collier & Morgan, 2008;
McLoughlin, 2012; White & Ali-Khan, 2013; Yee, 2016). A more narrow focus should result in
a more nuanced understanding of how students engage or disengage with various aspects of the
academic domain, and how that (dis)engagement may contribute to their academic outcomes. For
example, the findings of the current study suggest that the way in which first-generation students
perceive their positionality in the undergraduate academic community is influenced by their
ability to successfully leverage the academic skills and strategies they developed in high school,
both in general and specifically in terms of research assignments. By focusing narrowly on
research assignments, the participants in this study were able to share detailed reflections about
their experiences with a specific and common academic experience, thus providing a better
understanding of their academic engagement.

5.5.2

Information literacy research

Future research must assess the information literacy of specific student populations, particularly
minoritized and underserved populations. Previous research assessing information literacy has
focused on undergraduate students more broadly (e.g. Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2009,
Head & Eisenberg, 2010b) thus providing no evidence for first-generation students’ or other
140

minoritized students’ information literacy and the implications of their information literacy for
both the social-class and racial achievement gaps. This recommendation is consistent with
Bensimon’s (2005) equity cognitive frame in that faculty and other academic support staff
cannot begin to narrow and close achievement gaps if the nature of these gaps is not well
understood. The information literacy of minortized and underserved student populations is
largely absent from LIS research and scholarship (Pawley, 2006) thus making the potential
relationship between information literacy and achievement gaps invisible. If LIS practitioners
and researchers are unwilling to conduct rigorous research related to the information literacy in
these student populations, then these students’ experiences will continue to remain invisible and
we are complicit in the reproduction of achievement gaps (Bensimon, 2005). We cannot help to
narrow or close achievement gaps that we consistently fail to recognize, because this lack of
recognition results in complacency in our own practices.
Future research should further explore the first-generation students’ and other minoritized
student populations’ experiences with research assignments as they transition from high school
into college. Although the findings of the current study partially uncovered the role of high
school research assignments in preparing first-generation students to transition academically into
college, a comparative exploration of first-generation students’ experiences with research
assignments in high school and the early years of college was not an explicit goal. This kind of
an exploration would provide a more detailed understanding of both the successes and struggles
that first-generation students face when they encounter research assignments early in college,
which institutions could use to better develop, deploy, or promote services that are meant to help
students succeed academically. In addition, narrowly focusing on students’ experiences with
research assignments in high school may provide additional insight into how the academic

141

literacies in college are or are not communicated to students prior to enrolling in college, as well
as exploring the ways in which teachers portray college professors. This kind of research would
likely advance an understanding of the factors that may contribute to first-generation students’
perceived initially positionality in the community, as well as their willingness to initiate
interactions with faculty when they first arrive at college.
In addition, longitudinal exploration of students’ experiences with research assignments
as they transition within college is needed. Existing research has largely taken a snapshot
approach to understand students’ experiences doing research for a specific assignment (e.g.
Johnson & McCracken, 2017) or asked students to reflect more generally on their research
process(es) (e.g. Logan& Pickard, 2012; Pickard & Logan, 2013). In the current study,
participants were asked to reflect upon their experiences with research assignments throughout
college, which helped to uncover the ways in students’ strategies, relationships, and information
literacy did or did not evolve over time. However, this approach has its limitations to
understanding this kind of an evolution, because the participants were attempting to reflectively
describe a past identity rather than a current identity. In addition, threshold concept theory, on
which the current conceptualization of information literacy is based, is intended to provide a
foundation for understanding how students master disciplinary content and develop disciplinary
expertise. Existing LIS research has not provided an adequate foundation for how undergraduate
students master the information literacy threshold concepts as they enter their major field(s) of
study and transition within the collegiate academic domain.
Future research should also explore the relationship between goal orientation and
information literacy. An emergent finding of this study was the potential importance of a
student’s intrinsic motivation to learn more about a topic (i.e. goal orientation) related to their

142

identity or lived experience for a research assignment to the demonstration of the modes of
thinking related to information literacy. This is an exciting finding, yet more research is needed
to understand the potential relationship between students’ goal orientations, as well as a fundsof-knowledge approach to research assignments, and the development of students’ information
literacy skills, particularly for minoritized students. In terms of existing LIS research, Folk
(2016) hypothesized that there may be a relationship between a student’s goal orientation and
their information literacy development, and Flierl, Bonem, Maybee, and Fundator (2018)
recently found evidence for such as relationship. In addition, this recommendation is consistent
with the findings of related, non-LIS research. The Meaningful Writing Project (Eodice, Geller,
& Lerner, 2017) found that assignments which allowed or encouraged students to draw on their
prior knowledge and identities (i.e. funds of knowledge) were more likely to be considered
meaningful, which also increased the chances that students would transfer what was learned in
that assignment to other contexts. This transfer of learning is central to the development of
information literacy, which is transdisciplinary in nature. Ideally students will develop their
information literacy within the academic context but transfer those critical, analytical, and
reflective modes of thinking to their professional, personal, and civic lives.
Finally, more research is needed to understand the relationship(s) between critical reading
skills, reflection, and the development of information literacy. Others have argued that critical
reading skills are essential to developing information literacy, as students are expected to engage
with information sources to determine their relevance for their current information need or
context (Broussard, 2017). However, the findings of this study and others (Manarin et al., 2015)
suggest that students may perceive that close and critical reading are not essential for success in
the undergraduate academic community and faculty may reinforce this perception. This may

143

have implications for the development of the critical modes of thinking related to information
literacy and the frequency of the checklist approach to evaluating and using information apparent
in the current study. In addition, little is known about the importance of reflection to the
development of information literacy. Based on their analysis of reflective writing in an
undergraduate business intelligence course, McKinney and Sen (2012) argue that reflective
writing is an appropriate method to assess students’ information literacy development. However,
this reflective writing was summative in nature, and little is known about the potential formative
value of reflection to the development of information literacy.

5.6

CONCLUSION

My purpose for conducting this study was to examine the ways in which academic culture and
specific academic practices (i.e. research assignments) contribute to the social-class achievement
gap (Stephens et al., 2014). Based on the findings of previous research (Collier & Morgan, 2008;
Jehangir, 2010; McLoughlin, 2012; White & Ali-Khan, 2013; Yee, 2016), I assumed that
research assignments may be alienating experiences for first-generation students. However, the
findings of the present study challenge that assumption. Previous research did not consistently
account for the complex and intersectional identities of first-generation students. The findings of
the current study challenge the practice of continually comparing marginalized student
populations (i.e. first-generation students, low-income students, students of color) to students
whose identities align more with the upper-middle-class, white, patriarchal, heteronormative
cultures, which have traditionally been privileged in higher education. This continued focus on
comparison has resulted in a monolithic understanding of first-generation students’ academic
144

engagement, one that has largely surfaced the weaknesses that these students bring to their
collegiate academic experiences, rather than acknowledging their strengths. In addition, it
reinforces that notion that there is a normative academic experience, and that experiences that
deviate from this normative experience are aberrant or undesirable. It is imperative that scholars
conduct rigorous research that focuses on understanding the complexities of marginalized
student populations and the ways in which the culture of higher education must change to
become more inclusive of these students if we are to make progress in narrowing and closing the
social-class achievement gap. This will become even more important as the demographics of this
nation continue to shift such that the United State will become a majority-minority nation.
The findings of this study serve as call to action for faculty, both individually and
collectively, to consider the ways in which they create inclusive learning environments for
marginalized student populations. The findings suggest that research assignments have the
potential to engage first-generation students when faculty provide them with the opportunity to
explore topics that are meaningful. In addition, faculty-initiated interactions may be critical in
helping first-generation students and other marginalized student populations to feel that they are
part of the undergraduate academic community and begin to build their academic support
network. This call to action is aligned with Bensimon’s (2005) equity cognitive frame, which
asserts that the burden of successful academic engagement and performance should not be placed
solely on the student, nor should we seek to fix students whose identities may not intersect with
the dominant cultural paradigms in higher education. Rather, this call to action requires faculty to
consider the ways in which we can change our practices, at both the individual and programmatic
levels, to empower students and validate the identities, lived experiences, prior knowledge, and

145

interests they bring with them to their collegiate academic work and signal to these students that
they belong.