FACETS OF GRAFFITI ART AND STREET ART DOCUMENTATION ONLINE:
A DOMAIN AND CONTENT ANALYSIS

by
Ann M. Graf

ABSTRACT
FACETS OF GRAFFITI ART AND STREET ART DOCUMENTATION ONLINE:
A DOMAIN AND CONTENT ANALYSIS
by
Ann M. Graf
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2018
Under the Supervision of Professor Richard P. Smiraglia

In this dissertation research I have applied a mixed methods approach to analyze the
documentation of street art and graffiti art in online collections. The data for this study comes
from the organizational labels used on 241 websites that feature photographs of street art and
graffiti art, as well as related textual information provided on these sites and interviews with
thirteen of the curators of the sites. The goal of the research is to demonstrate the existence of
a coherent domain of street art and graffiti art documentation that may in turn be used to
inform the formal design of systems to record evidence of the art movement and the works.
Open coding was applied to the organizational text used by the websites to reveal a set
of four categories of descriptive facets. The categories are related to general aspects of the
websites themselves, the supports upon which works are created or placed, the various types
of works, and location information. There are several facets included within each of these four
categories. When a website shared information about the site itself, most frequently on an
about sub-page, this was analyzed for audience, explicit organization methods, motivations for
creating the site, and art style vocabulary used. Audience and explicit organization methods
were rarely shared. Motivations were coded as internal, external, or mixed with emphasis on
ii

internal or external. Art style vocabulary varies and is tied to motivations, but the most
commonly named style is graffiti or a variant thereof. Sites that feature work from internally
motivated sites feature the widest variety of art style terminology and tend to avoid use of
graffiti and graffiti-related terms.
All website curators that could be contacted were offered the opportunity to participate
in an interview regarding website organization for graffiti art and street art. Thirteen interviews
were conducted: one by phone, one by Skype, and eleven by email. The interview data reveals
varying opinions on what terminologies or categories should be used to organize photographic
collections of graffiti art and street art online, but there is general agreement that the name of
the artist or crew (if known), the year of the work, and the location of the work are the most
important facets. The curators demonstrate that the size of the collection, geographic focus,
and scope of works featured will have an impact on how the site should be organized. The
ontological formation of the domain of street art and graffiti art documentation is evidenced by
the combined results of the website analyses and interviews.

Chapter 1. Introduction
The purpose of this research is to contribute to the forms of knowledge organization
required by the process of documentation and sharing of street art. Specifically, this research is
an examination of how this process is being carried out with particular attention paid to the
textual information associated with photographs of the artwork in online, non-institutional
collections, the methods being used to document the street artworks, and the organizational
practices of collectors that serve to make the collections available to users. Operating on the
belief that street art is valuable historically, artistically, and culturally, and realizing that
numerous websites exist that are devoted to documenting and sharing street art, this study
represents a first step toward determining the structure of the domain of online street art
collections.
1.0 Introduction
Street art, artistic and otherwise, ancient and modern, has been studied across
disciplines (Olberg 2011, Bruce 2014, Phillips 2002, Valesi 2014). It has been considered as art
(Daichendt 2013), as social statement (Hagen et al. 1999), as activism (Wallace 2012) or political
commentary/discourse, as historical artifact (Forster, Vettese-Forster, and Borland 2012;
Graves-Brown and Schofield 2011), as criminal act (Young 2012, Alpaslan 2012), as urban spacemaking (Visconti et al. 2010), and even as “a potential enhancement to everyday urban life”
(Austin 2010, 34). Reactions to street art are as varied as the approaches to studying it. It has
been valorized as outsider art, urban expression and beautification, and often humorous
interjection. It has also been demonized by association with gang activity, vandalism, dropping
1

property values, dirt and disorder, and the general disintegration of societal values
(Mieszkowski 2010). Regardless, the practice and product are ubiquitous parts of modern urban
culture. An ever-increasing number of websites dedicated to street art and street artists around
the world testifies to the popularity of the medium, or what can be called an art movement
(Masilamani 2008, Bowen 1999, Armstrong 2005, Wacławek 2008, Bengsten 2014).
Street art is being documented in numerous ways around the globe, by those who
create street art documenting their own works and often the works of others, those who do not
make street art but enjoy it, and those who simply happen upon it and take photos of it. Often
these photographs of street art end up online in blogs, Flickr or Instagram streams, or websites
set up specifically to share street art collections. Whether intentionally or not, these collections
serve as models of preservation for what are notoriously ephemeral artistic works.
1.1 Background - Knowledge Organization
The documentation of street art requires several forms of knowledge organization (KO).
Smiraglia (2011) defines KO as “the arena in which the heuristics of ordering knowledge are
studied. More narrowly, within information science, KO is the arena in which classification and
ontology, thesauri and controlled vocabulary, epistemology and warrant are studied and in
which applications are developed and tested” (1). KO as a discipline concerns itself with the
study of the “semantic relations between concepts” (Hjørland 2003, 107) and with the
organization and representation of “documents for effective retrieval and to build systems for
this” (Mai 1999, 547). Because of its common application to bibliographic systems and
classification of information, KO is foundational to the field of Library and Information Science

2

(LIS), but its application is much broader, encompassing any and all domains, whether
academic, corporate, scientific, or social. KO principles underlie classification, indexing and
abstracting, cataloging, archiving, metadata and metadata schema creation, and information
search and retrieval, functions that are valuable in any system that deals with information in
various shapes and forms, from physical to digital.
Many KO scholars emphasize the relationship between the ontological nature of KO, or
the study of what is, and the importance of epistemology to inform the understanding of
domains (Smirgalia 2012, Hjørland 2013, Mai 1999). A postmodern view of KO places
importance on the differences in the way that groups and individuals approach, contextualize,
and use information. To design systems that best serve groups or individuals with specific
needs, researchers study the relevant backgrounds of the users, the types of resources they
use, and any specialized vocabularies or ways of talking about information associated with
them. Such research is considered domain-specific and as such, domain analytical
methodologies are often utilized to reveal particularities among what may be called a
community of users (Hjørland and Albrechtsen 1995, Hjørland 2002).
One such community is examined, that of those who photograph street art and share
collections of it on the Internet. Careful consideration must be given to aspects of this work,
including but not necessarily limited to the definitions for street art, community, and collection.
I begin with the belief that there is an actual cohesive community, or what can be seen in more
formal terms as a domain within KO, the members of which share certain ways of approaching,
talking about, and organizing access to collections of street art online. “A domain is best
understood as a unit of analysis for the construction of a KOS. That is, a domain is a group with
3

an ontological base that reveals an underlying teleology, a set of common hypotheses,
epistemological consensus on methodological approaches, and social semantics” (Smiraglia
2012, 114). To be considered a domain within KO, the members of (or practitioners within) a
street art community will cite each other, or if not writing academic papers, they will discuss
things using a common language and citing conceptual norms (Ma 2015), which may be
evidenced by analyzing text across street art websites for common uses of language and
methodological approaches to the art form. Such mutual semantic content, if present, is one
indicator of a shared ontological base that can serve as a source for ordering the products of
the community.
An interesting problem for research is to discover the extent to which websites
documenting street art can themselves be seen as documentary evidence of a domain. No one
has yet conducted a domain analysis to determine whether this domain exists, and if it does,
what constitutes the intension and extension—depth and breadth—of the domain. Examining
how the street art community itself talks about street art processes and the artworks is one
way of revealing the existence or non-existence of a coherent domain of street art websites.
Domain analysis can, in this way, allow for a post-modern definition of an individual domain by
way of allowing the actors within the domain to define the boundaries of the domain itself
instead of relying on outside perspectives, such as that of the traditional or “institutional” art
world, to impose a definition on what they may view as a sub-domain of their own purview.
Street art has often been heralded as democratizing traditional art, bringing art out of
the institutional setting of the museum and putting it out on the street to be viewed and
“owned” by all. I argue that this democratization is carried further into issues of access in the
4

online environment where descriptive practices of street art curation are carried out by those
who produce the works themselves or photograph the works, thus bypassing the institutional
gallery or museum use of standardized vocabularies designed by librarians, art specialists, and
those who are (likely) neither street artists nor street art community participants. The fact that
street art is being photographed around the world and shared online also provides a
democratizing effect on access to the works. Most traditional museum artworks are portable
and can be physically shared in traveling shows, or they can be gathered into one remote show,
making their collective access easier than is the case with street art. Street art is, by definition,
“produced illegally in the shared public spaces of the modern city” (Austin 2010, 34), and while
there are instances where certain pieces have been physically removed from their place of
creation and preserved, they by and large must be visited in situ or viewed as photographic
representations.
The science of the conceptual order of knowledge is concerned about, in this case, the
specific order a community is applying to street art. In a background discussion of street art, I
will provide a brief framework for understanding the actors within a community for whom their
specific conceptual order is meaningful.
1.7.1 Graffiti and Graffiti Art
The common conceptions of graffiti and graffiti art overlap and often appear
interchangeable, yet several scholars have striven to make a distinction between the two. The
definitional distinctions and restrictions for this research are based on the views of Austin
(2010), Riggle (2010), and McAuliffe (2012). While all note the possibilities of overlap, they all

5

also agree that there are differentiations. Riggle introduces the differences between what he
calls mere graffiti and artistic graffiti, situating these forms on a sort of continuum from graffiti
through artistic graffiti to street art. Austin takes a slightly different approach that raises graffiti
art out of the law enforcement standpoint of graffiti as vandalism and asks us to consider it for
the art form that it is, a public visual statement that relates less to the art gallery than to graffiti
art itself. “Graffiti art is a face-to-face, social practice with clear aesthetic intentions and unlike
traditional graffiti, the semantic content of graffiti art is secondary to its visual aspirations”
(Austin 2010, 35). A more detailed discussion of these distinctions is found later in this chapter.
1.2 Background - Street art
According to Loeffler (2012, 75),
Graffiti and street art is sophisticated in its concept and execution, whether that is
spraying, stenciling, paper cutting or yarn bombing. It poses questions to the stringency
of the urban environment structured around social control and aesthetic regulation and
creates a sense of beauty, whether in galleries, spaces like car parks, vacant lots and
abandoned buildings, or bang in the middle of the street.
The modern graffiti movement began in Philadelphia in the 1960s and soon spread to
New York City. This was a time of intense social, cultural, and economic upheaval in the US.
Researchers have associated the birth of the graffiti movement with limited venues for socially
acceptable youth expression and with high youth unemployment rates (Baca 1995, Austin 2001,
Macdonald 2001). Writers, as they are called, chose a name for themselves, in the early days
often using their given name and including some reference to the writer’s street or
neighborhood. Early known writers include names such as Taki 183, Topcat 126, and Eva 62
(Cresswell 1992, Austin 2001). Writers initially wrote these names or “tags” all over to saturate
6

their presence in a city or specific area of the city (Castleman 1982, Austin 2001, Wacławek
2011). The tags consisted of plain lettering, usually written with a marker, on public or privately
owned property in the urban environment, but they soon evolved into more elaborate, stylized
creations as more writers began to tag, necessitating new ways to capture attention and stand
out among the increasing number of names (Castleman, 1982). The tag and the style in which it
was written became a representation of the writer and as such it was carefully crafted and the
design often manipulated. The chosen letters do not always result in words that make sense
according to the rules of Standard English, but they may be used for how they sound together
and often for how they work out stylistically in the design of the tag. Artists often drop letters
out of their name or change a letter, even choosing an entirely new name as “self-protection
and a tool for stylistic innovation. Name-switching provides writers with a fresh combination of
letters to explore and contort, while letter-dropping allows them more time to paint their tag
and make it more visually appealing” (Wacławek 2011, 15).
Over time the names remained but became larger, extremely stylized, intricate, and
colorful. The practice moved from simply “getting up” – getting one’s name out and saturating
an area with it – to making a statement about the writer him or herself, or about the city,
politics, institutions, or society in general. To the names were added characters, animals,
people, brand names, designs, and textual statements. The now traditional spray can soon
bypassed in popularity the black marker of the early taggers (those who wrote simply their
pseudonyms anywhere and everywhere), and writers honed their skills developing styles, which
were copied and passed on to newer writers. They experimented with different spray paint
caps to give various types of application and line quality, affording writers more varied and
7

refined artistic and expressive capabilities and thus not only capturing the attention of other
writers, but that of the general public and even the institutional art world by the 1980s (Lydiate
2010, Snyder 2009).
A break from simple tagging and the emergence of a true urban art form became visible
in what is variously spoken of as graffiti art, street art, or the post-graffiti art movement (Bowen
1999, Riggle 2010, Austin 2010, Visconti et al. 2010). Wacławek (2011) confirms this distinction,
concluding that “the post-graffiti art movement boasts greater diversity and includes art
produced as an evolution of, rebellion against or an addition to the established signature graffiti
tradition” (29). Street art is “less concerned with letters (although they may be used) but
emphasizes the visual image, contextual use of space, and uses a wider range of materials that
extend beyond the spray can” (Daichendt 2013, 8).
Austin (2010) highlights the difference between graffiti and art, also using the term
graffiti art. He asserts there is a generally poor understanding of graffiti art as vandalism, a view
commonly held by urban officials who see graffiti art “as an urban problem confronting the citystate” (34). This definitional problem is mediated by the addition of the word art to the term
“graffiti,” bringing the historical process of scratching words or drawings onto public surfaces
into contrast with what Austin stresses as “spontaneous and unauthorized public art” (44) and
“a valued addition to contemporary urban life and a new kind of urban art that has already
spawned a second, more expanded variety: street art” (34). He critically notes the importance
of place and context in graffiti art by describing the city as “an artistic material” in and of itself
(38). At the same time, he sets up oppositions between pop art and graffiti art, and between
modern art and graffiti. Modern art “is authorized, expected and posed in shared public spaces”
8

while graffiti art is “an unauthorized artistic act that collectively and illegally ‘takes place’ in
shared public space” (40). He notes a lack of any institutional acceptance of graffiti as public art.
He goes on to point out that “graffiti art appears in public space, and is in dialogue with the
city’s legal public sphere, but it is not public art” (40). Graffiti art is artistic, but its practice on
private surfaces in public places is still illegal and therefore limits acceptance of the art form in
broader, institutionalized circles.
Several authors tend to use the terms graffiti and street art interchangeably. Riggle
(2010) provides a useful discussion of the two terms:
… street art and graffiti are different arts that sometimes meet in a single work. Some
street art is graffiti; some artistic graffiti is not street art. There is no essential
connection between the two. This is not to deny that graffiti and street art have a strong
historical connection. In fact, a case can (and should) be made that graffiti culture was
the driving force behind the development of street art. But this strong historical
connection does not imply a connection in essence. This shows that street art is just one
form of postmuseum art – a category that includes artistic graffiti. (253, emphasis
original)
He sets up a series of parameters that can be applied to street art, including meaning tied
intrinsically to the environment of the streets (not literally on the street itself, though it can be
there) and the acknowledgement that such space is “primarily for the public,” its nature as
“illegal, anonymous, ephemeral, highly creative, and attractive,” and as normally “cheap to
make, free to experience, and owned and overseen by no one (or, rather, everyone)” (Riggle
2010, 255, 246, 249). He also disambiguates two basic kinds of graffiti, mere graffiti (not art)
and artistic graffiti (art). Artistic graffiti is often street art, but not all artistic graffiti is street art,
owing to the definitions he presents earlier in the article. Riggle here states that graffiti is also
known as tagging, but others, myself included, would further differentiate these two terms, the
9

latter being more of a simple saturation technique and the former more complex. Again, the
definitions are fluid and overlapping.
While graffiti, graffiti art, and street art share many similarities, it is generally agreed
that there are differences as well. MacDowell (2015) states that “[i]n definitional terms, graffiti
can either be subsumed under the larger category of street art or graffiti itself becomes the
primary category” (35). Instead of trying to nail down the distinctions in each of these related
art styles or movements, the term ‘street art’ will be used throughout this research. This is
appropriate as well because the websites that will be studied do not follow neat distinctions or
limitations in art styles or movements themselves. The websites include images representing a
range of artistic street art/graffiti art/graffiti practices that cannot be pigeonholed into one
style or another. Bengsten (2014) found disagreement on terminology among street art
community members themselves, evidenced in online forum discussions (57). Descriptive
difficulties are of course not limited to these art forms, but are common among those who try
to define what is, and is not, art (Danto 1981).
1.3 Local Urban Environment as Contextual Organization – Place, Ownership, Surface
Graffiti and street artists use the street as a canvas and in so doing they inherently enter
into a discourse with the environment in which they create (Wacławek 2011). Operating within
local urban spaces the artists contend with expectations of parents and other adults, educators,
law enforcement, and the general public that most often come to side on the normative
criminalization of their creative and artistic expression. There is an obvious paradox: writing on
a surface that you do not own is illegal, regardless of how beautiful, complex, or creative such

10

writing might be, but the transgressive nature of these practices aside, there remains the
aesthetic value of the works. The location – the context – of the work, nonetheless, provides a
force for positive or negative reception (Riggle 2010, Austin 2001).
Several scholars have studied graffiti, graffiti art, writers, and writing culture and
highlight the struggles of urban youth, reactions against societal pressures and norms, and
desire to claim space and agency in the midst of a powerfully mediated environment that too
easily criminalizes youth culture (Austin 2001, Wacławek 2011, Snyder 2009, Castleman 1982).
Urban space is not lacking sanctioned images and text; quite the opposite is true.
Transportation and street signage, advertisements, municipal directives, and brand names
abound (Austin 2001). The more money and power, the bigger, more colorful, and more
ubiquitous a marketing message can be. Street art and graffiti art appear in the midst of these
other texts and images, yet they do not have the sanction of these legal and societally accepted
expressions. Street art can be found in the same places as these other messages, but its
adjacency highlights reaction against what may be viewed as corporate, commercial, and
political hegemony (Visconti et al. 2010).
The reclamation of space and the exploration of various dualisms are seen: what is
public and what is private, what is art and what is crime, what is allowed in public space and
what is prohibited (Dickens 2008). Graffiti and street art often are seen as disrupting the
heterogeneous look of the streets that has come to symbolize order, control, and safety (Austin
2001). Those in society who have power and agency, namely adults in law enforcement,
municipal or educational leaders, or corporations, dictate these standards. Cresswell describes
several typical media responses that have formed historically in connection with graffiti, and
11

graffiti art by association: dirt, disorder, disease, pollution, obscenity, epidemic, insanity, and
anarchy (1992). These particular discourses surrounding graffiti summon ideas that the work is
out of place, immoral, unsanitary, unwanted, deviant, out of control (Iveson 2010, Lasley 1995),
and signifying “assaults and riots waiting to happen” (Austin 2001, 146).
Along with the intellectual and emotional motivations and limitations, the context of
public spaces as physical structure influence not only the size and shape of the works, but the
materials and tools used, the length of time allowed to produce them, their public reach and
reception, longevity, and level of recognition and acceptance for their creator or creators. Using
public space as a sort of gallery means the artists are aware of, and must take into account, the
ephemerality of the works. They will most likely be exposed to the elements and will be at
much greater risk of being defaced, being destroyed, or of decaying than artwork in a museum
or gallery. If the spot chosen is in a high traffic area, the time available to complete a work may
be very limited. Often, the artist will often have to work under cover of darkness, another
challenge that will limit what he or she can accomplish. A piece in a popular high traffic spot will
gather a larger audience, and often more respect from other writers and those who appreciate
the work, than one completed under an out of the way train bridge, but at the same time it
might not last as long before being altered or removed.
Graffiti and street artists operate outside the rules of property ownership, law,
commercialism, and the formal art institution. They do not get paid to show their work, nor is
their work for sale. In this way they do not share in the economic structure and benefits of the
museum or art gallery, although some see their work as a reaction against the commercial art
world and what may be commonly accepted as constituting “art.” Their works are not
12

commonly protected nor are efforts formally made to preserve evidence of their existence
other than by the artists themselves and those individuals who value and photograph the works
for their own enjoyment (Forster, Vettese-Forster, and Borland 2012). These facts act as
limitations, but also as freedoms for the artist who pursues graffiti or street art and as such
they influence and shape their performance and reception.
1.7.3 Public Art
Also excluded from this study, public art, like graffiti art, is art that is in a public place,
but is sanctioned. Someone pays for it to be there, or designs a specific place wherein the art
will be performed, will be shown, or will reside. It does not take place illegally. Visconti et al.
(2010) specifically exclude public art, including street performance, street theater, clownery,
parkour, and flash-mobbing, within a definition of street art (514). The practice of creating
visual art by projecting images onto public buildings, for example, might be legal and takes
place in public, but if unsanctioned would still be considered street art, not public art. Some see
mural art, the painting of large outdoor murals, as street art because of its location, but using
the qualifier “mural” usually indicates that an authority has sanctioned the work and therefore
it is not street art.
Definitions for graffiti, graffiti art, street art, and public art – among other terminologies
– are porous and fluid, often overlapping in myriad ways and subject to change. The community
examined for this research may not agree on the strict use of these terms. Some curators will
collect and include murals, for example, on their websites, not making the distinction concisely
between what is sanctioned and what is illegal. I am noting this difficulty here and attempting

13

to develop definitions that will suit this study and allow framing and discussion of this particular
research. Other scholars and artists themselves may disagree with my chosen terminology, but
these definitions, however debatable, will stand for use within this dissertation.
1.4 Organic Organization Practices: An Ontology of Street Art
As described above, graffiti and street artists create art, but the context, the ephemeral
nature, and the illegality of their work differentiate their experiences and ways of knowing from
those of the “recognized” art world. Many of their processes are the same as or similar to
those of more traditional artists, but like any group of specialists, they use categories and
classifications, the intrinsic application of KO processes, that are specific to their artistic
domain. Those who work on the street, like other artists, usually keep a sketchbook of ideas,
what writers call piecebooks or black books. These are used to play with ideas and are
important for getting a design down on paper so that the execution can be planned out in
advance, given the cost of paint and supplies and the limited amount of time that will be
available to carry out the creative process in public. Graffiti artists will often share what they
are working on in their black books and bounce ideas off of each other (Ferrell 1993). Black
books or works from within them are also sometimes shown on street art websites in
conjunction with their owner-artists.
Graffiti art, as a particular street art style and as an example that can be used to discuss
organization and classification within a specific art community, is commonly described using
terminology that is distinct from that used within other art domains (Macdonald 2001). There
are broad terms used to describe types of graffiti art, such as bombs, throw-ups or throwies,

14

burners, and pieces. Each of these different types of graffiti art includes specific tools, numbers
of colors, lettering styles, time required, and may be carried out best solo or with a crew.
Lettering styles also have names within the graffiti art community, such as Philly Wicked or
Pichação used in tagging, and Bubble, Blockbuster, 3-D or Dimensional, or Wild Style letters
used in pieces (Gottlieb 2008). Graffiti art on trains may be referred to as T-to-B (top to
bottoms) and E-to-E (end to ends), depending on how much of a train car the work covers
(Whitehead 2004). Such specific terminology largely is not to be found in popular art
vocabularies used in the institutional art world. Graf (2016) showed this to be true with an
examination of the Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT), which revealed only very general
terms such as graffiti, mural paintings, and black books.
There are popular stylizations often seen in graffiti art pieces, such as arrows, stars,
quotation marks, crowns, bubbles, or paint drips. When a writer steals an idea from another
writer and uses it in his or her own work, he or she may be said to be “biting” the original
writer. Writers may also bite from commercial designs or characters (Ferrell 1993). Several
books exist that go into detail about graffiti art style conventions (Snyder 2009, Wacławek
2011, Felisbret and Felisbret 2009). Gottlieb (2008), as part of her doctoral research, developed
a classification system for graffiti art styles intended for use by those who catalog images in
archives or libraries.
Forms and styles differ between graffiti art and street art, but there is a lot of overlap as
well. Graffiti art can be considered a narrower domain or a subdomain of street art (Riggle
2010, McAuliffe 2012), or as a precursor to street art (Austin 2010). These two domains share a
use of public space, often illegality and a resultant desire for anonymity, some styles such as
15

textual messages and/or designs, some tools such as spray paint or markers, and a
consciousness of working outside the dominant, socially accepted art world or museum culture.
“The complexity of letter styles, which often renders graffiti illegible to the wider public,
supports a position that graffiti is an egocentric form of private communication among
writers—an appropriation of public space. In contrast, street art as a wider set of artistic
practices often presents a more public address, less tied to the subcultural practices and
conventions associated with graffiti” (McAuliffe 2012, 190). There exists a broader range of
tools, materials, and styles that fall within the realm of street art, compared with graffiti art.
Street art includes, but is not limited to, forms other than straightforward painting or spray
painting, such as reverse graffiti (removing dirt, for example, to reductively create words or
images), scratchiti (scratching words or images into paint or other surfaces), stenciling (with
various materials including paint or mud), cup-rocking (pushing colored cups into chain link
fencing to create patterns), yarn bombing (or knit/crochet bombing), sticker art, environmental
art (nature art, earth art, or ecological art), shadow painting (outlining cast shadow forms in
chalk or paint so they remain when the shadows are gone), and invisible graffiti (using paint
that remains invisible during daylight but shows up at night under lights) (McAuliffe 2012,
Riggle 2010, Wacławek 2011, Randazzo and Lajevic 2013).
1.5 Social Organization and the Hierarchy of the Streets
Early graffiti artists organized themselves, beginning at first with a gang-like structure,
but soon evolving to an artistic crew where members were often loyal to each other and close
knit, like family (Austin 2001). Newer writers who do not yet have a lot of skill are known as
“toys.” These beginners watch the more experienced writers and try to copy them. A more
16

talented writer might mentor a beginner and let the toy prime walls with plain paint or fill in
the outlines of their letters. Making the outlines is considered a job of higher skill and left to the
better writers. On the other end of the writer hierarchy are the “kings,” (or “queens,” though
the majority of graffiti writers are young men) those who had the greatest name saturation,
experience, and recognition in a city or area (Ferrell 1993, Austin 2001, Lachmann 1988).
Lachmann describes a three-stage typography of the graffiti writer: the novice, the tagger, and
the muralist, though his chronological organization reverses the first two stages in comparison
with what is discussed above (1988). The last stage is in general agreement across the
literature, that of muralist or piece-maker, the realm where graffiti becomes graffiti art or
street art (Austin 2001, Lasley 1995, Lachmann 1988, Riggle 2010).
Crews are a form of organization for graffiti artists; their members collaborate on
elaborate pieces. The crew can saturate an area – get their names and artworks up in greater
concentration – because they are a collective, but they can also create larger, more intricate
pieces that a lone writer would not have time or resources to complete. Individual crew
members often sign pieces alongside the name of the crew. Crews remain an integral type of
organization for graffiti artists across the country and around the world.
Socially a writer gains recognition by getting up and by becoming more skilled in design,
lettering, and what is known as can control, the ability to control the spray paint for different
effects. Painting in popular places where one’s work will be seen increases a writer’s
recognition, as well as painting on trains that will travel and therefore display one’s work across
the city or even the country. Working in hidden away places may afford writers or crews more
time to complete large, time consuming pieces, and such works may last longer without
17

disturbance, but there is no guarantee of this. These types of secret works may only reach a
very limited audience of other writers (Austin 2001). Locations may be chosen for a variety of
reasons: for saturation or recognition, large and varied audiences, or for specific audiences
(such as municipal leaders or commercial enterprise). Writers sometimes chose a location that
is very high or looks impossible to reach as way to achieve recognition. “The value placed on
the daring necessary to write in these inaccessible locations is similar to the more standard
public fame given to explorers, discoverers, and daredevils. It is a sign of collective admiration
for their skill, ingenuity, and courage” (Austin 2001, 54).
1.6 Social Semantics
The preceding pages have introduced the organization of street artists based on styles,
skill, crew membership, location, and recognition. Another aspect of organization can be found
in the ways that community members talk about the processes used to create street art, the
materials and styles, and the organizational divisions that street art website curators use when
sharing collections with the public. This last type of organization, the navigational structures or
design architectures of the websites, are used to group artworks often in ways that are similar
to the organization discussed by artists. Commonly seen facets for organizing the artworks
include style, surface, artist or crew, location, and date. These kinds of information regarding
the artworks are in turn similar to the common parts of a bibliographic record for a more
traditional document: author, date, and publication location. Data for this study will come from
textual descriptions of street art works on a selection of websites and the descriptive categories
into which these works are placed, as well as from interviews with website curators.

18

1.7 Definition of Terms Used in This Research
To begin this discussion, it is important to distinguish between what is commonly
referred to as graffiti and that which will be defined as graffiti art or street art, the digital
preservation and organization of which is the focus of this research. Other labels are often used
as well, obliquely referring to similar public artistic practices, such as ephemeral art, public art,
and murals. Being specific with terminology is important because of the social, legal, and artistic
perceptions of what will be argued are different forms of expression. In this research, when the
term “street art” is used, this is meant to include “graffiti art and street art”.
Street Art is a broad term that indicates art that is, in very simplified terms, made on the
street. It can include graffiti art, and several other forms of visual art, but it is understood to be
non-sanctioned, often on private or public property without permission, and therefore most
often illegal (Riggle 2010). For the purposes of this research, the term ‘street art’ will be used to
include graffiti art and other forms of visual art “that has been produced illegally in the shared
public spaces of the modern city” (Austin 2010, 34). Austin adds that it is a “social practice with
clear aesthetic intentions … practiced collectively within skilled, locally organized subcultures”
(35). This may include forms such as stencil art, paste-ups, reverse graffiti, yarn bombing, and
even glued down mosaics, welded works, and light graffiti. The term “street” may be construed
as literally the street, or walls, or trees, on or inside buildings and other structures such as on
train cars or inside subway cars. It will not be used to include performance art, public art, or
simple graffiti tagging, but it is understood that the community in question photographing
street art does not always draw such formal boundaries and therefore art and mark-making
outside this definition will occasionally turn up in the collections studied. To draw distinctions
19

between these terms, a number of them require definition for exclusionary purposes before
turning to those that will be used within this study.
1.7.1 Tagging
Graffiti tagging is the writing of one’s name in public space, usually done in volume over
an area of a city. Taggers tend to try to get their names – usually not their real names but
names chosen for their own purposes – to be as visible as possible, which means a specific tag,
or stylized signature, will saturate an area. Tags commonly appear in cities on things like street
signage, bus shelters, railings, and garbage bins. Tagging may incorporate small designs, but is
not normally considered art. It is often conceptualized as a precursor to graffiti and graffiti art,
though most taggers never become graffiti artists. Tagging also may be done on stickers, often
using “free” US Postal Service mailing stickers or purchased stickers. Graffiti artists look down
upon those who practice simple tagging, which is associated with claiming space or territory
and not with making art (Lachmann 1988). Tagging in reference to graffiti is not to be confused
with tagging as metadata added to online documents in the form of tags, which will be
discussed in later chapters.
1.7.2 Discourse Community
Specific communities will be named in this research, such as a street art community, and
a photo-sharing community, but it is understood that the communities discussed are
constructed and defined by the researcher for the singular purpose of this study and should not
be taken to represent actual communities of practice as they might exist in the real world, if
they could exist at all. The use of the term “community” will be used here to indicate groups
20

with characteristics that appear alike to the researcher, not necessarily to those within these
researcher-constructed communities themselves. In KO, such groups are often evidenced by
use of a common vocabulary that is specific to what is commonly called a discourse community,
or simply a community. Working parameters herein will include graffiti artists and street artists,
curators, documenters, and collection users.
1.7.3 Curator
A curator is defined as someone who has created or is curating an online gallery of
photographic images of street art. The curator might be an individual or a group of individuals,
a street artist or not, a documenter or not. Curators might collect photographic images of their
own street art or of the street art of others, either by taking the photographs themselves or by
soliciting for photographic contributions that are added to the image gallery from others.
1.7.4 Documenter
A documenter is someone who submits work to a curator for inclusion in the curator’s
photographic image gallery of street art. A curator may also be a documenter, a contributor to
his or her own image gallery. A documenter might be a street artist contributing images of his
or her own street art or contributing images of the street art of another person.
1.7.5 User
A user for purposes of this study is a person who makes use of the photographic image
gallery of street art. Such use might consist of browsing and enjoying the images, using the
images as the basis for research, or following the work of a particular artist or geographic area,

21

for example. A user might also be a curator or a documenter. A user might be a street artist or
anyone who stumbles upon the image gallery.
1.7.6 Collection
The term collection herein indicates the contents of a street art image gallery found on
one internet site or one platform, such as a Flickr or Instagram stream, or a blog devoted to
street art. A collection will have a curator (individual or group) and at least one documenter,
and it is assumed that each collection, if the collection is public, will have multiple users of
unknown number.
1.7.7 Metadata
Metadata herein refers to the information that relates to description of the images
found in online collections of street art that is not limited to what may be attached digitally to
an image by a camera, such as the architectural labels of a website used for organizational
purposes and data added by curators to describe, categorize, and organize images.
1.8 Summary and Conclusion
Photographs in digital form have metadata that is automatically generated and attached
to them, with varying levels of detail depending on the settings of the camera used and the
permissions allowed by individuals using the technologies. The parameters of an image sharing
website may be such that titles are required for digital uploads, authorship credentials (account
registration, etc.), or other meaningful data. Software or human preference for folders or
pages, sub-pages, galleries, or other named sections may dictate the architecture of a website.
Additional metadata may be automatically included or may be optionally requested, such as GIS
22

information, art style information, artist or crew names of those responsible for the
photographed work, or the assignment of category names such as stencil, paste-up, or piece.
These complementary aspects of the uploaded image become valuable knowledge to be used
in the description of works, their disambiguation, their collocation based on authorship,
location, style, or context, and as ways to create, maintain, access or use an online archive of
street art through an organic knowledge organization system, or KOS.
There is little institutional support for the documentation of street art, and because of
its value not only as art, but as historical, social, and cultural record, it is important to
understand how the street art community as defined herein is undertaking ad hoc efforts to
preserve records of this work. Most tools available to information professionals for the
organization and access of art images are created with vocabularies that, for reasons of
economy, represent traditional art forms and materials as opposed to terminologies used by
members within specific outsider art movements (Graf 2016). Processes and systems for KO are
used when making these collections available to the public online, but it is not yet evident what
these systems and processes are and whether they share any similarities across collections and
among curators. A domain analytical approach to analyzing these collections and the methods
used by their curators will reveal valuable information about the domain of street art, what
aspects or facets of street artworks are important to record, what terminology is being used,
and how much contextual information would be beneficial to capture all according to those
within the domain so that these extremely ephemeral works can be documented, remembered,
and made available for study and appreciation. It may also serve to provide at least one answer

23

to Austin’s question, “What is it that we (academics) have to offer writers and their art worlds
that might be useful to them? (2013, n.p.)

24

Chapter 2: Literature Review—The Research Problem
2.0 Introduction
Numerous websites exist that have the stated or assumed purpose of sharing images of
graffiti art and street art, but it is not evident whether the curators of these sites share any
coherent principles, motivations, or standards for their seemingly similar work. I have labeled
those carrying out similar work on similar collections as members of a community, yet does this
community and the material record of this work reveal a domain, a “knowledge [base] of
specific, definable contexts” (Smiraglia 2015, 1)? Domain analytic research has up until recently
focused on academic disciplines, but studies are emerging that examine KO work carried out by
specific domains of users, including what is represented by the work of the street art/graffiti art
community in this study.
KO research is an interdisciplinary endeavor, applicable to any area of interest that
relies on knowledge for maintenance and growth. Domain analysis in knowledge organization
has often been described within one of the eleven approaches discussed by Hjørland, which
includes producing literature guides or subject gateways; producing special classifications and
thesauri; indexing and retrieval research; empirical user studies; bibliometrical studies;
historical studies; document and genre studies; epistemological and critical studies;
terminological, language for special purposes (LSP), database semantics, and discourse studies;
studies on structures and institutions in scientific communication; and studies in scientific
cognition, expert knowledge, and artificial intelligence (2002).

25

The domain at hand is that of art, and graffiti art and street art in particular, so it makes
sense that a review of relevant art literature will be in order, but the foundation of this research
remains in knowledge organization. Literature that is relevant to domain analysis of specific
user groups is examined, the organization of collections online, user-generated resource
description and ontology formation, and studies that specifically focus on graffiti art and street
art that may usefully inform this research.
2.1 KO Studies of Specific User Communities
Following in the aforementioned trend in KO that values the ways of knowing of those
sharing interests, endeavors, labor, and thought (Hjørland and Albrechtsen 1995, Smiraglia
2012), there have been a number of studies that examine organizational practices of specific
domains or user communities. Hartel’s dissertation (2007) examined the ways that hobby
gourmet cooks approach their use and organization of culinary information. She relied on
ethnographic interviews with twenty individuals in their homes and cooking spaces to develop
an understanding of their use of specific cooking resources and processes surrounding their
information searching, use, documentation, organization, and creation. Her interviewees
comprise a group in a leisure pursuit, not a professional or work activity, which might have
similarities to those in the street art online community. She based her study on that of serious
leisure and specifically on an activity that falls under the “Making and Tinkering” class, one of
five hobby classes described by Stebbins (1994). Another of these five hobby classes is that of
“Collecting,” which could be considered the type of focus of the online community of interest
for this study. While originally of interest to me as a methodology for exploring the
organizational practices and needs of a user community—the gourmet cook hobbyist—Hartel’s
26

study presented a broader ethnographic review of the hobby itself, the information, spaces,
and activities of its members.
There have been many LIS studies along the lines of Hartel’s that examine various
communities, hobbies, and collections, from record collectors (Margree et al. 2014) and rubber
duck collectors (Lee & Trace 2009), all of which fall under the study of users as collectors of
physical artifacts, to online museum visitors (Skov 2013) and amateur photographers (Cox,
Clough, and Marlow 2008). Such studies have much to contribute to the ways of knowing of
various groups of like-minded information users, yet they focus more closely on the activities of
the community members in interaction with their respective hobby pursuits, collection
expansion, and group interaction, whether physical or virtual, than on the ways they seek to
describe and organize their respective collections.
McTavish (2015) examined how people understand a domain, in this case healthy
eating, by how they classify food in their everyday life. She compared what she found regarding
her participants’ understanding of healthy and unhealthy foods via their own classifications
with a large Canadian government food guide publication and found that users tended to have
a conception of healthy food that differed somewhat from the government standard. She
concluded that domain analytic techniques that are often used in LIS against scholarly fields or
actors need to be augmented by other methodologies to capture the intricacies of “lay domain
knowledge” (957). Her research is a useful example of applying domain analysis to a nonacademic user group.

27

2.2 Organization of Online Collections and Websites
One of the more frequent ways that online collections have been examined is via art
institutions that make photographic representations of their holdings available to the public.
There have been many studies that have looked at how controlled vocabularies can and are
used to describe works of art or cultural heritage. Benedetti (2000), addressing folk art
terminology, emphasizes the importance of language used to describe artworks considered on
the fringes of the institutional art world because such description reflects upon not only the
works themselves, but the people who create them. As she states, “Language influences our
preconceptions and can be used to assist understanding or aggravate mistrust,” which is easily
applicable to the contested arena of street art and street artists (17). Complexity also arises
from the fact that the language used to describe art, art processes, and theories of art are
“often imprecise or ambiguous” (Harpring, 1999, 840).
Scholars describe the practice and efficacy of user tagging of artworks and photographs
online, such as Trant (2008, 2009) who examined the steve.museum’s work with user tagging of
museum works. She discusses the folksonomy resulting from these user tagging efforts and
how it compares with documentation done by museum professionals. She found very different
vocabulary resulting from user input via tags than that applied by museum professionals,
evidencing a distinct perspective on the artworks that could not be easily reconciled with
controlled vocabularies in use by steve.museum. Cairns (2013) took a broad look at opening up
general museum collections to other modes of description and access, concluding as well that
descriptive museum user input, such as tags, can have benefits, such as higher engagement and
access to materials, yet is not sufficient on its own without professional vocabularies. Such
28

studies indicate the value as well as problems of community input of descriptive vocabulary for
institutional, professionally curated collections, but do not approach collection user description
outside of the museum environment, nor organizational behavior of non-professional collection
curators. These studies generally are predicated on the use of, or comparison with, formal
systems, schemas, and vocabularies. The current study differs in that the websites encountered
have developed their own vocabularies and systems for organization.
To determine how non-institutional online collections that are driven by amateur
contributions are able to contribute to the documentation of cultural heritage, Terras (2010,
2011) conducted interviews with a “high-quality” selection of website creators (2010, 427). She
found the websites to focus on specific and carefully scoped content, often featuring material
lacking or uncommon in institutional collections, often part of the impetus for creating the
websites. The collections are also very often immaterial, meaning that historical poison labels
might not actually be owned by the curator when their images are featured, mirroring
characteristics of street art images in online collections. She also found these amateur websites
or museums did not follow the examples of professional archives or institutional collections.
Curators interviewed often use blogging platforms to host their endeavors, sometimes also
using Flickr or other photo sharing and archiving sites to store images. Details about specific
items, examples or resources are most often included with added textual information about
provenance or description, revealing what she calls an “intuitive metadata” as opposed to
formal elements or controlled vocabulary. Such collections are very similar to street art image
collections in aspects of actual resource ownership, media platform preferences, and added
textual information. She calls for further examination of amateur curation websites and
29

discussion with their creators and users to ascertain practices, functions, and motivations that
can be of use to both institutional collections of cultural heritage and other individual or
collective online projects.
The “intuitive metadata” as described by Terras (2010) can be seen on all sorts of noninstitutional websites, blogs, and collections as the creators and curators use language that is
familiar and deemed appropriate to describe posts and images. Such language can be seen to
form an ontology for the blog, site, or series of sites when shared vocabulary begins to coalesce
and is examined to reveal a linguistic fingerprint of an individual or group, a knowledge
structure or way of knowing. Instead of imposing a professional knowledge structure on
resources outside of the library, Srinivasan (2005) explored the benefits of allowing such “fluid”
ontology to develop from within and to continue and evolve as a tool to guide the further
development of website architecture for the Somali refugee community in the Boston area. In
essence, the Somali refugees recorded video stories of things that were important to them and
to their community and then curators used the stories together to form a concept map, which
in turn was used to design the website to host these stories. The ontology guided contributors
in their selection of terminology by providing category options to choose from for the individual
videos during upload. Using simple computer technologies, the website curators can update the
ontology as it grows and changes, based on the addition of more stories. While the goal was to
develop this ontology from the beginning of the project, it is a useful call to acknowledge and
value how such knowledge structures develop “in the wild” (Dallas 2016).
Beaudoin and Menard (2015) carried out research on the online organization of video
collections with numerous similarities to this author’s own proposed research. Because
30

previous work has found great variation in the way users of pornography sites categorize sexual
content, the authors deemed that further examination was worthwhile. They examined the
commonly encountered concepts for organizing pornography on freely accessible websites,
comparing categories used for grouping videos and conceptual terminology via content
analysis. They also planned to seek information directly from website curators, but received no
response to their inquiries for survey completion from this group. This is not unexpected
considering the nature of the collections being curated and it may be reasonable to expect that
street art and graffiti art collection curators may have some reservations about participating in
interviews with a researcher due to the legal issues involved in the creation of such artworks.
This remains to be seen, but will have to be taken into consideration.
2.3 Street Art Studies Useful for Description of Artworks
Among the numerous books that have been published on graffiti art and street art, a
few are academic works that address description of artworks, the processes used to create
them, and the styles, materials, and surfaces used, all of which may contribute to an
understanding of organizational practices used on collection websites. In his seminal work on
train graffiti culture and the political and social milieu in which the early graffiti movement
developed in New York City, Austin (2001) describes an artistic community and provides ample
evidence of the use of domain specific vocabulary and community practices that will be useful
in the present study.
Wacławak (2011) provides equally valuable insight into forms, materials, styles, and
terminology, but approaches the art movement from an art history background and with a

31

more general, global geography. Writing a decade after Austin, she has the benefit of a longer
view of the migration of works from the physical streets to Internet photo galleries and
websites. Just as the zines began broadening the audience of the art form in the 1980s, the
proliferation of photographs of graffiti and street art online widened the reach further still to
the point where most street art is experienced outside of its original context of the street.
Echoing the writings of several scholars of street art and photography (Riggle 2010, Benjamin
1939, 1992, Austin 2001, 2010, et al.) Wacławak addresses the problem of lack of context found
within most photographs of street art. The loss of physical context, as well social and historical
context, reduces the quality of documentation information regarding a work, but it easily
overlooked by those who find the works and are simply interested in obtaining a picture of the
design itself. Loss of context will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. Despite the
inadequacies in recording street art photographically, this remains the most common and
efficient way of documenting the art form and has been the way that a historical record has
survived in the face of inherent ephemerality (179).
Gottlieb (2008) contributed research on graffiti art styles based on her dissertation work
(2006) that, while limited to style vocabulary in particular, is helpful as framed within structures
for librarians that may need to classify photographic representations of graffiti art. She bases
her classification system on the often-cited work of Erwin Panofsky (1939) and his model for
iconographic analysis, which has been explicated extensively and applied to image indexing in
LIS, most notably by Shatford Layne (1986, 2002). Gottlieb’s research resulted in a faceted
classification consisting of 14 different graffiti art styles and corresponding notation, along with
thirteen facets and forty-one foci that differentiate number of colors, types of letter outlines,
32

stylistic icons such as the inclusion of arrows, and fill effects, to name a few (175-198). She
made extensive use of knowledge gained by a set of questionnaires filled out by 11 graffiti
practitioners and/or historians (1), which adds to the richness and quality of her data.
In one of the most recent academic books on street art, Bengsten (2014) examines what
he terms the “street art world” from several perspectives. He presents the street art movement
from his experiences of it on the street, in discussion with artists, and within and alongside
discussions on public street art forums online. He situates his writing within social, artistic,
academic, theoretical, and physical geographies with fewer examples of street art-specific
terminology, but numerous references to specific street artists and examples of their work.
2.4 Problems Specific to Street Art Documentation in Contrast to Traditional Art Documentation
While studying the practical challenges and implications of preserving political street
art, Cowick (2015) enlisted the input of archives professionals who have worked with street art
documentation. She learned from her participants that the most common problems in regard
to such documentation deal with ephemerality, followed by anonymity that affects metadata
quality, legality, and accurately describing a resource that is outside its original context (41-42).
2.4.1 Ephemerality
The often-ephemeral nature of street art may not be construed as a problem at all to
those who produce the artworks (see Riggle 2010 for a “commitment” to ephemerality), but for
those who want to continue to enjoy them or study them, ephemerality may be mitigated
through photographic preservation and the collection of any associated knowledge about a
work. Wacławak hasgone as far as to say that the graffiti art movement would have
33

disappeared without the photographic collections of the works on the Internet to keep it alive,
preserving its history and compelling it ever onward (2011, 178). A short discussion follows of
the details contributing to issues of ephemerality that inform this study.
2.4.2 Little to No Institutional Support
An art movement operating in the streets or in public (and sometimes private) spaces
outside the museum or art gallery will face obvious challenges if there is any drive to preserve it
or a record of it. Using the list of artist websites included in the back of Wacławek (2011, 197)
the names of the artists were searched in the Getty Research Institute’s Union List of Artist
Names (ULON), a controlled vocabulary utilized by libraries, archives, museums, and
researchers (Getty Research Institute 2015). Of the forty-five individual artist names listed
(their works and images having been cited in her book), only six were included in ULON as of
February 2, 2017. These include Banksy, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Ron English, Shepard Fairey,
Keith Haring, and Dan Witz. This list is a very small selection of some of the most well-known
street artists, but also those who could be said to have crossed over into more mainstream
artistic acceptance for work that has moved from street to gallery. This is by no means a
representative selection from what is available in the ULON, but as many other street artists on
Wacławek’s list are well known to the street art community, it may be seen as an example of
the continued marginalization of street artwork and artists in the face of the traditional art
world, the lack of warrant for inclusion of street artist names based on lack of work records or
formal documentation, or a combination of both. These artists simply are not largely
recognized in this example of an institutional artist indexing tool. As mentioned earlier, the

34

inclusion of style, processes, and materials terminology common to the street art community is
absent from professional vocabularies (Graf 2016).
Lack of institutional support goes beyond inclusion in descriptive tools for professional
catalogers, archivists, and researchers. The artworks themselves are not being methodically
collected physically due to their situated nature. They are not normally moveable like a
traditional artwork most often is, and if they were, they would lose the aforementioned context
so closely tied to the meaning of the work. When a formal institution does happen to collect
street art, whether as a scheduled activity or an ad hoc opportunity, it is often in the form of
posters or other such more easily acquired media, or as photographs of the original works.
Google Arts & Culture is one example of a collaborative effort among the Google
Cultural Institute, archives, and museums to share art and culture exhibits curated online in
virtual space. The Google Art Project on street art (https://streetart.withgoogle.com/en/) has
begun to collect street artworks, street art stories, interviews, and virtual tours of popular
street art areas around the globe. As of this writing, they have amassed over thirteen thousand
images. Google notwithstanding, documentation of graffiti art and street art is most prolifically
found online in non-institutionally sponsored, ad-hoc photography collections. Do such
distributed efforts share any similarities, standards, or best practices for photographic capture,
context information, metadata, or description? This question remains to be answered by
analyzing the current state of street art photographic collections and their associated
documentary information and organizational structures.

35

2.4.3 Context - From Onsite to Online
If the work was taken out of its urban context, placed on a canvas, given a hefty price
tag and hung up in a gallery, it is likely those same people who viewed it as vandalism would
see it as art. Although to take the work out of its urban context means the work nearly always
loses something in transition, part of the creativity is how it integrates within the environment,
the chosen spot which gives it the finishing touch. There is something missing about the
interaction and conflict of the work in location (Hundertmark/C100 2003, 6).
What happens to the production and reception contexts of the local streets when the
art is transformed into a web presence, essentially translated from direct experience to
representation? A common sentiment regarding the response of the general public to street
and graffiti art when it is viewed somewhere other than the streets is related in the quotation
above by artist C100. What is interesting is that those making these observations also
commonly feature photographs of street and graffiti art along with their written commentary,
examples of the works essentially out of their original context. A contextual comparison for
reception is often from street to art gallery, which illustrates not only a site change, but an
institutional and therefore social change in reception as well. This institutional shift is not the
same as the shift to the Internet, but it has similarities in that the break is from the street to a
secondary representation.
A number of scholars have discussed the concept of replicating originals for the web,
very often in regard to textual documents, meaning texts written or printed on paper, not
painted on walls (Levy 2000, Lynch 2000). A concept or a work, once translated into text and

36

put to paper can be seen as residing within the boundaries of the page on which it is printed, or
within the book of which it may be a part. A painting hanging in a museum very often is
executed on a canvas or other such portable surface and can also, but not always, be seen to
belong to the canvas, representing another scene yet knowingly removed from the reality it
represents. Where graffiti or street art is concerned, the canvas is most often part of the street
itself, or part of the environment of the streets, and as such is not moveable, or at least not
easily moved. The context, the geographic location and surroundings – from neighborhood or
city and even to other artwork located next to it or nearby, is integral to the work itself and may
cause very different reactions from different viewers because of its specific location.
Walter Benjamin wrote an oft-cited essay that discusses the evolution of the
reproducibility of artistic works (1939, 1992). He outlines the history of artistic reproduction,
beginning with the basic process of simply copying one work by hand in the way the original
was created. Reproduction became easier with the advent of certain processes, such as
lithography for printing, but it really exploded with the invention of photography. Later the
recording of movement began with film and later still sound was added to make mechanical
reproduction extremely fast and very much like reality. Such technical reproduction “enables
the original to meet the beholder halfway, be it in the form of a photograph or a phonograph
record. The cathedral leaves its locale to be received in the studio of a lover of art; the choral
production, performed in an auditorium or in the open air, resounds in the drawing room”
(1992, 299). This “meeting halfway” occurs when a graffiti or street art work is photographed
and placed online, though Benjamin himself did not live to make the leap from the photograph
to the digital web representation.
37

Due to the inherently ephemeral nature of graffiti and street art, and also because of
the fixedness of the works in space – they are not portable or moveable from their location of
creation - it was a natural expectation that some would want to preserve a record of their
existence, a collection of the corpus, so to speak. Artists themselves often photograph their
completed works, though sometimes this is impossible because of the location, the darkness of
night, or the fact that the works disappear before the artists can return at an appropriate time
to do so. Early graffiti periodicals, or zines, such as IGTimes, Can Control, and 12ozProphet were
produced by writers beginning in the mid-1980s. They solicited and featured photographs of
especially interesting or skilled works and were printed on paper and run off for distribution on
copy machines (DeNotto 2014, Austin 2001). By the time the digital camera became readily
available, the Internet was the perfect place to upload photos and share them with a wider
audience than ever before, not just locally, but around the world. Today numerous websites
exist for the specific purpose of sharing graffiti and street art, such as ArtCrimes.com,
12ozProphet.com, 50mmLosAngeles.com, WoosterCollective.com, and GraffitiPlanet.com. Sites
exist for specific artists, crews, and geographic areas around the world as well.
The desire to collect, preserve, and share these artworks is understandable, yet it
cannot be said that viewing a work that has been digitally photographed and shared online is
the same as experiencing the original work in situ, especially graffiti and street art that depend
on their place of execution to add meaning and context. Benjamin bemoans the disappearance
of “aura” in mechanical reproductions of both art and life that came about through the
emergence of photography and film. Aura to Benjamin is related to the authenticity, history,
aesthetic and cultural value of a work of art. An original work of art, before this age of
38

mechanical reproducibility had value in its history, its use in religious location or life, and in its
authority as original and immediate, even in the fact that it was not something that could be
experienced by the masses. Once photography developed, art could be shared quickly and
widely and the masses were able to view artworks that were once inaccessible. Benjamin notes
a concomitant shift in value placed on artworks, from a cult value based on aesthetics, history,
and originality, to an exhibition value, open to critique from individuals of all social strata and
suddenly attended by an “art world” and therefore economic framework. For Benjamin, the
online sharing of photographs of street and graffiti art would surely equate to the loss of aura
attached to the original works (Benjamin 1939, 1992).
Even when an art institution that holds original artworks itself takes photographs of
their collections, it is recognized that such photographic images are not perfect copies of the
originals without bias or interpretation entering into the representation in multiple seemingly
small ways (Walsh 2007). Where a photographer stands, the lighting, the angles chosen, and
the equipment itself all have an effect on the resulting representation. The photograph also
commits the artwork to a moment in time by preserving it during the short exposure required
to save its digital image while the original continues to live on as a physical object (Baudrillard
1999). “Whatever the noise and the violence around them, photographs return objects to a
state of stillness and silence. In the midst of urban hustle and bustle, they recreate the
equivalent of a desert, a phenomenal isolation” (Baudrillard 1999, para 29). This illustrates a
possible distinction for place as well as image in photographic reproduction. More than simply
photographing an artwork that is itself already taken out of a prior context, such as a landscape
or portrait, this statement further addresses the photographing of something like a street or
39

wall that has an infinitely broad context, depending on how far back one stands to capture the
image. The photograph, as framed within the camera’s viewfinder, is bounded therein and
limited, thereby either adding or subtracting meaning depending on the selection chosen.
“Every photographed object is merely the trace left behind by the disappearance of all the rest”
(Baudrillard 1999, para 12).
While Benjamin’s famous essay and Baudrillard’s views have influenced many scholars
and critiques in the discussion of reproducing artworks, there are other opinions that differ.
Walsh claims that exactly the opposite of Benjamin’s aura argument is true, that there was not
the present value placed on the original, hand-crafted work of art until mechanical
reproduction made the original more valued than ever before. “Far from diminishing the ‘aura’
of works of art, these endless photographic reproductions have vastly added to their
significance, ultimately converting the museums that hold them from the Imperial warehouses
and curio cabinets of pre-photography to the vast, echoing temples of post-photography”
(Walsh 2007, 30).
Speaking from the domain of cultural heritage and museums, Cameron (2007) compares
several views on materiality and immateriality, including that of Benjamin. The digital historical
object is the focus of her discussion. While Benjamin and Baudrillard, among others, have
treated photography as a type of threat upon the original and authentic, Cameron advocates
following the course of photography from its early form as replicant maker through to the
present day where it is accepted as an art form in and of itself. Instead of focusing on the
differences between the original artifact and the copy and instead of lamenting the fact that
the digital image can never truly replicate the original, she suggests accepting the digital as an
40

artifact itself, a primary work though related to another. This is qualified by the admission that
provenance, authorship and aesthetic attributes are still important to the museum setting
when dealing with digital artifacts that are representations of material originals (Cameron
2007).
All of these points of view can be applied to street art as well, following the works from
the street to a photographic representation. One difference concerning street art in
comparison to artworks in a museum is the specific context that the streets provide. When
graffiti art or street art is removed from its place outside, on the street, it is “devoid of its
distinctive meaning. It has literally been stripped of its spirit” (Riggle 2010, 248). That fact that
these artworks are created and situated where they are is intrinsic to their meaning and to their
reception. Riggle goes on to succinctly explain how graffiti and street art should not, cannot, be
considered without their surroundings.
The very thing whose use contributes essentially to the meaning of street art, the street,
itself has meaning. The doorways, windows, alley walls, dumpsters, sidewalks, signs,
polls, crosswalks, subway cars, and tunnels—all have their own significance as public,
everyday objects. These are shared spaces, ignored spaces, practical spaces, conflicted
spaces, political spaces. To make sense of street art, the critic is forced to discuss the
significance of a work’s use of these inflected spaces. This violates the formalist
principle, derived from the principle of aesthetic autonomy, that to appreciate a work of
art the critic must attend to its aesthetic features alone. According to our definition,
making sense of street art requires attending to a nonaesthetic feature of the work,
namely, its material use of the street. (Riggle 2010, 249)

2.5 Justification of the Use of the Term “Community”
The work habits, language, media use, and understanding of what may be called a
community, or more specifically an online community, are under consideration and because of
41

the constructed – or imagined (Anderson 2006) - nature of such a concept as community, it is
necessary to explain what is meant when using this term. While many definitions of community
exist in the literature depending on the field of study, my chosen sense of community comes
from a work-based background described by Durkheim (1984) as the division of labor in society,
expanded upon with KO research by Birger Hjørland (1998, 2003), specifically recognizing the
differences among, and needs of, different “discourse communities” (2003, 94). The use of the
word community is common in studies in KO, especially in studies that focus on postmodern,
epistemological models of KOS informed by specific user groups. This can be seen in Hansson
(2013) in the “collected understanding” of social media communities (389), Mai’s (2011)
“already there language” (713), the masse parlante or linguistic community of Saussure (1986,
77), the photo-sharing communities of Konkova, et al. (2014), and the purposeful
conceptualization of a community of users evidenced in an ontology (Jacob 2003, 19).
2.6 The Proliferation of Media - Precursor to Online Collections
Benedict Anderson (2006) notes that the emergence of media, specifically the novel and
the newspaper, enabled the rapid development of nationalism, a form of constructed
community, in the eighteenth century (25). A sense of community is often discussed from one
of two unifying hubs, that of geography or physical proximity, and that of interest or
relationship. The latter is not dependent on a shared physical location, but rather on a
relational basis wherein community members experience a sense of belonging to a group
because they share interests or experiences (McMillan and Chavis 1986) and are also
differentiated from other groups in the same way, by the shared attributes, interests, and even
non-interests of members (Cohen 1985). This shows that as media outlets expanded the ability
42

of those sharing such relational characteristics to communicate over greater distances, the
sense of community did not necessarily diminish. There are several studies of web-based
communities that are composed of individuals who have never met in person, yet their shared
interests and activities permit them the sense of belonging to a virtual community (Rheingold
2000, Wellman and Gulia 1999, and Obst et al. 2002 as examples). “Just as the Net supports
neighborhood-like group communities of densely knit ties, it also supports personal
communities, wherever in social or geographical space these ties are located and however
sparsely knit they might be” (Wellman and Gulia 1999, 186). Wacławak (2011) has also
discussed the slippery definition of community in direct relationship to the street art
community, highlighting aspects such as the similarity and dissimilarity with the mainstream art
community, and the relationship between what may be considered a community of local street
artists and their audience, or more physically defined community in a sense closer to a
conception of neighborhood or city (79-80).
Anderson (2006) is well known for his writings on the imagined community in relation to
nations and nation building, but the sense of community he evokes can be seen as well in the
use of the term in this study. A community, especially an online or virtual one, may be
considered bounded by how the members, though they might have never met, feel they are
connected by similar work, language, and materials. The street art community, having grown
out of the graffiti art community of the 1970s in Philadelphia and New York, could be seen to
have congealed with the publication of The International Graffiti Times in 1984, which was soon
followed by numerous other graffiti zines (Austin 2013). Once the zines became available on
the street, styles, methods, and individual works by individual artists or crews could be shared
43

over a larger geographic area, thus enabling a type of community formation through the
dispersion of media. This is echoed and greatly expanded today with the proliferation of street
art websites, blogs, and Flickr and Instagram feeds. Such widespread diffusion of the labor, the
works, the styles, language, and images allows the street art community to grow across
national boundaries and has quickly become a worldwide phenomenon.
The street art community, to be defined as such, is comprised of people who share an
interest in street art, not only as a commonly conceived form of artistic expression, but also as a
form of social commentary, a grassroots push-back against large corporate, political, and
institutional bureaucracy that seeks to normalize a particular response, reaction, or acceptance
from the general public by minimizing the impact of dissenting opinion, marginalized voices, or
the otherwise disenfranchised segments of society. A street art community member in the
context of this study would likely share an interest as well in the styles, materials, techniques,
and locations of works. Unlike a narrower conception of a street art community limited to those
who actually produce or help to produce works of street art themselves, the community of
interest in this study has a broader foundation that includes not only the artists, designers, and
actors involved in creating the works, but those who may do no more than photograph the
works and share them online. Howard Becker (2008), in speaking of the art world, notes that
there are not only artists within this world or community, the obvious or assumed members,
but also those trained in art but not practicing it, those training in art (students, etc.), and those
who are “serious audience members” who know more than the average (“well socialized”)
person (47-54). Photography of street art is a form of documentation, and the collected effect
of this documentation is an archives, though a distributed and non-institutional one or a type of
44

community archives when taken as a shared identity or process among members of the graffiti
and street art world (Flinn 2007; Flinn, Stevens, Shepherd 2009).
2.7 Taxonomy of Terms
The following taxonomic table is taken from Graf (2016) and is used to introduce and
define terminology common to those who practice, discuss, or write about graffiti art styles.
Graffiti: “Typically refers to words, figures, and images that have been written, drawn and/or
painted on, and/or etched into or on surfaces where the owner of the property has NOT
given permission” (Ross, 2016, 476).
Piece: “(short for ‘masterpieces’) Large, colorful, elaborate, detailed, and stylistically intricate
rendering of letters and images. Pieces require a greater amount of time and expertise to
create than ‘throw-ups’ and ‘tags’. (Usually deserving of more respect from other graffiti
artists/writers)” (Ross, 2016, 477).
Bombing: “The prolific writing of one’s tag [chosen name]. Bombing usually involves
saturating a given area with a large number of one’s ‘tags’ and/or ‘throw-ups’. Often
regarded as an important avenue for achieving recognition among other graffiti writers”
(Ross, 2016, 475).
Throw-up: “(also known as throwies) … Produced with spray paint, throwies spell out a
graffiti writer’s name in bubble-style letters. These letters are usually produced and filled in
quickly with a single color, and then outlined with a second color of paint. Throwies may also
be done with a single can of paint, in which case the graffiti writer will produce a quick series

45

of letters. In the more recent history of graffiti, throwies have increasingly come to be
recognized as a distinct and valuable part of a graffiti writer’s repertoire, often leading to the
production of multi-colored throw-ups. Unlike masterpieces, throw-ups allow graffiti writers
to cover more surface area relatively quickly” (Ross, 2016, 478).
*Whole car: A large piece that covers an entire train car. This references the size of the piece
and is related to ‘end to ends’, ‘top to bottoms’, and ‘window-downs’. (Snyder, 2009)
*Aerosol: Aerosol can refer to spray paint (see below) or it can be used instead of the word
graffiti, as in an aerosol artist or an aerosol artwork. While a writer or artist may refer to a
piece as aerosol art instead of graffiti art, graffiti art remains illegal, while aerosol art could
be carried out legally on a canvas or other legal surface.
Character: “A term used to describe pictorial elements of graffiti works, especially renditions
of creatures or personas. Characters are often used in conjunction with elaborate pieces of a
graffiti writer’s name/tag, and often incorporate gestures that draw the viewer’s attention to
the name” (Ross, 2016, 475).
Spray paint: Paint in a can that is applied using internal pressure and aerosol spray caps of
varying sizes to change how it behaves when leaving the can.
Mural: “Large paintings on walls, sides of buildings etc. where the artist/s have been given
express permission by the owner, and/or has been commissioned to do the piece (e.g. the
work of Diego Rivera). Often depicting historical and/or religious events, themes, individuals,
etc.” (Ross, 2016, 477).

46

Top to bottom: A top to bottom (T-B, T2B, T-to-B) is a piece that covers a train car from top to
bottom. (Snyder, 2009)
*Piecing: Piecing refers to the making of pieces, or “masterpieces.” See the definition for
piece above.
*Wildstyle: “Energetic pieces of graffiti with interlocking, highly stylized and often cryptic
lettering” (Ross, 2016, 479).
Burner: “A graffiti piece that is regarded as high quality. To ‘burn’ is to outdo the work of
others” (Ross, 2016, 475).
Graffiti art: “Graffiti art is a face-to-face, social practice with clear aesthetic intentions and
unlike traditional graffiti, the semantic content of graffiti art is secondary to its visual
aspirations. The identity of the individual (name and/or signature) is a crucial component of
both, but graffiti art developed and is practiced collectively within skilled, locally organized
subcultures” (Austin, 2010, 35).
End to end: An end to end (E-E, E2E, E-to-E) is a piece covering a train car from one end to the
other. (Snyder, 2009)
Black book: “Writers carry sketchbooks that they call blackbooks which they use to practice
outlines and to get autographs from other writers” (Snyder, 2016, 211n3).
*Insides: The insides of subway trains. Graffiti artists can paint insides or outsides. There are
many different ways to describe outsides, but insides are not commonly places to bomb or to

47

piece, but rather to simply tag, which is to quickly write one’s stylized name, usually in black
marker. Graffiti writers speak of doing insides or outsides as a type of work.
*Subway art: Another way of referring to graffiti art that was typically practiced on the
subway cars in New York City in the late 1960s to 1980s.
*Production: These are larger and more involved pieces that involve several artists (often
from the same crew) to work together. They are done on legal walls, where permission has
been granted or the work commissioned. They require a larger amount of time, supplies, and
people, all of which are prohibitive without permission. (Snyder, 2009)
*Not specifically mentioned herein, but common and likely to be encountered in the research.
Table 1 Common graffiti art terminology defined, from Graf (2016)

2.8 Summary
I have examined the KO literature for studies that focus on domain analysis of specific
user communities and the value of such studies for the information of KOS development and
design. I have also looked at specific domain analyses within KO that examine user organization
practices and terminological studies that may serve to inform the development of ontologies or
controlled vocabulary. I have made use of literature from general art and photography, and more
specifically from street art and graffiti art, to place this research within the context of not only
KO, but the world of art, graffiti art, and street art as well. I have addressed problems specific to
the documentation of an ephemeral and largely non-institutionally supported art form and I have
sought to explain and describe what is meant by the term ‘community’ within this research. It
will be seen that these indicated community members, in photographing and sharing street art
48

images online, have used technologies that specifically support the identification and
organization of descriptive information, again whether intentionally or unintentionally.

49

Chapter 3: Methodology
This dissertation features domain and content analytic methods in an explanatory
mixed-methods design. The state of photographic street art collections online, the methods
used to document the street artworks, and the organizational practices of curators who make
the collections available to users are considered. The goal is to determine the structure of the
domain of the online street art community, its intension, extension, and ontological formation.
To do this, sources examined for this analysis include website text and architectural categories,
data later augmented by interviews with website curators.
3.1 Research Questions
The goal of this research, restated briefly, is to identify how online collections of street
art are organized. This is explored in relation to the process of gathering images, how images
are being organized and shared, and the types of textual documentation accompanying the
works. To address these goals, the following research questions are posed:
1. What types of information about street artworks are found on street art websites?
2. What types of organization are being used on street art websites?
3. Based on findings from websites analyzed for questions 1 and 2, do website curators
confirm or deny these as important facets of information regarding street artworks to
be recorded, and why or why not?
This research can be divided into two phases of data collection and analysis, 1) a quantitative
capture of website information; and, 2) an exploratory qualitative set of curator interviews.
Each phase of the research is outlined below.
50

3.2 Methodological Paradigms: Domain Analysis and Content Analysis
3.2.1 Domain Analysis
In knowledge organization, domain analysis as a method is based upon the need to
carefully examine any and all domains, including academic domains, but also all other areas
that constitute users and uses of information. According to Smiraglia (2015) “it is imperative
that knowledge organization as a science turn its metaphorical microscope to look at every
possible domain from the workplace to the neighborhood to the household to the academic
disciplines and beyond” (19). There is plenty of work to be done in domain analysis and much of
it must be done manually as the data is not clean nor consistently formatted for easy computer
analysis. He adds that not only do we need more domain analyses, but we also need to further
and more deeply analyze domains already studied. Beyond the specific goals of this research,
the results of this study also serve to inform knowledge organization in general.
3.2.2 Content Analysis
Content analysis is summarized by Stemler (2001) as “a systematic, replicable technique
for compressing many words of text into fewer content categories based on explicit rules of
coding” (1), noting also that it is particularly useful as a means to support other methods of
research. Content analysis, like domain analysis, often involves noting how often popular words
occur and in what context within large bodies of text. While commonly used to examine textual
resources, content analysis can also be applied to images. La Barre (2006), for example, used
content analysis to study websites for evidence of the use of faceted analytico-synthetic design

51

theory. Content analysis pairs well with domain analysis and is useful to reveal commonalities
of organization, terminology, content, and intent across websites using text and interview data.
A basic content analysis was conducted on text from the home pages, about pages, and
history pages of sites. QDA Miner software was used to reveal and compare popular
terminology between the site sources and the coding schema. This type of analysis reveals how
language is used by curators to talk about the works and the activity taking place around the
creation, documentation, and organization of the works. Coding interview data was deemed
redundant as the interview instrument included a large number of the codes already used in
the research. Solicitation of opinions regarding the codes provided information better suited to
qualitative analysis.
3.3 Quantitative Analysis of Website Capture Data
Website capture relates to research questions 1 and 2—and particularly to discovering
the extension of a domain of street art websites. In traditional KO domain analysis, “extension”
defines the ontological boundaries of a domain. In this research, the extension will be defined
by the collective content of street art websites. To discover consistencies, if they exist, in the
textual descriptions attached to records of street art it is necessary to examine the records
themselves along with any associated descriptive text. These records are found in a number of
sources that can be considered for inclusion in such a study and include websites that are
devoted to collecting photographs of street art, of which there are many. Currently street art is
commonly collected and shared on sites such as Flickr streams, Instagram galleries, Facebook
pages, individual artists’ websites, websites of non-artists who collect the work of others, and a

52

great number of websites that are collaborative efforts of graffiti and street artists,
photographers, and anyone else who has images to contribute.
Some websites offer tags attached to records and/or an organizational scheme of
different pages for individual styles, locations, or artists. The website New York City Trains
hosted by popular graffiti art website ArtCrimes.com offers historical graffiti art images
displayed according to the New York City subway line on which they appeared in the mid-1980s
(https://www.graffiti.org/nyctrains/index.html). This collection provides metadata about
location through the type of organization used, as well as through the use of artist name titles.
Other sites organize works by form, such as stickers, stencils, or wheat paste-ups; by surface,
such as walls, trains, subways, or vehicles; by style, such as murals, pieces, productions, or
wildstyle; or in many other ways that will be described in more detail in the pages that follow.
The website architecture often is used in such a way to serve as a type of faceted organization
system that adds descriptive information to records based on such navigational structure.
Granularity in terminology describing street art will help to define the intension, or depth, of
the domain of street art websites.
3.3.1 Selecting Websites
The empirical material analyzed in this study includes online collections of graffiti and
street art photography that can be found on websites and blogs. I did not examine works found
within online art museum collections or those curated by academic institutions because the
goal is to understand how street art community members themselves, as previously defined,
are approaching, describing, and organizing the photographic records. By including in the

53

examination collections curated by art museums or academic institutions, the organizational
practices would more likely be influenced by professional standards for material description,
metadata, controlled vocabularies, and other previously studied and formalized domains and
KOSs.
Blog-type websites are chosen for inclusion in this study while excluding certain specific
other types. This is because various other content sharing platforms use software or
architecture that limits the presentation of records, such as allowing only limited image sizing
(Instagram), favoring the sharing of images and the limiting of text (Instagram, Flickr), and
offering only hashtag conventions for grouping, which leads to some strange collocations in the
uncontrolled tag environment (Instagram, Flickr). Although there is no strict delineation
between what is considered a website and what is considered a blog, there are some basic
attributes of structure to weblogs, or blogs, that can be expected such as the use of discrete
entries or "posts" typically displayed in reverse chronological order (the most recent post
appears first). An example of a graffiti art collection in blog style is 12oz. Prophet
(http://www.12ozprophet.com/), entries of which are discrete and displayed in reverse
chronological order, though there are other organizational facets to the site, such as a page for
individual blogs by a dozen named contributors as of this writing. Even among websites or blogs
curated by an individual, there is often an associated collaborated effort such as pages for
external contributors or images uploaded from any number of outside sources.
Blogs might also be differentiated from other websites by their use of a known blog
platform, such as Blogger.com or Wordpress.com. The street art blog “Graffiti Lux and Murals”
is a blog hosted by Wordpress (http://graffitiluxandmurals.com/) that follows a standard blog
54

format as described above. To be included in the study a website or blog must have
photographic images of street art as the stated focal point. Websites or blogs may might refer
to the works they collect and display by terms other than street art, such as graffiti or graffiti
art, but it was determined by looking at the content if the bulk of the works contained on the
individual sites are considered street art according to the definitions outlined in previous
chapters of this research. Some websites that focus largely on graffiti that does not fall under
the definition of graffiti art, such as those that largely document tagging, are excluded, though
it is noted that the definitional boundaries of the concepts of tagging, graffiti, graffiti art, and
street art often overlap. Some of the included websites featured graffiti and street art
photographic galleries alongside other types of galleries, but as long as there was at least one
website gallery dedicated to the type of artwork researched, they were included. For the
purposes of this study, the websites and blogs that will be used as data for analysis will be
referred to hereafter as sites.
More and more street art photography from websites and blogs is showing up on other
online media platforms. It has recently become very common to find members of the street art
community using Instagram and Flickr feeds to post photographs of work from the street.
Mobile technologies make this very easy to do as many are documenting street artworks using
smart phone cameras and uploading images to these online platforms immediately after they
are taken by using apps specifically for this purpose (i.e. Instagram). Often a site dedicated to
street art will have other associated platforms for sharing works from their collections and will
offer visitors links to accounts on Instagram, Flickr, or Facebook, among others. While
increasingly common, collections of street art found only on social media feeds are not included
55

in this study because of the limitations inherent in the most common of these platforms as
already stated.
The types of descriptive text attached to these records (“records” will refer herein to
photographic representations of street art) vary depending on who is doing the documentation
– artists themselves, non-artist contributors, or experienced photographers, for example. When
a collection is part of a collaborative environment, accepting submissions of images from
various sources, there may might not be the ability to attach consistent descriptive text to the
records since because information that comes with these submissions may can be very limited.
Relevant record information may be found in titles for individual images, as well as in captions
when provided. Some records include the names of artists or crews as part of the artwork, but
this is inconsistent and sometimes, even when it is included in the artwork itself, the style of
the signature renders it unreadable. Artists are known to change their working names and tags
as well, making the positive identification of one person or group as the same entity over time
highly uncertain (Austin 2001, 56 and 121).
Clarification of the term “tag” is warranted. Tag, and the verb to tag, or the act of
tagging, are used in two related but different ways in a graffiti context and in an online context.
Graffiti tagging is discussed briefly earlier in this study, but tags and tagging are discussed here
as a descriptive and collocating device used online. Hashtags, or simply tags, are terms or
unspaced phrases that are preceded by a hashtag symbol, sometimes called a pound sign, and
are added typically to social media posts to describe, label, classify, or group material. They are
used often as a type of personal organization scheme, but they also allow others to easily find

56

tagged topical content. Once the hashtag precedes the term or phrase, clicking on the tag will
return all items on the platform that have also applied that same tag (Chang and Iyer, 2012).
Instagram users often make use of tags that serve the purpose of broadening the
audience for not only the image, but the user’s feed. Collecting tags from Instagram, for
example, might highlight these tendencies if enough weight is given to particular tags that
indicate specialty gallery inclusion, some of which might be assumed to be for the audiencebroadening purpose, but this is another line of inquiry that could take one off in several
disparate directions. There are numerous differences between sites and Instagram or Flickr
feeds and how each can be used to share collections of street art. Sites answer to themselves
and their own systems of organization that are, for the most part, controlled by the site
administrator. Instagram and Flickr feeds are part of the larger community of users within each
platform and are influenced by the tagging habits of this larger community as well as by the
constraints of the platforms themselves, which are narrower than what is normally available on
a blog site. The study of social media examples of street art image collections will be set aside
for future research.
What is interesting to note in previous academic research on street art, specifically
discussing the photographic documentation and online sharing of street art images (see
Bengsten 2014) is that many of the websites that are listed as sources are no longer being
updated or are gone altogether. Just as the artworks themselves are ephemeral, often so are
the websites that seek to document the artworks. For this reason, the original list of websites
that was chosen to form the basis for analysis had to be examined carefully to determine which
were still available for study, as well as which met the criteria for inclusion according to details
57

outlined above. The content and even the overall accessibility of some of the sites changed
during the course of this research as well. The careful conditions for inclusion in the research
were applied at the time of data collection, during the summer and early fall of 2017, and some
sites have since disappeared, changed slightly or completely, deleted or added English
translations. There have been a number of instances where a site was revisited months later,
during the coding phase or writing phase of the dissertation, only to find earlier site versions,
text, or architecture gone. When this happened, only the text and navigation labels were used
for analysis as gathered originally.
Street art is a global phenomenon, found most commonly in urban areas. For this
reason, no attempt was made to limit websites for the study to those that focus on US street
art only. As will be shown, many online street art photography collections are the result of
collaborative efforts by contributors from around the world. Websites that are not in English
were excluded, and for the second phase of research, interviews were conducted in English
only, which may might have excluded some curators. Certain metadata or image information is
occasionally provided in a language other than English, but this does not exclude such a gallery.
Navigation labels must be mostly in English, as well as at least an English translation provided
by the website itself for “about” information, which will be explained in more detail below.
It must be noted that sometimes a site will use a combination of English, casual English,
trendy vernacular or made-up words, and foreign language words. An example is seen with the
site for 187 Crew (https://www.graffiti.org/187/main.html). The navigation labels on this
Croatian graffiti site’s homepage are: Kodeone, Ghost, Haste, Case, Skat, Sly, History, Linx, Em@il. The first six labels represent the crew members’ graffiti names. Linx refers to links to
58

other sites, a common feature included in sites in this study. It may be spelled various ways
across the list of sites, such as links, linx, or linkz. A subpage for graffiti sketches may be labeled
as “scetches,” which may might just be a typo or alternate spelling. Graffiti artist Deace had this
text on his homepage with a list of navigation labels: “Home, Deace Graffiti, Expositions,
Medias Graffiti, Medias Tekno, Non Classé, Subscribe, BIO DEACE. Hi, Hello, Hallo, Salut!
Welcome on this new version of my site.” As can be seen by the language used, it is not strictly
all English, but the site is completely accessible to English speakers and the use of non-English
words does not get in the way of the meaning of the navigation labels. Sometimes a visit to the
sub-pages indicated by the navigation labels was necessary to clarify the meaning of the label,
but this happened on sites that were only using English as well. The Dr. Revolt Graffiti Page, a
subpage of his website that documents his graffiti as well as other aspects of hip-hop culture,
uses the main navigation headings Earaches, Migraines, Eyesores, and Cramps. Earaches
indicates a section for a music band, Migraines indicates other artistic conversation and reviews
(including a sub-page here titled simply “weird stuff”), Eyesores includes the graffiti art section,
and Cramps leads to the interactive area of the overall site, with a chat room, links, and
guestbook. Graffiti artist Ger uses the navigation labels 1. Espionage, 2. Attack!, 3. Surrender, 4.
Retreat. Along the bottom of the same page are these navigation labels as well, which duplicate
the previous ones with more descriptive names: Outlines, Flicks, Email, Art Crimes. Outlines on
these sites generally indicates sketches or drawings while flicks indicate photographs. Flicks
may also be spelled flix, flixx, or fliks. These variations may might not look like English at times,
but serve to demonstrate the variability in spelling that was still considered acceptable for
inclusion under a requirement for English language.
59

About is a term commonly used on blog-type websites as a navigation label, taking
users to an area where information is given about the website. The textual information given
on an about page may might be about the website and what the curators are trying to do with
the site, about the artist or artists featured on the site, or about graffiti or street art in general.
Sometimes there will be information given on the history of the artforms or artists themselves,
often beginning with the story of graffiti and graffiti art. Some sites go into a lot of detail with
this type of information, using several site sub-pages to explain the history of the graffiti art
movement. Some sites include separate pages for a history section that is separate from the
about area. Still other sites that focus more on an individual artist or crew will share
biographical information about the artist or crew, often including a list of art shows, gallery
shows, events, and sometimes with a complete curriculum vitae or resume. This depends on
the overall aim of the site. A site that is collaboratively fed, with images from various users and
sources, will generally provide more information about the site itself and the art movement,
while sites devoted to the professional goals of artists and crews, often available for contract
work, design, murals, and other services, will commonly include personal biographical
information and CVs. If a site only features professional work, with no gallery that at least
featured street art or graffiti artworks, it was excluded from this study.
To clarify the use of the term “about” within this research, it must be noted that this is
different from “aboutness” as used in studies of image description. When speaking of what a
website is about, the focus is on what a curator says a website is about, or the textual contents
of an area on a website that is labeled “about,” and not what the actual website itself may
appear to be about to the researcher. The units of analysis herein are textual in nature,
60

emphasizing the terminologies used by curators to describe what they are doing, to describe
works they are collecting and sharing, and to organize the works. What is conceptually
contained within the sites, the categories for organization, and especially within individual
works themselves is a different study altogether.
3.3.2 Selecting Data from Websites
Websites were included in phase I of the study if they were listed as links on the Art
Crimes website. Curators at Art Crimes state that they were “the first graffiti site on the net,”
appearing online in 1994, and it is generally accepted that they were the first comprehensive
site to feature graffiti and graffiti art (About Art Crimes 2015). The website features works and
sites from around the world and is used as an individual website in phase I and also as a source
for all other websites. Gottlieb (2008) used the Art Crimes website as a starting point for
identifying the experts she interviewed for her dissertation research on the classification of
graffiti art styles. The site offers a curated link collection of “Best Graffiti Sites” that included
709 websites, all of which were mined for about text, history text, navigation label text, and
contact information of curators during the summer of 2017. Of these 709 websites, 241 were
ultimately kept as the data for this study. As explained in more detail above, 468 of the
websites were excluded because the links to them were no longer active (the sites were dead,
empty, or had moved), were in a foreign language, were dedicated only to an artist’s
professional work, were not relevant to the study, were only links to an excluded social media
platform (such as Instagram or Flickr), or, in one instance, were only a collection of works by an
individual artists featured on Art Crimes instead of a site hosted by Art Crimes. This breakdown
of the original 709 sites is shown below.
61

Websites

Explanation

241 Live sites included for study
318 Dead, empty, or moved
64 Other languages
57 Artist’s professional site (not graffiti or street
art)
20 Not relevant (music group, advertising, etc.)
8 Other social media only (Flickr, Instagram,
etc.)
1 Art Crimes sub-page, not website
Table 2 All websites examined for inclusion in the study

All 709 web links were visited and of those the 241 live sites that qualified for inclusion
in the study were examined for about information, history information, website navigation
labels, website curator contact information, and any other relevant information that might be
useful. For example, if the website used a map of any kind to organize their photographs, that
information was noted, and whether the map was hotlinked or static. A hotlinked map is one
where the names of areas on the map can be clicked on and photographs of works from those
areas are collocated. A static map would not have hotlinks, but would somehow indicate areas
of the world featured in photographs on the site. Textual about information on the homepage
was harvested, as well as any information from designated about pages, history pages, gallery
pages and the like as long as the text provided relevant information about the background,
purpose, or history of the site; the artists; the artworks; or the organization of the site, all as
deemed relevant and useful by the researcher. Often such introductory material will provide
insight into how the collection came to be, who is curating it, why it is being curated, and
62

possibly guidelines for contributors, all of which can add to the overall description of the
website itself and organizational practices behind the scenes. Homepages, as opposed to other
sub-pages, most often show any available organizational architecture such as names of pages,
menus, or sub-galleries. Acquiring data related to architectural organization often necessitated
visiting several pages of each website, depending on the individual architectures used. Some
sites were nested several levels deep, and contained galleries for individual artists that
numbered into the thousands, while others were very basic with few labels.

Figure 1 Homepage of 50mmlosangeles.com showing architectural sub-page labels and about information

Figure 1 above shows the homepage of 50mm Los Angeles, a large and popular graffiti
art website. The architectural labels can be easily seen across the top of the page: Gallery,
Articles, Events, L.A. Legends, Blackbook, Links, Forum, About Us, Submit an Event. What is not
ascertained from this homepage is the detail within each of those sub-pages. The next figure
63

shows the individual artists and collocated collections available on the Gallery sub-page. There
were 3102 hotlinked categories listed on this page at the time of data collection.

Figure 2 Gallery page of 50mmlosangeles.com showing linked categories

A distinction must be made here between the use of hotlinked tags as descriptors, tag
clouds, and more organized looking category lists such as that shown in Figure 2 above. Many
sites that use a blog-type format take advantage of the ability to add tags to individual posts or
even to individual photographs of works. These tags form an organic, folksonomic organization
scheme in that a visitor to the site can click on any hotlinked tag and be taken to a list of entries
that have been identified with that same tag. Research by Kipp and Campbell (2006) has shown

64

the problems inherent in this type of organization, wherein a lack of consistency in tag terms
often does a poor job of gathering like items together, especially without a large number of
taggers and tags. This is exemplified by tag use on the website éiresol: Irish Graffiti, which uses
the similar and undifferentiated tag sets of Traingraffiti, Graffiti on trains, and trains; and
Irishgraffiti, Irishtrains, and Irish (http://eiresol.com/). To set definable boundaries for what
would be considered navigation labels for inclusion in this study, and to avoid tossing a net into
the murky waters of user-contributed tags, sites that shared their category lists explicitly, with
enabled navigation, were considered part of the architecture of the site and were used as data.
If a site used tagging on individual posts or individual images, those tags were not included for
analysis herein; tags for individual works were not included. On a site like 12oz Prophet, the
tags applied to posts and images were visible upon visiting individual posts and images, but
were not available as an aggregate list provided to the user. A site like 50mm Los Angeles has
applied tags to individual posts and images, but has also taken their tags, gathered them into
one directory page for users, and called attention to this page as a separate sub-page that they
call the Gallery.
3.3.3 Coding of Website Capture Data
Once all data were gathered, either by copying and pasting or by transcribing various
levels of architecture labeling by hand, they were imported into QDA Miner software for coding
to determine which facets of the street artworks are being documented, as well as other
relevant information. The coding list was initially developed based upon common facets of
documentary information that were seen during the data gathering stage, and further codes
were added and existing codes modified as warranted by closer examination of the data during
65

the coding process. A complete list of the 97 codes used in the analysis phase of websites along
with brief definitions is provided below in Table 3.

66

FacetsGeneral
Artist
Color
Day
Decade
Event
Featured
FemaleArtist
Gallery
Illegal
Inside

Legal
Month
New
Old
Outside

RIP

Year
FacetsLocations
Address
Cities
CityParts
Continents

Countries
CountryParts

Image gallery dedicated to the work of a particular artist or crew.
Works organized by dominant color.
Gallery featuring works from a specific day, but not a specific event
or festival.
Gallery featuring works from a specific decade or group of years.
Gallery featuring works from a specific event or festival.
Works set aside in a featured area to highlight an artist, event, or
other reason for special focus.
Works by female graffiti or street artists.
Works featured in a gallery or museum. These are usually on canvas.
Gallery described as illegal works, most likely all graffiti art.
Works completed inside, usually commissioned work inside buildings,
homes, or other private property, though sometimes this refers to
graffiti art inside trains, subways, tunnels, or other structures.
Gallery described as legal, which usually refers to murals or other
commissioned work, or work on legal graffiti walls.
Gallery featuring works from specific months of a named year. Does
not get down to day level.
Records described as new, newer, or recent uploads to the site.
Records described as old or older work. Sometimes referred to as
“old school,” which may refer to old styles or classic works.
Gallery featuring works done outside, which usually means they have
a greater chance of being graffiti art or street art, but they may also
be murals or other commissioned works as well.
Rest in peace abbreviation denotes an artist who has passed away.
This is most often seen next to an individual artist’s name, but may
(rarely) also represent a collection of works of artists who have died.
Gallery devoted to a specific year.
These facets describe geographic location information.
A specific location identified by a city address
Named city
Named part of a city, such as the Bronx or South LA. Can be confused
with cities at times as some may actually be their own named cities.
Named continents. Also used for locations in between countries and
continents when there was an obvious grouping, such as for a group
of island nations, for example.
Named countries
Smaller than a country, but bigger than a state or territory. The
Maritimes in Canada, or Northern Italy are examples.
67

Intersection
SpecificLandmarks

States
Undisclosed
World

FacetsSupports
Billboards
Blackbook
Buses
CarsTrucksVans
Clothing

Freights
Rooftops
SubwayCars

Subways

Trains
Tunnels
Walls
FacetsTypes
3D

The intersection of 2 named streets as location.
A gallery devoted to works at a specific landmark, such as a named
park, a named business, or known area of a city that is more specific
than a neighborhood.
A US state, Australian state or territory, or Canadian province, for
example.
This is a gallery that is specifically undisclosed, where the curator
says they are not going to say where it is, for various reasons.
This type of gallery is devoted to works that fall outside the main
area of the geographic focus of an individual site, and are described
as such. It is also a catch-all category for miscellaneous works from
around the world whose location may not be known.
These codes refer to the surfaces or supports for the works.
Usually graffiti art, these are works done on advertising billboards.
Gallery dedicated to works done specifically in blackbooks, a graffiti
artist’s sketchbook. Not coded as sketches.
Usually graffiti art, these are works done on buses.
Often, but not always graffiti art, these are works done on cars,
trucks, vans, and other similar vehicles.
These galleries are devoted to graffiti style art on clothing, most
often hats, t-shirts, jackets, and shoes. May be original or printed and
sometimes for sale.
Works done on freight train cars. While trains, these are coded
specifically as freight trains.
Gallery devoted to work done on rooftops, a popular graffiti spot.
Gallery devoted to work done on subway cars, as opposed to just
trains or freights. Some galleries specifically use the words subway
cars instead of just subway or subways.
Gallery devoted to art in subways. May include the subway cars, the
subway tunnels, or other aspects of the subway. If subway cars are
not mentioned, this is simply coded subways.
Gallery devoted to works on trains. May include subway trains or
freight trains, but is not specific beyond simply trains.
Gallery devoted to work in tunnels, whether subway tunnels or other
tunnels.
Work on walls, most often outside, and most often indicating graffiti
or street art.
These codes describe the works themselves.
Work that is described as 3D, sculpture, or objects, such as when
artwork is applied to 3D surfaces. Not all objects are type 3D.
68

Action

Bombs
Canvas

Characters
CommercialDesign
Digital
Graffiti
Latrinalia
Letters
Murals
Other

Pieces
Political
Posters
Productions

Projections

RatedHigh

Rollers
Sketches
Stencils
Stickers

These are galleries devoted to photographs (sometimes including
videos) of artists in the process of making art. This is often graffiti art
and artists may have their faces covered or blurred, but not always.
Gallery for works described as bombs or bombing
This type of gallery is most often described using the word “canvas,”
meaning works done on canvas or what I coded as studio work.
These are works that are not done on the street.
Gallery for works that include characters or are works of characters.
Gallery for commercial designs, custom work, or other nongraffiti/street art works.
Gallery for works done digitally, electronically.
Gallery specifically for graffiti works.
Gallery specifically for graffiti and graffiti art in public restrooms.
Gallery devoted to lettering, letter styles, hand-lettering, graffiti
fonts, and/or typography.
Gallery described as murals, which may be legal or not,
commissioned or not, usually bigger works.
This is a catch-all category for other named surfaces, styles, or
themes. This group of codes was reviewed after all coding was done
and appropriate new codes were created if warranted. Those still
coded here did not occur often enough to warrant a specific code.
Gallery devoted to the graffiti style known as Pieces, which are
larger, more colorful, and complex works, short for masterpieces.
Gallery for works with a political theme.
Graffiti or street art posters. May be printed and posted or wheatpasted up outside, in a gallery, or for sale.
Gallery of graffiti style called a production, which is usually carried
out by more than one artist, or a crew, or more. These are usually
larger works, more colorful, and more complex.
Using light projected onto a surface instead of permanently marking
with paint, for example. Could be called light graffiti or light painting
(Rezine69, for example).
These are works described as most popular on a site, most-viewed,
or highly rated. Some sites allow users to rank or rate works and
these may be gathered via algorithm into a gallery.
Works not specifically in a blackbook, though they may be, these are
referred to as sketches, drawings, and sometimes as outlines.
Gallery dedicated to stencil work.
Gallery dedicated to stickers.
69

StreetArt
Tags

Throwup
TrainEtoE
TrainTtoB
TrainWholecars
Wheatpaste

Wildstyle

Sites
About

Contact
ContributeFlix
Disclaimer
FAQ
Forum
Glossary
Guestbook
History

HowTo

Gallery simply described as street art or street. Very general.
Gallery devoted to graffiti tags, a specific, simple type of graffiti
consisting of a stylized rendering of a name, usually in black Sharpie
marker, but not always.
Gallery of graffiti style artworks known as throwups, throw-ups, or
throwies.
Graffiti artwork on trains that goes from one end of the car to the
other.
Graffiti artwork on trains goes from the top of a car to the bottom.
Graffiti artwork on trains that covers a whole car.
Gallery of works that are either stenciled, painted, or printed on
another surface, then glued onto another surface in public using
wheat paste or other fixative. Commonly referred to as wheat pasteups.
Gallery devoted to graffiti art style Wildstyle, which features
complex, colorful, interlocking letters that are often difficult or
impossible to read.
This code category relates to what is offered on the sites.
This refers to a general about page and may include information
about the site, about the curator of the site, about an artist or crew,
about the type of featured artworks, or any combination of these.
Contact information for the website curator, such as an email, a
phone number, and sometimes an address.
This code is used when a site solicits and/or accepts photo
contributions from users.
This code is used to denote when a site offers a disclaimer indicating
that they do not condone any illegal aspects of graffiti or street art.
This code is used when a site offers a section for frequently asked
questions.
This code is used when a site offers discussion forums for users.
Glossary of graffiti and street art terms. Only a couple sites offered
this, but it was considered valuable for terminology definitions.
This code is used when a site offers a guestbook where users can sign
in and comment.
Information on the history of the site, the artist or artists featured on
the site, or the art forms themselves. The information could overlap
with what is sometimes on an about page, but it is specifically listed
as history.
This code is used when a site offers any kind of instruction on any
aspect of the art.
70

Interviews
Map

MyAccount

Poll
Shop
Subscribe
Videos
OtherMedia
Blog
Book
Facebook
FLKR
IG
Links
Pinterest
Tumblr
TW
YouTube

This code is used when interviews are specifically offered, usually
with graffiti or street artists, but sometimes other people as well.
This code is used when a site offers a map, static or interactive, to
denote where works on the site may be found. Some maps are
general, such as only offering locations to the level of countries,
while others mark locations at specific GPS coordinates.
This code is used when a site offers users personalization, such as the
ability to create their own account on the site. Then users can upload
their own images and/or videos and keep track of favorite images or
artists, for example. They may also be able to comment or tag on
images or posts or participate in a forum not available to nonregistered users.
This code is used when a site asks users their opinion in a poll or
survey and then shares the results.
Many sites offer an area for shopping, often including graffiti art
prints, posters, or clothing.
This code is used when a site offers users to subscribe to a blog feed
or to receive email notifications.
This code is used when a section of a site is set aside for videos.
These codes are for links to other media related to the sites. Except
for the Links code, all are accounts associated with the site itself.
The site links to its own blog or a blog related in some way to the
site.
The site may have produced a book, such as that done by site Global
Street Art. It may be featured and for sale.
Link to a site’s associated Facebook account.
Link to a site’s associated Flickr account.
Link to a site’s associated Instagram account.
A section devoted to outside links that usually relate to graffiti, street
art, or other artists, but can be about anything.
Link to a site’s associated Pinterest account.
Link to a site’s associated Tumblr account.
Link to a site’s associated Twitter account.
Link to a site’s associated YouTube account.

Table 3 Website Code List

71

3.3.4 Coding and Analysis Instrument
QDA Miner data analysis software was used for coding of text, website architecture
labels, and word analysis for term extraction. Qualitative examination of collected text was
carried out to determine the expressed facets of street art information across websites.
Content analysis was also applied to reveal commonalities in vocabulary used to describe
graffiti art. The results of this examination expose facets of street art that are being described
consistently as well as descriptive terminology used, and this information formed the basis for
questions posed to curators in phase II of the research.
3.3.5 Intercoder Reliability
The coding schemes used in analysis of text and website architecture labels of records
were tested for inter-coder reliability. It is useful to have inter-coder input on the application of
codes for analysis to make sure categories developed are clearly defined and therefore easily
applicable, as well as the best possible conceptual categories to be used to meet the goals of
the research. A random sample of 10 percent of the 241 sites, or 24 sites, was chosen for
coding by another person who holds a master’s degree in Library and Information Science. His
coding of the sample revealed inter-coder reliability of 96.9% based upon presence or absence
of a code in each of the coded cases. This percent was factored automatically by the QDA Miner
software. The details individual codes used for inter-coder agreement are shown in Appendix A.
The inter-coder agreement was very high for this research, but this was expected because the
codes are very descriptive of what is present in the data.

72

3.4 Qualitative Interviews with Website Curators
A second data source is the information gathered from those who collect the artworks
and post them online, otherwise known as curators for the purposes of this research. When
curator contact information was available on a website, it was used to introduce the research
and to solicit further participation in Skype, telephone, or email interviews during phase II.
Providing these three means to complete the interview was intended to broaden participation.
IRB approval was sought and obtained via exempt status for the interview portion of the study
(see Appendix B).
Careful development of interview questions elicits knowledge from these domain
creators and users that is specific to their experiences with the phenomenon at hand and is
used to triangulate data gathered from the descriptive facet and terminological analysis.
Comparing emerging vocabulary and themes from the two types of data lends validity to the
research process (Cresswell 2014). Gathering knowledge from collection curators and users is
useful to determine whether these groups taking part in the domain of street art are using
consistent methods to describe and access records or whether there exist different views on
what types of descriptive information are important and why. Approaching those who are
familiar with the artwork, from creation through documentation and online exhibition, situates
the phenomenon under study from within the community. The examination of textual data
sources is carried on from outside the domain, but the additional information provided by
domain insiders valorizes “indigenous” cultural knowledge over that of simple outsider
observation.

73

These explorations demonstrate the vocabulary used for street art documentation, as
well as revealing which aspects of description, or facets, are of value to domain users. Teasing
out the role of graffiti art and street art culture in the generation of such art as contextually
important for the evolution of domain-centric knowledge organization systems (KOSs) requires
a sensitivity to the history of the art forms and their attendant practices, careful attention to
the terminology and language used by the creators of these artworks as well as by those who
collect and use them, and analysis of the descriptive text associated with the online records
themselves. Providing space within the research for domain insiders to explain their practices
and describe how they approach their collections adds contextual knowledge that cannot be
gained by simply dissecting text associated with works.
Phase II addresses research question 3. This phase of the research was designed on the
basis of knowledge gained from Phase I. The list of descriptive facets resulting from Phase I
analysis was used to inform questions for curators during the interviews. This information could
be determined from several points of view; the two considered here are that of the members of
the street art community, and that of the researcher, informed by library and information
science and by KO in particular.
3.4.1 The Interviews
While it is not known precisely whether or which curators are practicing participants in
the making of graffiti art or street art, it must be acknowledged that the secretive nature of the
community and the often-illegal aspects of the work render access to insiders complicated for
interview purposes. Such difficulties may depend on whether the curators are only collecting

74

and sharing works, if whether they are artists carrying out illegal work, or artists seeking more
professional commissions. The worldwide distribution of curators added another level of
complexity for interview access as well. For these reasons, participants were offered flexible
ways to participate in the interview process, including by phone, Skype, or email. The same
questions were posed and follow-up questions asked as necessary regardless of medium. It is
acknowledged that the differences in medium likely have an effect on the quality of
information gathered during the interviews, though the depth of responses varied greatly
despite the asynchronicity of email. Scholars such as Burns (2010) and Ratislavová and Ratislav
(2014) have reported on the differences between email and face-to-face interviews, citing not
only the challenges inherent in the email methodology, but the many possible benefits as well.
Such benefits include convenient time management and greater focus for participants, savings
of time and money as physical travel is avoided, the comfort of indirect and written response,
and the benefits to the researchers who could broaden their data collection by offering the
interview via email.
Burns (2010) questions the difference between email surveys and email interviews and
shares that “Email to and from one person seems much more like an interview, whereas an
email broadcast to substantial numbers of participants has most of the hallmarks, and often the
actual label, of a survey” (para 5.2). He further qualifies this not very neat definition with
examples where more survey-like methods can combine with technology to conduct a multilayered exchange more easily considered an interview and richer for all the complexities that
may might come to bear on the process. The initial contact emails sent out to curators for this

75

research could in this way be considered surveys in which further participation was elicited for
either phone, Skype, or email interviews.
When presented with the results of Phase I during the interviews, curators were asked if
whether they agreed that these captured facets are were indeed important to them and their
perceived audience, and why. Questions are designed to determine what are considered the
important facets of information regarding street art documentation, what is missing now that
we know what is being documented, and what is considered important to document according
to those who are doing it. Questions were also included to address what would in the
traditional art world be assumed as important, such as the size of works and real names of work
creators, despite their exclusion as categories for organization among curators. The interview
instrument is provided in Appendix C.
3.4.2 About Text
Qualitative analysis was carried out on the text from about pages. QDA Miner software
was used to code for stated purpose, audience, art style, and organization methods. This type
of analysis reveals how curators to talk about their reasons for curating, who they are curating
for, how they describe the general style of works they curate, and if whether they apply any
specific method of organization or organize for any particular reasons.
3.5 Summary of Methodology
Domain analysis of this user community and these specific collections has not been
undertaken and therefore indicates a gap in the literature that will be filled by this study. The
organization of photographic street art collections online represents various aspects of art,
76

community, and description that deserve further exploration and that can be used in the future
design of formal systems for the preservation of a record of these important works. The
methods used in this study are designed to show what has been done so far to document the
history of street art and graffiti art production through the textual evidence of those who are
sharing such collections.
Content analysis of website material and qualitative analysis of curator interviews
supports and adds depth of insight to domain analysis through closer examination of the work
practices of participants evidenced by their organizational practices, stated goals, and
terminology. Through these combined methodologies it may be shown not only how online
collections of street art are being organized, but why. This study differs from others that
examine graffiti art and street art practices, motivations, challenges, and history of the art
movement because exploration herein focuses on the organization of the works in online
collections and the descriptive text that supports such organization. Curators of the collections
provide information on how and why they organize their own collections, and offer insight on
best practices for their own and other collections.

77

Chapter 4: Text Analysis and Website Code Categories
Beginning with the full list of 709 links on the Art Crimes website, each was visited and
included or excluded from the study based on the parameters explained in the preceding
chapter. The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview of the websites, their stated goals,
what they offer users, and to give a series of more detailed examples of sites that were
structured and organized in more complex ways. Textual analysis of about information, along
with detailed coding of general navigation labels serves to illustrate the motivations, goals, and
techniques that are being implemented to group records according to various descriptive
facets.
4.1 Analysis of About Text
When a site provided an about area or page, the text was collected and analyzed to
determine any stated purpose of the site or motivations for collecting the works, the art style
terminology the curator uses to describe the works on the site, the intended audience for the
site, and any information loosely related to how works are described or organized. Not all sites
provided such information, and many sites simply used an about area to introduce a particular
artist and the artist’s work instead of the purpose of the site. Further related input was gained
from the interviews conducted with curators that add to the about text findings, which is
discussed in chapter six.

78

4.1.1 Audience and Organization
While coding for both an intended audience and organization information in the about
text was desired at the outset, these types of information were rarely encountered. There were
only three instances that warranted the Audience code. The text for these three ranges from
very vague to rather specific. Starting with the vague audience information, 12oz Prophet
states: “If you don't get it, this isn't for you” (https://12ozprophet.com/pages/about). This
statement implies that the site is designed for insiders, or those who already understand the
types of work that are featured on the site. The Hull Warehouse states: “given time i hope the
site will eventually reach the right audience: those representing hip hop (and themselves) all
over the globe...” (http://www.angelfire.com/in/warehouse/Editorial.html). Graffiti is one of
the four commonly accepted pillars of hip-hop, which also include break-dancing, DJ-ing, and
rapping (Chang 2007). The third site is the most specific. FatCap states: “The average FatCap
visitor is between 15-35, has great chances to be a man, and is most likely to live in a big city”
(https://www.fatcap.com/about.html). This last audience statement could be said to describe
who their audience is instead of who they set out to attract as an audience. The surrounding
information on the page demonstrates that this audience demographic data attracts possible
advertisers on the site. After this analysis of the about text, it is clear that neither prescriptive
nor descriptive audience demographics are normally explicit.
Only three sites explicitely offered organization methods within about information. Like
the Audience code, the depth of information regarding explicit organization and description
varied. Super site Art Crimes was very detailed in its explanation of what terminology the
founders chose to use to describe the style of works they feature. “This site uses ‘graffiti,’
79

because we think this word still has the most recognition and precision and using it makes Art
Crimes more findable with search engines” (https://www.graffiti.org/index/story.html). This
points to a conscious choice of terminology to affect greater visibility of the site, though choice
of terminology will be examined in more depth in the section regarding art styles later in this
chapter.
Double-H provides this information on their about page:
For safety reasons, all illegal pieces remain untitled, except a few from the history
section. For all other pieces, artist and year are stated where known. For pieces from
outside of Hamburg, the location is specified as well. For canvases, title, size (in
centimeters) and technique (acrylics, spraypaint...) are specified where known. As a rule,
sketches remain untitled (http://www.double-h.org/english/impressum.html).
This demonstrates the site’s value of artist, year, and location information when it is available.
Another issue that will be addressed further during the interview discussion in chapter six is the
omission of location information for works when it is known that they have been produced
illegally. This is done to protect the artist or artists from law enforcement using this information
for prosecutions.
The last of the three sites to provide any type of organization information within about
text is super site Miami Graffiti, which states: “Anyone can browse flicks by writer, crew,
location, or date, and also submit updates on existing submissions so the information becomes
more accurate on the site” (http://miamigraffiti.com/about.php). Again, the importance of
artist, date, and location data is evident, as well as the welcome invitation to site users to
provide additional information, if they have it, to maintain a more accurate record of works.

80

4.1.2 Art Style
Most of the sites with about text use terminology to describe the style of art that they
are featuring. Terms most often used include graffiti, street art, murals, or other styles and
combinations of styles. Sometimes the about information is describing the work that an artist
has experience with instead of making a direct correspondence with the actual works featured
on the site. When it was possible to discern these two, emphasis was given to the latter as the
websites themselves are the focus of this research.
There are 105 sites that provided art style terminology within about text. The
normalized terminology and frequency of occurrence are shown below in Table 4. Variants of
graffiti are the most commonly used terminology, including graffiti art, graff, train graffiti,
freight train graffiti, and 3D graffiti. These terms occur 86 times. Murals is used 22 times and
street art 15 times. A total of 31 art style types is revealed in the about text analysis, with
slightly more than half (16) occurring only once. Further discussion below addresses the
correlation of motivation and selected terminology.

81

Art Style Terminology: Frequency of Occurrence
0
Graffiti (graffiti art, graff, train graffiti, freight train…
Murals
Street art
Graphic design (design, graphic art)
Art (contemporary art, fine art)
Illustration (drawing)
Lettering (letterform, calligraphy, typography)
Spray painting (aerosol art, spraycan art, spraypaint)
Urban art (urban contemporary art, urban culture)
Photography
Sculpture
Visual art
Studio work (canvas)
Painting
Post-graffiti
Architectural design
Comics
Digital art
Engraving
Graffuturism
Installation art
Modified objects
Multimedia
Photorealistic productions
Plush figures
Pop surrealism
Stencil art
Style writing
Tattooing
Textiles
Wild Style® writing

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

86
22
15
10
6
6
5
5
5
4
3
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Table 4 Art Style Terminology: Frequency of Occurrence

4.1.3 Motivation
On the about pages two main types of motivation were noted. When a specific artist or
crew was curating a site, personal gain was the most common implicit purpose, such as to
provide a working portfolio and garner further exposure for more commissioned work, gallery
exhibitions, or other economic benefit. This was coded as Internal. The other main purpose
82

encountered for a site was to feature, gather, and preserve a record of ephemeral works for
public use and enjoyment. This was seen more often from super sites and from sites not
curated by an individual, active artist. This was coded as External (see Kipp, Beak, and Choi
2017).
In this way, motivation information was gathered from 112 sites. Of these, 72 were
coded as Internal and 40 coded as External. There were four sites that were also coded as
Mixed. Two of these were Internal, Mixed and two were External, Mixed. Each of these four
had a tendency toward either Internal or External motivation, but also had indication of the
other motivation so they were not coded only Mixed. For example, a site was coded as Internal,
Mixed when it was curated by an artistic crew and featured the work of the crew, but also
added in the work of others when an image was made available. Their motivation was seen as
promoting the crew, yet also to feature the works of others in a less focused capacity. All 11
super sites within the about text analysis were externally motivated.
4.1.4 Art Style Terminology and Purpose Relationship
There is a correspondence between terminology used and whether a site is internally or
externally motivated. Before normalization and grouping of terms as described for art style
terminology above, the words used by the sites were tallied by super sites, by all External sites,
and by all Internal sites. Externally motivated super sites used the following art style
terminology: graffiti, graffiti art, post-graffiti, street art, stencil art, urban art (6 terms).

83

Including all externally motivated sites added six more terms to the previous six: graff, train
graffiti, freight train graffiti, photography, graphic design, and aerosol art (for a total of 12
terms).
Internally motivated sites used the widest variety of art style terminology: graffiti art,
graphic design, street art, fine art, urban contemporary art, post-graffiti, studio art, murals,
spraycan art, digital art, canvas, engravings, sculpture/s, modified objects, photorealistic
productions, letterform, lettering, illustration, design, visual art, art, aerosol spray paint,
painting, drawing/s, installation art, urban culture, spray paint, canvas, 3D graffiti, calligraphy,
photography, plush figures, gallery art, spraypainting, contemporary art, architectural design,
textiles, multimedia, Wild Style writing, abstracted typography, comics, pop surrealism,
graffuturism, tattooing, style writing, and urban art (a total of 46 terms). When a site is
internally motivated, it likely benefits the artist or artists to use a broader range of art style
terminology to advertise a wide range of skills and expertise that may be of interest to business
clients or galleries. The term graffiti, by itself, did not occur as an art style descriptor on any of
the internally motivated sites. Graffiti art, post-graffiti, and graffuturism were the only terms
that employed the word graff or graffiti in them, but these terms distance themselves from
graffiti, which may be seen as a benefit for artists interested in commercial work and wishing to
distance themselves from illegal activity.
4.2 Analysis of Navigation Labels: The Six Code Categories
The following analysis moves into the coding of navigation labels used across all sites.
There are six broad categories of codes, two of which focus on the websites themselves and

84

four of which focus on the works on the websites. The categories are listed below in Table 5,
showing how often each code category was applied, the percentage each category represents
of all categories, how many sites warranted the application of each category, and the resulting
percentage of all sites to warrant the same. They are ordered by how many sites used each
code category, from most frequently used to least frequently used.
Code Category
Sites
Types
Supports
General
OtherMedia
Locations

Table 5 Code Categories

Count
701
824
746
15090
214
2705

% Codes
3.50%
4.10%
3.70%
74.40%
1.10%
13.30%

Sites
200
163
145
137
129
60

% Sites
83.00%
67.60%
60.20%
56.80%
53.50%
24.90%

A graphic representation of this same data shows the percentage of code categories
across all applications of the code categories, including multiple applications within one site.
This represents the Code, Count, and % Codes columns in Table 5.

85

Code Categories
4%

1% 4%

4%

13%

74%

FacetsGeneral

FacetsLocations

FacetsSupports

FacetsTypes

OtherMedia

Sites

Table 6 Code Categories as Percentage of all Codes Applied to All Sites

A subset of coding will be examined herein, focusing on general site information. This
includes the general facets and other media code categories. This chapter forms an
introduction to the more detailed analysis of general, support, type, and location codes for
works applied to navigation labels across all sites in the next chapter. There are 97 individual
codes and a total of 19,582 instances of these codes applied to the data.
4.3 General Website Codes
Coding for this research can be divided into those that describe the sites and those that
describe the works. Attention is now given to the former, which include two categories of
86

codes: Sites and Other Media. The Sites category is further divided into the codes About,
Contact, ContributeFlix, Disclaimer, FAQ, Forum, Glossary, Guestbook, History, HowTo,
Interviews, Map, MyAccount, Poll, Shop, Subscribe, and Videos. The category name Sites was
used because this group of codes is used for material found on the sites that does not directly
relate to describing the works themselves, but relates to the structure of each site in general.
A breakdown of how often each of these Sites codes occurred is shown below in Figure
4.1, arranged from most common to least common by the number of sites warranting the code.
The code name is given in the first column, the total count of how many times that code was
applied across all 241 sites in the second column, the percentage of all codes that this code
represents in the third column, the number of sites that had material coded with this code in
the fourth column, and the total percentage of all sites that had material coded with this code
in the fifth and last column. The list is in order of the most sites including a code, not by the
total number of times the code appears. For example, the HowTo code appears 77 times, but is
only used across 8 of the sites. A limited number of sites provide HowTo information, but they
provide several different kinds of this information in different areas of the sites. Sometimes the
same code is applied to different subdivisions of a site.
Sites
Contact
About
Shop
Videos
Disclaimer
Interviews
ContributeFlix
Guestbook
History

Count
147
145
77
61
33
51
18
21
18

% of Codes
0.7
0.7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
87

Sites
133
110
60
43
26
22
16
15
9

% of Sites
55.2
45.6
24.9
17.3
10.8
9.1
6.6
6.2
3.7

Map
MyAccount
Forum
FAQ
HowTo
Subscribe
Poll
Glossary

10
13
9
7
76
6
3
6

0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

9
9
8
7
7
6
3
2

3.7
3.7
3.3
2.9
2.9
2.5
1.2
0.8

Table 7 Occurrences of the Sites Codes, ranked by most sites using

4.3.1 The Contact Code
A page for contact information is coded as Contact. Nearly all of the sites had contact
information, but not all of the sites had a specific sub-page for this type of information.
Sometimes contact information is given at the bottom of the homepage or elsewhere within
the site. Over half of the sites do have a specific sub-page labeled for contact information, and
at 55.2% of total sites, this is the most used navigation label in the Sites category.
4.3.2 The About Code
If the site has a page dedicated to explaining what the site is about, who the site is
about, or the aims of the site, this is coded as About. Often this type of page is labeled simply
About, but sometimes it is labeled according to the name of the site, the artist or crew, or with
a short phrase such as “who we are.” An about page may focus solely on the site and guidelines
for using the site, encapsulating many of the other codes described in this research. An about
page may also focus more on an artist or crew and include biographies, resumes, lists of
exhibitions or gallery shows, and contact information.

88

4.3.3 The Shop Code
It is very common for a site in this study to offer an area for sales of graffiti or street
style art. This may be works on canvas, prints, posters, or other items such as clothing, digital
downloads, design services, or supplies. A quarter of all sites offer a sub-page or sub-pages for
shopping.
4.3.4 The Videos Code
Videos are another common offering on the sites. These may be recordings of artists at
work, interviews with artists, or videos of walls or other areas of one or more works. They may
also be recordings of events, travels, and other things sometimes not related to graffiti art or
street art. Just under one fifth, 17.3%, of the sites offer an area dedicated to videos.
4.3.5 The Disclaimer Code
A disclaimer is often labeled as such directly, but at times the word disclaimer is not
used. If a site includes text that explains that the site does not condone the destruction of
property, or any type of illegal activity, this was coded as Disclaimer. The site St. Louis Freights
states, “This site is dedicated to the freight train graffiti movement. Vandalism of railroad
property is illegal. This site does not condone or promote vandalism. The purpose of this site is
to document this movement for those not able to view these trains first person”
(http://www.graffiti.org:8080/stlouis/freights/index.html). On a sub-page labeled Info and
coded as About, site Intergraff includes this text: “Intergraff does not condone the act of
vandalism of any sort nor does it promote any illegal activities. Intergraff serves exclusively as
an archiving database to document photos about graffiti and the communities it derives from”
89

(http://intergraff.com/info.html). The Lame Face Crew site states: “DISCLAIMER: Lame Face
Crew does not condone vandalism or the making of graffiti. We are only here to provide
pictures of beautiful artwork that just happen to be done on walls, trains, vans, trucks, etc... We
do not support vadalism [sic] in any way” (https://www.graffiti.org/lf/). 26 sites, or 10.8% of all
sites, offer some type of disclaimer.
4.3.6 The Interviews Code
Twenty-two sites, almost ten percent of all sites, offer an area for interviews. Interviews
may be videos or text, or a combination of these. Videos may be offered directly on the site,
embedded within, or may be hosted on a link external to the site, such as YouTube.
4.3.7 The ContributeFlix Code
Some sites welcome and even actively solicit contributed photographs from users. This
was seen in 16 of the 241 sites. There may be an entire sub-page dedicated for this purpose, or
there may be text included on a different page with information on how to submit photos.
Often guidelines for formatting, file size, and appropriate content of submitted images is
included. The Graffiti Network offers these rules for submitting photos:
If this is your first time submitting flicks to GraffNet DO NOT send black book sketches,
tags, simple throw-ups or fill-ins. You will not get a reply and your files will not be used.
If you have already sent in a piece or a burner and it has been posted to the site feel
free to submit any graffiti-related art.
SENDING BY EMAIL
Please include the following information with your email:
WHAT THE PIECE SAYS
THE ARTIST
90

DATE IT WAS DONE
LOCATION (COUNTRY & CITY)
THE PHOTOGRAPHER
Images should be high quality jpegs, at least 300 pixels high for horizontal flicks.
(https://www.graffiti.org/graffnet/index-frames.html)
Many sites build their photographic collections with submissions from users. Site
Intergraff highlights the importance of this collective effort: “Intergraff continues build a
comprehensive archive of everything that would otherwise be erased from history. Our team of
archivers try to identify each and every photo we get, however we rely on your knowledge and
experience coming from your own community to construct an accurate archive”
(http://intergraff.com/archive.html). Site Miami Graffiti states that they are an
openly submittable picture database of graffiti history for a specific part of the world. It
is a site composed of a massive collection of pictures of various graffiti art done in and
around the South Florida / Miami / Ft. Lauderdale areas. Users can submit their own
flicks with relevant information attached. Anyone can browse flicks by writer, crew,
location, or date, and also submit updates on existing submissions so the information
becomes more accurate on the site. (http://miamigraffiti.com/about.php)
The site has specific rules as well and offers a form for submissions that includes specific
metadata to be included with each image.

91

Figure 3 Screen shot of photo submission form for site Miami Graffiti (http://www.miamigraffiti.com/submit.php).

A few sites specifically ask that users do not send in photos. The site BurnerzOnly asks
that users do not submit any new photos because the site is an archive only and no longer
being updated (http://burnerz.pl/). @149st states that they do not accept photos of clean
trains, those that have been buffed of graffiti writing (http://www.at149st.com/clean.html).

92

4.3.8 The Guestbook Code
A guestbook is an area where visitors can leave a greeting or a comment for the site
administrators or other users. Website Toronto’s Unauthorized Permanent Artifacts offers this
information on their Guestbook page: “What did you think of the site? What do do [sic] you
want to say about Toronto graff? Want to shout out your crew? Do it in the GuestBook and be
heard!” (http://www.angelfire.com/mo/tupa/start.html). They offer links from this page to
either sign the guestbook or view the guestbook, but neither of these links are active any longer
as of this writing, displaying an error messages that the guestbook has been made unavailable
as of March 31, 2015. Of the sites that offer a guestbook, only two of these actual guestbooks
were accessible to the researcher. A related, but more active way to leave a comment or ask a
question of a site is through the forums when offered. Fifteen sites offered a guestbook, or
6.2% of all sites.
4.3.9 The Forum Code
A forum is like it sounds, a place where users can post comments, share information,
and ask questions of the site administrators or other users, who can then comment on others’
posts. There are eight sites in this research that offer forums and five of them are currently
active. Three of the sites offered a forum as a navigational label, but the links did not work. Of
the five active forums, all had been used within the last six months of this writing, most of them
within the last week, and all required users to register for an account with the site and to log in
to that account before participating.

93

4.3.10 The History Code and Glossary Code
There are nine sites that offer an area dedicated to history information, but there are
also several places where the history of graffiti, street art, specific artists or crews, or other
related topics are offered on the sites. Some sites include their stated purpose with an
emphasis on providing such historical information, such as site FatCap, which stated at the time
of data collection: “FatCap … is a photo, video sharing community and an online media which
provides information and historical data about street art and graffiti. The purpose of FatCap is
to inform about a cultural and artistic movement” (http://www.fatcap.com/register.html). This
text has since changed and now similar information can be found on the bottom of the site’s
main pages as “FatCap is a web-based resource on graffiti and street-art culture. Here you will
find pictures, videos, and articles, classified by artists, and updated daily. All our content is geolocalized, so you can quickly discover main artistic trends from all over the world”
(https://www.fatcap.com). Words underlined in the quote are hotlinked to named areas of the
site.
There are three sites that provide extensive historical information that will be described
here in more detail. @149st offers the most granular and comprehensive text on the history of
graffiti writing (http://www.at149st.com/history.html). A section devoted to history is linked
from every page on their site. The main history page offers several sub-pages including two for
general history (Part 1 and Part 2), Women in Graffiti, Tags, Throw-ups, Wild style, Writers’
tools, Clean Trains, Tunnel Bombing, Scratchiti, Yards and Lay-ups, Graffiti Photographers, The
Fun Gallery, and a Glossary of graffiti terms. The two pages of general history tell the story of
the graffiti writing movement beginning in 1966 in Philadelphia and quickly moving to New York
94

City. Specific pioneering writers are introduced, as well as the areas where they worked and the
styles they developed. Part 2 takes the reader up to the move to the Internet, where images of
the works are now very readily and widely shared. The Art Crimes site, which seeded all the
sites used as data in this study, is “credited as being the first organized web site focused on the
documentation of Writing” (http://www.at149st.com/hpart2.html).
The @149st site does a thorough job of presenting several facets of graffiti writing
history. The site includes a sub-page specifically for women writers, featuring details on several
of them and highlighting the challenges uniquely faced by women in a male-dominated subculture. A very basic introduction is given to three popular types of graffiti writing on three
separate sub-pages for tags, throw-ups, and wild style. Images are provided as examples for
each type. A sub-page exists to describe the concerted efforts of the New York City
Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) to crack down on subway graffiti by removing any
marked subway car from service immediately, otherwise known as the Clean Train Movement
(see Austin, 2001). The Clean Train Movement spawned other concerted writing efforts, such as
tunnel bombing and scratchiti, each also afforded their own sub-pages in the history section
and each illustrated with at least one image. The Yards and Layups sub-page of the history area
has eight sub-pages for specific popular writing subway yards and four for layups. Each of these
has an introduction, historical significance information, and sample images.
Rounding out the history section is a sub-page for graffiti photographers, which have
their own unique place in the history of writing, documenting the largely ephemeral works.
A widely held public sentiment was that graffiti was merely the scribblings of
misdirected youth. A small handful of professional artists[,] photographers recognized
95

the artistic and social significance of the movement. Each of these individuals
approached documentation in a unique way. Their collective efforts have preserved an
important visual record of graffiti art history. Their documentation of the art has not
only assisted in the preservation of the culture; it has also aided in its growth.
(http://www.at149st.com/photo.html)
This section is further subdivided into individual pages for photographers Henry Chalfant,
Martha Cooper, Ernie Paniccioli, James Prigoff, and Jack Stewart. Cooper, Paniccioli, and Prigoff
each were interviewed by @149st and transcripts of these interviews also are linked on their
respective pages. A sub-page of the history section is devoted to The Fun Gallery, described as a
Manhattan art gallery supportive of early graffiti artists and having an influential impact on the
credibility of the art form.
Last in the list of history sub-pages is a glossary of 81 alphabetical terms relating to
graffiti writing “provided primarily for the use of people outside the writing community”
(http://www.at149st.com/glossary.html). @149st is one of only two sites in this research to
provide a glossary of terms, the other being Romanian Graffiti
(https://www.romaniangraffiti.ro/graffiti-glossary). The @149st glossary includes 80 terms and
the Romanian Graffiti glossary includes 108 terms, with slightly more focus on tools such as
specific paints and markers. They share 45 of the same terms between them. All terms in the
Romanian Graffiti glossary are in English.
Subway Outlaws provides another comprehensive history area for their users. Like
@149st, Subway Outlaws acknowledges that people were writing on public surfaces long
before the US Graffiti movement began in the 1960s as a cultural phenomenon, but the
curators begin their formal outline of writing history in the late 1960s. The site focuses on
96

subway writing, so they end their historical section in 1990 as the “clean train” era was ushered
in (http://www.subwayoutlaws.com/History/History.htm). They provide images along with the
chronology of subway writing, discussing specific artists and crews. There are other labeled
sections of the site that would appear to provide more historical information, such as Stories,
Writing, and Interviews, but the organization of the site is confusing and the layout is cluttered,
with flash design and small text of varying sizes embedded within images that a user can
sometimes click on to visit another section and sometimes not. There was nothing more than
an image of eight men with their writer names under each on the Stories sub-page, but the list
of main navigation labels that appears on each page of the site suddenly had two extra
categories once on this Stories page: History of Writers, and Old School Kingz. The History of
Writers page then takes the user to another sub-page that says “Famous Names in THE
HISTORY OF WRITING (The Hall of Fame) A -Z, A list of writers that have have [sic] made their
mark on N.Y.C. Subways, or have made a mark in the Graffiti movement”
(http://www.subwayoutlaws.com/Interviews/HISTORY%20OF%20NAMES..htm). This is
followed by a list of over 1000 names on several pages. Most are simply writer names or crew
names, but some have a very short bit of information after them, such as when they wrote,
where they wrote, or with whom. They are static, not hotlinked.
Another sub-page that appears only on some sub-pages, such as the history page, is the
RIP Page, hosting another list of names and sometimes images “in respect to all the fallen king's
[sic] of the subways era” (http://www.subwayoutlaws.com/interview2.htm). Looking at the URL
for this page, it seems to be part of the sub-page for interviews, but clicking on the navigational
label for interviews takes the user to a different page that does not offer the main navigation
97

labels at all that are available on almost every other page of the site. Despite these
idiosyncrasies, the historical information available, when it can be found, offers more than most
other sites in this study.
One last site discussed here with historical information about the graffiti writing
movement is Tracy168, itself a featured section of New York City community site Bronx Mall
(www.bronxmall.com). It is linked as a site on Art Crimes and fits the requirements for a site
according to this research, so it is referred to as a site on its own. Tracy168 features sub-pages
for The Story, parts 1 and 2, as well as two individual sub-pages with graffiti writing histories
composed by artists King Two and Caine One. The two-part feature on Tracy168 speaks of the
artist’s impact on the graffiti writing movement in the very early days of the developing cultural
phenomenon, his thoughts on writing, and his influence on the development of Wild Style
writing and its birth in the Bronx. The sub-pages written by King Two and Caine One are
personal accounts of their experiences in the early graffiti writing movement.
Most sites in this study offer little in the way of historical information; the ones
mentioned here are exceptions. When a site has a section that is coded History, it is most often
providing the history of the featured artist or crew. A few sites focus on specific locations and
this is reflected in the historical information they provide. Double-H, which focuses on the
history of the German graffiti writing scene, includes information on specific German artists and
areas of Germany, German train graffiti history, and German wall graffiti history
(http://www.double-h.org/history/index.html). Likewise, 187 Crew includes a short history of
the graffiti writing movement in Rijeka, Croatia (https://www.graffiti.org/187/main.html).

98

4.3.11 The HowTo Code
The HowTo code was applied whenever a site had an area for instruction, whether
offered on the site directly or through the curators of the site at a physical location. One site in
particular out of the seven using this code is dedicated to online instruction. Trainwriters.com
has this text on their home page:
FACT: GRAFFITI IS NOT THE ORIGINAL WORD FOR WHAT WE DO! It is
called "WRITING" and we are called "WRITERS". We focus on the art of LETTERING. I
only used the word GRAFFITI on this page because that is the word everyone uses to
describe what we do. This site is dedicated to all future writers who really want to learn
the art of Writing. If you came to this site to learn and copy exactly what I teach. THEN
YOU WILL NEVER BE A REAL WRITER! You can learn, and then change the letters and
styles to fit your skills. Other wise you will be called a "BITER"!. And you will never get
respect from real Writers. (http://trainwriters.com/home.htm)
Of the other six sites that offer material coded with the HowTo code, four of them
advertise workshops or classes in physical locations. One site includes basic tips on how to learn
to write graffiti, while one other site offers a very basic, customizable stencil kit that can be
copied and made at home. Stencil Archive advertises various workshops in physical locations,
but also includes videos that demonstrate wheat-pasting and making and using stencils, among
others. They also link to other sites that provide downloadable patterns for various stencils.
4.3.12 The Map Code
The Map code was applied whenever a map graphic was presented to show works by
location. In this regard, this code could be considered as part of the works code categories, but
was included here as a general site feature. The more specific textual locations used with or
without a map are treated separately in the following chapter when analyzing codes for
99

geographic specificity. The use of a map to guide users to geographic areas where works are
found is a helpful way to quickly visualize the areas where works are from, whether on a global
scale or when used for an individual city. There are nine sites that offer a map to organize
where works originate. Of these nine, five used the Google Maps platform. Screenshots are
included here from a sample of sites to illustrate how they are making use of maps in unique
ways.
Bombing Science features graffiti from around the world and this is reflected in their
mapping. Areas with featured works are marked on the map with circles that include numbers
to indicate how many images are to be found from that area. For an area with less fewer than
ten images, the circle is blue. Areas with more than ten but less fewer than 100 images have an
orange circle, and areas with over 100 images use a red circle. These proportions change as a
user zooms in further on the map and areas become more granular in this way, dividing areas
up more finely to individual cities and suburbs. Images display below the map once a user clicks
down to a specific area and the icon on the map changes to a camera icon instead of a circle.
This square icon can be seen in Figure 4.2 below, indicating a terminal point where images will
be shown, such as near Mongolia in the example. Faith47 uses a very similar Google Map style
with a different color scheme.

100

Figure 4 World map from site Bombing Science (https://www.bombingscience.com/graffiti-map/)

Bristol Street Art has a much narrower focus to the collection, featuring works from
Bristol in England. Above the Bristol map, a user can choose from several filters to narrow down
the types of works shown. Figure 5 shows the options to choose from, as well as a small
amount of text explaining how to use the filters.

Figure 5 Bristol Street Art Map (http://www.bristol-street-art.co.uk/map-of-bristol-street-art)

101

The menu is not easy to read because of the dark background, but includes four types of filters
to choose from: Status, Period, Type, and Artist. Users can choose from works that are labeled
active or gone. Once a work no longer exists because it has been painted over or otherwise
removed, the marker for that work changes color and the status changes from active to gone. It
cannot be proven how up to date this feature is or how well maintained, but it is the only map
among the sites that offers this option. The period filter can show users works from the last
seven days, the last month, or the last year. It is not obvious whether this means the works
were completed, documented, or uploaded in these time frames. The type filter offers users
nine different types of works to choose from: stencil, paste-up, façade, sticker, textual,
illustration, bins, signs, and other. The artist filter offers 22 different artists from which to
choose.
At the time of this writing, the map was not functioning as intended and remained
black, but when a filter is chosen, a user can see a pop-up that displays how many images are
included. Keeping all categories, one sees text that says “730 found.” This text appears for a
couple seconds when any filters are chosen. Choosing all for status, period, and type, and
choosing only artist Banksy displays text that reads “17 found.” Below the black space where
the map should appear, a list of categories includes the nine types mentioned in the filters and
the addition of Banksy. There is also a list of 11 named areas around Bristol. A user can choose
any of these to be taken to a gallery featuring that category.
Daim uses a Google map to show “the ‘geo-tagged’ posts of the daim.org website”
(http://daim.org/site/en/map/). This is a basic map with the familiar Google Map pins to
indicate locations. Spray City and Kiam 77 use a basic Google Map as well with slightly different
102

fonts and colors. Kiam 77 uses icons of a container instead of the familiar Google Map pin to
indicate geo-locations. The container icon is a representation of the work of street art that the
artist has placed around the world, meaning the actual piece of artwork is in the shape of a
container similar to the icon. Site Huh? uses a very basic map of an outline of Poland to indicate
areas where featured works are from. This does not appear to be a Google map, but it gives a
sense of where one is within the boundaries of the country. The city names are listed below the
map, not on the map near the points themselves. A bigger circle on the map means there are
more works there than at the smaller circles.

Figure 6 Huh? map of Poland with hotlinked cities as circles and text

The sites Intergraff and FatCap both make more extensive use of interactive mapping
than those previously mentioned. Neither appear to be using Google Maps, but there is no
103

obvious marking to indicate what geo-location software is serving their sites. Intergraff includes
the navigational structure of a map on their homepage, as shown in Figure 7 below. Users can
click on a continent to begin, which then will open up a new map with that area chosen, broken
out into sub-sections (Figure 8). North America, South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and
Australia are the areas available from the world map, given as hotlinked text below the map.
Asia and Australia are not hotlinked on the map nor from the text labels, indicating that there
are no works featured from these continents. After choosing a continent, a user can click again
to a country. Once within a country, the options change to textual navigation through listed city
names. In countries such as France, where Intergraff has numerous works, they list the top ten
cities and then a link to “view all cities.” Similarly, they list the top ten writers beneath this, with
a link to “view all writers.” They also give options to view all cities in the country with works or
to view all writers featured in the country alongside the map itself at the country level (Figure
9).

104

Figure 7 Intergraff home page map navigation (http://intergraff.com/)

105

Figure 8 Intergraff Europe map (http://intergraff.com/pages/eu/eu.html)

106

Figure 9 Intergraff France map (http://intergraff.com/pages/eu/fr/eufr.html)

FatCap has a similar navigational style, employing a world map divided roughly into continents
that can be clicked on, taking the user to ever more granular and focused areas. They have the
most extensive map navigation of any site in the study, befitting the very large collection of
works available to browse. A user can access the map navigation by clicking on a small image of
a map in the upper right corner of the home page labeled “Worldwide Graffiti.” This image and
therefore link is available from most of the various pages of the site. Beginning on the main
107

map page, a user can see the world with continents to choose from. Once a user chooses a
continent by clicking on it, a floating text box appears temporarily over the continent, listing the
number of photos and number of artists available for that area. Then the map reloads to show
the continent, where the user can again choose a country. The temporary text box will appear
at each selection along the way with number of photos and number of artists, until reaching a
terminal division, such as a European country or a U.S. state. Choosing North America, then the
United States, then New York State, brings a user to a menu of featured cities, as shown below
in Figure 10.

Figure 10 Map of site FatCap at the New York state level (https://www.fatcap.com/usa/new-york.html)

The floating text boxes that temporarily appear over a continent provide the number of
pictures and artists for that continent, but once further inside the navigation structure of the
map, the text box numbers no longer add up to the numbers at the higher level. For example,
when a user clicks on North America, the temporary text box shows “1034 pictures 362 artists.”
Then when a user clicks on the United States, the temporary text box reads “986 pictures 346
artists.” A list of states and inclusive cities appears below this map, giving the total number of
108

pictures in a total number of cities for each state. The state of California alone, for example,
lists “2762 pictures in 68 states,” followed by a hotlinked list of 68 cities (not states). This is
already more than twice the number of pictures indicated at the previous level of the map for
the entire United States. The more a user goes back and forth on the levels of the map, the
more quickly the floating text boxes disappear, so they are not very useful in the end to
determine how many images and artists are actually represented in the collection. Despite this,
the granularity of the map navigation is impressive and appears very useful in accessing works
from specific locations.

109

Figure 11 FatCap details for United States map (https://www.fatcap.com/usa-graffiti.html)

110

4.3.13 The MyAccount, Subscribe, and Poll Codes
The MyAccount code is used when a site offers users the option to create their own
unique account on the site. This is used most often to participate in forums or to add comments
to posts or images. The sites that offer discussion forums require users to set up a personal
account in order to participate. Some sites also allow users to create accounts to track their
own image submissions and to group their image submissions for other users as well under
their created user names. In very few sites, this becomes yet another way to organize images,
by the user who is contributing the photographs.
The Subscribe code is used to represent the ability of a user to subscribe to new
material posted to the site. This is usually done via an RSS feed or email notification. The Poll
code was applied to sites offering a basic poll or survey question to users. Only three sites
utilized any kind of poll. For example, site Australian Graffiti asked users “Which city has the
best graffiti? Adelaide, Brisbane, Canberra, Hobart, Melbourne, Perth.” The votes indicated
Melbourne in the lead with 66/80 votes or 82% at the time of data collection
(http://australiangraffiti.blogspot.com/). 50mm Los Angeles asks users “What is more
important to the longevity of graffiti?” Users can choose one of three answers: “Unity amongst
all writers, low pro spots – keeping it under the radar, going all out and bankrupting the
system” (http://www.50mmlosangeles.com/). Location Twelve asks users about their own
writing experience and preferred paints, a screenshot of which can be seen below in Figure 12.
At the time of this writing, the links to view poll results were inactive.

111

Figure 12 Poll from site Location Twelve (https://www.graffiti.org/dj/index-l12.html)

4.4 Other Media Codes
The set of Other Media codes were applied when a site offered a link to an associated
blog or other social media account, a list of links to other graffiti or street art sites or related
material, or when the site had been involved in the publishing of a book and linked to such
112

information in a dedicated area. Many sites have more than one other associated social media
account. The statistics associated with each of the Other Media codes can be seen below in
Table 8.
OtherMedia
Links
Blog
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Flickr
Book
YouTube
Pinterest
Tumblr

Count
107
50
12
11
9
8
8
4
3
2

% of Codes
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Sites
90
40
10
10
7
6
6
3
2
2

% of Sites
37.3
16.6
4.1
4.1
2.9
2.5
2.5
1.2
0.8
0.8

Table 8 Occurrences of the OtherMedia Codes

By far the most common use of other media by the sites is the provision of a set of links
to related material. As stated, this is most often links to other graffiti or street art sites, links to
other media platforms run by the same person or persons who are running each given site, or
links to other types of related media, such as commercial design sites, commercial art supply
sites, or anything of potential interest to the site users. The second most common type of other
media is a blog associated with the individual sites. Some of the sites in this research are
themselves clearly blogs, but they may have other blogs associated with the first blog, or they
may be less of a blog and more of a gallery and offering a blog for textual information relating
to graffiti art and street art. Textual information commonly found in blog format includes
interviews, events, and news of interest to the graffiti and street art community.

113

What may be of great interest for further research are the links to various associated
social media sites. Those coded in this study include, by order of most frequently encountered:
Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube, Pinterest, and Tumblr. Occasionally a site would
have an associated MySpace account or other less popular or no longer active platform. These
were not individually coded. Each social media platform coded in this research treats
information differently for categorization, tagging, and general organization. Further research
into the methods of description and organization of graffiti art and street art images on imagebased platforms in particular (Instagram and Flickr) will be valuable to learn more about how
people document and share the art form.
4.5 Summary of Website Code Categories
This chapter has examined the general site codes and other media codes warranted by
all sites in the research have been described in detail in this chapter. In contrast to what will
follow in chapter five, the general site codes provide a broad look at the organization of the
sites from a structural and sometimes commercial perspective. The information coded at this
level relates to administrative functions such as purpose statements, how to contact site
curators or administrators, personalization functions, and how to actively interact as a user
with the site itself. The legal information found as disclaimers can also be seen as
administrative in nature.
Other aspects of the codes examined herein relate more to commercial or economic
promotion. The Shop code is the most explicit of these, but such motivation can also be implied
in the connections a site makes to other media platforms such as those discussed in the other

114

media codes category. The possible impact of internal or external motivation on a site’s
organization was introduced with a qualitative analysis of about text information. These
analyses will be revisited in the following chapters as the coding for organization of works is
presented in chapter five and the input from curators is brought into the discussion and
compared with site findings in chapter six.

115

Chapter 5: Work Code Categories
The work category codes are applied to navigation labels that describe the works
themselves, as opposed to the codes discussed in the previous chapter that are applicable to
the sites. They are grouped for detailed analysis into general facets, support facets, type facets,
and location facets. The codes within each of these groups are presented with their total code
counts, percentage of codes, number of sites that were coded with the individual codes, and
the percentage of sites that included that type of code. Each of the groups are sorted from the
most sites to fewest sites using a code, not for the individual codes as these may be reused by
individual sites, sometimes very frequently as can be seen with the individual galleries for
named artists. The various facet codes in this chapter are often used as subdivisions of each
other, both within and across facet groups.
During coding it became apparent that certain sites are exceptional examples of
organization for graffiti art and street art documentation. Nineteen such sites stood out from
the 241 as having not only large image collections, but employing more consistent, granular,
and useful methods for organizing their works. These nineteen sites are also currently active
and adding to their collections, have clearly articulated information about the sites, and have
been noted for more in-depth study in the future. These nineteen sites are referred to
hereinafter as super sites.
5.1 General Facet Codes
The general facet codes are best explained as relevant descriptors of works that do not
readily fit into the more organically evolved groups for supports, types, and locations;
116

therefore, they are discussed as a group unto themselves. There are 18 general facet codes, as
seen below in Table 9, arranged by most sites using a code.
General
Facets
Artist
Event
Gallery
Year
New
Old
Featured
Inside
RIP
RatedHigh
Legal
Outside
Month
Color
Day
Decade
Illegal

Count

% of Codes

Sites

% of Sites

14439
89
49
227
35
35
27
11
75
14
15
7
35
12
5
8
5

71.2
0.4
0.2
1.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

50
31
29
27
26
26
20
10
10
8
7
7
5
4
4
4
2

20.7
12.9
12.0
11.2
10.8
10.8
8.3
4.1
4.1
3.3
2.9
2.9
2.1
1.7
1.7
1.7
0.8

Table 9 General Facet Codes

The general facet codes were not all obvious from the start of the research. Grouping
works by artist or by year were not unexpected, but finding categories to group works by those
new to the site, by user ratings, by legal or illegal status, or by works found inside or outside
were interesting because they demonstrated not only the users’ participation in shaping the
collection groupings, but facets of the works that are particular to graffiti art and street art that
might not be applicable to institutional collections of more traditional art. Codes will now be
examined individually or in small clusters of related codes.

117

5.1.1 The Artist Code
The artist code is the most used code most used by far in the research, applied 14,439
times over 50 sites, which is just over 20% of all sites. The artist code was applied whenever an
artist or crew’s name was used to signify a gallery of works by that artist or crew. Artists often
work in groups or are associated with a particular group that may work together at times. These
groups are commonly referred to as crews. Ross (2016) defines crews as
Graffiti artists/writers who usually paint together. They serve different roles in the
construction of elaborate murals and pieces. Not only do crew members paint together,
but also they often socialize together. Crews may live geographically close together or
they may live in different cities and countries and periodically assemble to work
together (476).
When initially coding, it appeared easy to say when a name was referring to an
individual artist or to a crew, so there were different codes for each. As coding continued, it
became apparent that it was not always obvious which names were that of an individual and
which were crews. Often a site would use the word crew after a name to indicate a crew, such
as TC5 Crew, but this was not consistent so the two codes were then merged into the Artist
Code to avoid confusion. In traditional library or art collection systems for documentation, this
would be equivalent to the author or creator, which can be individuals or collective names as
well. The Jackson Five or The Metropolitan Museum of Art are examples of such collective
author or creator names familiar to most people. Just like bibliographic authors and creators,
the membership of a collective group frequently changes, adding another justification for
merging the two codes into one.

118

There are so many artists and crews operating around the world in the genre of this
research, resulting in several thousand artist codes that have been applied. There is no formal
authority file for these names as there is for many artists’ names in the traditional art world.
The Getty Research Institute, for example, maintains the Union List of Artist Names (ULAN),
which includes lists of artists and those related to the production of art and architecture. The
ULAN includes artists’ names by given names, pseudonyms, descriptive names when actual
names are not available, and proper names of “firms, studios, museums, special collections,
patrons, donors, sitters, creating cultures (e.g., unknown Etruscan), and other people and
groups involved in the creation, distribution, collection, maintenance, and study of art and
architecture. Artists may be either individuals (persons) or groups of individuals working
together (corporate bodies)”
(http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/ulan/about.html). Graffiti art and street
art often are documented in uncontrolled or ad hoc ways so that tracing the evolution of an
artist’s or crew’s name is difficult, if not impossible. If a piece is not signed legibly, a best guess
may might have to be employed to attribute authorship, or no authorship of a work may might
be ascribed at all. Despite these challenges, the name of an artist or crew remains the most
commonly used descriptor for works in this research.
5.1.2 The Event and Gallery Codes
The Event and Gallery Codes are used in 31 and 29 sites, respectively. A site will use an
event or a gallery show as a way to set aside a group of works. These events or gallery
sponsored exhibits may be on the street or within a traditional gallery. They may might also
feature works created during a multi-purpose event such as international art fair Art Basel held
119

annually in Miami, Florida. Wynwood Walls is a popular open-air graffiti writing and street art
area in Miami that participates in Art Basel with painting demonstrations and collaborations
that are open to the public. Such works could be documented and shared in an Event gallery on
a site and would be coded as such. An art gallery, though traditionally an inside, museum-like
endeavor, may might occasionally take to the street for exhibits of public art, may provide tours
of work in-situ, or may sponsor specific shows of graffiti art style works on portable surfaces
such as canvas for an in-house show. While such an indoor, gallery show would technically not
be considered graffiti or street art by definitions presented earlier in this research, they are
nonetheless frequently used as types of organization on the sites.
5.1.3 The Old Code
The Old Code was applied for areas of a site that feature old works as indicated. These
may can be groups of works that are older in an artist’s career, such as before current styles
developed, or they may might be older works that a curator has not updated and organized as
finely as the rest of the site, such as an archive area for works migrated in from a previous
iteration of a site. One common textual distinction that appears in the group of items under the
Old Code is “old school” as methods, writers, and styles indicative of the early days of graffiti
writing. When a site features old school writers or works, these often are used to show the
historical evolution of the art form.
5.1.4 The Chronology Codes: Decade, Year, Month, and Day
The most common chronological way to organize works among the sites is to use
specific years. Some sites make an effort to differentiate among images created, photographed,
120

or posted to the site during a specific year, but this information is not consistently provided
across all sites. This applies to all chronological codes as well, though the Day code is explained
with more detail more often than the others. This is likely because of a named day’s association
with an event that warrants more text, if only a descriptive title that includes the date. The
Decade code was applied to actual ten-year spans used as grouping mechanisms, but also to
spans of years that were larger than five years. Some sites choose to use an irregular span of
years to organize works, based on what they have in the collection and a decision was made to
code either Year or Decade, depending on the span of years and whether it was over or under
five years. When the span of years was under five years, it was coded as Year; five years or
more and it was coded as Decade. The Month, Day, and Decade codes were applied to a very
similar number of sites, five, four, and four, respectively.
5.1.5 The New, Featured, and RatedHigh Codes
The New code was applied 35 times to 26 sites and indicates when a work is either
recently produced, or recently added to the site. The definition of the word recent varies
greatly, depending on how often a site has been updated. It is uncertain how long works remain
in an area coded New, though some blog-type sites simply have a running area for posts of new
works that gradually age, older posts falling to the bottom of the pile as newer posts are added
on top of them.
Featured works or featured writers and artists may be new works or new additions to
the site, but also may be older works or familiar artists highlighted on the site in a specific post.
An area of a site for a feature may include an interview, a news update, outside media links, a

121

series of gallery images, or a combination of any of these. Text associated with the word
feature, features, or featured includes artists, street artists, pieces, writers, sketches, and, on
one site, stuff. Specials, special places, special pieces, and special guest stars are also used as
labels. Halls of Fame, Hall of Fame, and HOF Guide are examples of navigation labels also coded
with the Featured code. Writer Spotlight and Spotlight are used on two other sites.
50mmLosAngeles has a feature area called L.A. Legends, and Fatbombers used to have an area
called Gimme5 where they would feature five images at a time (the site has disappeared since
data collection).
The RatedHigh code was applied 14 times over eight sites. The text used to indicate
application of this code includes best of, best rated, hot, most comments, most featured, most
popular, most viewed, most views, most votes, top 20, and top ten. The word hot was used on
RatedHigh navigation labels on two different sites. A couple sites differentiated between
various types of high rating. Ekosystem.org uses an area for Best Rated Photos of the Year and
then offers individual years from 2001 to 2015, in addition to categories Before 2002, Before
2005, Before 2010, After 2010, and After 2014 (http://www.ekosystem.org/mostloved/).
Individual images in these annual collections include ratings on a scale of 1-5. For example, a
work may say Rating: 4.4/5 (58 votes). Anyone can rate an image simply by choosing how many
circles of five they want to give it. Site Full Color, at time of data collection, offered areas for
Hot!, Most Votes, Most Comments, and Most Views, each of which warranted the RatedHigh
code (http://www.fullcolor.gr/).
Graffhead offers a combination of gallery views, including areas for Latest Additions,
Most Viewed, and Latest Comments (http://graffiti.graffhead.com/). I Love Graffiti offers
122

several ways to group works, including Spotlight and Top Ten, the latter offering their take on
the ten best pieces each for a roster of featured artists
(http://ilovegraffiti.de/blog/category/topten/). UK Graffiti allows visitors to sort posts by new,
hot, or random (http://ukgraffiti.com/). Subway Outlaws has a navigation label Hot 110, which
at first was interpreted as a page that warranted the Featured code, but this explanation for the
term is given upon visiting the page itself: “‘Hot 110’ was a word, and term, used to go over
another writers [sic] work in the 1970's. The reasons for writing "Hot 110" over someone else's
work varied on the individual writer. The main reason writers went over works of another
writer, was to retaliate against the other for going over his/her work, which is a sign of
disrespect” (http://subwayoutlaws.com/Hot110/Hot110.htm). Various images of writers going
over other writers are then shown on the page with more discussion of this practice and its
significance in the early graffiti movement.
5.1.6 The RIP Code
The RIP code was applied in two different ways. If a site had an area set aside for artist
memorials for those that have died, this was coded as RIP, but the code was also applied to
artist galleries that signified the artist’s death with the addition of RIP to the name. In this way
the RIP code was applied 75 times across ten sites. Of these 75 applications, 62 were from two
sites, 50mm Los Angeles and Art Crimes, both of which are super sites and include large hotlinked lists of galleries by artists’ names. Within these lists, artists who have passed away have
the letters RIP added either before or after their names. This is the most common way that the
RIP code is used in this research, attached to individual artist names to indicate that they are no
longer alive.
123

Four sites out of the ten warranting the RIP code have memorial pages. DuroCIA has two
individual memorial pages, one for artist Shy 147 and another for artist Dondi White. Both
pages feature works by the artists, photos of the artists themselves, and tribute works for the
artists. The Dondi White memorial page is extensive, largely comprised of images
(http://durocia.com/dondi_white_memorial.html) and is a wealth of visual information about
the artist and his work. CanControl has a memorial page for artist Dream. Two sites feature
areas for memorials in general. German site I Love Graffiti has a page labeled Memorial that
includes 22 posts covering the passing of 21 artists. Subway Outlaws includes a R.I.P. section
that covers memorials to 75 individual artists over four pages.
5.1.7 The Inside and Outside Codes
The Inside and Outside codes were applied to 4.1% and 2.9% of sites, respectively. Most
graffiti art and street art is found outside, though sometimes inside public or private structures,
or artworks in graffiti or street style may be commissioned inside buildings. As discussed
previously, tThis distinction is not always clear when trying to define the art forms, though the
general place for the works tends to be outside, in public, on the streets. This would make the
exceptional category of Inside a more expected facet than Outside, and this shows in the
application statistics of these two codes. A total of 12 sites warranted one or both of these
codes. Five of these twelve had both the Inside and Outside codes and five had only the Inside
code, but only two sites used only the Outside code. Besides the words inside and outside, sites
employed terms like interior/exterior, indoor/outdoor, rooms (for an Inside code), and art in
space (also an Inside code).

124

5.1.8 The Legal and Illegal Codes
Similar to the Inside-Outside pair described above, the Legal and Illegal codes were not
equally expectedanticipated. Graffiti and street art often are carried out illegally, disdain for
permission almost intrinsic to the meaning of the works in many cases, especially regarding
graffiti (see Merrill 2015). Legal graffiti or street art is the exception, not the rule, and again this
is exemplified in the occurrence of these two codes. The Legal code was applied 15 times across
seven sites and the Illegal only five times over two sites. The two sites with areas set aside for
illegal works also had areas for legal works. Legal works, being the more expected distinction,
were set apart without any corresponding area for illegal works in five out of seven sites where
the code was used. The term illegal or illegals, when utilized as a navigation label on the two
sites in this research, is more like an alternative way to describe graffiti writing than a way to
distinguish works as a distinct type. For example, the site for Queen City Tribe uses the heading
“Other Bombing and Illegals” as well as a heading for “Legals”
(https://www.graffiti.org/cincinnati/qct/surface.html), which emphasizes the expected nature
of most graffiti works to be illegal in nature. Hence the use of the term illegal to set apart works
of graffiti art or street art is not very useful.
5.1.9 The Color Code
The color code was applied whenever a site used a specific color to distinguish works,
or, in one case, where the site offered the user the ability to browse a gallery of works by
colors. Only four sites warranted the application of the Color code. Digital Does, in a section for
materials, allows users to view works using bronze leaf, gold leaf, and silver leaf

125

(https://www.digitaldoes.com/works/). Ekosystem offers users a menu of facets to choose
from that include red, green, yellow, blue, pink, and black
(http://www.ekosystem.org/last/500/). Full Color offers tag navigation for the colors red and
green as well as for color, but the latter has to do with a color festival and not distinction by
particular color so it was not coded as Color. Mr. Stack’s Graffiti Website offers a color bar
whereby users can click on a color palette to browse by color, as shown in Figure 13 below.

Figure 13 Browse by Color, Mr. Stack’s Graffiti (http://keusta.net/blog/index.php/Graffiti)

His site features his own works only and the organization by color feature works well. This type
of organization might not be as valuable with works that do not feature a dominant color
scheme, but when they do, it serves to sort a collection effectively. The value of such sorting is
beyond the scope of this research.
5.2 Support Facet Codes
The Support Facet Codes category describes the surfaces, or supports, upon which
works are created or placed. Works often are painted, stenciled, or otherwise applied directly
to a surface, but are sometimes created off-site and applied later in a different location. Such
remote creations may include sticker art, wheat paste-ups, and even light projection
applications. The support facet codes are shown below in Table 10, again by order of most sites
to least sites using each.

126

Support Facets
Canvas
Walls
Trains
Blackbook
Freights
CarsTrucksVans
Subways
Billboards
Body
Clothing
Rooftops
Tunnels
Subway Cars
Buses
Highways
Signs
Skate Deck
Trash Bins
Shutters

Count
109
107
253
28
27
28
81
10
5
11
4
5
60
3
2
2
2
2
2

% of Codes
0.6
0.5
1.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Sites
77
65
51
20
16
12
11
5
4
4
4
4
3
2
2
2
2
2
2

% of Sites
32
27
21.2
8.3
6.6
5.0
4.6
2.1
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

Table 10 Support Facet Codes

5.2.1 The Canvas Code
The most popular of the support facet codes is the Canvas code. This is significant in
that works on canvas are a deviation from the expected surfaces in the public eye that make up
the majority of the other codes in this code category. Working on canvas often is associated
with working on commissions, for galleries, or for profit (i.e. sales) that can run antithetical to
the graffiti art ethos. This is seen in one of the category names used under the Canvas code:
“Street Sellout Art.” The name for this code was originally Studio, but the more often that this
type of navigation label was encountered, the more obvious it became that the term used most
commonly for this kind of work is canvas. The word canvas was used to indicate works not only
created on canvas, but implying works created in a studio setting as opposed to live on the
127

street. The different terms used to denote what was eventually coded as Canvas, and their
variations, are shown with frequencies in Table 11 below. Super sites were coded with Canvas
only seven times over four total sites. Text used on super sites is in green.
Canvas (canvas (2), canvases, canvas & sketches, canvas/mixed media, canvas/wood,
canvas art, canvas works, graffiti canvases, on canvas, original canvas, poster & canvas,
tableaux/canvas)
Painting (paint, paintings, paintings/drawings, Scribe paintings)
art (art on paper, art work & portfolio's [sic], artwork, artworks, original art, fine art, the
art collection)
Prints (Dondi prints, graffiti prints, screenprints on paper, Newduro's prints)
Studio
Color Works on Paper
Commission
Inks
Land escapes
Life forms
Mini-walls
Op Ill Graffiti
Pigments
Portraits
Street Sellout Art
Watercolor
Table 11 Canvas code terminology

51
22
13
10
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

It is not always obvious from the terminology shown that these should be coded as
Canvas. Galleries were visited to determine the suitability of codes as applied. While labels such
as Commission and Pigments might seem to warrant the codes CommercialDesign and Color,
respectively, the contents of such site areas indicated the Canvas code. Other labels, including
land escapes, life forms, and Op Ill Graffiti did not fit into any clear coding facets until visiting
the site areas. This speaks to the value of qualitative analysis of the sites and their contents
over and above simple textual analysis of navigation labels.

128

5.2.2 The Walls Code
Walls are the most common surface found in this research for actual works of graffiti art
and street art, whose definitions are intrinsically if broadly tied to their presence on the streets.
Thus walls, and the Wall code, refer to outdoor walls. Some walls featured on the sites may be
inside tunnels or other structures, but they are mainly exterior in nature. The sites commonly
employ other labels for indoor walls, or interior room walls, such as the Inside code described
above.
The Walls code is sometimes also seen as a general graffiti label. Style Depth has five
main navigation labels across every page of the site: home, walls, design, blog, contact. Of
these five, two are used to describe work galleries; walls for outdoor, graffiti style works and
design for commercial designs often on paper or digital
http://www.styledepth.com/index/home/4047/). Artist Cenz organizes his work gallery into
walls, canvases, and mixed media, and as such demonstrates the use of the walls label as a
general graffiti art gallery label (http://mrcenz.com/my-artwork/). Sites with more granularity
in their gallery organization may be much more specific, using the walls label as only one
among many to separate various supports. For example, Brikk Graff has these main navigation
labels: main, walls, freights, trains, links, contact. Walls, freights, and trains are all outside
supports, but each are given their own area. The Walls area is further subdivided into four
geographically focused galleries, three for named Swedish cities and one for Sweden in general.

129

5.2.3 The Train Type Codes: Trains, Freights, Subways, and Subway Cars
These codes are similar, yet there was enough difference evident in the use of
categorization for each that they warranted individual coding. Freights and subways are most
easily differentiated as freights carry things other than people while subways (subway trains)
only carry people. Subways are found in urban areas and freights are found more broadly, often
seen across countries or continents where, when used as a support, they can transport the
work of an artist or writer far and wide. Art works on freight trains are still very common.
Graffiti writers used subway cars heavily as supports in the early days of the art movement,
most notably in New York City and Philadelphia, regarding them as an efficient way to get a
writer’s name and work to a great number of viewers across these larger cities. They are not as
popular as supports today as they once were. The risks inherent in creating works on subway
trains combined with the short life of most of these works has likely contributed to their
decrease in popularity as a working surface.
There are two very similar codes that cannot be easily separated within this study, that
of Subways and Subway Cars. At first it appeared that these two support codes were simply the
same thing, but as data coding continued, it became apparent that sometimes the works were
on subway cars and sometimes they were on the subways themselves, or were a combination
of the vehicles – the subway trains or cars – and the structures that facilitate the run of the
former, including the subway tunnel walls. There is also the Tunnels code to be discussed later,
which was mentioned enough to be warranted as a separate code, though it likely overlaps
with the Subways and Subway Cars codes. Analysis at the image level would be required to
resolve these types of labeling issues, which is beyond the scope of this research.
130

Over all, trains are the most common surface in the research relating specifically to
graffiti art. Walls are common supports for works that can be more easily categorized as street
art, but when discussing trains, the works commonly are perceived as graffiti art over street art.
This distinction is not always easy to make, as was discussed in previous chapters, but trains
have played a large part in the history of graffiti writing. The Trains code was applied 253 times
over 51 sites, which is more than the Canvas and Walls codes combined. The Trains code was
reused on the sites more frequently than any other support facet code, indicating the
importance of the code as a subdivision of other, broader code areas.
5.2.4 The Other Vehicles Codes: CarsTrucksVans and Buses
Other vehicular supports appeared frequently enough in the research to warrant coding,
such as buses. Cars, trucks, and vans were grouped as a type of vehicle separate from municipal
public transit vehicles, which would include buses and the subway trains. Again, there is likely
overlap between privately-owned and municipally-owned vehicles used as supports for graffiti
art and street art. There is also a combination of legal and illegally produced works represented
by these labels.
5.2.5 The Blackbook Code
A blackbook or black book is the graffiti writer’s sketchbook, where they work out
designs on paper before being committed to a final support. This is done to practice variations
on a style, as well as to draft specifics in preparation for an eventual application that may need
to be carried out quickly, depending on the type of support chosen. Blackbooks may contain
simple black and white sketches or full color, intricate works. An artist might provide a site with
131

a blackbook sketch or sketches of a design and then also a photo of a completed work based on
the same sketch. Despite being a private rendering on a legal surface other than the streets, the
blackbook is a respected part of a graffiti writer’s body of works, in contrast to works on canvas,
produced for gallery show or sale, which other graffiti writers often view as selling out. This
could be seen in the Canvas code terminology shown in Figure 5.4 above, where one site
labeled canvas works as Street Sellout Art. The Blackbook code was warranted on 20 of the
sites, or 8.3%, and is the fourth most popular type of support occurring in the research. The
term “black book (graffiti)” is included in the Getty Research Institute’s Art and Architecture
Thesaurus with the graffiti qualifier, which is an indication of the term’s acceptance in the
broader art community, but also as its connection to graffiti art in particular (Getty 2015).
5.2.6 Billboards, Highways, and Signs Codes
These three codes, for Billboards, Highways, and Signs, are grouped because of their
relation to roadways. Highways and Signs did not occur as navigational areas in the research
often, each applied only two times to two sites. The Highways code was used for navigational
labels using the words highway or freeway and both sites that warranted the Highways code
also warranted the Billboards code. The Billboards code was more popular, with five sites
warranting it, and one site in particular using it multiple times for subdivisions of specific city
galleries.
5.2.7 The Body, Clothing, and SkateDeck Codes
These three codes were not used often, seen in four, four, and two sites, respectively.
They represent surfaces with commercial implications, such that works would be for sale or
132

produced legally on commission. Sites may offer various types of clothing for sale, usually
falling under the general website codes referenced in 4.1.3, the Shop Code. Four sites offered
areas to group graffiti style works on clothing, subdividing as necessary for different types of
clothing, including shirts, shoes, jackets, and hats. Skate decks are skateboards, featuring
graffiti style works on the bottoms of the boards, or decks. The body used as a support includes
photographs of graffiti style art on the body with paint, or graffiti-style tattoos.
5.2.8 The Rooftops Code
The Rooftops code and Tunnels codes were warranted on four sites each. Rooftops are a
fairly common urban support for graffiti art or street art. An example of rooftop graffiti is
shown in Figure 14. In this photo one can see that the works are on the sides of walls or other
structures on the roof of a building. Rooftop works could also be on the rooftop itself, as in the
horizontal surface, but they are usually as seen in this photo on other upright structures or
walls, accessed by way of the rooftop.

133

Figure 14 Rooftop graffiti, Chicago, photo by Ann M. Graf

5.2.9 The Tunnels Code
Tunnels likely have overlap with various other codes, as works often appear on tunnels
associated with subways, trains, or highways. The Tunnels code was warranted five times over
four sites. The code tends to be warranted on sites that use more granularity in categorization,
such as on super site FatCap, where there are numerous divisions of supports and types. This is
another example where image-level analysis would be necessary to understand the various
meanings of a tunnel as a support for works.
5.2.10 TrashBins, and Shutters Codes
TrashBins and Shutters codes were each applied twice over a total of four sites. These
were the least frequently warranted support codes. Each time that a TrashBins or Shutters code
was applied, it was on a super site. This makes sense as super sites use more granularity in their
134

organization to meet the needs of larger collections of images. Trash bins are a common sight in
the urban environment and, as one interview participant pointed out, writers typically do not
considered them a high stakes surface. Basically, few people care if you paint on a municipal
trash bin so they are easy targets for tags and graffiti works.
Shutters are typically aluminum or other often corrugated metal walls or doors that
slide down to close off a shop or building of some sort. They are more common in some parts of
the country and world than in others. While only two sites in this study warranted the Shutters
code, there were many images that were collocated in this way. Global Street Art has a gallery
area titled “Shutters or Ridged Surfaces” that holds 14,106 images as of this writing
(http://globalstreetart.com/search?action=bar&q=shutters&tab=tags). The other site
warranting the Shutters code is Ekosystem, which also has a gallery area dedicated to
“Shutters” with over 300 images. Analysis at the individual image level over all sites may reveal
many more works labeled with the Walls code that could be more finely characterized as
shutters. One may walk down a city street lined with shutters that are up during business hours
and not see any of the works. Only when the shutters are down, typically after business hours,
can one view the works.

135

Figure 15 Works on Shutters, Rio de Janeiro, photo by Ann M. Graf

5.3 Type Facet Codes
The Type category codes express the various styles or types of artworks. The vocabulary
used for type discrimination is often particular to the graffiti art and street art community, in
contrast with what one might encounter within a traditional museum setting (see Graf 2016).
Type Facets
Sketches
Graffiti
Other
CommercialDesign
StreetArt
Murals
Tags
3D
Characters
Pieces
Stencils
Bombs

Count
74
75
184
63
38
39
22
18
59
37
20
13

% of Codes
0.4
0.4
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
136

Sites
56
50
43
43
35
32
17
16
15
15
13
12

% of Sites
23.2
20.7
18.3
17.8
14.5
13.3
7.1
6.6
6.2
6.2
5.4
5.0

Throwups
Letters
Productions
Stickers
Digital
TrainWholecars
Action
Posters
SprayPaint
Wheatpaste
Political
Projections
TrainEtoEs
Collaborations
TrainPanels
Silvers
TrainTtoBs
Wildstyle
Handstyle

Table 12 Types Facet Codes

16
19
12
14
8
13
6
9
4
4
3
3
5
3
3
2
2
3
2

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

12
10
10
10
8
8
6
5
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2

5.0
4.1
4.1
4.1
3.3
3.3
2.5
2.1
1.7
1.7
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

5.3.1 The Sketches Code
Appearing on nearly a quarter of all sites, the Sketches code was the type code
warranted by the greatest number of sites. Sketches are often the design mock-up for what will
become large pieces in color. The more complex a piece and the more time and materials
required for its execution, the more important it is to practice the design first on paper before
committing resources to the final surface. An artist preparing a work for an illegal surface may
be especially concerned with getting the design right on paper in advance as there will be
pressure during the execution to complete the work quickly. These are just some of the reasons
that graffiti writers and street artists will prepare sketches. The Sketches code was applied to
labels using the words sketches, drawings, outlines, illustrations, and variants of these such as
charcoal sketches, ink outlines, and sketch battles. There is likely overlap between this code and
137

the supports facet code Blackbooks as one of the main purposes of a blackbook is to sketch out
future works.
5.3.2 The Graffiti Code
Labeling a photo gallery with the word graffiti may seem either an obvious choice or a
useless one, depending on the collection and goals of the site. One fifth of all sites dedicated an
area for graffiti works with this code applied. Of the 77 times this code appeared, it was applied
to labels with the words graffiti or graff 57 times. The other 20 instances it was applied to labels
including vandalism, buff killers, P. Skips, and various country and city named graffiti subgalleries. The content of these galleries, combined with textual information often given within
the galleries, was used to apply the codes when the labels were unclear, such as with P. Skips
and buff killers.
5.3.3 The Other Code
The Other code represents types that do not fit into any of the other categories and do
not appear often enough to warrant their own codes. Many sites use the word other or others,
sometimes in combination with other words (other graffiti pictures, other works) to indicate a
gallery of assorted types or styles. Some sites also use labels that do not have meaning other
than to denote sets of images according to unknown criteria. Examples of this include Armed
Rob, which uses the labels set 001, set 002, set 003, etc. up to set 018, and then a series of ten
labels that simply read “EMPTY” (http://www.armedrob.dk/, no longer available as of this
writing). Examples of label text that were coded Other are shown in Table 13 below, grouped

138

by the individual sites. Super sites are in a green font color to demonstrate the granularity of
terms needed by those with larger collections of images and more detailed organization.
Site

3

6
9
11

12
13
31
32
36
37
38
52
57
59
69
72
73
79
80
81

88

Text
Scratchiti, Street art/Murals/Alternative, Yards and Lay-ups
Backpacks, Boom Boxes, Bum Graffiti, Graff Sluts, Graffiti Flyers, Graffiti
Pogs, Graphic Art, Landmark Inc., Landmarks, Overhangs, Roll Calls, Room
Graff, Toy Trains
Right Vibe (Images that tell stories)
others
EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY, EMPTY,
EMPTY, set 001, set 002, set 003, set 004, set 005, set 006, set 007, set 008,
set 019, set 010, set 011, set 012, set 013, set 014, set 015, set 016, set 017,
set 018
Motorcycles
ILLUSTRATION, OTHER
Other
Mixed Media
Screenprints
Scenes
Wallpapers
Acrylic Paint, Aluminium, Engrave, Fiberglass, Furniture, Ink, Marker, Paper,
Paper, Pencil, Roller Paint, Rope, Steel, Wood, Wood
Cardboards
Big, night
Other Works, Urban Works
Bratislava tram, Calgary tram, Istanbul tram, mixed, trams, trams, trams,
trams, trams, trams, trams
Abstract, block, brush, bubble, cartoon, fat cap, hardcore, ignorant,
landscape, realistic, sharp, shops, street equipment
Trams
copycat
Animals, art/artists/paint tools (non spraycan), body parts, body parts (not
skulls), bombs, brains, buildings/structures, close ups, corners or curved,
cultural theme, earths/planets, eyes/nose/ears/mouth, famous men,
famous women, film/tv/computer references, food & drink, freehand
spraycan, gas masks and masks, geographic/historic, hands, hearts, hello my
name is – to do, high reality, hip-hop culture, legs/feet, liquid paint, martial
arts/eastern culture, object/appliance/flag (excl. spraycans), objects, other
body parts, other technique (pen, sculptures, tiles, etc.), panorama, plants
and fungi, police/crime/consumption/pollution, pyramids,
religious/spiritual/festive, scenes/waves, sexy/nude/exaggerated,
slavery/black culture, sleeping – to do, smoking/drugs, soldiers/other
fighting/guns/knives, sports/cards/games, spray cans, Surfaces 196,
Techniques 282, vehicle (incl. planes & boats)

139

Codes
3
13
1
1
28

1
2
1
1
1
1
1
15
1
2
2
11
13
1
1
47

94
112
120
132
149
150
151
172
174
177
189
205
207
209
217
218
221
223
224
225
229
240

unusual spots
hand
Moving Objects, other moving objects
Bunker, concrete, industrial, trackside, urban
Others
art objects, art on building
private
blown out
Other graffiti pictures
Detailizm, styleizm
Public Art Projects
Burners
Other Works
planes
2D Science, 3D Science, Automotive/Bike Works, Style Experimental
Fun, Plastic SubwayCars
Color Circus, Lost Letters
QUICKIES, Quickies & Misc., SEX!, SMILEYS
Locked Beauties: doors & gates
random
specials
Bass Reliefs

Table 13 Other Code Text by Sites, Showing Super Sites in Green

1
1
2
5
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
2
2
4
1
1
1
1
TOTAL 184

It can be seen from Table 13 that the sites that have the greatest number of Other
coded text tend to be super sites. Site 12 has many terms, but they do not have conceptual
content to differentiate them. Site 73 has eleven terms, but ten of them have to do with trams
in general, or specific city trams. Site 57 remains the only site using more than five Other codes
that is not a super site. Out of 184 total Other codes, 81 are used on super sites. To further
isolate conceptual individuals within labels coded Other, EMPTY text, numbered sets, and exact
duplicate text within one site was removed to leave 148 Other codes. Super sites still account
for 81, revealing 55% of the Other codes belonging to super sites.

140

5.3.4 The CommercialDesign Code
There are a number of codes used in this research that are applied to sites with
commercial interests more than to sites that are aggregations of photos of works by various
artists. These sites often are run by individual artists or crews that actively seek commission
work and exhibitions. The CommercialDesign code is one that is almost exclusively used by sites
run by artists, crews, or other artist collectives. Vocabulary used to label site areas that
warranted this code are shown below in Table 14 with text used by super sites in green.
Album Cover Portfolio
Artwork
Assignments
Carhartt
Clothing Design Portfolio
Comercial [sic], commercial, commercial works
Commission, commissioned, commissions (1)
Custom, custom graffiti (2), custom graffiti lettering, customized,
customs, cutomizations [sic]
design, designs, flier design portfolio, graphic design
editions
for cash
illustration, illustration & design, illustrations
installation, installation art, installations
Interiors
Jobs
Logo Design Portfolio, logos
Main Portfolio Menu
on-demand
Pre-Digital Portfolio
professional/art
Projects
Web Design Portfolio
work

Table 14 Vocabulary Coded CommercialDesign with Variations and Number of Occurrences

141

1
1
1
1
1
6
6
7
10
1
1
6
3
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1

One super site used the label commissions. All other CommercialDesign codes that were used on
super sites were on one individual site that is run by a specific crew, which would agree with the
idea that sites run by individual artists or crews unsurprisingly have their economic interests at
heart more than sites that gather and share the work of all artists and crews.
5.3.5 The StreetArt Code
The StreetArt code is very general, but used as a distinction from works that are
conceptualized as graffiti art. As discussed earlier, this is a difficult distinction to make, often
fraught with differences of opinion and issues surrounding public perception, artist intent,
legality, and style. Entire sites are devoted specifically to street art, such as Bristol Street Art
(http://www.bristol-street-art.co.uk/), Global Street Art (http://globalstreetart.com/), and Irish
Street Art (http://irishstreetart.com/, which became unavailable by the time of this writing).
While this code was relatively popular, appearing on 14% of all sites, it is ultimately too broad
to be useful, unless the site includes areas for both graffiti art and street art, distinguishing
between these two broad styles. There are 15 sites that have galleries for both graffiti and
street art.
5.3.6 The Murals Code
The term mural is associated with legal or commissioned works and is not normally used
within the graffiti art community to describe graffiti art works. There were 32 sites warranting
the Murals code, seven of which also had galleries coded for Graffiti and seven of which also
had galleries coded for Street Art. Three sites warranted all three codes for Murals, Graffiti, and

142

Street Art. Further analysis at the image level would be warranted to determine the possible
differences in usage of these three type facets, which is beyond the scope of this research.
5.3.7 The Tags Code
Tags are a common type of graffiti work, ubiquitous in any urban environment. They
were defined and discussed in detail in chapter one. Seventeen sites set aside areas to feature
works labeled as Tags. Of these 17 sites, one site warranted the Tag code six times, while all
other sites with this code only once. This site, 50mm Los Angeles, is a super site and had works
tagged with various types of Tag tags, including cement tags, dust tags, and slap tags. Cement
tags are when someone writes in wet cement and their signature is left to harden. Dust tags are
writing in dusty or dirty surfaces. Slap tags are stickers with a tag written, printed, or stenciled
on them and applied to various surfaces. This super site also had overlap between codes for
Tags and Stickers, and between Tags and Handstyle, which demonstrates the greater
granularity often used on super sites with large collections.
5.3.8 The 3D Code
The 3D code was applied to areas of a site that feature works that are in three
dimensions, such as sculpture or other physical objects treated as graffiti art or street art. There
was one super site that used the term 3D to mean 2D works painted in a three-dimensional
style, such as by using shading to create what appears to be an image that jumps off the flat
surface. This was not included in the scope of the 3D code. Terminology used for this code
includes 3D and 3-D, as well as sculpture, sculptures, graff sculpture, sculpture graffiti, and
objects.
143

5.3.9 The Characters Code
The Characters code was applied 59 times over 15 sites. Thirty-seven of these 59 codes
were warranted on one single super site, Global Street Art. They use very granular
categorization, as previously demonstrated in this research. Individual types of characters were
coded with the Characters code. The text coded as Characters from Global Street Art includes:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Characters 115
CHARACTERS
animals
character types
children/babies
cute characters
females
males
many characters (3+)
bears/pandas
birds/sky
cats/lions
dinosaurs
dogs/wolves
dragons
elephants/rhinos
fish/octopus/sea
insects/bugs
monkeys
other animal (frog, croc, gir'f)
pigs
rabbits
rodents
sheep/cows/bulls/horses/goats
snakes/lizards
abstract/other character
all other monsters
angels/fairies/wizards
clowns
famous comics/cartoons
Lego/Lego-like
144

•
•
•
•
•
•

letter characters
machines/robots
mermaids/pirates/seamen
skulls/skeletons
space/aliens
sun/moon

50mm Los Angeles, also a super site, is the only other site to utilize a specific character gallery
along with a general character gallery. They have a very granular tagging system that includes
the named character of child television actor Gary Coleman.
5.3.10 The Pieces Code
Pieces refer to large graffiti works that require more time, materials, and effort than
other types of graffiti. The Pieces code was applied 37 times over 15 sites. Terminology used for
this type of work label almost always (34 out of 37) includes some variant of the word “piece”
such as pieces, streetpieces, piecing, masterpiece, and feature pieces, but also “Big Prodz lot of
work” on one site, “big wall” on another, and “wall of fame” on a third.
5.3.11 The Stencils, Wheatpaste, and Posters Codes
The content of the Stencils code has overlap with that of the Wheatpaste, Stickers, and
Posters codes and possibly other codes as well. Wheatpaste works often may be stencil works
and vice versa. This is true as well for Posters, which may be stenciled works applied with
wheatpaste. As such, the Wheatpaste, Stickers, and Posters codes could all be considered
supports instead of types, but they were not coded in this way for this research. One of the
super sites in this research, Stencil Archive, focuses exclusively on stencils. Stencils are the most

145

popular of these types of repeatable works, with galleries for their organization featured 20
times over 13 sites. The Posters code was warranted on five sites and Wheatpaste on four.
5.3.12 The Bombs Code
One curator stated in an interview that there are no works called bombs, only the act of
bombing, so a better code name would have been Bombing. The code was applied thirteen
times over a dozen sites. One site used “bomb” and one other “bombs,” but the other eleven
sites used the word bombing, sometimes with modification for surface (tunnel bombing,
bombing busway) or geographic location (Finnish bombing). The use of the gerund form may
signify agreement with the one curator who stated this was an action, not a type of work,
though as a result of an action possibly producing a particular type of work.
5.3.13 The Throwups Code
Throwups (called by various similar names, including toss-ups, quickies, and throwies)
are works that are done quickly, hence the name, and result in works with less complex designs
and fewer colors than pieces. This code was applied 16 times over 12 sites, or on 5% of sites
overall.
5.3.14 The Letters Code
The Letters code was applied 19 times over ten sites. This code was frequently repeated
under different facets on two sites in particular. One site reused this type of navigation label
three times for letters, block letters, and straight letters. The super site Full Time Artists has a
page for graffiti fonts that is further subdivided into seven different pages:

146

Graffiti Fonts Home
Buy Graffiti Fonts
Font Collections
Graffiti Fonts 1.7
Graffiti Fonts 2.2
Graffiti Fonts 3.1
Graffiti Fonts 4.0
The last four subdivisions are for collections that can be downloaded digitally
(http://www.fulltimeartists.com/graffiti_fonts/). This code likely has overlap with the
Handstyles code below, though it would be hard to state this definitively without further
research. The Handstyles code is used rarely and the few images with which it is associated in
this research are all tagging examples.
5.3.15 The Productions Code
The Productions code was warranted 11 times over ten sites. One site repeated this
type label, using it once for productions and once for crew productions. Crew productions are
those that are produced by multiple writers all of whom are members of the same graffiti crew.
The word production, productions, or prod (abbreviation of the same) was used in all labels for
this code save one. Super site Fat Cap used the label “big walls,” which aptly describes what a
production is. Works known as pieces, when combined with a background, are referred to by
Snyder (2009) as productions. In this way, they can be seen to be one step up on the complex
hierarchy of graffiti art styles.
5.3.16 The Stickers Code
Stickers are printed digitally, stenciled, or designed by hand and affixed to street signs,
municipal utility boxes, traffic light poles, trash bins, railings, and any other surface where they
147

may be seen. Many commercial enterprises utilize stickers for advertising and these will be
seen mixed with graffiti art and street art stickers, most often in an urban environment (see
Figure 16 below). A popular sticker form of graffiti art employs US Postal Service mailing label
stickers, which can be obtained for free from most local post offices, in person or delivered to
your door through the online USPS ordering system (O’Neill 2010). Graffiti writers or street
artists draw their tag, character, or other design on the stickers and then commit the works to
public surfaces quickly, without having to take time and risk executing the works themselves in
public. For this reason, they are sometimes referred to as slap tags or slaps. The word stickers
was used eleven times; sticker, slap tags, and slap tag were each used one time for this code.

Figure 16 Examples of Sticker Art: Obey Giant by Shepard Fairey, Pittsburg (left) and Have Goals, Milwaukee (right). Photos by
Ann M. Graf.

148

5.3.17 The Digital Code
The Digital code was applied to site areas set aside for digital works, which are not
typical graffiti art or street art works. These are graffiti-style works executed using digital
software, often involving artistically stylized text. These areas of a site may be either tutorials
that demonstrate graffiti style fonts or, more commonly, they are areas useful to demonstrate
an artist’s design skills for commercial purposes.
5.3.18 The Train Codes: TrainWholecars, TrainEtoEs, TrainTtoBs, and TrainPanels
The Train codes are used to differentiate among different sizes of train graffiti.
Wholecars require more planning, time to execute, materials, tools, and risk than the other
types of train graffiti listed here. For this reason, they often earn more respect and admiration
from other writers. EtoEs, or End-to-Ends, and TtoBs, or Top-to-Bottoms, are types of train
works that also earn more respect than smaller works because of the effort involved.
Train panels represent further defined works on passenger trains that are not as large as
Wholecars, TtoBs, or EtoEs. Sites with emphasis on train graffiti featured train panel works,
using the term as one of several ways of dividing up the large number of works on trains. More
granularity in description is needed when the collection is large or focused on one type or
surface that could be seen as unwieldy with just one area labeled as trains.
5.3.19 The Action Code
The Action code is applied to site areas that feature photographs of artists creating
works. Often the identity of the artist or artists is protected, either by not showing the faces in
the photo or by blurring or otherwise blocking out any visible faces. This code refers to a type of
149

image, rather than a type of graffiti art or street art. There are six sites that warranted the
Action code; of these six, half were super sites.
5.3.20 The SprayPaint Code
The SprayPaint code was warranted only four times on four individual sites. Terminology
used as navigation labels for this code include spray paint, sprayings, spraycan art, and aerosol
& paint. Graffiti art is known for the use of spray paint, so this type of label does little to
distinguish works by style, unless the site has a collection where this separation makes sense.
Three of these four sites are artist sites, where an artist collects and promotes their own works.
The fourth site is undetermined. It may be the works of one artist or many. The fourth site
employs “aerosol & paint” as one of four subdivisions of a gallery of work from Barcelona in
2004 (http://www.txmx.de/graffindex.html). The three other sites have commercial
motivations as evidenced by the promotion of individual artists, which has been discussed in
more detail in chapter four. It may make sense for artists promoting their own work to use this
type of material distinction to show their breadth of skills and experience.
5.3.21 The Political Code
The Political code was warranted three times on three sites. Describing a work as
political refers to the content of the work less than to an actual artistic style. Interestingly, this
code was only used by super sites. 50mm Los Angeles, Global Street Art, and Stencil Archive are
the three sites that warranted this code, and they all employ a very granular categorization for
their works. 50mm Los Angeles used the word political for these works, while Global Street Art
used politics. Of particular interest among these three sites is Stencil Archive, which, as the
150

name implies, features specifically stencil works. Stencils, posters, and wheatpaste works are
often used for political messages. These types of works can be created in the safety of a studio
and applied quickly to the streets, or stenciled quickly on the streets. While many stencils of a
political nature are featured on the site, one sub-gallery exists on Stencil Archive for the Occupy
Movement in the US, entitled “Occupy Together (Occupy Wall Street, Occupy San Francisco,
Occupy Oakland, and other Occupy locations)”
(https://www.stencilarchive.org/archives/index.php/USA/Occupy-Together).
5.3.22 The Projections Code
Projections refer to the use of light projected onto surfaces to display textual or artistic
images without indelibly defacing the structures that support them. This code was only
warranted on three sites, one of which is a super site. The terminology used for this code
includes projections, light painting, and lightgraffiti.
5.3.23 The Collaborations Code
Collaborations likely have overlap with works considered pieces or productions, but the
emphasis is on the concept of working together as a group to accomplish something. This code
was warranted on sites that feature the work of a single artist or crew when that artist or crew
worked with others outside the crew. This code was warranted three times on three individual
sites and the terminology used included collaboration, collaborations, and collaboration murals.
5.3.24 The Silvers Code and Wildstyle Code
Silvers are a very specific kind of graffiti work that involve simple letter outlines and
filling with silver paint. While a known graffiti style, this type label rarely occurred in the data,
151

only on two sites. Wildstyle is also a well-known graffiti style, dating to the early days of New
York graffiti writing, but like Silvers did not appear on more than two sites. Both Silvers and
Wildstyle appear in Gottlieb’s faceted classification for graffiti art styles (2008). The only other
two style codes here that overlap in any way with Gottlieb’s classification are Trains, Freights,
and Pieces, corresponding partially with her “Swedish Train,” “Neo Classic American Freight,”
and “East Coast Piecing Style.”
5.3.25 The Handstyle Code
Handstyles refer to lettering and thus to graffiti style works in general. There may be
overlap between this code and the Letters code, as mentioned above. The Handstyles code was
only warranted twice, making it was easy to see both site examples, which were galleries of
simple black line graffiti writer tags. The two navigation labels coded with Handstyles were
“Graffiti Handstyles” and “Handstyle.” The Lettering code contains much more granularity
beyond simple tag lettering.
5.4 Location Facet Codes
The coding process began with a list of basic geographic divisions that were assumed
would be found in the data, including GPS coordinates, addresses, intersections, cities, states
and territories, and countries. As analysis took place, it became apparent that GPS coordinates
are not something used by either contributors or curators. GPS coordinates were never seen on
any of the sites. A postal street address was only used twice on one site. This same one site was
the only one to use street intersections as a geographic location, but they used this type of
location 27 times. This site was also the only one to employ a specific location designation of
152

“undisclosed,” which they did two times. This site is also a super site. Normally a code was not
applied to a facet that was only used on one site, but because there were so few location
codes, all facets of location were kept for inclusion here.
Location Facets
Cities
Countries
SpecificLandmarks
CityParts
World
Continents
States
CountryParts
Address
Intersection
Undisclosed

Count
1637
543
73
94
22
42
117
10
2
27
2

% of Codes
8.6
2.8
0.4
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0

Sites
43
37
13
13
12
11
6
5
1
1
1

% of Sites
17.8
15.8
5.8
5.4
5.0
4.6
2.5
2.1
0.4
0.4
0.4

Table 15 Locations

A total of 2569 location facet codes were applied to the data. Of these, 1988 were
applied to super sites, or 77% of all location codes. Fourteen out of 19 super sites employed
location codes, or 74%. Only 46 out of the 222 sites that are not super sites warranted location
codes, or 21%. Across all sites, the most common geographic facet used by far was city. The
World code was added because many sites focus on a geographic area and would use a
category to indicate works from areas outside of this focus. Often this would involve using one
category for all other locations. The word World was used to code this outside-of-focus area
because, depending on where the site was focused, this catch-all category included works from
all over the world.
Intermediate geographic codes were necessary to indicate areas on the sites for parts of
countries, parts of cities, and for specific landmarks. Cities, states, and countries were
153

sometimes referred to in parts on the sites. Cities parts include examples such as Tenderloin,
the Castro, and the Mission in San Francisco, or Plaistow, Tottenham, Crouch End, and Turnell
Park in London. Country parts include the Midwest, the South, the East Coast, and the West
Coast of the US, Puerto Rico, and Andalucia. Specific landmarks include named buildings, parks,
tunnels, train yards, and other names that often required additional research to determine how
they should be coded.
While it was expected that there would be information on the sites to indicate locations
as granular as street intersections, postal addresses, and even GPS codes, this information was
rare. There is an obvious problem with protecting the artists who are involved in illegal activity
so some sites may be intentionally vague when providing location information, resorting to less
specific location information such as city, even when more precise location information is
known. This was noted in the interview portion of this research. Providing precise location
information may not be favored for such legal reasons, but also because the works featured
online are often gone quickly, negating the value of such data for those who might want to try
to visit a work in person.
5.5 Tagging as Post-Coordinated Grouping
When a site uses image or post tagging, a type of post-coordinated indexing occurs that may
find an image in a grouping for several facets of the work at once. This can be extremely
helpful, but also has inherent problems if there is no system in place to control the tags for
consistency. Some sites use systems of organization that utilize what could be called parent
categories and various levels of child categories. For example, a site may use locations as parent

154

categories, and subdivide by surfaces or types beneath this. This can be useful, but also
confusing if a user is trying to find wholecar works and they have to look in various geographic
location areas on a site to find them all. This is seen, for example on Double-H, a site devoted to
graffiti in Hamburg, Germany, which uses the four basic (or parent) categories of History,
Trains, Legal, Illegal (http://www.double-h.org/english/index_e.html). When a user visits the
trains page, they are offered the subdivisions (or child categories) as shown in Figure 17.

Figure 17 Trains subpage of Double-H site (http://www.double-h.org/english/trains/index.html)

From here a user can choose from six specific named trains. Choosing DB (German Railway)
takes the user to another subpage with options for about U-trains, trainbombing, WHOLECARS,
E-TO-E, and PANELS (http://www.double-h.org/english/trains/utrains.html). These same
options are similar for each of the subpages under the main trains page. A site could just as
easily use the text label Wholecars as the parent category with subdivisions beneath it for
different train types. In either case, this creates more work for the user to find works by
particular facets.
Another option is to offer numerous subpages for different supports, types, or locations
and allow users to find works with their own facet preferences. This involves redundancy as an
155

image may then have to be in, or be linked to, several places. An option that makes sense is to
employ tagging to individual images or posts with the ability to click on any given tag and be
taken to a post-coordinated gallery of works attached to that tag. An example of this can be
seen in Figure 18 below in a tagged work on Global Street Art, a super site with an extensive
collection of works by artists around the world. Global Street Art makes use of tagging in
various ways and auto generates collections based on the names of artists, regardless of
whether they already have a separate area within the site organization. This happens when a
user clicks on the tag for artist Caratoes. The user is taken to a page for that tag that includes
the message: “This is an auto generated page. If you are this artist or we've got the name
wrong, please email us” (http://globalstreetart.com/artists/14a01to-caratoes).

Figure 18 Image of work by artists A squid called Sebastian and Caratoes with tagged categories
(http://globalstreetart.com/images/31mknlz)

156

The tags on the right side of this image are hotlinked so users can click on each one to be taken
to an ad hoc collection of works featuring that tag. “A squid called Sebastian” and “Caratoes”
are artist names. “Murals” and “Character / Object” are type facets. “Walls or Flat Surfaces” is a
support facet, and “Belgium” is a location facet. “My Work” is seen on many works on the site,
but does not lead to any collections. The titled applied to this work, “Collab wall at KERK Ghent”
can also be seen below the image. The title gives further location information, situating this
work in Ghent, Belgium. Kerk is Dutch for church, so this may indicate an area of Ghent,
adjacency to a church, or work on a church.
5.6 Size of Collection and Need for More Categories
After analyzing all the codes applied to the data, it was apparent that larger collections
had a broader range of categories for organization in general. This is not surprising. The number
of individual codes applied to each site ranged from one to 4,725. Only 15 sites warranted over
100 codes. Nearly half of these, seven sites, are super sites. The greatest number of codes
applied to a non-super site is 712 while the greatest number applied to a super site is 4,725.
Super sites do account for the majority of codes in this research, with the average super site
warranting 797 codes. The average number of codes warranted on non-super sites is 23. Once
duplicate codes were removed, leaving only one instance of a code on any one site, the total
number of codes ranged from one to 50. This indicates an average variety of 18 codes each on
the 19 super sites and seven codes each on the 222 non-super sites.
The actual size of the 241 image collections are not individually known, though a few
sites report statistics providing the number of images available. It is not known how accurate

157

these numbers are when they are offered by a site so no attempt was made to compare
number of codes applied to a site with the size of the collection.
5.7 Summary of Work Code Categories
The categories discussed in this chapter are a representation of the various ways that
photographic images of works are grouped and categorized on the sites. The size of the
collection may dictate how the granularity of the organization of the site. This is seen in various
libraries and archives, which require morethe common knowledge organization problem of
depth of indexing or cataloging when the number of breadth of resources represented
becomes too large to effectively categorize with a shallow knowledge organization system.
More differentiation is needed when more works are added and this is reflected in the use of
more facets for organization on sites with larger collections.
The scope of a site also corresponds to varying needs for categorization. A site focusing
on fewer styles or supports, or on works from a smaller geographic area will require different
levels and types of organization. While size of the collection was already noted as likely
affecting the granularity of categorization, even a small collection that is narrowly focused may
might require a greater number of conceptual divisions to avoid having only one relatively large
gallery of images. A common example of this would be a site that features train graffiti. Instead
of having one gallery for all train graffiti, there may can be several different galleries for train
works in various geographic locations, in various styles, or covering various portions of trains
(equating roughly to size of works).

158

Another factor that appears to influence the number and kind of categorization used on
the sites is the motivation of the site curators. Differences are seen in the categories used by
those with internal motivations and external motivations. Internal motivations involve the
desire to garner commercial work or commissions and to add to an artist or crew’s working
portfolio. This is associated with certain categories that are not as prevalent on externally
motivated sites, which are those that tend to share more educational, historical, or altruistic
interests. Each type of motivation will result in categorization to meet the needs of different
audiences.
Analysis has been carried out herein at the level of the category label on the sites. It is
acknowledged that image level analysis is necessary to more precisely define the conceptual
contents of various codes in this research. Much further depth can be given to analysis at the
individual image level, but that is beyond the scope of this research.

159

Chapter 6: The Interviews
6.0 Introduction
There is evidence on the websites to demonstrate aspects of graffiti art and street art
that may be regarded as important for documentation. This evidence has been examined and
introduced in detail in the last chapter. What is lacking from this examination is the input from
those who set up those facets for documentation in the first place. Short interviews were
designed to present the findings to the website curators and to then ask for their opinions on
the different facets. The knowledge gained from the interviews will be presented here and then
related to the findings from examination of the sites. The interview instrument can be seen in
Appendix C.
6.1 Contacting Participants
When first collecting data for this research from the websites, any contact information
for the website curators was collected. Most often this contact information was in the form of
an email address. There were 35 sites that offered a contact form instead of an email address.
The contact form was used in place of an email for these sites, though a few of these contact
forms were no longer operational due to the age of the site or the fact that the site was no
longer being maintained. Of 241 sites, an invitation to participate in an interview was sent to
212. Three were invited via Facebook Messenger and one by posting the invitation directly onto
the comment area for a Facebook post, as no message option was made available. There were
29 sites for which no contact information was found. The email invitation text can be found in
Appendix B.
160

6.2 Responses to the Interview Invitations
Participants were given the options to respond by email, by phone, or by Skype. The
overwhelming majority chose to participate by email. This was not unexpected due to the
broad geographic distribution of curators. A one-month window was reserved for participation
from the date of sending out all invitations. During this time, 39 responded that they would be
willing to participate. Six of these willing participants were associated with super sites, as
previously defined. Thirty-seven requested the questions be sent through email. One
participant requested a Skype interview and one requested a phone interview. All participants
were given the interview questions via email, including the Skype and phone participants. One
participant decided to decline the interview after receiving the questions. Eleven completed
interview responses were received through email; one Skype interview and one phone
interview were also conducted successfully.
6.3 The Participants
There were thirteen interview responses thus received. Of these thirteen, five
participants are curators of super sites. One other participant is co-founder of another super
site in this study, though no longer managing that site, having moved on to a new site also in
the study. This equates to input from six super site curators, representing 32% of these 19
exceptionally well-organized sites within the sample. Super site curators also therefore
represent 46% of interview participants overall. Participants are situated around the world,
from the United States (7 sites), the UK, France, Denmark, Spain, Romania, and Croatia. Super
site participants are from the US (4 sites), Romania, and the UK.

161

Participants were not asked their roles in the graffiti and street art community, other
than if whether they were responsible for the organization of the websites used in this study,
which they all are. Most submitted that they are or had been graffiti writers at some point in
their lives. None of them referred to themselves as street artists. Eight out of the thirteen sites
curated by the participants are collections of images of works not created by the curators.
These curators are collecting photos of graffiti art and street art when they photograph it or
they receive photographs from others. One site is a tribute site for late U.S. graffiti artist Dondi,
who was prolific during the mid-1970s and 1980s in New York City. This site features only
photographs of Dondi and his works. The remaining four sites feature largely the works of the
artists who curate the sites, as opposed to collecting broadly from other artists. Two of these
three sites focus on individuals, yet include works with other artists, and two sites features
works by a particular graffiti crew and its members. Ten of the thirteen curator sites are
currently active, still updating posts and adding images. Three of them are in an archive state,
where they are no longer being built or actively maintained.
6.4 Interview Results
Questions are grouped in the interview similar to the way codes have been grouped for
analysis from the sites and for reporting in chapters four and five. Therefore, the results will be
reported here in the same way, by discussion of code groups and the participants’ information
relevant to those code groups. The website code categories were not discussed with the
participants. They were asked about the work code categories for description of works, which
represent the general, support, type, and location facet codes.

162

After introducing the research again briefly and explaining the four categories of
organization seen on all 241 sites, curators were asked if whether they had any comments on a
group of labels used in each category, beginning with the General Facets. In this research, the
General Facets are referred to as codes, but they were discussed with participant curators
simply as ways to organize general site content. Some participants provided information on
specific labels, while others gave broader, less specific feedback. Specificity of comments varied
across categories, codes, and curators.
6.4.1 General Facets Discussion
Most curators began by explaining their own basic organization labels. Speaking
generally at the beginning of the interview, the most commonly referenced way to organize
was by geographic location. More than one curator mentioned the impact that the early
movement had on the inclusion of geographic location information. Before the Internet, graffiti
aficionados would trade photos of graffiti, often their own works, via mail. It was common to
write the general location of the work on the back of the photo when trading or when
submitting the image to a graffiti magazine. The editors of the early magazines would often
only have a city to attribute to a photo submission, whether written on the photo itself or from
the return address or postmark on the submission envelope. This became a standard way to
describe submitted photos, also including the name of the artist if supplied or ascertained from
the image itself.
A few curators also mentioned the scope and motivation of a site. If the site features the
works of only a specific artist or crew, there will be a different kind of organization warranted in

163

comparison with sites that seek to document any and all works, or sites that accept submissions
from users. Once a site provides images submitted by users, there is only so much information
that can be gathered about the image. The curator must take what they get from users and
offer what categorization they can if they agree to post an image. Curator A also mentioned
that the organization of a site will depend on the perspective the curator wants to present to
users.
Organizing works by artist or crew is very important. Image submissions received by
artists or crews also lend themselves to organizing in this way. Several curators mentioned that
organizing by artist or crew name is either the most important, or one of the most important
ways to organize images of works. Some acknowledged that the name of the artist or crew is
not always known. Curator I said that if he knew at least one artist or crew member who
contributed to a work, he would include that one name along with the work, possibly adding “+
?” to indicate that others were involved, but not known. Some sites will solicit for further
information from users who view the works.
When asked about the importance of knowing an artist or writer’s real name, as
opposed to an alias or graffiti name, all curators agreed that the name that the artist goes by
was the most valuable. Some curators mentioned the possible benefit of knowing the real
name of an artist, but always stated this in association with commercial work (Curators A, D, G,
I, and J). Curators stated the value in knowing an artist’s real name if that artist wished to be
acknowledged for a style or skill to gain commissions or gallery representation, not for adding
to images of works of graffiti art online. In fact, six curators specifically mentioned that it was
important to only refer to artists by the name they choose to use, which is often an alias, in
164

order to respect their wishes, to adhere to the unspoken rules of the graffiti community
surrounding anonymity, and to avoid divulging information law enforcement could use for
prosecution (Curators A, B, G, K, L, and M). Two curators mentioned that not only could
revealing the real names of artists who work illegally jeopardize those artists and their work,
and it could have impact on the websites that feature those works as well (Curators C and M).
This was the only prompt among the General Facets category questions that all thirteen
curators addressed.
In response to a related question, about half of the curators mentioned that they would
add RIP to the name of an artist who had died out of respect, decency, or tradition. This was
said to be done for more prolific and respected artists especially, and for pieces that were done
specifically to honor another artist who had died. Curator C asked, “… what’s the point? You
never see Picasso(RIP) in his galleries, right?” Curator D noted it was a sign of respect, yet felt it
more relevant in a textual description of a person than next to a photo of work by that person.
Curator K echoed a similar sentiment, adding that it was sometimes hard to find out about the
death of an artist due to the anonymity afforded them in the graffiti community. This same
curator admitted to sharing a blog post about a death instead of adding RIP after names in an
image archive. Curator L of a crew site stated that one of their own members had died, but still
was considered a member of the crew and referred to with the addition of RIP after the name.
This curator specified that they do not use he or she in order to further protect anonymity,
adding “In older crews it’s mostly a man’s world. Maybe [we] represent both – he and the she
side.”

165

Only one curator (M) noted that it could be useful to have an area for very well known
or famous artists. This curator stated that it might be important, “though maybe not overtly,
but more in a structural way behind the scenes, to push less experienced viewers/users
towards the better stuff.” Curator H said he never had seen that used for organization on a site.
No others commented on this facet from an organizational perspective, though some made
comments about the importance of fame in the graffiti writing world in general.
After organizing by artist name and location, the next most commonly accepted facet in
this category is date. The year is the most mentioned component of date required, though a
few curators included a preference for as specific a date as possible of when the work was
completed to situate it within the historical context of graffiti art styles. The year was
acknowledged as often the best that could be ascertained, especially with user-supplied
images. Curator H mentioned that the month is good to have as well to place the work within
summer or winter, each season presenting its own challenges depending on location. Curator E
stressed the importance of knowing when a work was destroyed or painted over, while Curator
M stated that this did not seem important, but could be provided if known “for curiosities [sic]
sake.” In general there was no agreement on the preferred form of date, other than to provide
at least the year. Curators did not always specify what the date should represent, such as the
date of the completion of the piece, the date of the photograph, or the date of the
disappearance of the piece.
Four curators (B, H, I, and M) commented on the use of the name of an event as an
organizational label. There was general agreement that an organized event that produced
works relevant to the site could serve as a gathering method for images, though curators
166

disagreed on how relevant this would be for their own site and how these images might be set
apart. One issue that arose regarding the use of an event as an organizing label for an online
gallery includes the fact that unless a user is familiar with the event, the label might not make
sense. Curators B and I mentioned that tagging or adding descriptive information to an image to
indicate an event might work better than a separate area for event photos. Curator H simply
agreed that using a label for named events was a good idea.
There was no consensus on the use of labels for new and old works. Some curators used
a type of feature post on their sites to highlight works new to the site, while others felt that all
new things become old at some point so the label was ineffective. Categorizing works as new to
the site by featuring them in a blog post that would move down over time is one way that
curators handle this category, but two curators, F and J, specified that the date of the works
should suffice to identify works as old or new. Only Curator K stated that documenting older
work was important to maintain a historical record of the art, including that there should be a
special area set aside for old works. Overall, curators did not view using labels for works such as
new or old as a priority, but prefer having a date of some type.
While Curator H simply wrote “yes” next to the indoor/outdoor label, five others (E, F, I,
L, and M) asserted that these labels did not make sense, were never used, or, as Curator M put
it, “should be implied by the location data, and the picture itself.” These labels likely make more
sense for curators working in commercial art who desire a broader portfolio to attract clients.
All but one curator had something to say about the importance of knowing the size of a
work, though opinions again varied. Several noted that extreme size, either very large or very
167

small, can be worth noting. Very small yet intricate pieces can require greater skill, or can
control, and very large pieces may require more planning, time for execution (and sometimes
therefore risk), and materials. Curators B and D mentioned the same well-known and extremely
large work by artist Saber in Los Angeles to illustrate their points. Curator E mentioned the
importance of very large pieces beyond roughly “the area of 8-12ft in length and 4-6ft in height
as a function of the size of a human & the width of the average spray pattern.” Several curators
stated they were in favor of showing the size of a work that fell outside of average range by
including context instead of stating measurements.
It is worth noting that Curator D co-developed the Art Crimes website used not only as a
site among the 241 analyzed for this study, but as the source of all the other sites. Curator D
shared details of the discussion that the Art Crimes co-developers had regarding size when they
began their groundbreaking graffiti art archive. He felt that size was important to note. His cocurator agreed, but wanted to focus on the works and not the context of the works. There are
two famous photographers of the early graffiti art movement, Martha Cooper and Henry
Chalfant, each with a different approach to documentation. Chalfant focused on the works
themselves, while Cooper focused more on the context, the environment, and the process
along with the works. The Art Crimes developers decided to follow the former’s style, focusing
on the artworks themselves and consciously removing context. “That was a decision to try to
make people just look at the pure visual artistic merits of the art that was created because at
that time the discussion was much more negative in general.” This quote reveals more about
the social acceptance, or rejection, of graffiti art and graffiti writers during the mid-1990s when
the Art Crimes site went live.
168

To summarize the comments relating to the importance of noting size, most curators
agreed that it was important, especially regarding works that are larger or smaller than
average, but they did not agree on how to provide size information. Four curators, B, D, G, and
I, specifically said that noting size was not very important, Curators G and I stating that the
photo should indicate the size and Curators B, D, and I that size was only important with works
that are either very large or very small. Five curators, G, I, J, K, and M, indicated that they
preferred to include something in the photo to give a sense of scale for exceptionally sized
works. These might include the feet of the person taking the photograph (Curator K), a human,
a car, or the entire building on which a work is completed. Curator J noted that size definitely
should be included if the photo is of a production where “several different artists [come]
together to make a big wall.” Curators H and M specifically related greater size of a work to
greater time required to complete a work, which can be important information.
When asked about labeling works as legal or illegal, the answers again varied with
agreement that it could be important information, but many sharing that this was most likely
going to be evident by the work itself, the surface the work was on, or other labeling used to
group works according to type. Certain language used to describe works carries an association
with illegal or legal works. For example, works described as pieces, throwups, burners, or
freights will be understood by the graffiti art community to be illegal, whereas murals are
regarded as legal works. Only Curators J and M specifically said it was important to know
whether a work was legal or illegal, though Curator M admitted that he does not label works in
this way, stating,

169

I think this is important information that sets the context of the work majorly (whether
it was done quickly on a highway, or something had all day to complete it), but due to
the nature of my site being publicly available on the internet, we felt that we did not
want the site to be used as a law enforcement tool, or something that hindered the
artists productivity, so preferred to keep this information not directly listed. That being
said, most experienced graffiti heads would be able to tell the legality of a work fairly
quickly by seeing a flick of something, or knowing about the artists who did it.
Like the comments regarding size, curators in general see the legal status of a work as helpful
information, but they did not often explicitly state that works should be labeled as such.
6.4.2 Support Facets Discussion
Most curators agreed that it us useful to categorize photos by the names of supports or
surfaces on which a work is created, but this depends on the site and the collection. Curator M,
for example, said that his site focused on graffiti art and therefore more of the supports they
featured were walls and freights, which are among the most typical or traditional of graffiti art
surfaces. The interview questions did not specifically mention every single support encountered
on the 241 sites, but listed several of the more popular ones and asked for ideas for other
supports not listed. The interview did ask curators how important they felt it is to distinguish
the different types of rail supports, such as trains, subways, and freights.
While the Canvas code was the support most frequently applied to the sites, the label is
not popular with the curators interviewed. Five curators, C, E, F, J, and M, commented on it, but
the consensus was that it was not relevant to graffiti art unless an artist was interested in
selling work or showing in a gallery. Curator J went as far as to say that works on canvas were
not featured because of the graffiti focus of the site. Curator M affirmed the “marked”
distinction between works on the street and works on canvas, the latter a form of work
170

directed at “traditional galleries and museums.” Those who did comment on the use of canvas
as an organizational label felt it was irrelevant or beyond the scope of recognized graffiti art.
Few curators commented on clothing as a surface. Curator F mentioned a love for
designing on clothing, but nothing about the use of clothing as a surface for organization
purposes. Curator E spoke of historical distaste for graffiti on clothing in the 1990s, and Curator
M has a specific geographic focus for his collection and is only interested in photos of graffiti art
on clothing from the very early days of the art form in his city, during the 1980s. Subways were
also mentioned by only two curators, one to suggest that an artist might as well paint on the
subway walls if they are already in there (Curator E), and the other to note that there are no
subways in his city (Curator M). This points to the influence of the particular geographic
location or scope of the collection curated as a factor for use of this, and other, labels.
Alongside rail transport vehicles such as trains and subways discussed below, walls are
among the most commonly acknowledged supports for graffiti and street art. Only four
curators commented on the walls label, Curators E, I, L, and M, and one of these to simply
express the enjoyment of painting on this surface, yet this is obviously a popular label judging
by the positive remarks and frequent use of the category. Curator C stated that the biggest
galleries on his site are for pieces and walls. Curator E said that “the walls are the traditional
‘canvas’ for graffiti. They have the size & visibility that the graffiti artist wants. They’re flat,
easy, sometimes they have a nice texture. This is where most of the truly great work is done.”
Curator I added, “I don’t care much about the surface used (it’s almost all just walls anyway).
Curator K manages a site specifically focused on stencils and said that “this list appears to be
more graffiti-oriented and stencils are mostly on walls or sidewalks.”
171

Nearly half of those interviewed commented on trains, freights, and subway cars as a
group. Curator E affirmed their significance as surfaces: “These in my opinion are the ‘realest’ of
all surfaces. Technically challenging & physically dangerous, never legal, mobile, traditional &
often very long running.” Curator M agreed, stating, “Obviously one of the original and most
interesting formats of Graffiti. It also focuses almost entirely on illegal work, which is also often
the more interesting. So a major category for organizing flicks.” Curator J shared that these
types of moving surfaces will used as descriptors above the styles applied to them, meaning
that he would not separate out throw-ups and pieces on freights, for example, because the
surface itself would be the category here that trumps the style. This relates again to the scope
of the site in question. A site devoted to train graffiti might warrant more granularity to
distinguish a larger collection of works on rail transport vehicles.
There were five curators (D, E, J, L, and M) who addressed subway cars as a surface, as
opposed to the subways themselves. Curator A was the only one to suggest using subway
stations as a support category. Three (F, J, and M) mentioned that they did not have subways in
their city, and of these Curator M added that this made the label not as relevant on his site.
Curator E reiterated the historical significance of subway cars as a surface by stating that they
are “[t]he original, the legendary, almost holy venue for graffiti art. A difficult, irregular surface
with no absorbency placed in a very dangerous environment where life & limb are at risk.”
Curator L noted that their site did not feature subway cars “[b]ecause of some ended cases by
law enforcements and possible troubles … “ These comments highlight the value of images of
work on subway cars, mostly from a historical perspective, but not a concerted effort by any of
the curators interviewed to set aside space on their sites specifically for work on this surface.
172

The use of subway cars as a surface category is likely more important depending on the scope
of the individual site, including any geographic focus that a site may have on an urban area with
a subway system.
Comments about tunnels were similar to those regarding subways and subway cars. This
type of organization is tied to the scope of the site and the geographic location featured, and
whether they have tunnels for trains or subways. Only three curators spoke about the tunnels
label, two (F and M) to say that they had few or no subways so the label was not relevant.
Curator E said that “Tunnels & overpasses are great spots, fairly safe (from the law),
infrequently buffed and generally nice surfaces. A wealth of hidden artwork covers the hidden
places of most cities.”
Curators were asked whether they felt it was important to distinguish among trains,
freights, and subway trains because the terminology regarding rail transport vehicles varied
across the sites. All who responded to this question agreed that there are important
differences. Works on passenger trains or subway cars, sometimes referred to as clean trains,
are highest on the hierarchy of respect due to the high amount of risk and very limited time
available to execute them. Freights are considered lower risk and easier to do, while scrap
trains that sit in a yard out of service are lowest on the scale of respect. The confusion over
terminology regarding rail vehicles mainly concerns the word train. A train can be a passenger
train, a subway train, or a freight train. Using the finer distinctions of freights (sometimes called
boxcars), passenger trains, and subways helps to set each type apart. An active train that
carries people, as opposed to freight or things, remains the most dangerous and most
respected of the modern rail transport supports for a graffiti writer.
173

Very few curators offered comments regarding the organization of works on other
vehicles. Curator I mentioned the use of categories or tagging works for trains and vans, but did
not think he used any other categories for vehicles. Curators E, F, and M shared opinions about
creating works on vehicles, but did not address the use of a category specific to these kinds of
supports. At least three curators, E, J, and M, regard works on billboards, signs, and rooftops as
prestigious accomplishments in the “hard core” graffiti art community. Curator F from outside
the U.S. noted that “there is a difference from writers in USA and here, here, we don’t really
care about billboards, they get changed quickly and nobody paints them.” Graffiti art done on a
highway sign would be the most challenging and therefore likely to garner the greatest respect
from other writers, followed by billboards, lesser signs, and rooftops. The risk involved and the
time required to complete a work were once again emphasized as a type of measure of the
value of the image. Curator J from the western U.S. introduced the term Heavens, defining it as
the “highest ranked illegal graffiti there is when people get on highway signs … they either
climbed over the bridge to get on that sign or they had to climb the pole, climb all the way up it
and that’s what we call Heavens. … They did it probably in the middle of the night with semis
flying under them … so Heavens are definitely up there when it comes to graffiti credibility.”
This term may be regional as it was not encountered on any of the sites. Curator E, from
California, said that “If you do billboards or heavens (freeway signs) you’re fucking hard core. …
This is a deadly sport.” This was the only other use of the term heavens encountered during the
research.
Trash bins are regarded as the bottom of the graffiti hierarchy within the categories
specifically discussed as surfaces for this research. Four curators commented on them, only one
174

showing any degree of interest in documenting them. Curator E commented that just because a
trash bin is there, “someone will tag on it. Who cares? It’s ugly & full of stinking refuse anyway.”
Curator F stated that they were not worth documenting because the surfaces were generally
small, while Curator M stated the normally hasty and low-quality work commonly found on
trash bins “was not a priority to document.” Only one curator, J, admitted that some people
might be fascinated by the variety of tags that can be found on them.
Blackbooks are recognized as important tools and records associated with the graffiti art
movement, both by graffiti writers and more traditional art institutions. Curator E summed this
up: “Blackbooks are probably 2nd only to subway cars in terms of the depth of tradition &
importance. This is where styles are developed & plans are laid. This is where traditions are
passed & where new writers are trained.” Two curators, L and M, indicated that they did have
an area for Blackbooks on their sites, but they were very selective in what works they would
feature. Curator M “decided not to include this type of stuff on the website unless it was a well
produced work by a notable writer or deceased writer.” Curator L uses this label for
organization to feature “selected pieces made in full scale, only. To show a piece from sketch to
paint, and to keep the web site simple.”
Curators suggested a few additions for support labels, including bus, train, and subway
stations (Curator A only), airplanes, submarines, ships, private cars, motorcycles, legal industrial
design objects (Curator F only), and specific materials such as glass, wood, brick, and iron
(Curator H only). Curator D also suggested sculpture and stickers, but these are already part of
the list included in the Types Facet section of the interview.

175

6.4.3 Types Facets Discussion
Curators were presented with a list of commonly found type labels from the 241 sites to
solicit feedback on the usefulness of each. Interestingly, the first curator interviewed, Curator B,
said “this is kind of a list that would be generated by an outsider.” Said list, in contrast to this
comment, was developed directly by looking at what was done by those arguably considered
insiders: writers, crews, and aficionados that are organizing these works online, including
Curator B. It is not certain whether Curator B understood that the list was generated by other
graffiti website curators, or whether he was suggesting that other websites are not curated by
graffiti art insiders. There was general agreement on the most popular types, such as graffiti,
stencils, and murals, but some addressed the needs of their own sites and the scope of their
collections as important considerations for their own organizational decisions. The influence of
collection size and scope is a common theme throughout the interviews.
Curators B, I, K, and M expressed that they now use hashtags on works to make finer
differentiations between types and to order works in non-mutually exclusive categories. This
practice of hashtagging has developed organically as technologies have evolved to allow this
type of ad-hoc organization over time. Curator M explained that his site was designed from the
start to be simple because he was not sure that it would be successful and he did not want to
invest the time to develop categories that were too granular for fear of overwhelming his early
audience. The site also grew out of user submissions, which limits the amount of information
that can be gathered while relying on inconsistent data provided by others. Now that this site is
very successful and heavily visited, more categories have been developed as a critical mass of

176

images in various more granular categories has been gathered and the use of hashtagging has
also increased.
Feedback on top-level categories focused on the difference between graffiti and street
art. Curator E referred to this distinction as “a pretty hard division” that “seems to be blurring
somewhat over time,” while Curator G noted “a fundamental distinction between NY inspired
graffiti and the rest of street art, and this should be two categories. This line is difficult to put
but you should be able to organize in those two categories.” Curator E added that “there is a bit
of animosity here as many [graffiti] writers feel like they practice a far more difficult craft & get
far less credit.” Curator J associated lettering with graffiti and some political works with street
art.
Curator J also felt a category for sketches was unnecessary, arguing that these would be
in the Blackbooks category (discussed among the supports above) because “that’s where
they’re going to be.” Curator E suggested further granularity for the sketches category by
adding pencil, ink, and full color distinctions. It is not known whether this curator would like to
see these further divisions of the Sketch category, or if he is simply suggesting ways it could be
subdivided if desired.
Only one curator commented on Characters, Curator J, but he made the distinction
between works featuring realistic portraits of actual people and “cartoonish-looking graffiti” by
introducing the term realistics. Realistics are described as painting the image of a real person,
such as Martin Luther King, Jr. or an RIP piece of Tupac Shakur, in which the rendition is realistic

177

and not a cartoon illustration. No other curators commented regarding Characters as a category
for organization.
Curators often spoke of stencils, stickers, wheatpaste, and posters in overlapping terms
so they will be addressed together here. These types are often combined, such as a stencil
appearing on a wheatpaste, sticker, or poster. Curator J shared that he grouped repetitive
media such as stencils, wheatpaste, and stickers together. A stencil, once cut, can be used to
repeat the same design over and over. Stickers and posters often are either stenciled or printed
so they provide the same design sometimes hundreds or thousands of times over. Unless an
artist makes an effort to include their name or other identifying information on a stencil design,
sticker, wheatpaste, or poster, it can be very difficult to assign attribution information to these
works. Curator K, whose site emphasizes stencil works, asserted the importance of including
images of the stencil cutouts used to create the finished stencil works, stating “Many
photographers do not include this and it is important to share knowledge and document the
actual cut media.” This is very likely not possible for most sites unless a curator is documenting
his or her own stencil works. Curators did not give posters more than a passing mention, but
they did suggest that stencils, stickers, and wheatpaste are all useful categories depending on
the scope of a collection.
Curators did not comment often on letters or handstyles, only to mention that this type
of label overlaps with others or it is not included in an effort to avoid very simple works such as
bombing or throwups, “unless the writer was a particularly notable local writer (Curator M).”
Curators only mentioned the categories of throwups, bombing, productions, and digital works
to indicate that they were not used. Curator J specifically stated that he would not feature
178

digital or computer-generated works. Curator E, on the other hand, suggested near the end of
the interview adding a category for digital typefaces and fonts, stating that “if blackbooks &
light shows are graffiti then so are fonts.” Curator H hinted at the acceptance of digital works by
suggesting further categories for hacking, crypted, laboratory, futuristic, and contemporary. He
did not further define what these labels mean.
Curator H referred to the category of Wildstyle as Freestyle and Curator J used the term
Burners, but neither offered further information beyond the alternative names used for this
label. Curator E suggested adding a category for New Wave, equating this with “wildstyles that
really had no discernible letters even to the most trained eye.” The action category was largely
unacknowledged as well with only one comment by Curator E: “Graffiti lends itself to this much
better than most visual art for sure. There is some resentment around the largely social media
driven idea that everyone has to be a performance artist now. Personally I resist the urge to do
this but I don’t hate it or anything.” Curator H was the only one to refer to Projections,
suggesting to “make a group with light graffiti we could name ‘Post Graffiti.’”
None of the curators discussed specific sub-types of train graffiti. These terms include
Wholecars, End-to-ends, and Top-to-bottoms. It is not known whether this means they are not
needed, or they generally are accepted ways to further distinguish train works. Only two
curators discussed the political category, with seemingly different opinions. Curator H shared
that “this is not a categorie [sic] for me but agree it can be. Maybe add ‘brainless works’ with
it.” This comment could be taken as supporting the use of the category or as sarcasm to suggest
it is not useful. Curator K is in favor of such as category, specifically citing the use of hashtagging
to note political works.
179

There are some groups on flikr, for example, that are solely for political work. I will tag
my photos with “antigentrification” and “antifascist” and “anarchist” if the message is
clearly stated. Clarion Alley here in San Francisco has very political messaging in their
murals, as does Precita Eyes muralists (and their cohorts). There has been an “Evict
[insert name]” tag in the City for about three years now, tagging “Evict [mayor] Ed Lee”,
“Evict Google” etc. Stencilist Eclair Bandersnatch has political themes in her work. So
does Solis. I only have a major album for San Francisco protests, but I have many tags
for political stencils.

This statement indicates the value of some type of organization, in this case hashtagging, to
group political works, but it is evident that location and scope of the collection likely affect this
value for any particular site.
The last question regarding the different labels used for types of art works solicited
suggestions for additional categories. Four curators had nothing to add, but those that did are
discussed here, starting with the most commonly mentioned. None of the category additions
were suggested by more than two curators so there was no overwhelming response for the
additional of any specific categories.
Curators D and E suggested a category for what can be called etching, scribing, or
scratching. Both of these curators manage sites based in the western United States. They both
felt this was distinct enough to warrant its own category. This type of work was originally coded
for during the site analysis once the term was first encountered, but it did not repeat so the
code (Scratchiti) was removed. Curators J and M mentioned body art as a possible category.
This was included in the list of support codes during site analysis, but was not given as a
category in the interviews as some rarely used categories were left out to simplify the interview

180

and not overwhelm participants with too many of the lesser details. Interestingly, body art was
brought up independently of any prompt.
Only Curator J volunteered comments on the 3D (sculptural) type, but using a different
meaning, as explained below. Curators D and E mentioned it at the end as possible additions,
despite the fact that the category was listed in the interview. The term 3D was used to code
three-dimensional works in the site analysis, but this term was qualified in the interviews with
the word sculptural after it to distinguish this type of work from a three-dimensional writing
style that is sometimes seen wherein a writer uses careful shadowing to make letters or images
appear to jump off a flat surface. This style of writing was not used as a conceptual code as it
was not encountered on the sites, though a careful image-level analysis might reveal its actual
use. Curator J was obviously referring to this latter style of 3D writing and not to actual works in
three dimensions. Curator E suggested adding a category for “sculptural,” but it is unclear what
exact conception is meant by this term. His only comment after suggesting this category was
“there is such a thing.”
Other suggestions for additions include “monikers or hobo monikers on a freight train”
often done in grease pencil or chalk, regional styles, derivative styles passed down from writer
to writer, non-art graffiti (“Bobby loves Susie, Skate or Die, Kilroy Was Here, KISS, ACDC”), gang
graffiti, hacking/crypted/laboratory/futuristic/contemporary, and Post Graffiti (to include light
graffiti or projections). Non-art graffiti appears to indicate graffiti tagging, which is already a
code applied to the sites. The conceptual boundaries are undefined for many of these
suggestions and there is likely overlap in meaning with each other and with previously
introduced categories.
181

6.4.4 Location Facets Discussion
Curators addressed location information much more generally in the interview
questions. Curators were asked for their opinions on providing location information, how
granular or specific that information should be, and if whether they had any other suggestions
for providing location information or organizing by location. In this way the questions were very
open-ended, except when asked whether specific GPS coordinate data were valuable to add to
the description of a work.
No one questioned the importance of providing location information for works, but
rather the discussion centered on how specific this should be and how this specificity should be
expressed. The scope of an individual site is a consideration, as Curator A suggested that a site
with a local focus would probably benefit from greater precision in location than one that
covers an entire country or the globe. The issue of legality also arose, wherein a few curators
reiterated the courtesy involved in not divulging the exact location of illegal works if there was
any concern for police prosecution of a writer (Curators B, D, E, I, and L). Curator B is against
very specific location information, stating “Specific location is frowned upon. Comes close to
snitching as cops will assemble a folder on a suspect to qualify a warrant for arrest (and later
prosecution) and this just makes it easy.” These considerations are understandably complex
and depend largely on the judgment of the one posting the images. Curator B frowns on the
idea of having a tourist-style map to guide people to specific works, while Curator I considers
this a good idea for those who want to see works in person and who can travel to them.
Another complexity that Curator J brought up is the sometimes rapid destruction or otherwise

182

disappearance of works that could make such a map extremely unreliable and ultimately
disappointing beyond as a historical reference.
After considering the scope of a site, such as how local the collection of works, the
specificity can be decided upon. Obviously, sites with a broader geographic scope will have
need for a greater number of top level categories, usually countries. The most commonly
mentioned geographic category suggested by the curators is the name of the city. Again, if the
site focuses on a very local collection, such as from one city, the name of the city will be
useless, requiring more granularity. Curator I mentioned categorizing by known Halls of Fame,
or HoFs. These are areas usually with a lot of wall space that are popular, often tolerated, semilegal or legal, places to paint. Writers recognize them within their respective communities as a
space to create and often the work of some of the best, most talented, and most respected
writers can be seen there. Curator I stated that once a critical mass of images was gathered
from a particular HoF, he would create a category for that location.
Curators spoke of the link between graffiti and travel, not only of interest for those who
wish to see works in person, but for artists and writers who want to see what the graffiti scene
looks like in another place and possibly to plan where they would like to create work
themselves. Styles are historically tied to locations, such as specific parts of the United States
like New York and Los Angeles. Curator M talked about the homogenizing effect the Internet
has had on current styles, rendering them less tied to place than in the past, adding
… I am of an older generation that was around when graffiti was still very 'scene'
dependent, and the city where something was from, was very relevant to the work.
Nowadays I could understand that people just want to see pictures of good artwork, and
don't care where its [sic] from, and I can understand the objective appeal of this. But I
183

still find the original graffiti forms and traditions to be what gives the artwork a lot of
meaning, and the city it was done in to be important for context.
Ultimately there was no general agreement on how specific geographic location should
be expressed beyond including at the very least the name of the city for a work, and more
specific for a locally-focused collection, such as a neighborhood or even a spot on a GPSenabled map. GPS coordinates are easy to use, often built into smartphone camera applications
and digital SLR cameras alike, so it can be easy to precisely locate a work and provide access to
a range of works using a simple GoogleMaps interface, as on several sites within this research.
There are advantages and disadvantages to this technology regarding graffiti art and street art,
most specifically when providing the location of an illegally produced work would aid in an
artist’s prosecution. For these reasons, curators were asked to speak to the use of GPS
coordinates in connection with works online.
Seven out of 13 curators stated that specific GPS coordinates were very important or
useful. Curator J qualified this by adding that it was more important in a collection focused on a
smaller place, such as one city. Curator D said that it is very good to have this information, but it
should not be shared when it was obvious that the work was done illegally. Personal judgment
is required to decide whether a work could get an artist or writer in serious trouble and in this
case the added information should not be shared. Curator I shared that when traveling it was
very useful to have geotagged works to visit in a destination city so they could be viewed in
person. Geo-locating works can be very useful when considering future research on historical
and political movements reflected in works over time and space. Curator M, in favor of GPS
tagging, stated, “I think this is fine and useful. Though I know many writers would think this is
184

too technical of information to include with an artwork, but effectively it is the same as saying
'the Burger King on 8th st.’” Again, this would make sense to a local collection and
demonstrates a similar specificity.
Three curators, B, C, E, are against using GPS coordinates to specifically locate works.
Curators B, C, D, and E brought up the issue of law enforcement using this information to
prosecute writers. Curator G simply stated a lack of interest because of the site’s focus on
historical works that no longer in exist. Those interviewed generally acknowledged the benefits
of GPS technology, but again were not in agreement on its use. Careful judgement on the
ramifications of geo-tagging works is in order, depending on the scope of the collection and the
attitudes of individual curators. The more obviously illegal the works, the less acceptable the
technology seems to be to curators, while street art works by their very nature and association
with more socially acceptable and legal artistic production can be geotagged without the same
careful consideration.
6.5 Summary of Interviews
There were several factors that influence the differences of opinion among curators.
The most obvious of this is the scope of the individual site. Focusing on train graffiti, for
example, will obviate the need for more granularity in categories to describe types of works on
trains that might be unnecessary in another collection. This is applicable to location specificity,
supports, and type facets as well. Unlike the site analysis, commercial motivation did not arise
as a common factor in deciding upon organization labels, though curators occasionally
discussed commercial design work.

185

The interviews were qualitatively designed for explanatory power, so it is important to
recognize that the views expressed are not representative of the population of curators. The
preferred use of email for the interview itself is limiting. It is likely that offering the interview by
email allowed for more individual responses because this affords participants control over the
process, the time involved, and the effort expended. It may also be easier for some participants
for whom English is not their native language. Using email limits the exchange of information by
cutting off the ability of the researcher to follow-up in real time to questions, to elicit further
information, or to receive clarification. A few curators were asked for additional information,
but this was much more easily obtained during the two interviews conducted in real time via
phone and Skype than it was for the email participants.
The curators focused on graffiti as opposed to street art, which is not in and of itself a
bad thing, but it is acknowledged. As previously stated, there is a very hard to define difference
between the two art forms, but after analyzing the sites and conducting the interviews, there is
a relationship arising in the data that points toward an internal motivation associated with
graffiti art and an external motivation associated with street art. This association would benefit
from further research and may lead to more nuanced study of organization on internally and
externally motivated sites.
The interview participants were ultimately a source of rich information. They represent
those who are carrying out the work of description and organization of graffiti art and street art
images online. Their collective knowledge of the art form, its history and development, styles,
methods, and the attitudes toward it, coupled with an awareness of their audiences that goes

186

beyond what an outside observer could ascertain by viewing the sites combine to make their
opinions on terminology and organization of collections extremely valuable for this research.

187

Chapter 7: Summary and Conclusions
The purpose of this research was to contribute to the forms of knowledge organization
required by the process of documentation and sharing of street art. Specifically, this research is
an examination of how website curators are carrying out this process, with particular attention
paid to the textual information associated with photographs of the artwork in online, noninstitutional collections, the methods being used to document the street artworks, and the
organizational practices of collectors that serve to make the collections available to users.
Operating on the belief that street art is valuable historically, artistically, and culturally, and
realizing that numerous websites exist that are devoted to documenting and sharing street art,
this study represents a first step toward determining the structure of the domain of online
street art collections.
A set of 241 street art and graffiti art websites were examined. A total of 107 codes
were applied to the site data from within six categories. Two of these categories relate to
aspects of the sites in general and four of these categories relate to the works collected on the
sites, which are the photographic images of graffiti art and street art. Text on the sites that was
coded as “about” information was harvested, analyzed, and qualitatively coded for purpose or
motivation, audience, organization, and art style language. After all coding of the sites was
completed, an attempt was made to contact the owners or administrators of the sites to
request an interview. Interview requests were sent to 212 of these owners or administrators,
referred to as curators. Of these 212 interview invitations, 35 were unsuccessful as noted by
server errors, returned email errors, or other electronic failure to reach their intended

188

destination. Thirty-nine curators initially responded favorably to the invitations and were
emailed the interview questions. Thirteen interviews were conducted successfully, eleven by
email, one by phone, and one by Skype. These three sets of data serve as the material
examined within this research.
7.1 Results
Results of site analyses indicate the occurrence of several facets of organization for
collections of street art and graffiti art online. The most commonly encountered information
about the sites themselves is contact and about information. The most popular uses of other
media offered on the sites are lists of links to other sites and blogs associated with the original
sites. When a site has other associated social media accounts, these are most often Facebook,
Instagram, Twitter, and Flickr in descending order of popularity.
Information that relates to the organization of images is grouped into four facets for
general, supports, types, and location information. By far the most commonly used descriptive
facet for works encountered in the research is the name of the artist or crew, though each
name was coded individually, which inflates this representation. Accounting for which
descriptive work facets occurred most frequently without repetition are the Canvas, Walls, and
Trains supports codes and the Sketches and Graffiti types codes. Location information is most
common at the City level, followed by the Country.
7.2 Size of the Collection, Scope, Motivation
Three influences likely have impact on the organizational practices encountered on the
sites. These are the size of the collection, the scope of the collection, and the motivation of the
189

curators. The size of individual collections was not determined quantitatively as this was not
possible within the scope of this research. Some sites list how many photos are in their
collections, but it is not known how accurate or up to date this information is. Therefore, a
determination of size of collection is based upon qualitative examination of the sites. Some are
obviously much smaller than others and some are obviously quite large. The relative size of a
collection and the scope of a collection are intrinsically tied to the granularity of descriptive
facets employed by curators. This makes sense and was expected as it is encountered
commonly in bibliographic collections such as those found in libraries and archives. The more
materials, the greater need for discrimination in classification and subject headings for those
materials. Some smaller collections with narrow focus, such as a site that features train graffiti
only, will also have a need for more granularity to distinguish among works on one like support,
and to avoid having only one relatively large group of works for a user to browse. Some sites,
usually older ones that are no longer active, do present all works together without more
granularity than galleries numbered by pages or by years.
More than one curator during the interviews mentioned that they had started their
collection and their organizational scheme to be very simple in the beginning, adding categories
as the collection grew. Growth of a collection could occur rapidly, especially in successful sites
that solicit user submissions of works. This presented inherent problems when the growth
outpaced the ability of curators to keep up with site design, especially with long-lived sites such
as Art Crimes, developed before today’s relational databases that can be categorized much
more easily than older, more simple ones. The use of hashtagging has also greatly expanded the
ability of curators to add and group images as needed, though only two curators mentioned
190

consistency in the use of hashtagging terms as a stated goal. Several sites displayed such
inconsistency in hashtagging, but this was not a focus of this study.
After analyzing about information when supplied across the sites, it became apparent
that there are two basic types of motivation for posting collections of graffiti art and street art
online. These two motivations were coded as internal and external. An internally motivated site
is compiled by, and largely for, the interests of an individual artist or crew and promotes their
work and skills. It is often used as a portfolio to attract attention for the artist or crew and to
garner future commissioned work or gallery representation. An externally motivated site is
usually compiled to share works by a variety of artists and crews for pleasure, education, and
historical record. There may be items for sale to benefit the site curators, but these are not the
primary motivation of the site and can be seen to support the maintenance of the site itself.
Externally motivated sites tend to use fewer descriptive terms to represent the style of work
featured on them in comparison with internally motivated sites, which likely benefit from a
broader range of style terms to attract interest in a broader skill set. The term graffiti is more
often used as an overall style descriptor on externally motivated sites. This may be associated
with a desire by working commercial artists to distance themselves from activities perceived by
possible future clients as illegal.
There are several similarities between what curators do on their sites and what they say
is important, and what art museums do when documenting artworks for their visitors. There
are also some notable differences. One will often see a standard descriptive label for an
artwork in an art museum that includes the name of the creator and the year that the work was
created. A title for the work is also usually included as well as the medium of the work. Often
191

the city where the work was created is included, if known, as well as the size of the work. In this
study, curators most often included the name of the creator of the work, the year, and the city
where the work was created. Medium is sometimes indicated by the grouping of works in this
study, but this varies greatly.
Most notable is the absence of size information in this study, though this is not a strict
comparison as art museums do not organize works in general by size either. Works are usually
grouped in art museums by artist, by style, by medium, or by recognized art movements. In this
way, the organization of art museums is very similar to what was seen in this research. Further
analysis at the image level will be valuable to consider such comparisons between works on the
sites and traditional works in art museums.
There are many similarities noted across all the sites in this study. This is interesting
because the sites are located all around the world and the curators are not using any formal
controlled vocabulary or recommended guidelines to organize the works they feature. This
study has demonstrated the importance of knowing the artist’s or crew’s name responsible for
the work, when and where the work was completed, as specifically as possible while being
sensitive to the legal ramifications of this information, and ultimately providing the best
possible image of the work itself.
7.3 Limitations
Textual grouping mechanisms for the organization of works were the focus of this study
and as such limit the information gathered for analysis. Further conceptual clarification of
supports and styles information, for example, could be gained by taking analysis to the
192

individual image-level. There may be more overlap or distinction revealed at this level for
terminologies used to describe works. Further distinctions could also be made between site
architecture and hashtagging, when used, as grouping techniques and how each affects the
granularity seen on the sites.
The use of email for eleven out of the thirteen interviews can also be seen as a
limitation. As previously stated, the use of email inhibited the ability of the researcher to ask
follow-up questions and receive clarification from curators regarding the use of categories to
organize works. Some curators simply responded that they used or did not use a category, but
did not offer reasons why. The interviews asked for additions to terminology in each of the four
work categories, but without synchronous interviews, it was difficult to determine whether
these suggested additions were simply thoughts on how a category could be further divided or
useful terms that should be used. Most of the suggested additions were never seen in actual
use on the sites and therefore do not seem warranted. Additional interviews by phone, Skype,
or in person would help to clarify these important issues and will be a focus of future
exploration.
The findings are largely qualitative in nature and not generalizable to all photographic
collections of street art and graffiti art. The lack of agreement on exactly what separates graffiti
art from street art continues to be an issue in regard to how these works are organized and will
likely play a needed part in any future examination of this topic. The nature of collections often
based on user submissions and what data is provided along with these submissions also affects
the ability of curators to organize works as efficiently and consistently as possible.

193

7.4 Future Research
There are several areas that will be fruitful for future research. One of the largest of
these and most complex is the analysis that could take place at the individual image level. There
is often metadata or other descriptive information provided at this level that could be analyzed
to gain a more precise understanding of how images are described, how much context is given
within an image, and what terminology is used. This is more granular than the collection-level
analysis applied herein and can be a rich source of further information, especially focusing on
the super sites from this study. Related to image-level analysis is the use of hashtagging for
post-hoc grouping. What types of hashtags are applied, how consistently are they applied, and
who is providing them – the curators or the users or both? In this way the possibility of
following or archiving the works of individual artists or crews, locations, or styles could be
explored as well.
These areas of further research can also be applied to specific social media platforms. Of
the most commonly associated platforms, Instagram and Flickr are particularly rich sources of
information because they are image-based and both rely on hashtagging for description as well
as text. This is once again a complex area for research as hashtagging on these platforms goes
beyond description to the use of specific tags to garner attention from groups and galleries.
Further understanding of motivations and platform-specific architectures would be warranted,
along with the technical expertise to harvest data automatically with APIs or other available
software in face of the enormous amounts of data that could be gathered and analyzed.

194

7.5 Contribution of this Study to KO Research
This study has contributed important knowledge regarding how the street art and
graffiti art community approaches the organization and presentation of artworks online.
Members of this community share terminology that is specific to graffiti art and street art and
they organize collections using methods that are allied with the way they talk about the works.
The legal complications associated with the creation of some of these artworks, as well as the
desire to protect working artists from prosecution, are shared concerns among curators that
impact how the works are shared. This is an important finding related to this community and
this artistic movement that sets it apart from the traditional art world. Such issues have impact
on the data collected and shared in relation to works and can also impact effect the future
study of the works and the history of the movement.
This research has revealed the existence of a domain of street art and graffiti art
documentation, evidenced by the ontology revealed in the four work-related facets used for
organization. These include the mutual semantic content of the general, supports, types, and
location facets. This ontology can be used to inform the design of KOSs to support
documentation of street art and graffiti art in the future. It can also be compared or combined
with current systems for art documentation, such as Gottlieb’s classification system for graffiti
art styles (2008), the Getty vocabularies and tools, and elements of commonly used metadata
standards such as the Dublin Core, and VRA Core.

195

7.6 Conclusion
The goals of this study were to examine how works of street art and graffiti art are being
documented online to expose the organizational practices and terminology used by gallery
curators. This study was introduced as an important step toward determining the structure of
the domain of online street art collections from a non-institutional point of view. The research
has succeeded in presenting an overview of how such collections are organized. The specific
terminologies used to describe these types of works have been revealed in detail, as well as
some of the reasons given for their use by a set of site curators.
Motivations, size of the collections, and stated collection scope have been shown to
play a part in how sites are organized and the vocabulary chosen to represent art styles. The
research revealed the existence of a set of sites, herein referred to as super sites, that are very
well developed and current examples of granular organization that warrant further study. This
research serves as a successful summary of the current state of graffiti art and street art
collections online and as such is a valuable addition to the literature discussing such art styles,
motivations for documentation, and terminology favored by those within the communities
carrying out the creation of work as well as the process of organizing the collections.