Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis
By Valerie Brett Shaindlin

A Note on Language
This is a collaborative project between an interviewee (Ruth Horie) and an interviewer
(me). It is both of our hope that use of the Hawaiian language here in the Hawaiian Islands
continues to increase. While it is already officially one of the two languages of Hawai‘i, 1 neither
of us believe we have reached (or are even close to) the realization of Hawaiian as a commonlyused language—even second language—here. However, we are both hopeful that there is
momentum in the right direction.2
Unfortunately, only one of us (Horie) comprehends Hawaiian as well as English. Most of
us living in Hawai‘i have at least a small reserve of Hawaiian vocabulary at our dispense.
However, it must be presumed that most readers—including, and importantly, the thesis
committee, but also most people outside Hawai‘i—are at this time unable to comprehend the
Hawaiian language.
Based on her experience cataloging and reading countless academic materials, including
hundreds of theses and dissertations, Horie recommended I use italics for any non-English
words, with a definition in the text, as well as a separate glossary. While I wish to acknowledge
that putting Hawaiian words (other than people- and place-names) in italics could inadvertently
“other” the language, I follow my interviewee’s advice in this thesis for several reasons: 1) I am
only fluent in English; 2) the program this thesis is in partial fulfillment of is wholly in English;
3) Horie is more experienced than me academically, so I trust her opinion in this area; and, 4) her
academic specialization is in language, she comprehends Hawaiian, and has much stronger roots

1

“Section 4. English and Hawaiian shall be the official languages of Hawaii” Retrieved from:
https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/hrscurrent/Vol01_Ch0001-0042F/05-Const/CONST_0015-0004.htm.
2
This year, the University of Hawaiʻi announced that moving forward, it will issue diplomas in both English and
Hawaiian, upon request: https://www.hawaii.edu/news/2018/05/08/hawaiian-and-english-diplomas/.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

7

in these islands than me, so I feel that she is particularly qualified to make a sound and sensitive
determination in regards to this issue.
There is a persistent sexist usage in English of referring to ships, cars, and other
inanimate objects with feminine pronouns (Romaine, 1997), and I have noticed anecdotally that
many writers tend to similarly gender geographic/physical locations and nations, assigning them
as female. No doubt, this gender coding is a violence, one that allows for the projecting of
masculine entitlement onto the people who wish to exploit the land,3 and feminine otherness onto
colonized places,4 which are then seen, once gendered female, as “spaces in need of mastery and
appropriation” (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p. 96).5 In this paper I purposely avoid gendering
objects and/or land, nations, etc.
From here on out, I do not use the term “non-white,” as it implies a lack of something,
and defines what is by what it is not. My aim is to discontinue defining people by their lack of
whiteness, and in doing so, de-normalize the white person as the universal, standard human
being or American citizen. White/non-white is a false and damaging binary that I do not want to
reinforce nor perpetuate. While it is slightly awkward and similarly nonspecific, in this thesis I
here on out use “person/people of color” instead of “non-white” whenever possible.

3

And the Native people of the land.
In tourist and military discourse, respectively, “Hawaiʻi is coded as a soft, feminine, welcoming place, waiting and
receptive” or “as a weak female needing manly protection from a dangerous world” (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p.
98).
5
Native Hawaiians also sometimes referred to Hawaiʻi as a woman, an earth mother/goddess named
Papahānaumoku, but their attitude toward her was completely different and based upon respect; the “strictest rules
and protocols existed to ensure that each aspect of the taking and giving of life was observed” (Kamahele, 2008, p.
80). There is a “fundamental clash between the Kanaka Maoli relationship to a living ʻāina (literally “that which
feeds”) and the Euro-American concept of ‘land’ as flat and lifeless real estate” (Kajihiro, 2008, p. 176).
4

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

8

Abstract
This thesis is an oral history biography of Ruth Horie (1950- ), a Japanese American
librarian in Honolulu, Hawai‘i whose work centered mainly on preserving and providing access
to Native Hawaiian materials. Primarily a cataloger, Horie was one of the rare librarians who
understood Hawaiian, a critically endangered language. She earned her undergraduate degree in
Hawaiian Studies and two master’s degrees, in Library Studies and Linguistics, from the
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. She worked for a decade as a reference librarian at the EastWest Center and Bishop Museum, and then spent twenty-two years as a cataloger at Hamilton
Library at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. The accompanying intersectional feminist
analysis aims to examine the unique positionalities Horie embodied, and extract insights from
her experience. Horie’s life and work turn out to be an excellent example for all librarians who
wish to take a social justice stance in their careers.

Keywords: cataloging, Hawai‘i, intersectional feminism, Japanese American Biography,
library science, oral history, Yonsei

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

9

Part I: Oral History
Family History
Much, if not most, research about Hawai‘i begins the story at the point of Western
contact, as if there was no history in these islands prior to white people laying eyes on it. This is
absolutely not reflective of reality; Hawai‘i has a rich and complex history that precedes Western
contact by at least a thousand years, and starting history at the point of Western contact is
misleading.6 While I will not provide a detailed Hawaiian history prior to Western contact here, I
wish to emphasize that this is only in the interest of time,7 and because the interviewee of this
oral history is part of a family of settlers, not Native Hawaiians, who arrived in Hawai‘i in the
nineteenth century.
Precisely when humans first arrived in the Hawaiian Islands, the most geographicallyisolated archipelago on the planet (Stannard, 2008), physically located roughly 2,400 miles from
its closest neighbors (Rohrer, 2016), is not a consensus. Over the course of possibly seventeen
centuries, waves of Polynesians discovered, settled and developed societies in the Hawaiian
Islands (Young, 1998).8 One estimate is that Polynesians first arrived around 700 (Daws, 1968);
another is that initial Polynesian discovery of the Hawaiian Islands occurred between
approximately 1000-1200 (Kirch, 2011), and other scholars (Wilmshurst et. al., 2011), who
performed a meta-analysis of radiocarbon dates from the region suggested it was likely closer to
the year 1200. According to some Kanaka Maoli (Native Hawaiian) records, it was sometime

6

Unfortunately, “some of the most pernicious misrepresentations of the colonization of the islands” are “that
Hawaiʻi’s history began with Cook’s landing, that colonization was easy and nonviolent, and, perhaps most
importantly, that Kanaka Maoli did not resist.” Challenging these misrepresentations “challenges the notions of the
haole as discoverer, savior, and civilizing force in the islands” (Rohrer, 2010, p. 8).
7
Since scholarly texts must, as Batuman (2007) notes, “flatten the events of centuries into a matter of some hours’
reading” (p. 1).
8
Some estimates include the fact that the group that is now considered Kanaka Maoli was not the first of the
Polynesian groups to arrive.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

10

around two-thousand years ago (Trask, 2008; Hoʻomanawanui, 2008). Whichever date is closest
to the truth, Kanaka Maoli have nevertheless been the Indigenous population of the Hawaiian
islands for at least eight hundred years, and possibly up to two thousand years.9 Native
Hawaiians “are the indigenous people of Na Kai ‘ Ewalu (the Hawaiian Islands), not simply an
earlier arrived immigrant group in Hawai‘i’s contemporary multiracial milieu” (Young, 1998, p.
4). The Hawaiian Kingdom was established by 1810, and since 1843 was recognized as an
independent state by the major powers of the world (Kauanui, 2018). These facts, combined with
the United States-backed overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy in 1893 (Saranillio, 2010), shed
light on who ultimately has the right to stake claim to these islands.
White Englishman James Cook arrived in Hawai‘i much later than the Native Hawaiians,
somewhere between five hundred and one thousand years later, in 1778 (Daws, 1968), laying the
groundwork for future colonization. American missionaries followed, in 1820, to impose their
lifestyles and worldview; over the next hundred years, through intentional linguistic and cultural
repression,10 they nearly succeeded in completely wiping out the Hawaiian language
(Warschauer, Donaghy & Kuamoÿo, 1997).11 Missionary wives, recruited specifically to serve
that role, were tasked of course with the usual gendered-labors of the household, and a “final
manic move in the effort to map domesticity on the social space of the Hawaiians was the
attempt to introduce the concept of marriage and female submissiveness among those native to
Hawaiʻi” (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p. 101). Also, importantly, the missionary wives
fastidiously kept watch over their own children, ensuring that they would not acquire native

9

One scholar estimates Polynesian arrival in Hawai‘i as far back as an entire millennium (Stannard, 2008); for
comparison, everyone else has only co-inhabited these island for less than two hundred years (Daws, 1968).
10
Including a ban on the traditional practice of hula.
11
Non-natives also succeeded in wiping out a sizable percentage of the native population (Turnbull & Ferguson,
1997).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

11

language (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997). Bringing their language, lifestyle, and religion with
them,12 with the explicit intention of imposing them, these missionaries established a firm
foothold for continued colonization, exploitation, and displacement of Hawaiian land and people,
that persists today. “The history of the present in Hawaiʻi emerged from its encounters with
Western explorers; missionaries, entrepreneurs, and sugar planters” (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997,
p. 99).13
Circa 1826, American naval ships joined French and British warships docked in Hawaiʻi
(Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997). In the first half of the nineteenth century, these white foreigners
struck clandestine deals with chiefs and Kings to gain rights to land for development (Daws,
1968). By the 1840s, agricultural exploitation of the islands began to look especially lucrative to
these men14 as whaling, which had helped develop Honolulu into a trading port, failed; by midcentury, the Hawaiian government had passed laws allowing foreigners to purchase land in fee
simple (Daws, 1968), meaning “belonging to the owner and his heirs forever, without limitation”
(Oxford University Press, 2018). Shortly thereafter, urged by the white American colonizers,
King Kamehameha III proposed the Great Māhele (1845-1850), a land redistribution act
(Heckathorn, Morgan, & Motteler, 2018) in which lands were re-plotted according to ideal
utilization, with “ideal” meaning, as so deemed by the colonizers (Rohrer, 2010). The Great
Māhele resulted in an almost total displacement of the Hawaiian population (Okihiro, 1991),
with white men ending up with four acres of land for every Native-owned acre (Daws, 1968).15
Ostensibly, this “freed” Native Hawaiians from serfdom, but really, it undermined their

12

And their diseases, but that was unintentional.
Importantly, these outside groups ultimately transformed Hawaiʻi to a capitalistic society, one at odds with the
traditional Indigenous worldview and lifestyle, and that positioned Kanaka Maoli to fail from the outset (Okihiro,
1991).
14
Sugarcane grew wild in the islands, and this is where they set their sights (Daws, 1968).
15
Including all acres owned by Kanaka Maoli chiefs.
13

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

12

relationship with the ʻāina (land) and subsequently, the fundamental basis of their society
(Okihiro, 1991).
The white American colonizers “had forced the government to westernize itself at great
cost and in great haste, and then they chose to act as if the government did not exist” (Daws,
1968, p. 110). These white men were, not surprisingly, “Manifest Destiny men,”16 whose interest
around this time was that the United States annex Hawaiʻi so that their businesses would benefit
by being placed within the U.S. tariff structure (Daws, 1968, p. 147). Many of these white men
were not benignly self-interested but were actively racist toward both Native Hawaiians and
Asian immigrants (Daws, 1968). They craved economic prosperity for themselves above all else,
and the nineteenth century in Hawaiʻi was plagued by white men gathering in exclusive groups
to plot their ascension to power (and subsequent wealth). While some favored what they called
“revolution” and others craved U.S. annexation, none wanted statehood for Hawaiʻi because that
would turn Native Hawaiians into American citizens, and white men were “against equal rights
for kanakas in a white man’s country” (Daws, 1968, p. 148).
Honolulu was a bustling international trade port by mid-century, and that resulted in
additional public issues, such as when a United States merchant ship delivered a passenger
infected with smallpox in 1853. By January 1854, 2,485 people—mostly Native Hawaiians—had
perished from the disease, and that number was likely inaccurate with the true death toll perhaps
as high as 6,000 (Daws, 1968). By the 1860s, due to the single-minded businessmen taking over
the islands, the missionaries “were in full retreat” (Daws, 1968, p. 163). From the mid-nineteenth
century and through World War II, Hawaiʻi’s elite—mainly haole (foreigner/white person)

16

“The colonizers of Hawaiʻi brought with them both a profound sense of entitlement and a fear of engulfment”
(Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p. 99) and “apologists for expansionism during the late nineteenth century justified
U.S. imperialism as manifestly destined by divine sanction, geography, and racial superiority” (Okihiro, 1991, p.
17).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

13

businessmen, some of whom married into Native Hawaiian royal families—derived their power
by controlling land, capital, and the government (Okihiro, 1991). A distinguishing feature of the
territory was the concentration of political and economic power in the hands of a few: Hawaiʻi’s
“financial oligarchy” was comprised of “The Big Five”17 companies who together owned almost
half the total land area of Hawaiʻi, produced 90% of the total value of all products, and
controlled ancillary businesses such as banking, transportation, utilities, insurance, and retail
(Okihiro, 1991). Not surprisingly, their pervasive influence in the islands reverberates to this
day. These elite haole businessmen exploited the unstable socioeconomic and political
conditions that Asian nationals were experiencing (because of American, British, Spanish, and
Japanese imperialism), to establish an American settler colony with the plantation as its
economic base (Fujikane, 2008). Between 1860 and 1866 the Hawaiian sugar business boomed,
exporting fewer than a million and a half pounds in 1860 and almost eighteen million pounds by
1866 (Daws, 1968). Between 1850 and 1870 plantation owners demanded more labor than those
already in the islands could provide. “After early unsuccessful attempts at using Hawaiians as
labor (thwarted by depopulation, out-migration, and resistance), plantation owners brought in
successive waves of mostly Asians… to work on the sugar and pineapple plantations” and this
shifted the demographics of the islands’ population, creating the political backdrop of every facet
of Hawai‘i from then on (Rohrer, 2016, p. 61). Plantation directives were strict and harsh, and
laborers were essentially “ruled by the master-and-servant relationship” (Okihiro, 1991, p. 22).
The plantation owners wanted “cheap and docile workers;” the first sizable group of
recruited workers were Chinese, known for their skill in sugar production (Okihiro, 1991, p. 29).
Perhaps emboldened by their economic success, white businessmen instigated the 1875

17

The “Big Five” companies were C. Brewer & Co., Castle & Cooke, Alexander & Baldwin, Theo H. Davies &
Co., and H. Hackfeld & Co. (later Amfac, Inc.).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

14

Reciprocity Treaty between the Hawaiian Kingdom and the United States, which further
strengthened their political power (Okihiro, 1991) by assuring duty free entry into the U.S. for
Hawaiian sugar; this treaty also, importantly, gave the U.S. exclusive rights to Pearl Harbor
(Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997). The following 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy was a
strategic political move, precipitated by the perceived threat of then-reigning Queen
Liliʻuokalani, who had promised her people she would restore the powers of the monarchy and
instate a new constitution (Okihiro, 1991).
Horie’s maternal family emigrated from Japan to occupied Hawai‘i—what was at the
time a United States territory—around 1898, as part of a second influx of Asian plantation
workers, this time Japanese.18 Horie is not sure if these family members emigrated together, or
met when they were already in Hawai‘i. The one thing that is certain is that Horie’s maternal
great-grandparents emigrated to Hawai‘i from Japan. She believes that these family members
came to Hawai‘i specifically to work on the plantations.
My ancestors on my mother’s side initially worked on plantations on Maui and
Hawai‘i Island. I’m not sure if they landed in Honolulu and then travelled to those
islands, or if they landed on those islands directly from Japan.
Almost all Issei19 arrived between 1885-1924, a period during which roughly 180,000
Japanese arrived in Hawaiʻi (Tamura, 1994; Scheiber, 2013), becoming by 1900 the largest
ethnic group in the islands (Tamura, 1994; Fujikane, 2008). These were mostly, at a rate of about
80%, men (Tamura, 1994). Similarly, but under different circumstances, Japanese immigrants
were among the “pioneer” immigrants to the continental United States from Asia (Darlington &

18

The United States’ Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 (Asato, 2006) resulted in other Asian immigrant groups
recruited by plantation owners around this time.
19
Issei are first generation Japanese immigrants to the United States.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

15

Mulvaney, 2014, p. 45). Like many American citizens, Horie comes from a family of
immigrants. However, unlike most Americans, the first immigrants, or Issei, in Horie’s family
emigrated to the Hawaiian Kingdom, not to the United States of America,20 so they never
became American citizens; yet, they remained in Hawai‘i, which eventually became part of the
United States.
The American-born children of Asian immigrants largely populated the public schools in
Hawai‘i, and Japanese students often additionally attended Japanese language schools
(Tachihata, 1981). Many (mostly white, American) public-school teachers complained of Nisei
children who spoke Hawai‘i Creole English (HCE), commonly called “Pidgin.” This was not a
so-called problem only for Japanese children. In fact, “only 2 or 3 percent of all students entering
public school spoke Standard English” as late as 1920, and public-school teachers largely blamed
this phenomenon on Japanese language schools (Asato, 2006, p. 23).
In 1898, United States’ President McKinley signed a resolution to annex Hawai‘i and in
1900 Hawai‘i became a territory of the United States through the Organic Act (HawaiiNation.org, 2018). The United States annexation allowed Japanese in Hawai‘i to move to the
continental United States, and about 20% of the Issei did, between 1898-1907 (Tamura, 1994),
some because of higher wages offered in California (Asato, 2006). Nisei, the first generation of
Japanese immigrants born in the U.S., possessed dual nationality (Asato, 2006; Tachihata,
1981),21 as anyone born in the U.S. is automatically a citizen, and any Japanese person born
outside Japan was at the time automatically also a subject of the Japanese emperor (Daws, 1968).
American citizenship, however, was not available to Issei or some other Asian immigrants22 until

20

Renowned Native Hawaiian activist and scholar Huanani-Kay Trask (2008) argues that Asian immigrants to
Hawaiʻi are in fact settlers, not immigrants.
21
As such, if they visited Japan, they might be required to serve in the military (Asato, 2006).
22
Discluding Chinese and Filipinos.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

16

over half a century later, when, in 1952 (U.S. Department of State, 2018), the McCarren-Walter
Act was passed (Tachihata, 1981).
Horie’s paternal grandparents were both born in Toyama-ken, a prefecture on Japan’s
main island, but their birth years are unknown. Her paternal grandmother was named Hatsue
Yago and her paternal grandfather’s first name is unknown, but his surname was Kamada.
Horie’s maternal grandmother, Ruth Ume Nakamura—after whom she is named—was born in
1904, on Hawai‘i Island.23 Her maternal grandfather, Samuel Torashige Tachibana, was born on
the same island, in the same year (or possibly the year before). Horie is not sure whether or not
this side of her family immigrated to Hawai‘i to specifically work on plantations.
My father’s parents came from Japan. I don’t recall anyone on his side saying that
they actually worked in a plantation first. I mean they might have, but since they
lived in Honolulu and never went any place else for a lengthy period of time before
my father was born and my uncle was born, they might not have first gone to
plantation, but I really don’t know. I’m a bit sketchy on that part.
Between 1900 and 1910, more wives arrived from Japan, so fewer Japanese people
traveled back to the homeland; as ties to Japan loosened, the Japanese community in Hawai‘i
was strengthened and they began to earnestly establish themselves in the islands (Tamura, 1994).
In the 1909 “Great Strike,” 7,000 Japanese plantation laborers from all the major plantations on
Oʻahu (Okihiro, 1991, p. 45) demanded higher wages; no more ethnic pay scales; better housing
and sanitation; and a reduced work day, to ten hours (Tamura, 1994). The strike was
unsuccessful, but it “showed that the Japanese were discarding more and more of their old-world
ways and embracing American attitudes and methods” (Tamura, 1994, p. 215).

23

Horie is unsure of the exact location, but likely it was in the Kona area.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

17

Exaggerated patriotism during the following decade, due in large part to World War I,
made Americans wary of people speaking any language other than English (Tamura, 1994;
Asato, 2006) and so, like the effort to eradicate the Hawaiian language almost exactly a century
before, there was a concerted effort to abolish Japanese language schools in Hawai‘i. Japanese
language schools had started on plantations, for workers’ children (Asato, 2006).
Japanese language schools were originally established to provide immigrants’
children with Japanese education based on the assumption that they would
eventually return to Japan. The language schools, however, blossomed with many
Issei determined to settle in the United States. (Asato, 2006, p. 106)
At the beginning of the twentieth century, “nativists demanded that the question of
Japanese language schools was a challenge to Japanese assimilability into white society” (Asato,
2006, p. X). The attack on the schools was part of a much broader Americanization agenda to
stamp out diversity, both culturally and ideologically (Tamura, 1994). Several claims against the
Japanese included that they were a sizable threat due to their economic power, supposed inability
to assimilate to American life, and their growing population; these complaints (similar to the
“yellow peril” myth) all stemmed from fear of economic competition and political control
(Asato, 2006);24 many Japanese workers had left the plantations to enter skilled trades, where
they were newly in direct competition with haole (Scheiber, 2013). Such fear-based exclusionist
attacks occurred simultaneously in Hawai‘i and most Western states where Issei settled. In
Hawai‘i, “the Japanese language school debate was a manifestation of power conflicts among
several different groups” with the battle ultimately “a grueling struggle” between whites and

24

These fears echo some expressed today in the U.S. about Mexican immigrants.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

18

Nikkei over land ownership and subsequent control over the future [voting] majority in Hawai‘i
(Asato, 2006, p. 42).
Around this time, in 1919, Horie’s father, Masanori Horie, was born in Honolulu.
When my father was an only child his parents lived in Honolulu on Waipā Lane,
just off Vineyard Boulevard, north of Liliha Street. After his father returned to
Japan,25 his mother married another Japanese immigrant, Mr. Yasusaburo Horie. I
believe my father’s half-brother was born while the family was still living in
Honolulu and his stepfather was working as a night watchman at a car lot near the
corner of Kapiʻolani and Kalākaua. Later, the four of them moved to what is now
Āhuimanu on the Windward side.
While [white] Americans unfairly and xenophobically attempted to stamp out diversity
and cultural practices in Hawai‘i, those cultures were not always necessarily progressive
themselves. Tamura (1994) describes the social structure and conditions that Japanese
immigrants brought with them to Hawai‘i: “While the Japanese valued schooling, they stressed it
for boys rather than for girls… the Japan the Issei knew was a patriarchal society, and the Issei
brought that tradition with them to Hawaii” (p. 119). Like in the Western world, Japanese
families were patriarchal, and specifically, women and girls were expected to do unpaid labor at
home (Tamura, 1994).
In some ways, the cultural norms and social structure that Japanese immigrants brought
with them to Hawai‘i helped them survive, and eventually thrive, here; extremely statusconscious, traditional Japanese culture “enabled them to adapt rather easily to the class-driven
society they encountered in Hawaii” (Tamura, 1994, p. 195). The Japanese sense of self-worth

25

Horie says the reason he returned to Japan from Hawaiʻi was that after he attempted to murder his wife, his
friends and neighbors got together to raise enough money to send him back to Japan.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

19

was apparently so high that it was unscathed by the rampant discrimination and intolerance it
encountered in the U.S. (Tamura, 1994). Of course, this sense of superiority had a sinister side
(beyond sexism):
The Japanese in Hawaii came from a heritage that exalted them as a people superior
to all others. Even when Japan encountered the technologically more advanced
West, the Japanese still believed themselves better because of their spiritual
culture… Part of this self-perception derived from ideas of skin color, ideas the
Japanese had formed long before contact with Westerners. Japanese saw
themselves as white-skinned, which they considered beautiful; they viewed black
skin as ugly… In this regard ideas from the Nisei’s cultural heritage merged with
views rooting in the Islands’ class-based society. (Tamura, 1994, p. 188)
In other words, Hawai‘i, by then annexed by the United States, was a white supremacist
society, and the parallel Japanese culture of racial superiority is what enabled them to easily
assimilate. There is an inherent and complex contradiction in their racism, however; the Japanese
in Hawai‘i both believed that they were superior to other races, and they considered themselves
white.26 However, white European Americans definitely did not see the Japanese as belonging to
that elite group.27
While Americanizers insisted on loyalty from the Japanese, they refused to treat
them in ways that encouraged that loyalty. While Americanizers demanded that

26

There are possibly lasting repercussions of this complex racial situation in Hawai‘i today, that will be further
examined in the analysis.
27
An interesting parallel: Kauanui (2018) disappointedly notes that it is common within the contemporary Hawaiian
Sovereignty movement for Kanaka Maoli to derive their right to self-determination by positioning themselves as
superior to—more advanced and civilized than—Native Americans. Of course, in the eyes of the United States
government, Native Hawaiians are Native Americans. These political sentiments of the Kanaka Maoli “naturalize
Native Americans’ limited political status based on chauvinistic (mis)understandings of what constitutes a “tribe” as
somehow inherently domestic and dependent” (Kauanui, 2018, p. 4).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

20

Nisei renounce their Japanese citizenship, they gave tacit approval to the denial of
naturalization rights for Issei. And while Americanizers spoke of democracy, they
attempted to destroy the Japanese language press and denied Japanese the kind of
justice accorded Caucasians. (Tamura, 1994, p. 88)
The complex racial milieu in Hawai‘i meant that Japanese settlers had prejudices of their
own, but still faced rampant discrimination and antagonism.
My grandfather on my mother’s side, he and his brother, his younger brother, were
orphaned after the 1918 (or so) Spanish Flu, or Influenza. And since they were left
without parents, they were taken in by a Hawaiian family, on the island of Hawai‘i.
And, so that’s how my grandfather learned Hawaiian, and learned to love Hawaiian
food, and Hawaiian music, and learned to play the ukulele.
The influenza pandemic of 1918-1920 was experienced worldwide, and “killed more than
21 million persons, including at least 675,000 Americans and more than 2,300 people just in
Hawai‘i” (Schmitt & Nordyke, 1999, p. 101). It was the fourth most-fatal epidemic in Hawai‘i’s
history;28 plantation dwellings were notoriously cramped, and overcrowding exacerbated the
spread of the disease. Horie does not know how her grandfather and great-uncle ended up hānai
(adopted)29 by a Hawaiian family; plantations were methodically separated along racial lines, to
keep workers from banding together against the cruel working conditions, plantation owners, and
luna (usually-Portuguese30 plantation overseers). Horie said that no one has ever asked her about

28

The epidemic was brought to Hawaiʻi by the islands’ occupiers; the first cases here broke out in the navy and
military bases (Schmitt & Nordyke, 1999).
29
She also said: “hānai would only apply to my maternal grandfather and his younger brother,” and not to their
subsequent progeny.
30
Despite being European, Portuguese people were not considered racially white in Hawaiʻi, but close enough to
oversee the decidedly-non-whites.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

21

how her grandfather and great-uncle ended up hānai by a Hawaiian family, and that no one has
told her the reason for it.
I don’t know. The head of the Hawaiian family who took in my maternal
grandfather and his younger brother was Mr. Kilinahe, a policeman. I believe this
was in a coffee growing area in the Nāpoʻopoʻo, Kona district of the island of
Hawaiʻi… It’s possible that other Japanese adults had also died from the flu and so
their families weren’t able to take in two orphan boys.
The Horie family lived in what is now Āhuimanu, where [Ruth] Horie says they were
surrounded by and learned a lot about the Hawaiian lifestyle and language. Her father “went to
school in a region called Waiāhole,” a farming valley on the windward side of Oʻahu. As a child,
her father walked every day from Āhuimanu to Waiāhole,31 where
he completed the sixth grade, which was the highest grade offered at Waiāhole
School. His mother raised vegetables at home. I’m not sure what his father did. My
father made spending money by catching frogs alive and selling them in Chinatown
where his mother sold her vegetables.
The Horie family growing produce at home was not unusual; like the Chinese before
them, many Japanese plantation workers had eventually sought better opportunities for
employment, such as family farming (Okihiro, 1991).
Horie’s mother, Irene Tachibana, was born in 1925, in Honolulu, to Ruth and Samuel, a
sharpshooter with the Hawai‘i National Guard. When Irene was 16, in 1941, Japan bombed Pearl
Harbor.

31

This is a distance of roughly three miles.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

22

After the Pearl Harbor bombing, the grounds of the University [of Hawai‘i] were
torn up for trenches and a site near the present-day Hamilton Library was readied
as a mass burial ground for casualties anticipated in a Japanese invasion… as the
war wore on, the staff and student body were greatly affected. The military presence
dominated the campus, and the library’s Oriental and Pacific Islands collections
became a resource for army and navy intelligence officials. Librarians were called
upon, especially in the early years of the war, to help with fingerprinting,
enumerating, and other defense work. (Morris, 2006)
Masanori and Irene had both been born in the territory of Hawaiʻi, so they were citizens,
but Masanori’s parents were not (Irene’s parents were both American citizens, having been born
in 1904 in the territory). Even though there was rampant discrimination against people of color,32
many Japanese citizens and Japanese Americans in Hawaiʻi rushed to defend the islands and
their occupying power. Horie’s father, Masanori, who was 22 at the time, was drafted to the
United States Army33 in 1944, to serve in World War II. Japanese Americans were banned from
joining the military until 1943 (Altschuler & Blumin, 2009); Horie’s father “was inducted on
April 27, 1944 and honorably discharged on April 18, 1945. He served in the 1399th Engineers
Construction Battalion, stationed at Schofield Barracks, Wahiawā.” This primarily Japanese
American battalion remained in Hawaiʻi and was never in combat, but three members died in
service-related incidents; the battalion “completed 54 defense related construction projects on
Oʻahu and was awarded the Meritorious Service Award in October 1945” (Grubb, 2014).

32

“Paradoxically, the Japanese did not lack a capacity for loyalty; in fact they were overendowed [sic] with
patriotism” (Daws, 1968, p. 307).
33
He was never stationed outside of Hawaiʻi.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

23

Horie’s mother dropped out of high school to aid in the war effort, also on behalf of the
United States. Despite her parents’ involvement in the American war effort, during this time,
Horie’s extended Japanese family lived in fear of unwarranted incarceration (and what exactly
happened in the “internment camps”34 was unclear, so at worst, they imagined death).
During the war she [Irene] worked as a secretary. They got some dispensation to
leave school, the ones who were old enough, in high school, to get a job and help
the war effort. Well that was another reason, when talking about, you know, are we
gonna survive this, is… my grandparents on my mother’s side, my grandmother
told me this story, about something that happened during the second World War.
Obviously before I was born, but— my grandfather was a member of the Hawai‘i
National Guard. He was a sharp shooter. He had a gun, and when the second World
War broke out, and they started rounding up Japanese, and Japanese Americans,
my grandmother was really afraid. She told me that, number one, that all the
Japanese regardless of—see, both my grandparents on my mother’s side were
American citizens. They were born in Hawai‘i during the territory. She was afraid
they’d all be killed, all Japanese, regardless of American citizenship or whatever.
That was her number one fear.
Luckily, despite their fears, no one in Horie’s family was arrested or killed. She attributes
this to the fact that had Japanese in Hawaiʻi been incarcerated in camps, the economy would
have collapsed (“local authorities realized that if everybody was rounded up, the economy would

34

“Another serious problem inheres in the scheme’s treatment of the Japanese-American experience during World
War II. The only pertinent subhead is — DEPORTATION, which less-than-adequately describes the forced
installment of over 110,000 Japanese-Americans in concentration camps… entirely on the basis of their ‘ancestral
origins.’ To do justice, subject-wise, to this wholly shameful episode requires, minimally, a new sub-head like —
MASS INTERNMENT, 1942-1945, with ‘xx’s’ for ‘Civil rights’ and ‘Racism—U.S.’” (Berman, 1971/1993, p. 31).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

24

collapse, and Hawai‘i would not be able to support the war effort”) so it was more relaxed than
in the rest of the U.S. She is correct that the reaction toward anyone of Japanese ancestry was
more relaxed in Hawaiʻi than the rest of the United States (Scheiber, 2013), but it was not
entirely positive. Partially in response to the attack on Pearl Harbor,
Anti-Japanese sentiment had resulted in the closing of Japanese language schools
and Buddhist and Shinto temples, as well as the evacuation of certain Japanese
community leaders to relocation camps35 on the U.S. mainland… a mass evacuation
of all Japanese living in the islands was not feasible. Hawai’i’s 160,000 Japanese
comprised one third of her [sic] population and it would have been impossible to
send these people, many of them American citizens, to the U.S. mainland or to
segregate them on one of the islands. Such a move would have severely dislocated
the local economy, since both private industry and the military employed skilled
Japanese workers. (Tachihata, 1981, p. 199-200)
As soon as Pearl Harbor was bombed, the territory’s governor imposed martial law,36
which lasted until October 24, 1944 (Scheiber, 2013). Although they were treated moderately
better than those in the continental U.S., Japanese Americans—and, to a lesser extent, Italian
Americans and German Americans—were still “subject to investigation, interrogation,
incarceration, and evacuation” (p. 416).
...we had Pearl Harbor, we had a staging area for soldiers to be trained before they
went to the Pacific Islands, and you know… so, only a few people, in terms of the

35

Tachihata does not clarify the meaning of this euphemism.
“From the start, martial law in Hawai‘i was regarded as a measure for internal security and the solution to what
was called, in the military and political discussions of the time, “the Japanese problem”—the presence of large
numbers of Japanese who might side with the enemy in case of war” (Scheiber, 2013, p. 417).
36

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

25

general Japanese or also German and European population were actually rounded
up and interned. I heard one story from a professor at Leeward Community College
who’s been studying internment in Hawai‘i is, in the beginning, the authorities
actually rounded up all Europeans, German or whatever, including Swiss, French,
Italians, and so that crippled the hotel culinary industry cuz these people were chefs,
they were professionals, that’s why they were working here, in a hotel. [laughs]
And that didn’t last too long, apparently… probably they couldn’t tell who was
German, who was Italian, so just round them all up. And in fact, one of my
grandfather’s, on my mother’s side, one of his friends… an Italian American, he
was decorated, a decorated veteran of World War I, and he was rounded up!
Once the war ended, things started to go back to normal for the Tachibana and Horie
families. Between 1946 and 1959, Oʻahu’s population increased by over one-hundred thousand;
at this time, Japanese and Caucasians were dominant groups, followed (in descending order) by
Hawaiians, Filipinos, Chinese, and Koreans (Tachihata, 1981).
Horie’s parents met through mutual friends. “By the time I was born in 1950 my father’s
family (his mother and stepfather) had moved to a new house on Kamehameha Highway just
north of the Kahaluʻu Stream. That’s where my father started his “Kahaluʻu Garage” Chevron37
gas station, towing and auto repair business. My mother moved in after she and my father got
married in 1949.” Masanori was 30 and Irene was 24 at the time of their wedding. By the end of
the following year, they were new parents.

37

“The Chevron station was my father’s business. He was the boss. I guess you could call it a franchise type of
ownership.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

26

Youth (1950-1968)
Childhood
Ruth Horie was born on Friday, December 1, 1950, in the territory of Hawaiʻi. Irene and
Masanori welcomed their first child at
Kapiʻolani Hospital, the one where Barack Obama would later be born. On my
mother’s side of the family, I’m fourth generation; on my father’s side I’m the third
generation. But when people have a family background like that, the generation is
counted as the higher one.
Fourth generation Japanese Americans are also called Yonsei (Tamura, 1994). “Those
with plantation labor family histories often identify generally as local… Racial identity is one of
the mainstays of local culture flowing through family narratives, food ways, traditions, jokes,
literature, and cultural expectations” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 82). While Horie is racially and ethnically
100% Japanese, she is what is considered “local” in Hawaiʻi.
Local identity and culture emerged primarily from the experience of those who
labored on sugar and pineapple plantations and as such is an amalgamation of Asian
and Pacific immigrant cultures and native Hawaiian culture. Being a “local” in
Hawai‘i is therefore different from being a “local” in common discourse on the
continent, since it is tied to this history and culture and not simply to residence.
(Rohrer, 2016, p. 10)
“Local” is a classification that means not-Indigenous, but also claims—rightfully or
not—some sense of Indigeneity in that it indicates belonging to the land of Hawaiʻi. Localness is
performed38 in various ways, either consciously or not, and is enacted as if it is its own ethnic

38

“all identities are performatively produced in and through narrative enactments that include the precarious
achievement of belonging” (Prins, 2006, p. 277).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

27

classification (although it can be comprised of many ethnicities and mixed-race people). One of
the primary ways this localness is performed is through language. The language Horie speaks
when excited or stressed, what she says she considers to be her “native” language, is Hawaiian
Creole English (HCE). This is consistent with research on earlier generations of Japanese people
in Hawaiʻi, who wished for the “rights and privileges due them as Americans without having to
reject their identity as children of Japanese plantation workers. This attitude of the Nisei was
reflected in their use of Hawai‘i Creole English, which Americanizers attempted to eradicate”
(Tamura, 1994, p. 198). Also known as Pidgin,39 HCE persisted among Nisei as their “mother
tongue despite the fact that lack of fluency in standard English could have negative educational
and economic repercussions” (Tamura, 1994, p. 202). Notably, Horie speaks both standard
English and HCE.40 Food is another important identity marker of any ethnic group, and locals are
no different. Horie likes Hawaiian and local food; her favorite food now is Texas steak and
Pacific Spiny Lobster, but she also enjoys Hawaiian food and local specialties such as plate
lunch.
I was born in 1950. Right before the Korean War started. And, I asked my mother
once, did she have some fears or apprehensions about future life in Hawai’i, you
know, given this war, because both my parents were old enough to experience the
Second World War. You know, she was in high school, and he actually enlisted in
the Army. But she says she doesn’t recall. So, the Korean War, I don’t think really
played an important part in our family stories. My father would tell World War II
stories now and then, because he didn’t go to Europe, he was stationed here, along

39

“Hawaii residents have commonly used the term “Pidgin” to refer to the entire spectrum of languages spoken by
plantation workers and their descendants” (Tamura, 1994, p. 199).
40
Among many other languages; more on that later.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

28

with some of his friends… the thing that I really remember about the early
childhood in the fifties, in terms of geopolitical things, was the Cold War, and the
threat of nuclear attack. And we had these drills in school about getting down on
the floor underneath our desks, and, [laughs] we had [sigh] we got explanations
about, you know, radiation, and the bomb, and stuff, and this was also at the same
time that the U.S. was doing bomb testing in Micronesia—in fact, my uncle, my
father’s younger brother, was in the Army at this time. He was stationed in
Enewetak. So, he was directly involved in some of this nuclear testing. We even
had a book in our household that had… it was basically a cookbook, I think, but in
the back, it had a whole section devoted to nuclear survival…What to do, stockpile,
in terms of non-perishable food that could be eaten as, you know, in an emergency,
food, to sustain your calories, but it’s not really too appetizing or tasty, but you
know, to stay alive. And how to detect if there’s fallout. Ok, you know, thinking
back on this, this is ridiculous. It says look on your window sills, [laughs] keep your
windows closed but if you see these little particles, little dusty particles,
accumulating on your window sill, or you know, other flat surfaces around your
house, it could be fallout, and, honestly when we had that false-alarm drill last
month, on January 13,41 I went into PTSD.42 Cuz I, you know… from that time, all
that Cold War and bomb threat and hiding under the desk in a classroom, 43 that

41

On January 13, 2018, Hawaiʻi residents received a text message that was “an erroneous alert that falsely warned
of an imminent ballistic missile strike,” distributed via the state’s emergency warning computer program
(Deitchman, Dallas, & Burkle, 2018). Many people panicked; local news websites crashed, the emergency alert
system was unable to send out a corrective alert for almost an hour, and Governor Ige could not figure out how to
log onto his Twitter account to provide an update for over a quarter of an hour.
42
PTSD is the acronym for post-traumatic stress disorder.
43
Later, she said: “the under-the-desk-drills, that was in the sixth grade, when I was 10 or 11, in 1961 or 1962.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

29

probably colored my whole outlook of what I wanted to do in the future. People
would ask often, ‘Well what do you want to do when you grow up?’ I didn’t think
I was gonna grow up! I thought I was gonna die; because it seemed like it was
gonna happen! I thought you know, obviously, you know, books have been printed,
and they’re talking about bomb shelters, and I was really angry at my father for a
long time because he refused to dig a hole and build a bomb shelter. [laughs] Well,
what’re we gonna do? You know, we’re helpless!
Horie was born at the peak of the Cold War, which continued throughout her childhood
and young adulthood (Britannica Academic, 2018). (Horie was 41 years old when the Soviet
Union collapsed and the Cold War (1949-1991) finally ended (Fink, 2014).) When talking about
her birthday, Horie notes that it was also right before the Korean War (1950-1953) started
(Millett, 2018). She says that she has asked her mother if they were hesitant to have children
when the country was on the brink of war, but her mother apparently does not remember any
connection between those two considerations. Horie remembers her maternal grandmother—who
had also apparently assumed that she and her Japanese family would be rounded up and killed
during WWII—was scared, and Horie possibly absorbed this sense of unease. She remembers
that it even shaped her world-view; between drills at school, cookbooks instructing how to
survive the nuclear apocalypse, and a decades-long war, she took for granted that she would die
before adulthood. She says it was not until college that it even occurred to her that she might be
able to have a future.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

30

Horie describes herself as a sickly child; she had bronchitis and limited lung capacity that
persists to this day, and which she does not believe she can fix. She attributes these respiratory
ailments to being around too many people smoking cigarettes.44 She
was kind of sickly because of secondhand smoke. I had a lot of lung problems,
bronchitis and… in fact my, our family doctor was a bit worried about my coughing
and she actually convinced my father to take me to the Lanakila TB45 branch, which
was there from way back, to have my chest x-rayed to see if I had TB or some kind
of lung problem. And turns out I didn’t, but you know, I was allergic to the smoke.
That’s why I was coughing all the time. [laughs] Smoke from both sides of the
family.
This unfortunately also affected her pursuits, such as when she quit hula because of
second-hand smoke.
I didn’t like it that she46 would smoke during the lessons… I mean she was in her
own backyard. Right. I mean, and people smoked, right. We didn’t have that
antismoking aspect of our society at that time yet, but I didn’t like it, so I think I
told my grandmother about it and my grandmother told my mother about it and my
mother asked me if I really wanted to keep going or not and I said I didn’t, so I
stopped and I think there was another one of those instances where I turned away
from a good educational opportunity, but later on I made up for it by actually
studying hula at the university formally, and that was quite rewarding, I think.

44

In 2006, State Bill §328J‑3 passed prohibiting smoking in enclosed or partially-enclosed public spaces
(Hawaii.gov, 2006).
45
Tuberculosis.
46
The kumu hula (hula teacher).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

31

Horie tells another incredible story related to smoking, one that she thinks might have
shaped her outlook and attitude toward life. Her father was driving her to see the doctor about
her lung problems. The car windows were rolled up and he was smoking a cigarette; Horie asked
her father if he would not smoke, just this once, and he replied: “You can’t change the world.”
She says that at that moment, something in her mind clicked; she thought, “Well, maybe I can.”47
Despite this discouraging interaction, Horie also remembers her father as generally very
supportive of her.
…my father and my grandfather were entrepreneurs, sole proprietors of their own
businesses. I think those are very good role models. If you want to do something
you can. And even when my parents suggested that if I wanted to go to college in
France at the Sorbonne it, looking back on it, I thought that’s pretty phenomenal,
that they would support me to such an extent that if they were able to support me
in whatever I thought I wanted to do, that was quite fortunate… I never heard from
either of my parents that they wanted me to be any type of profession, go into any
type of profession in particular. I knew my father kind of wanted me to be a doctor,
but he never actually came out and said that… they sort of left it up to me.
Masanori Horie was head of the household. He shared stories from WWII, stories that
Horie says now were part of her family’s stories. Horie says she learned from her maternal
grandmother’s stories of World War II that being a person of color was or could be dangerous:
“our existence as a minority group, though we didn’t use those terms, in those days, non-white,
put it that way, could be in jeopardy, depending on world events.” Her impressions from her

47

She also said, in regard to her father smoking in the car, “eventually the world did change… And you know,
ironically enough he died of lung cancer.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

32

youth were that haole were a rich, separate class and you had to “watch out for them.” It seems
this was a sentiment shared by both sides of her family.
I got the distinct impression from my father that any haole, you know, white people,
he interacted with were generally rich and they were in a separate social class. And
you have to watch out for them. [laughs] And although his other friends were really
kind of a mixed bag… one of his best friends was Filipino, Filipino American—
and I wouldn’t say we had any white friends, so to speak...48 my father...told me a
couple of stories about how rich haole men can take advantage of people like us
and I thought that was kind of unjust, but he didn’t have a solution and I couldn't
think of a solution, but he said there was this rich haole man who lives up there on
the hill over there… He gave my father this old bicycle. It was an adult bicycle and
my father fixed it up and got it running and he could ride it, you know, he pumped
up the tires or fixed them or whatever. And then when Mr. So-and-So saw that, saw
that my father had fixed up the bicycle and he could ride it, he took it back! And
that was what my father said was so unjust about it.
Somehow, despite the warnings, Horie’s best friend at school since first grade ended up
being a local haole girl named Joyce. Her parents were like Horie’s second family, and yet they
never met her parents. Horie’s family mainly socialized with other family members or with
friends who were also Japanese American. She says she had several haole friends, because they
were more accessible, but she also remembers discrimination against haole.

48

She also said: “most of my parents’ friends were fellow Japanese or some possibly Okinawan, and… my father
had a lot of more friends and associates because of his business. He dealt with pretty much everyone… Another of
his best friends was Hawaiian. Another I believe was Chinese American. It’s hard to say, I mean, socially, no, we
didn’t socialize with anyone besides fellow Japanese Americans, or Japanese, or Okinawans.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

33

The Horie family was not particularly religious or otherwise involved in community
groups; other than Masanori’s business, the family mostly kept to themselves. Horie’s parents
were very private and told her not to get involved with other people in general. This perhaps
seems unusual today, but it was common for families like hers at the time; discrimination
discouraged Japanese from having close relationships with European Americans (Tamura, 1994).
Horie was struck by how different families on TV were from her family.49 She mentioned
several times during the interviews that in her experience growing up, people simply did not talk
about things.50
Our family and probably a lot of Asian American families, we didn’t do a lot of
discussing anything at home. We didn’t talk around the mealtimes, and I don’t
know if that was the norm…51 I do know that we didn’t interact much with too
many friends to actually go over to their house or have them come over to our
house.
Horie was an only child until 1958, when her brother was born. That same year, her
father was in a bad car crash, which had negative repercussions for the whole family for many
years, and meant he was unable to work for some time while recovering. During that period,
Horie recalls that they did not have as much money while he was unable to work. Luckily, her
mother also worked, full-time, downtown at Honolulu Savings and Loan.52

49

I believe what she means is that the All-American [all-white] families portrayed on TV mid-century were a far
cry visually and culturally from what life was like in territorial, multicultural Hawaiʻi.
50
She even relayed a time when one of her classmates died over the weekend, electrocuted while picking mangoes.
They were told at school and that was the end of it; no counseling, no discussion at home. She was disturbed by it.
She notes that people did not grieve publicly, back then, especially Asians or Asian Americans.
51
When asked if she thought this was due to Hawai‘i culture, or Japanese culture, or 1950s culture, or some
combination, her answer is “all of it,” including her particular family’s culture.
52
She had a full career and retired at age 65.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

34

While their parents worked (or recovered, in her father’s case after his accident) they
received free childcare from their families; Horie and her younger brother were cared for by their
maternal grandparents. Horie therefore spent her childhood between two locations: Kahaluʻu,
where her nuclear family and paternal grandparents lived (together),53 and Kāneʻohe, where her
maternal grandparents, who she says in large part raised her, lived.
…my mom’s job was in town, and so she’d, she got to work in a carpool. Back and
forth. She drove herself and me down to Kāneʻohe,54 to my other grandparents’
house, and dropped me off, and then she got on the carpool to go to town. And
when she came back on the carpool, then she collected me, and then we went home.
So, I was there from breakfast to nearly dinnertime. And on Fridays, when her
company worked until six, I had dinner there too. And so, my grandparents really
raised me, my maternal grandparents. Cuz I spent most of my time with them. And
that’s why, because both of my grandparents were born and raised in Hawai‘i and
spoke fairly standard English, because they were, in their interactions, dealing with
a lot of haole, I was really discouraged from speaking Pidgin [laughs] and I had to
learn to speak proper English once in school. I think I’m sort of in both worlds, but
not fully in one or the other. I don’t consider myself a fluent Pidgin speaker, because
I only spoke it with some classmates, and with my brother, and on the other hand,
I do consider English to be my second language, because I still struggle with it.55

53

This was the same Horie family house that Masanori and Irene had moved into (with his parents) upon marriage.
From Kahaluʻu, a roughly 15-minute drive without traffic.
55
“...people tell me ‘Oh, as soon as you open your mouth, we can tell, you’re from Hawai‘i.’ Right? I don’t sound
like my aunts who went to California right after high school, and they really do sound like Californians. And my
mother, even though she grew up in Hawai‘i, she moved to the mainland in 1974, after spending some decades, she
has, to my ears, sounded less and less local. Not quite to the extent as my aunts, who are both younger than her. And
my brother, who was about fifteen when he moved with my parents to New Mexico, and then he graduated from
high school in Albuquerque, and then after that he moved to Texas. My brother really does sound like a Texan.”
54

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

35

Horie’s mother was fluent in both Standard English and Japanese, but “but she chose not
to speak Japanese at home.” Her own mother had learned “proper” English as a teen, working as
a domestic servant for a wealthy family in Hilo. Irene “got furious” when Horie’s paternal
grandparents, who lived with them and were both fluent in only Japanese and HCE, spoke a sort
of half-Japanese, half- “Japanese-ized pidgin” to their granddaughter, because “she thought it
would just ruin my learning… She wanted me to learn proper English, totally and completely.”

School Years
Horie was a child and came of age during the Cold War, the Vietnam War, and the Civil
Rights Movement of the 1950s-1970s. During the 1950s, communism was viewed as a serious
threat to the American way of life, including in Hawai'i, where there were several local and
federal investigations (Tachihata, 1981). Horie remembers her father as staunchly anticommunist. In 1959, when Horie was in elementary school, Hawai‘i was declared a state by the
U.S. government (Saranillio, 2010). When Hawai‘i officially became a state in August, the
newly approved state constitution replaced the 1900 Organic Act that had governed Hawai‘i as a
territory (Tachihata, 1981). Despite a high number of them having served in the American WWII
effort (Kosasa, 2008)—including Horie’s own parents—Issei were not granted the right to vote
until 1952 (Weiss, 2018). Before statehood, the G.I. Bill—whose authors did not consciously
intend it to be racist or sexist, but who also did not challenge the race or sex assumptions of their
time—enabled many Japanese American men in Hawaiʻi to obtain formal education, which led
to their increased involvement in political and business hierarchies (Altschuler & Blumin, 2009).
The following decade of “democratic revolution” (during the 1950s) further saw Japanese locals
in increased positions of power (Rohrer, 2010, p. 8). To this day, Hawaiʻi’s officials on the

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

36

county, state, and federal levels are largely Japanese American (Fujikane, 2008). Japanese in
Hawaiʻi were successful because they were not only willing, but eager, to assimilate into the
existing American colonial structure and ideology in Hawaiʻi.
The acculturation of the Japanese community began slowly during the sojourner
period of 1890 to 1907, picked up some momentum during the settlement period of
1907 to 1924, and became progressively more substantial during the 1920s and
1930s as the Nisei grew up, attended school, and reached adulthood. Japanese men
responded overwhelmingly to the call for volunteers to join the U.S. Army during
World War II. Forty percent of all Japanese males in Hawai‘i enlisted, constituting
60 percent of Hawaii’s fighting forces. This demonstrated not only the Nisei’s
desire to prove their loyalty, but also the extent of their acculturation. (Tamura,
1994, p. 235)
Even though Hawaiʻi was not yet a state when most of the Japanese immigrants arrived,
with each generation, the Asian settlers became increasingly Americanized (Tachihata, 1981).
Portraits of the United States Presidents were displayed proudly on the walls in public schools.
At elementary school assemblies, Horie recalls that “Hawaiʻi Ponoʻī” was sung.56 During the
sixth grade, Horie’s classmates took turns leading the Pledge of Allegiance each morning and
picking a patriotic song to sing. Horie says that she always picked the U.S. national anthem,
“The Star-Spangled Banner,” because she liked the tune. Horie remembers many people in
Hawaiʻi wanting to incorporate into the United States. Statehood

56

Queen Liliʻuokalani wrote the original national anthem i "He Mele Lāhui Hawaiʻi" in 1866 before she became
Queen. Her brother Kalakaua and Henri Berger wrote Hawaiʻi Ponoʻī; Liliʻuokalani was the reigning monarch when
the Hawaiian monarchy was overthrown (Liliʻuokalani, 1898).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

37

brought a prosperity to Hawai‘i that would last throughout the 1960s, as both
tourism and defense spending began to compete for first place with the sugar
industry which had dominated the Hawaiian economy for nearly a century. The
people of Hawai‘i continued to be largely Asian, but they were mostly of the second
or third generations and quite thoroughly American in custom and outlook
(Tachihata, 1981, p. 269).
By the time Hawaiʻi was proclaimed a state, Horie was eight years old and had been born
an American citizen.57 On the first-ever Admission Day, along with her classmates, Horie was
shuffled into a sort of impromptu parade. The students all waved small American flags as they
marched in the procession, and although it was too abstract for her to grasp enough to care about
then, there was a general level of excitement she remembers picking up on, even at that age.
I think I was really too young to understand any of the implications… I wasn’t
really aware of how anyone else in the community felt about it except that it seemed
really exciting. I can pinpoint I think that I was in the third grade and I was eight
years old. That was in March of 1959 when Eisenhower signed the Act of
Admission to take effect on Admission Day, August 21, 1959. At that point in time
we would have been on summer vacation, so I figured it must have been at the
signing that it was so special and we got into a little parade across the street and
back from my school with the little American flags to wave and it seems according
to the mood of the teachers and everybody that it was something to be celebrated.

57

“... some of us who were born in that era prior to statehood found it so amusing and or maddening that when
Barack Obama was running for president and people started challenging his citizenship because ah, yes, we weren’t
born in the state of Hawai‘i, we were born in the territory, but John McCain was born in the canal zone, which was
not a state and never was a state, never became a state and later on was given back officially to the people of
Panama. So you know, his birthplace is actually now a foreign country, and nobody made a big deal about John
McCain. So what’s the big deal?”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

38

So, we did. But the only thing that I recall that actually happened as a result of
statehood at the time was the Farm Fair, which it is still called now,58 up until then
was always called the 49th State Fair because there was this push, this desire for
Hawai‘i to become a state. And they named the state fair, you know, for the
aspiration of becoming a state, the 49th state. That changed to the 50th State Fair
after that because Alaska actually became the 49th state right before Hawai‘i.
Statehood did not mean that Hawaiʻi was now a multicultural American paradise. Even
after the Americanization of the islands was considered complete, there was unrest. Horie
remembers that during her junior year of high school (1966-1967) “Kill a Haole Day” started. As
she remembers it (vaguely), it was related somehow to football, and the worst thing that ever
happened at her school was that a haole teacher was stabbed by a student59 (he survived).60
English was the language used in all the schools Horie attended, but it would not be until
college that she consciously noticed all her professors—mostly haole—using “proper” English.
Before college, both Standard English and HCE were used in the schools Horie attended. Her
formal education had begun at Shaklee’s private school,61 where she attended Kindergarten. For
first through sixth grade, she attended Benjamin Parker Elementary62 in Kāneʻohe—after
kindergarten, she attended all public schools for the rest of her education—and then Heʻeia
Intermediate for seventh grade, also in Kāneʻohe. Her neighborhood high school was Castle,63
and that is where she completed eighth through twelfth grade. She did not attend Japanese

58

https://hawaiistatefarmfair.org/.
Details on this boy are unknown.
60
She says it was maybe related to homosexual advance; at least, that was a rumor.
61
“my mother didn't send me to a public-school kindergarten because her work hours didn’t enable her to pick me
up after school. The following year I attended first grade at Benjamin Parker elementary school, where the
kindergarten (that I didn’t attend) was available.”
62
http://benjaminparkerschool.weebly.com/
63
http://www.castlehs.k12.hi.us/
59

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

39

language school, despite the fact that attendance was and remains fairly common. Horie says she
hated school from day one, and she was not any happier on day two when she realized she had to
go back:
you had to get dressed up and wear shoes, it was uncomfortable and awkward and,
it didn’t seem very interesting to me. Some things were interesting, like for six
years… we had a rotating traveling Japanese language teacher who would come in
twice a week for six years to our class and I’m sure other classes...Ms. Kiyokawa.
And she taught us Japanese reading and writing, Japanese culture, songs, dances. I
thought that was fascinating. And is possibly a substitute for going to Japanese
language school after regular school.64 Certainly I thought it was more interesting
than what the, some of the other children were learning in Japanese school.
She recalls feeling stifled by the rigid and authoritarian structure of school, and says she
began rebelling against authority immediately. She remembers an incident when she wanted to
color her printed outline of a four-leaf clover—which, as an island child, she had never seen
before in real life. Her teacher insisted on everyone using green. “I did color the shamrock green,
but I also added a red dot in the middle because red was my favorite color.” Horie remembers
inadvertently inciting a mini-riot, wherein, having seen her include red in her clover, the other
children were inspired to similarly take advantage of the rest of the crayon box. “...one student, I
can’t remember who it was, put red dots entirely around the entire edge of the four-leaf clover,
that’s a lot of work and she did a really careful job and she went way beyond.”
Still, Horie had compassion for her teachers. Since childhood, she was observant and
reflective. “I’ve been aware since early childhood that I knew I didn’t want to do what other

64

“I refused and for some reason my parents let me get away with that.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

40

people seemed to expect me to do,” she says. “Especially in terms of a profession, and a lot of
my parents’ friends thought I should be a teacher,65 and that was absolutely the farthest thing
from my mind.” She appears to have been quite empathetic from a young age; she says she
observed that teachers’ days did not end when the kids got to go home. For teachers, the end of
the school day meant grading and preparation for the next day;
especially as the grades got higher and higher and the homework got more and
more, I could see that wow, they had to check all that homework, right? Their day
didn’t end at the end of our day! I could see how teachers really had to work hard,
and really had to put up with a lot, from us, in particular, the students. And, I don’t
know, it seemed like… not too fun. I mean, some of our teachers were great, and
they seemed to have some interesting experiences outside of teaching, but it didn’t
sound like something I wanted to do.
She was also aware of large class size,66 and thought that managing all the children
seemed tiring. Her early observations in and of schools stuck with her, and for the rest of her life,
she avoided any jobs in schools, despite her academic achievements and eventual love of (and
proficiency at) learning.
...my grandparents on my mother’s side had three encyclopedias in the house, small,
medium, and large, and I would pore over them endlessly. I thought it was very
fascinating, especially the color pictures of various things like minerals and Roman

65

“One profession that welcomed the Nisei was teaching” and it “provided upward mobility” (Tamura, 1994, p.
228). Perhaps this is why Horie was encouraged to become a teacher; her elders all saw that she had potential and
they wanted her to succeed. Teaching was a profession that would allow her to succeed regardless of her
race/ethnicity and gender.
66
“Well, kindergarten wasn’t that big. I think it was maybe about, I don’t know, less than two dozen, probably later
on our classes in the elementary school got bigger, but maybe the biggest numbered class was maybe in the midthirties or high thirties...I think sixth grade was probably our biggest class.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

41

sculpture and all kinds of things like that. My father had a copy of the Boy Scout
manual but he was never in the Boy Scouts and I’m not sure what year of the manual
it was, I’m assuming not later than the mid-fifties, 1950s, could’ve been older, but
I thought that was fascinating too because it had Morse code and the flag
semaphores and how to care for an injured person, how to make bandages, splints
and how to tell what time it was, and the compass, and all that stuff… Those were
two of the earliest actual books I remember.
Although her family only spoke English at home, and all the schools she attended were
run in English, Horie spoke many languages from an early age. In addition to her fluency in HCE
and Standard English, she could understand Japanese,67 although she now says she is not
comfortable speaking it to people from Japan. She describes the version she learned as “frozen in
time” and very unlike the Japanese she learned in a conversational Japanese class later. Her
hesitation also stems from the fact that there is a different way for men and women to speak in
Japanese, and all the Japanese she learned in childhood was from her father’s side, so she learned
the man’s way of speaking. She remembers hearing snippets of other languages in and around
home and school. At his business, which served a diverse demographic, Horie’s father picked up
conversational Korean, Ilocano, Japanese, Hawaiian, Spanish, Portuguese, and even Italian, the
last she says due to prisoners of war he had contact with during his time in the U.S. Army. Horie
took French in ninth and tenth grade. She remembers her parents telling her that French was an
international language and encouraging her to perhaps think of attending college in France, at the
Sorbonne.

67

Her elementary school had a traveling Japanese teacher who would teach them sporadically, and her grandparents
were bi- and multilingual. “My maternal grandfather spoke Hawaiian, and my father spoke Hawaiian. And I believe
that my father also understood Okinawan. Because he had a lot of Okinawan friends.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

42

I thought it was a good idea to take French because I learned a lot about the culture
and appreciation for some songs and some things. I don’t know why our teacher
didn’t teach us the Marseillaise, you know, the French national anthem. But he
didn’t. He taught us some drinking songs. I think he was a nontraditional teacher
actually.
Talk of college began in earnest during Horie’s senior year of high school. Every year
throughout her childhood, some of her classmates would disappear, having transferred to private
schools; “a lot of my classmates were Hawaiian and started disappearing to go to Kamehameha
and other schools.” Horie was always aware of private schools and continental colleges. The
students who could afford to attended private schools in Hawaiʻi and then college or university
on the continent.68
Growing up, Horie never considered becoming a librarian. No doubt this was in part due
to the fact that, as previously mentioned, she did not think she would grow up. Additionally, a
library school did not exist in Hawai‘i until 1966 (Tachihata, 1981). She enjoyed reading for fun
but was terrified of librarians.
We were introduced to the Benjamin Parker school library in the first grade and
went there as a group. And… it’s funny, you know, I ended up being a librarian,
because I was terrified of the librarian, the first librarian I’d ever seen. She was
large, middle aged, had iron-gray hair, sort of like a Brillo pad, she had on these
big thick shoes, with big, thick heels, black, black shoes. And her desk was kind of
a high desk. It was sort of like a judge’s desk. She was looking down on you, as a
little kid.

68

This is still common.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

43

Her perception of librarians changed in seventh grade when the librarian was not
intimidating, or, as she put it, a “normal person;” and later, at Castle High School, she says the
two school librarians took her under their wings.
Around this time, during her teen years, Horie’s father recovered enough from his
accident to not only get back to work, but to build his family a new house.
Sometime before 1965 my father built a new house on the property,69 sold the
Chevron station and rented our old house to the new owner, Mr. Cookson. I believe
it was around 1966 that Dad started working for Honolulu Sporting Goods, which
had a store at Ala Moana Center. At first he worked as one of two gunsmiths at
their workshop on Colburn St. in Kalihi. Later, by 1968, he transferred to the Ala
Moana Center store and switched to fishing rod and reel repairs.

Undergraduate Education (1968-1979)
In the fall semester of 1968, Horie enrolled as a freshman at the University of Hawaiʻi
(UH), Honolulu.70 She was the first in her nuclear family to attend college.71 She thinks many of
her high school classmates applied to college; most of her friends were the smart kids. Horie
always assumed that she would attend college, and her parents offered her the choice of either
private high school, or a continental (or international) college, but not both, and she had
apparently made her choice by remaining in public high school. However, her father’s 1958 car
accident resulted in thinner-than-expected finances even a decade after the fact, eliminating the

69

He did not personally build it; he paid to have it built.
The name authority record for the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa states that it was changed from the University
of Hawai‘i, Honolulu, to the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa in 1972.
71
One of her mother’s cousins had attended college.
70

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

44

international or even mainland college options Horie had grown up encouraged to pursue. She
applied only to UH.
Castle High School employed a guidance counselor, a man whose main role was to guide
students through the college application process. UH was the least-expensive option available, at
about $250 per semester.72 Horie says she was not upset about not going to the continental U.S.
for college. Her expectations for college were shaped by what she heard about it in high school;
she says she received academic training but did not expect nor realize that there would be such a
large student body, meaning less-personalized attention and less “hand holding.” Oddly, she had
only visited the Mānoa campus once before, to take a French placement exam. She does not
recall that any tours or orientation sessions were available to incoming freshmen.
While her mother’s female friends had suggested Horie become a teacher, her father
wanted her “to be a doctor, a medical doctor. But I didn’t really take to that idea because I was
too squeamish about blood.” Because her grandfather was a landscape designer, and she was
“intrigued by atriums,” Horie thought at first that she wanted to be an architect. She says she
could always see what could be improved in spaces. She also enjoyed art and had learned
photography as part of an art class in high school. Her father also took still and Super 8 [movie]
films, which perhaps provided implicit approval to pursue the arts, but taking one art class was as
far as Horie went in that direction. She had wide-ranging interests, which she pursued
enthusiastically. Her interest in multiple disciplines, and her habit of exploring these interests via
her course schedule, is one reason it took her so long—11 years—to complete her undergraduate
degree.73 She also considered French (she took two years), pre-law (mainly because she loved

72

Horie’s father secured her a Lion’s Club scholarship for the first academic year (1968-1969). She is not sure if he
was a Lion’s Club member. I contacted them to ask, but they have not replied.
73
Financial and personal issues were also factors and will be expounded on shortly.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

45

the class “Logic”), American Studies, and Anthropology, before finally settling on and
ultimately graduating with a B.A. in Hawaiian Studies: “Once I started taking Hawaiian, that was
it.” At the time, there was no Hawaiian Studies department, so Horie designed her own degree
under the Liberal Studies Department. She also completed a minor in Art History-Visual
Design,74 with a focus on traditional Hawaiian tattooing.

The Hawaiian Renaissance
The design-your-own Hawaiian Studies major that Horie graduated with was a popular
option at this time, because the Hawaiian Renaissance flourished in the 1960s and 1970s, in
tandem with the Civil Rights Movement, Women’s Movement, and other similar movements
focused on Indigenous peoples’ rights. During this time, legal restrictions on the use of Hawaiian
language in schools—originally implemented in 1886—were overturned (Hawaiʻi State
Department of Education, 2018). The Hawai‘i State Constitutional Convention of 1978 made
Hawaiian (along with English) one of the state’s official languages (Warschauer, Donaghy &
Kuamoÿo, 1997).75 Another result of the Hawai‘i State Constitutional Convention was the
addition of a constitutional amendment to include Article X, Section 4, mandating that the state
promote Hawaiian culture, history and language in public schools; immediately thereafter, in
1980, the Hawaiʻi State Department of Education created the Hawaiian Studies Program
(Hawaiʻi State Department of Education, 2018).

74

This would now be considered graphic design.
However, to this day the use of the Hawaiian language continues to be a fraught and oft-contested issue (Boneza,
2018). Colloquial and official use of the Hawaiian language is not on-par with the use of Standard English.
75

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

46

While Horie says she did not recognize it at such at the time, she was in the middle of a
cultural revitalization movement. Dr. Jack Ward,76 a professor in the Indo-Pacific Languages
Department, was Horie’s academic adviser. She remembers her perspective broadening when she
learned Hawaiian history from the Indigenous point of view, for the first time, under Pauline
Nawahineokala‘i King Joerger. During this time, she also danced hula in a UH class taught by
Ho‘oulu Cambra.
Horie was part of two groups associated with her undergraduate studies. The first was a
selected studies group for honors students; they were awarded use of their own special study
room with “nice views” and access to special magazines, on the top floor of Sinclair,77 the
university’s relatively-new (since 1956) undergraduate library. Through the Selected Studies
Program, Horie met her first UH friend, Davianna Pomaikai McGregor (now a professor with the
UH College of Social Sciences). The second group was Hui Aloha ‘Āina Tuahine, the Hawaiian
Studies Club. Dr. Larry Kimura78 was the club’s adviser; he is now internationally renowned for
his work on Hawaiian language revitalization. The Hawaiian Studies Club organized and
participated in Hawaiian cultural activities, such as food and camping trips. Kimura hosted a
Hawaiian language talk and music shows; as part of their class assignment, Horie and her friends
would listen to the show, call in to talk, and once visited him downtown in the studio to sing
Christmas carols in Hawaiian. The movement was serious about cultural revitalization, but it was
also fun; perhaps that was a factor in its success. Simultaneously, the Second Wave of the
Women’s Movement reached its height, between 1960-1980. Horie remembers Pauline King

76

He is currently listed as Associate Professor of Hawaiian and Tahitian: http://www.catalog.hawaii.edu/0708/personnel/faculty/w.htm.
77
https://guides.library.manoa.hawaii.edu/sinclairlibrary
78
https://hilo.hawaii.edu/keaohou/2014/10/09/kimura-hawaiian-language/

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

47

Joerger, the professor who taught Hawaiian history from the Hawaiian point of view, also
championing women’s rights and feminism.
I was aware of the Women’s Movement. I subscribed to Ms. Magazine in the 1970s.
My mother doesn’t identify herself as a feminist79 but she did pursue a nontraditional career path—working in a financial institution in downtown Honolulu.
Definitely not a housewife. I mean, she could cook and clean and whatnot, with the
best of them, I think. But she did have a lot of help from my paternal grandmother,
you know, in terms of the household, and also, my maternal grandparents were
taking charge of me, while she went to work…80 In thinking back, I see the true
feminists in my family were my father and my maternal grandfather. My father
because he had high expectations for me, and supported my career choice even if it
didn’t match his preference. Dad also taught me to fish, shoot a rifle, use a bow and
arrow, and go snorkeling—generally sports for boys. My maternal grandfather
because of something my mother said he told her when she was old enough to work:
“You have to paddle your own canoe.”
Horie does not remember Title IX specifically, nor its implementation, but she does
remember efforts to pass the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which would have
constitutionally protected citizens from sex discrimination. She was in favor of the ERA;
Hawai‘i was the first state to ratify it, but unfortunately, the amendment was never ratified on the
national level. Horie’s only outright activist activity during this time was when she testified in

79

When asked to clarify, Horie said: “This topic never came up.”
“She worked, she was still working there when they decided to move to the mainland and she continued to work
on the mainland, cuz she was quite young actually, fairly young, too young to retire… she did retire at 65. She was
able to get a job at a national company, Hewlett-Packard, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. And so, was pretty well
set.”
80

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

48

favor of the Senate bill for an act for Prepaid Health Care during the 1973-1974 legislative
session:
I was motivated to lobby for health care for part-time employees and raises for
UHM81 student workers because I was personally impacted… It was my first time
testifying there and I was very nervous as I read my prepared statement. At the time,
I was working part-time on campus as a student assistant at the East-West Center.
The bill eventually passed and was enacted in 1974.

Kahaluʻu Flood (1964) and Family Relocation (1974)
Horie took a long time—11 years—to earn her undergraduate degree. This was long even
at UH, where most people, she remembers, took four to five years to graduate; however, more
than half of UH students still take 6 years to earn their undergraduate degree (UH News, 2016), 82
so her experience was not completely unusual. While she eventually felt like she was falling
behind her peers, Horie truly enjoyed being in college, so she was in no rush. However, personal
factors ultimately affected her timing, as well.
In 1964, there was a major flood in Kahaluʻu, where her family’s house was located; a
decade later, her family moved to the mainland United States as a direct result.
My parents’ property was condemned for a flood control project so they accepted
the government’s eminent domain payment and moved to the mainland in 1974…
my parents invited me to come along, cuz I was here as an undergraduate, here at

81

University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
This was announced as an “all-time high” for 4-year undergraduate graduation rates, indicating that prior to 2016,
most students took even longer.
82

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

49

UH, but I declined because I was majoring in Hawaiian Studies and I didn’t see
how I could do that anyplace else.
She says, “the stream overflowed and the house flowed downstream and hit the bridge
over Kamehameha Highway.” There was
a lot of inundation, and property damage. So, the government confiscated our
property, which was bought and paid for, by eminent domain. And we didn’t really,
you know, we got a settlement but it wasn’t really enough to get another similar
place of equal size and value, let’s put it that way. So my father and his boss, who
was from Albuquerque, that company was part of a chain; Honolulu Sporting
Goods was part of Cook’s Sporting Goods, which had a store in Albuquerque. They
decided to move together. You know, my father to move to Albuquerque, and his
boss to move back to Albuquerque since that’s where he was from. And so that’s
where my parents moved to, along with my younger brother… it was really kinda
traumatic for him, because he was in the middle of high school.
In 1974, while her family relocated to the mainland, Horie secured full-time employment
with the Department of Health, in the Vital Statistics branch83 (archives). She worked at the
Lanakila Tuberculosis branch, then the Department of Education’s student demographics office.
When I worked there it was called the Student Information Branch. It gave out the
federal survey cards to students to take home and tabulated the demographic
information that the students’ families provided when the cards were brought back
to school. The information was used to determine how much federal funding would
be given to Hawaiʻi, based on how many students were military dependents.

83

http://health.hawaii.gov/vitalrecords/

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

50

Another function was projecting demographic changes in numbers and ages of
children likely to attend public schools in the different school districts. The current
unit that comes closest might be “Special Projects.”84
Horie credits her career success in part to the eclectic nature of the various jobs she held
over the years, which included posts in both the private and public sectors. In this position, Horie
learned about analyzing data. Unfortunately, her boss was a “borderline sexual harasser;” he
made people uncomfortable, and Horie was warned about him by other women in the office.
This is still common today, but now it might be referred to as a “whisper network.” She agreed
with her female coworkers that this man got too physically close to them; her solution was to
pull out one of her drawers whenever she heard him coming to her desk, so that there was a
physical blockage between him and her. Eventually, in 1976, this temp job expired.
This was a rough period for Horie; her financial insecurity, hostile work environment,
and especially her family’s unwanted relocation took a toll on her psychically as well as
financially. She wrote one of her papers for an American Studies course about how her parents
had to move because their property was condemned, even though the house was not damaged.
She did not receive a good grade for the paper and admitted that that was “tough to take.”
I really sort of entertained the thought of protesting on my own, making a sign, you
know, parking myself on our former property. But then I wasn’t brave enough to
really do that, and I didn’t have a network.

84

The Special Projects office addresses “academic/educational issues that are significant to the Department and that
impacts several offices” including operational, technical, and project management projects (Hawaiʻi State
Department of Education, 2018).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

51

Employment
Even before the flood forced her family to move, Horie was a diligent worker, in addition
to taking out student loans to finance her undergraduate education. The second week of her
freshman year at UH, while enrolled in school full time, she began working downtown at
Honolulu Savings and Loan, the same financial institution that had employed her mother. She
was a part-time employee there for several years, starting as a teller but eventually climbing the
corporate ladder to serve as librarian and automatic mortgage payment control clerk in the data
processing department. “I was put in charge of the library of computer books and manuals,
which had been just kept on shelves, in no particular order, with no labels, and no catalog.” She
attributes her ascension at Honolulu Savings and Loan to being “groomed;” she had placed high
on the institution’s entrance exam and therefore was singled out by management as someone
with potential.
Horie had already moved out of her family’s home before her parents relocated to the
continent in 1974. She said that they were against it, for financial reasons, but she craved
independence, especially since she was butting heads with her more conservative father, a
“veteran and staunch anti-communist.” She wanted to leave home because of this dissonance she
felt between her competing desires to be a good daughter, and stand by her beliefs—particularly,
she and her parents held conflicting views regarding the war in Vietnam. Horie had experienced
high school during the 1960s, when, for young people, counterculture was popular culture. Mrs.
Kirk, her high school social studies teacher, had been in the Peace Corps, and taught her students
about the origins of the war in Vietnam. Mrs. Kirk had assigned her students to go to the library
and look at U.S. News & World Report and Time magazine and try to understand other issues
about Vietnam. College was again broadening Horie’s perspective; she says her American

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

52

Studies and Ethnic Studies courses—new fields of study at the time85—made her realize her
“racist upbringing;” she had observed prejudiced stereotypes used by her nuclear family, such as
the idea that Native Hawaiians are lazy. She now attributes much of this inter-group prejudice as
“tribalism—the survival of the group is the primary motivation.” She points out that humans are
animals, and that threats to our survival trigger something deeply primal within us that can lead
to ugly attitudes and behavior toward our fellow human beings. During this time, there was also
what Horie describes as a lot of propaganda against communism, which to her, sounded
“horrible;” she saw it as the U.S. trying to prevent a local people from exercising their own
political will. Her father, as a World War II veteran, was staunchly pro-American and anticommunist. During the Civil Rights movement and the Vietnam War, both spanning the 1950s1970s, many experienced this “clash between young idealists who wanted to purify the nation
from what they saw as a history of poverty and injustice and conservatives who tried to squash
what they saw as an attempt to overthrow traditional morals” (Asato, 2011, p. 288). Horie did not
want to stick out as the rebel in the family; that would be too uncomfortable. The easier thing
was to simply remove herself. Although she avoided conflict at home, Horie did not stay wholly
silent on the issue. She attended a sit-in to protest the firing of UH Professor Oliver Minseem
Lee, a self-described “Chinese-American Radical” who was considered a Communist for
protesting the Vietnam War and advising the antiwar Students for a Democratic Society (SDS)
student chapter (Kubota, 2017). Some of the students and faculty who attended the
administration building sit-in were arrested; after the protest, the University of Hawa ʻi

85

The UHM Ethnic Studies Department was established in 1970 as an “outgrowth of the civil rights, anti-Vietnam
War, ethnic empowerment, and students’ rights movements.” At this time, “there was no redress for Japanese
Americans illegally interned during World War II, the United States was using Kahoʻolawe for military exercises,
and Native Hawaiians were losing thousands of acres of land in adverse possession proceedings” (McGregor &
Aoudé, 2014, p. 68).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

53

Professional Assembly (UHPA) conducted an investigation and decided in favor of free speech,
and determined that Lee had been let go without due process, so he was reinstated (Kubota,
2017).86
When she moved out of her parents’ house following disagreements with her father’s
political views, Horie found a place to rent in Makiki, much closer to the University. It was a
tight situation, with four women sharing two bedrooms, but not an uncommon one for college
students. Moving out of her parents’ house meant Horie needed to pay rent, so she began
working at the first-ever all-night grocery store in Waikiki. She worked the graveyard shift,
which was difficult87 and indirectly caused her to flunk her first college course, a Hawaiian
language class. Another issue she had to contend with was health-related. Horie first thought she
was suffering from early-onset arthritis because her big toe was swollen and painful—a
condition that still flares up now, at times. Eventually, a doctor found she had instead developed
gout (a type of inflammatory arthritis) from eating too many bean sprouts.
She says that while she did not interact much with librarians during her undergraduate
education, when her graduation neared, Horie was already thinking about getting her master’s in
Library Studies (MLS) degree. She spoke to Wil Frost, a social sciences librarian, about what his
job was like. Abraham Piianaia,88 the first director of the Hawaiian Studies Program, and one of
her mentors,89 had planted the seed of this idea. He explained to her that Hawaiian Studies
graduates were needed in libraries, and he thought she might make a good fit.

86

First, the Board of Regents and top administrators had refused to reinstate Lee; the board later reversed its
decision “after a top candidate to become UH president, Harlan Cleveland, said he would not accept the job unless
the controversy over Lee was resolved” (Kubota, 2017).
87
Working overnight has myriad negative health effects (Ramin et. al., 2014).
88
He died in 2003 (Blakeman, 2003).
89
She was also a student assistant in his office for a year.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

54

Graduate Education and Early Career (1979-1991)
Master's Degree in Library Studies (1979-1981)
Horie graduated with her B.A. in Hawaiian Studies in May 1979 and went straight into
the Library Studies (LS) program.90 This time, she would graduate with her degree—an MLS,
Master’s in Library Studies from the Graduate School of Library Studies (GSLS)—right on
schedule. It took her two years (August 1979-August 1981), which was, and still is, typical for
the LIS master’s program, three decades later.
Horie had spent the summer between undergraduate and graduate school working in the
Hawaiian Studies Office. Horie thought earning her MLS degree would teach her how to do
research, which would come in handy in the future, if she continued to pursue Hawaiian Studies.
That was her plan, especially since alternatives were not appealing; she knew she did not want to
work in a school or public library. Horie says she has not been, and still is not, good at long-term
planning. So, she formulated a loose plan that gave her life just enough structure, but she had few
expectations.
Before she started her next degree in the fall semester, Horie spent her summer as a temp,
in a job for a special grant, “The Social Role of the Courts in the Hawaiian Kingdom,” awarded
to the Judiciary. This included going to the State Archives to read court case reports, code
metadata, and translation of Hawaiian language letters from the first Chief Justice, William L.
Lee, and it eventually led (indirectly) to volunteer work after she retired. In the second year of
her MLS degree, she secured a paid internship in the Pacific Collection at UH’s Hamilton
Library. By this point, Horie was 29 years old. While she had a lot of interesting opportunities

90

This is now the Library and Information Science (LIS) Program: http://www.hawaii.edu/lis/.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

55

she was pursuing, she still could not help but feel a bit behind, since it had taken her so long to
earn her undergraduate degree.
Maack & Passet (1994) have documented the importance of mentorship and role models
as “agents of inspiration, catalysts to move in new directions, and sources of support” for
aspiring women in academic environments (p. 148). Luckily, Horie was able to find several
academic mentors while earning her MLS degree. She particularly remembers Dr. Sarah Vann,
who she says taught her indexing and abstracting, as well as the Dewey Decimal Classification
System, the Library of Congress Classification and Subject Headings, and the AACR2
cataloging code.91 Dr. Vann assigned a memorable and practical project—she had her class index
a real UH anthropology book, published by UH Press in 1981: Ethnic groups and social change
in a Chinese market town by C. Fred Blake.
While Horie was working on her MLS degree, ALA’s affiliate Asian Pacific American
Librarians Association (APALA) was founded, in 1980 (Echavarria & Wertheimer, 1997).
One thing that I remember about APALA was discussing the possibility of joining
with one of the UHM librarians around 1991 or 1992. She expressed her opinion
that even though she was Asian-American herself, as a librarian she didn’t closely
identify with that group. That idea seemed reasonable to me.
It might be less surprising that Horie did not join APALA when accounting for the fact
that she possibly did not see herself represented in it: “The four largest APALA ethnic groups are
Chinese (40 percent), East Indian (14 percent), Filipino (10 percent), and Korean (16 percent)”
(Echavarria & Wertheimer, 1997, p. 379). Horie did join the Hawaiʻi Library Association
(HLA), first as an MLS student, and then the American Library Association after graduation. She

91

New at that time, the switch was eventually made from AACR2 to RDA, currently still in use.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

56

said she did so simply because it was “the thing to do.” Overall, she thrived in the program, and
was inducted as a member in the international LIS honor society Beta Phi Mu.92

Employment at the East-West Center (1981-1986)
Upon graduation, Horie had several things on her mind, but the most important was
obtaining a full-time and permanent position in order to make rent, start to pay back her student
loans, and receive benefits, such as health insurance. Her non-negotiable criteria for a full-time
job was that it must be on Oʻahu, since she was dating someone here at the time. Her mentors all
strongly advised her against accepting any position below the level of librarian, but when she
was offered one such position, as a library technician at the East-West Center (EWC),93 she went
against everyone’s advice, and accepted. Her reasoning was that it was full-time, paid wellenough, and was in a library (bonuses for not being a public or school library). “Dean Ira Harris
discouraged me from taking this position because it was a library technician job and he felt
strongly that I should pursue a professional librarian position instead. He explained that if I
began my career as a technician, I may find it difficult to move into a professional position
later.” His worries turned out to be well intentioned, but unfounded.
The [first] position was in a two-person library, with a librarian and a technician.
As a technician, I was able to learn and do all the activities involved in running a
library: reference, database searching, ordering supplies, cataloging books,
labelling books, re-shelving books, filing catalog cards, putting on and taking off

92

Candidates for membership in Xi Chapter are nominated by the LIS Faculty on the basis of the following criteria:
have a cumulative GPA of 3.75 or higher; be in the top 25% of the graduating class; demonstrated service to the
profession, LIS Program, and fellow students; demonstrated professionalism and leadership potential in the
profession; passed the oral exam in the final semester; and have no LIS grade below a B-minus.
93
https://www.eastwestcenter.org/

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

57

newspapers from the sticks, etcetera. My title was “resource materials technician.”
The position was [eventually] eliminated and re-described as a “junior resource
materials specialist.” I applied for that position and accepted it when I was offered
the job.
Located across the street from the UH campus, the East-West Center is a “an
independent, public, nonprofit organization with funding from the U.S. government, and
additional support provided by private agencies, individuals, foundations, corporations, and
governments in the region” (East-West Center, 2018). It was established by the United States
Congress in 1960 and charged with promoting “better relations and understanding among the
people and nations of the United States, Asia, and the Pacific through cooperative study,
research, and dialogue” (East-West Center, 2018). Horie’s professional education included
cultural sensitivity training and interactions and events with diverse individuals. She felt engaged
at this job because of this constant influx of different and interesting people. The center even had
an exchange program for librarians. Horie did not participate, but she remembers one visiting
librarian from New Zealand, one from Japan, and one from Malaysia; to this day, she remains
friends with the Malaysian librarian.
Chiefly, at EWC Horie learned how to work collegially; she thinks that was a good lesson
for her specifically, because she tended to struggle with people and her reactions to situations, a
difficult weakness to have as a librarian, considering that as a profession, librarianship is
collaborative (Irvin, 2016). Despite this self-assessment, Horie accomplished plenty of joint
work; one example from this period is that she successfully co-edited the 1983 HLA Journal with
Terese Leber, another resource materials specialist at the EWC. In hindsight, she thinks that she
might have jumped to conclusions and acted in a way that made things worse, because she did

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

58

not have all the information. For example, she says that expectations were unclear between her
and the head librarian; Horie was resentful when she learned that another new employee was not
expected to do exactly what the last person in that position had done. She attributes this
frustration to that fact that she does not like change. But there were many changes, and they
mainly benefitted her.
While Horie was in her second position at the EWC, the center underwent an institutionwide reorganization, during which the five libraries were consolidated into three. Horie helped
by creating a plan to move all the materials in a short amount of time by pre-assigning the
shelves where the books would go. She even measured the shelves, without being asked. This
was not the first time she took initiative to improve the library.
One of the first things I did before the incumbent technician left was to integrate
the two different parts of the card catalog into one sequence. Later I learned how to
do database searching, something I had not learned before graduating. When the
library acquired “smart” typewriters that could be programmed, I developed a
method of typing multiple catalog cards instead of running them off on a
mimeograph machine. I also learned how to update the reprint catalog and order a
new printout at the UHM computing center.
Horie speculates that her job was technologically advanced (for the time) perhaps
because the library she worked in was the communications library. She was not afraid to
embrace innovation; she had taken a programming course as an elective for her MLS degree, and
her willingness to early-adopt was an asset that would persist throughout the rest of her career.
As mentioned, she proposed using the “smart typewriter” to print the catalog cards for books and

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

59

the metadata94 sheets for reprints, which made the entire process less messy, faster, and easier.
She also learned how to use several databases, while on the job. At the time, the library she
worked at had an account with the UH computing center in Keller Hall.95 Bibliographic
information was collected on data sheets; to update the catalog, Horie had to order a printout of
the whole thing, or a significant portion of it. The librarians and technicians would update a
portion every week or month. They informed patrons of what was new, in a binder. They could
also database96 search closer to the library, in another room nearby, where they had to deal with a
phone console and receiver. They would type in the query—Boolean could be used—and results
would be printed out. Before printing, it was possible to see how many results there were, and
modify the search if necessary before printing.
In 1986, five years after she had started working there, Horie was unhappy to find that
there was talk of reduction in force (“RIF”). This was in the middle of then-President Reagan’s
two terms in office, and his economic program (“Reaganomics”) curtailed social services
spending, increased military spending, and lowered taxes; combined with the Federal Reserve
Board’s reduction of growth in the money supply, Reaganomics resulted in a recession (1981-82)
and his terms were characterized by economic growth, but also huge budget deficits (Downes &
Goodman, 2014). Horie remembers that during this time, there was even fear of the East-West
Center being totally eliminated. Due to a significant budget cut, they would have to let people
go. Horie was worried for her job, which was a salaried position with benefits. She was
automatically a member of AFSCME, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal

94

At the time, the word “metadata” was not used, but I use it here for clarity’s sake. Horie clarifies that at the time,
it would have been referenced as “bibliographic information.”
95
http://libweb.hawaii.edu/names/keller.html
96
Although they had access to multiple databases, Horie does not remember which specifically.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

60

Employees, which represented all the center’s employees, so she would not be destitute even if
laid-off, but she was averse to change and craved job security.
Horie says that both at the time and now, looking back, she would describe her time at
the East-West Center as a great learning experience, one in which she was able to meet new
challenges. While employed there, she continued several other pursuits on the side, including
volunteering at UH’s Hamilton Library, in the cataloging department. She had been in contact
with Kengo Yasumatsu—a librarian from Japan who previously worked at the Library of
Congress in Washington, D.C.—about a job at Hamilton Library, back when she was still a
graduate student, but at the time of her graduation and subsequent job hunt, there was no
opening. Five years later, she had strengthened her connections with that library, but there was
still no position available for her. Luckily, one Sunday morning, she happened to see an ad in the
newspaper for a reference librarian at Bishop Museum Library. She sent in her application the
next day, on Monday; interviewed for the job that Friday; and was offered the job on the spot.
She accepted.

Employment at Bishop Museum (1986-1990)
Bernice Pauahi Bishop, a descendant of Kamehameha I, was the largest landholder in the
Hawaiian Islands during the mid-nineteenth century (Okihiro, 1991). Her namesake museum97
was founded by her husband, Charles Reed Bishop, in 1889.98 The original ethnology museum
absorbed the then-inactive National Museum in 1891 (Tachihata, 1981). By the 1980s, the
Bishop Museum had become the largest natural and cultural history institution in Polynesia and

97

https://www.bishopmuseum.org/
He also made substantial financial contributions to the Honolulu Library, and had opened the first bank in the
islands, in 1848 (Okihiro, 1991).
98

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

61

in 1988 it was designated the State Museum of Natural and Cultural History (Editors of
Encyclopædia Britannica, 2013). Of this, Horie said:
I was excited about the “State Museum” designation, because I assumed (wrongly,
as I later found out) that the Museum would join the State messenger service
(saving money on postage) and that Museum employees would join the civil service
system (and get job security and union representation)… When I learned that the
designation did not include what I assumed it would, and that it wouldn’t really
affect the staff as far as I could tell, I became disappointed.
Horie had first volunteered at the Bishop Museum Botany Department as an
undergraduate. “I felt the experience would help me learn and perhaps give me a leg up on a
potential future job there. I believe I had the same motivation to volunteer at the Hamilton
Library Cataloging Department while still working at the EWC.” She started in her new position
at Bishop Museum’s onsite library in November 1986. She took a $12,000 pay cut,99 from
$25,800, which would be significant today, and was even more so then; however, she felt it was
worth it to be able to go back into Hawaiian Studies. She agrees with the general perception that
the Bishop Museum’s library houses arguably one of the best if not the best Pacific collections in
the world. The reasons she took the job without hesitation were that it was the ideal job for her
background; she already knew one of the catalog librarians; and she thought that it was a rare
opportunity. “I felt very fortunate to work in a position that fit my education background and
interests. I also appreciated the importance of the institution to the local community and the
wider research world.”

99

There were perks and benefits, including free parking, a 35-hour work week (instead of 40 hours), institutional
support for attending ALA annual conferences, time off to attend HLA conferences on island, a store discount, free
business cards, and OCLC training when it was held on island.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

62

Her new title was reference librarian, and her duties were “serving the Museum staff in
person and by phone; serving the public in person, by phone, and by mail; making outgoing
interlibrary loan (ILL) requests; some cataloging; some manuscript inventory work; [and]
proofreading the Museum newsletter.” She also did communications outreach, and instruction.
She only worked in the library, but through her duties had contact or involvement with the Amy
B. H. Greenwell Ethnobotanical Garden and the Hawai‘i Maritime Center (HMC), both of which
were once part of the Museum. “The library felt like a part of the museum, definitely a support
unit, and sometimes its own entity, as an OCLC holding library, for example.” Horie interacted
with any museum staff who came in to use the library; she was mainly customer-facing. “During
public hours I was in the reading room. During all staff working hours100 I was available to
answer questions from museum staff.”
One drawback, besides the pay cut, was that she went from a union job to working at a
non-union, private nonprofit; she therefore now felt she had less job security. However, there
was an informal expectation that she would remain working as a librarian at Bishop Museum
until retirement. Horie did not intend to move up the chain of command; she says that from
speaking with and observing all three of the women who had the head librarian job while she
was there, it was clear that she “would not want to be them.”
Aside from the head librarian, there was one reference librarian (Horie), two catalog
librarians, a half-time geography and maps librarian, and two library clerks.101 Since there was
no promotion available for her except to head librarian, a job she did not want, Horie did not get
promoted during her four years at the museum library.

100
101

Monday-Friday all day, and Saturday morning, except holidays and holiday weekends.
All the Bishop Museum librarians were women.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

63

I generally worked well with everyone. There was only one clash that I can
remember, when I made a remark about a person calling in from the public, without
realizing that he was a friend of one of the library clerks. I said that he was being
too “vague” in his reference question.
That this was perceived as a “clash” possibly displays Horie’s high personal and
professional standards, and/or the culture of politeness in Hawaiʻi. Here it is customary to err on
the side of politeness since there are fewer degrees of separation between people on an island.
When asked about her specific experiences or accomplishments at Bishop Museum,
Horie says:
I continued the practice of creating index cards of answers to frequently-asked
reference questions. Example: who are the “Big Five?” When a local radio station
promoted a Hawaiiana trivia contest, I called them and asked for the questions, so
that we could be prepared with answers for members of the public who called us. I
created a staff phone directory sorted by first name. I learned to process and
inventory a manuscript collection by working on the Vivienne “Huapala” Mader
collection of hula chants and songs. I assisted with bibliographic data collection for
“Hawaiian sheet music index : a union catalog” and worked with project director
Michaelyn P. Chou102 on editing the volumes, which were published in 1990.
Also while at Bishop Museum, Horie had her first experience of contributing to the
OCLC Database; she learned how to fill out data sheets to contribute to the National Union
Catalog of Manuscript Collections (NUCMC).103

102
103

Hawaiian Collection librarian.
http://www.loc.gov/coll/nucmc/about.html

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

64

When the decision was made to progress from retrospective conversion to using
OCLC for current cataloging, we had onsite training from OCLC staff. Because I
had used OCLC in my previous position at the EWC, I was able to assist library
staff and answer some questions after the trainer left.
When Horie left her position at Bishop Museum, after almost five years, her salary was
approximately $20,100. Horie did not know how much her coworkers were earning; she
emphasizes that she was unaware that “anyone at all could ask for a raise.” She said that when
her financial circumstances changed, she decided that she needed to seek a higher –paying job:
“After divorcing, I realized that I needed a higher-paying job to maintain my living expenses,
and after some Museum employees were laid off without much notice, I needed better job
security.” The exorbitantly-high cost of living in Hawaiʻi—possibly the most expensive place to
live in the United States (Ross, 2017)—can mean high risk if a person loses their job here.
Asking for a raise simply did not occur to Horie; instead, she resolved to find a new position.
Horie had continued to be part of previous organizations and communities during her
employment at Bishop Museum, including Beta Phi Mu and HLA. She also attended the UH
Alumni dinner at one of the ALA annual conferences, in Chicago, June 23-28, 1990. She says
that she received support from HLA, OCLC, contact people at EWC, and UHM libraries: “I
benefited from those contacts as I learned how to do my job and develop professionally.” The
support “originated organically from my prior network contacts and also from learning from the
others already working at the Museum.” Finally, a spot opened for her back at the University of
Hawaiʻi. Her connections, which she had worked hard to maintain, ensured that she was top-ofmind for filling the position when it opened.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

65

University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (1991-2012)
Employment at Hamilton Library (1991-2012)
In January of 1991, Horie assumed her new role, assistant head of the Serials Department
at the Thomas Hale Hamilton Library at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (UHM). The
College of Hawai‘i was originally established in 1907 and became the University of Hawai‘i
thirteen years later. Hamilton Library’s emphasis on Hawaiian, Pacific, and Asian materials,
which has continued, had early roots; early acquisition lists include a Hawaiiana collection from
antiquarian Thomas Thrum and books gifted by Japan’s Prince Akihito (Morris, 2006). The first
building constructed specifically for books is now known as George Hall; its 1925 opening
ceremony was attended by Governor Farrington and members of the Hawai‘i Territorial
legislature. Elizabeth Bryan, who worked at the library from 1913-1919, was “an early feminist
who waged and won a battle for recognition of the head librarian as a faculty member” (Morris,
2006). Half a century later, Ralph Shaw—who served as University Librarian and worked at the
library from 1966-1969, while Horie was starting out there as an undergraduate student—secured
faculty status104 for all the librarians (the “professional staff”) and upgraded civil service
rankings for the library’s support staff. He also “transformed a respectable college library into a
major research institution;” founded the Graduate School of Library Studies; completed a new
“graduate research library;”105 and supervised the reclassification of holdings from Dewey
Decimal to the Library of Congress system. When Sinclair Library was converted from an
undergraduate library to a music and media center, in 1977, “the Asia, Government Documents,

104
105

From civil service.
Hamilton Library.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

66

and Hawaiian and Pacific collections, as well as the library school, were moved from Sinclair” to
Hamilton (Kittelson, 1984, p. 62).
Horie had wanted to work at Hamilton Library ever since she was a graduate student at
UHM. The library’s Hawaiian collection is “unequaled in the world” (Morris, 2006). John Haak,
successor to Don Bosseau as University Librarian (1983-2000), had finally hired Horie in 1991.
Four years earlier, in 1987, Haak had moved to establish a new archives and manuscripts unit,
which “grew rapidly to include Hawaii Congressional papers” and Plantation Archives, formerly
held by the Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Association, but now housed within the library’s Hawaiian
collection (Morris, 2006).
Horie was assigned a “coach” to her help learn the job, which she said was common but
not categorically practiced; she found it very helpful. She got along well with her new
colleagues. “I really looked up to them because they’d been doing this work for years and years,
and I just needed to get a good start and learn the job.”
Exactly one year later, in January of 1992, Horie went half-time, which meant she moved
to a different library; she was a part-time librarian at UH West Oʻahu Library only for three
months (through March). That odd period in an otherwise very stable and continuous career was
due to personal circumstances; she thought she might move to the mainland, but in the end, she
did not. In April (1992) she returned to the UHM Library, where she was a catalog librarian in
the Cataloging Department until her retirement two decades later, in November 2012.
Just after Horie began working at Hamilton Library, the Family and Medical Leave Act
was passed, in 1993. This eventually directly benefited Horie, who applied for family leave in
1997 while working at UH: “My father was terminally ill on the mainland and then passed
away.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

67

I was aware of the changes in the missions of Hamilton and Sinclair Libraries, as
well as the shifts of materials. Many non-music and art related titles moved from
Sinclair Library to Hamilton Library. Some less-used back issues of serial titles
moved from Hamilton Library to Sinclair Library to make room in Hamilton
Library. When materials moved or were withdrawn, their records in the online
catalog had to be adjusted. I was glad that Hamilton Library became the “main”
library because it meant to me that anyone could use it, not just those doing
“graduate research.” While I was an undergraduate, I remember feeling like a bit
of an interloper exploring Hamilton Library.
That feeling had gradually changed over the years, as Horie became interested in working
at Hamilton Library.106 She had envisioned herself becoming a librarian at Hamilton, and had
finally achieved that goal; when asked if she was interested in advancing her career, or in
leadership roles, Horie says,
I was mainly interested in learning the many aspects of being a good cataloger… I
accept that I have an aversion to holding leadership positions. I would rather put
my head down and do my work than deal with bureaucracy and all the
administrative and personnel headaches that go with leadership… there was a
possibility of my applying to become Assistant University Librarian, 107 when that
individual left… Well, when the person that had that position during the flood, later
on, left, to go back to the mainland, people, several different people encouraged me

106

Although even now, she says she has always experienced some sense of “imposter syndrome.”
“...the Assistant University Librarian is not a faculty member, it’s an administrative position. The library has
three administrative positions: The University Librarian, and then Associate University Librarian, for administration
policy and planning, something like that. And the Assistant University Librarian would cover automation,
computing, technical services, systems.”
107

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

68

to apply. But I was absolutely not interested. [Laughs] It was flattering, to have the
confidence of people who would come up and actually tell me, “Ruth, you should
apply for that, we think you’d be actually good at it.” But, maybe so, but, it just
went against the grain. Having seen what [the] person in that position was
responsible for, I just didn’t think it was something I wanted to do. So that, as far
as the career opportunities, that was probably the highest level that anyone
encouraged me to apply for.
Horie says she likes or dislikes things—such as paperwork—and is impulsive. She is
extremely group-oriented and proactive, and therefore probably would have excelled in
leadership positions, which would have been great since “women make up less than a critical
mass of academic leadership” (Baker & Bobrowski, 2016, p. 82).
I think the major inhibition was my own aversion to paperwork. And the other
factor which advanced my efforts to obtain professional development and
promotion would be the expectations within the department and, in the form of
subtle peer pressure and encouragement from the more-experienced librarians who
had been there longer. Plus, the general library administrative support; they really
wanted us to succeed. It was really apparent… and so, all of those three, I think,
worked together to make it easy to actually go along and jump through all those
hoops, and feel good about it.
As at most university libraries, UH librarians are all faculty; they start as Librarian II
(instructor); next is Librarian III (assistant professor); then Librarian IV (associate professor);
and, finally Librarian V (full professor). Horie thinks she was probably qualified to be a
Librarian V—in fact, many of her colleagues agreed, and voiced their encouragement for her

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

69

advancement—but she never applied. She did not want to apply for something she might fail at,
and she was more preoccupied with achieving tenure; she felt anxious about it and calls herself a
“worrier by nature.” In order to remain employed by the University, librarians must achieve
tenure,108 so the stakes are high. The tenure process was explained to her by both UH and
Hamilton Library. She was advised to apply for promotion to Librarian III and/or IV before
applying for tenure, so that is what she did.
Speaking of her own experience as well as her later work helping others go through the
process, Horie says:
Coming up for tenure or promotion together, you consult with each other as to how
you’re gonna write this up. It’s not a matter of colluding, it’s a matter of getting the
facts out in the open so that we’re all on the same page about it. Yeah. Maybe I was
overly-concerned about that. But I tried to, partly as my role as a faculty
representative in the union, but partially out of trying to impart some of the good
wisdom that I got from other mentors, that, number one, this is a multi-year process,
you have to be prepared, you have to document what you’re doing, 109 and write
yourself up as if you’re writing a newsletter article or something. So-and-so, this is
what I did, and this was the outcome, and I worked with so-and-so, and it doesn’t
have to be necessarily somebody in the library, could be someone in another
department, or another state agency, let’s say, whoever, whomever, and just
learning to document and look at your own activities almost like a third party. Like,
how is this going to fit in with these criteria that you’re eventually gonna have to

108

Tenure is a permanent or indefinite university position.
Starting in 1999, Horie kept individual annual reports, which summarized employee activities during the
previous fiscal year (July 1-June 30).
109

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

70

address? And make sure that what your position you’re hired at, you gotta focus on
certain criteria that are really focused on your job, just don’t go all over the place,
or, just don’t focus on something that’s not really what you’re hired to do, cuz that’s
a problem too, if you think you’re doing great work, but it’s not really a central
activity of your personal position.
Horie applied for (and was granted) tenure in 1996. The only factor that Horie feels
inhibited her career advancement efforts was her own aversion to paperwork. She attributes peer
pressure and administrative support with helping to advance her efforts.
I chose to pursue the first two promotions (to rank four) within my position. I did
not pursue promotion to the highest rank (rank five, equivalent to full professor),
because I have an aversion to paperwork. I was not prevented from pursuing any
other career advancement steps… I chose to pursue nearly every professional
development opportunity for which I was eligible and that was offered. I was not
ever prevented from pursuing any.
Besides promotion to leadership positions, there were professional opportunities
available, such as promotion to a higher rank within her position; appointment to chair library
committees or task forces; appointment to department head; and promotion to division head or
assistant university librarian. Professional development opportunities available included training
to learn how to create LC (Library of Congress) name and subject authority records; propose
new LC classification; how to use new versions of the integrated library system (ILS), called
Voyager; OCLC Connexion Client training; LC Cataloger’s Desktop; Hamilton Library’s
intranet software; the new RDA (Resource Description and Access) cataloging code; the BIBCO
Standard Record (BSR), a bibliographic monographic record model that uses a single encoding

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

71

level in a shared database environment;110 the CONSER Standard Record (CSR);111 the Library’s
institutional repository software; and the University’s online grading system.
While Horie was most interested in increasing her capabilities as a cataloger, there was a
desirable incentive to apply for promotion: per institutional policy, each promotion included an
automatic 8% pay increase. “Because salaries serve as one index of a profession’s success, one
would expect remuneration to increase commensurately with educational requirements and
credentials” (Passet, 1996, p. 208). This seemed to be the case for Horie, who managed to
somewhat overcome the stereotyped low-pay for women in general and librarians in particular
by being a university librarian at a university that considers librarians faculty,112 and at a state
institution accountable to regulation by the government and unions.
However, the academic library profession “gets short-shrift from academe” (Juárez,
2015, p. 299), and indeed, Horie describes some instructional faculty outside the library as
actively against librarians having faculty status. UH librarians were not considered “real” faculty
by the non-librarian faculty, so much so that some even wanted to strip librarians of their faculty
status. The in-group she had aligned herself with—the exclusive category of faculty—ultimately
rejected her (and those in her camp). They were unwilling to share their power, even though it
cost them nothing to do so. This is consistent with “modern formulations of the academic
library… with a significant gender distinction in wages and prestige created between faculty and
librarians” (Sloniowski, 2016, p. 647). Possibly, non-librarian faculty perceived their own status
as tarnished or somehow limited or denigrated by association with librarianship, a feminized and
chronically undervalued and underpaid profession. “Librarians were considered support staff,

110

https://www.loc.gov/aba/pcc/bibco/bsr-maps.html
https://www.loc.gov/aba/pcc/conser/issues/CSR.html
112
It is likely not a coincidence that academic librarians are paid more than public and school librarians, and that
faculty are generally skewed white/male, especially those with tenure.
111

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

72

subservient to the scholarly and pedagogical output of the faculty… It was a long struggle113 for
librarians to become accepted as members of faculty associations, and in some places they still
bargain independently” (Sloniowski, 2016, p. 647).
Horie says that because of this antagonism, the UH librarians needed to be extra solid on
tenure and promotion applications. In technical services in the library, Horie felt like a
minority within a minority within another minority. Because many librarians do not
understand what we do. And it’s sometimes difficult for us to concentrate and focus
and say something in a concise way that’s understandable not only to the other
librarians, but other faculty on campus too, some of the other faculty on campus,
I’m sorry to say, [are] actively against librarians having faculty status.114 So there’s
all these hurdles to jump through. And make sure we’re making these applications
in a confident and professional way. Not to put it anything that seems the least-bit
iffy.
As faculty, UH librarians were required to eventually apply for tenure. Their applications
were reviewed by the UH Tenure and Promotion Review Committee (TPRC), an anonymous
group of faculty members who are all either at or above the rank to which the applicant is
applying. Horie has advice for anyone who must go through this process, since she successfully
completed it: “stay on track and check in with people.” For her, that meant her department head,
and the “coach” who was assigned to her (a tenured librarian).

113

Sloniowski (2016) calls this struggle “the Dewey-imposed ceiling on our work” (p. 647).
Horie fought this bias in several ways, in addition to being the “model minority” as a cataloger/librarian: “I
proposed to UHPA that the hierarchy of priority for faculty housing be rearranged in a way that was not based on
faculty classification. At the time, librarians were near the bottom of the hierarchy. I proposed two different ways of
arranging the hierarchy, based on rank and based on anticipated length of time the housing was needed, but was not
successful. In the process I learned that the priority for faculty housing was held as a prerogative of the Board of
Regents.”
114

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

73

She describes the overall work environment as encouraging and supportive, despite the
antagonism of some non-librarian faculty. And, after a few years working at UH, Horie found
another source of guidance and support; she joined a campus mentoring program mainly geared
toward women. “After a while it broadened out to minority men, and some of them had
experienced similar problems with… credibility and discrimination, etcetera.” She was not
looking for such a group, but just happened to find out about it via the UH announcement emails.
Later, she proactively reached out115 to new librarians with the same advice she had learned from
that group, which she felt she had benefited from.
Horie had an aversion to failure; specifically, she did not want to apply to anything she
might not succeed at; this is the reason she gives for never applying for Librarian V. When asked
what she meant by “not succeed” in this context, she replied, “not succeeding at getting the
promotion, even if I would still be continuing in the position.” Interestingly, she also says she
received encouraging input from others.
…a couple of times [I] asked some of the more senior librarians in our department
or, who had been on those committees, judging the applicants, and reviewing their
applications, “Well, do you think I could qualify for Librarian V?” or, “Do you
think I should apply for Librarian V?” and everyone said, “Yes, go ahead.” You
can’t lose. I mean, it’s totally voluntary. And it’s not a big deal or a detriment to
your career if you don’t get it. It’s not like tenure. Tenure is—if you don’t get
tenure, you’re out of a job.

115

A gap in the literature exists regarding “pink-collar” labor that university librarians perform, also known as
emotional labor: “the often unrecognized or unproblematized affective work of academic librarians in knowledge
production and education” (Sloniowski, 2016, p. 647).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

74

Ironically, her failure to apply for that ultimate librarian rank meant she did not get
Faculty Emeritus status, which would have meant free parking and an office during retirement,
two perks that are a particular shame for her to not receive since she still volunteers there (she
still goes to UHM three days per week, and pays for parking, which is not cheap). One of her
own self-defined failures is when she applied for a special salary adjustment, and her request was
only partially granted.
In the 2003-2009 contract, the UH Board of Regents and the UHPA created a
memorandum116 of understanding to enable faculty members to apply for “special
salary adjustments” under the criteria of equity, market, merit, and retention, and
bonus payments. I applied for an adjustment of $6,000 per year based on equity and
merit. Library Administration granted a $600 adjustment.
It seems that Horie needed prior approval before feeling comfortable asking for a raise; at
least now, she was aware of the possibility.
When asked to define her own successes at UH, Horie highlights her embrace of evolving
technologies in cataloging. There were many technological transitions over the course of her
employment at UH. The advance of technology did not intimidate her. She also served on the
[rotating] UH system-wide cataloging coordination committee (SCCC).
I did do well in terms of embracing and promoting the evolving technology of
cataloging. Like, one of the training sessions we had, I collaborated with a former
library school classmate who got a job at the East-West Center, to have one of these
training sessions actually be multi-campus, multisite, almost like a conference call
kind of thing. It was held in a room in the library school; whereas in the past it was

116

Details in Appendix R-18 on p. 41 and 106-107 of the 2003-2009 contract: https://1gyy0p31bywk3kl09732jggrwpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/legacy/uhpa-bor-contract/archives/2003-2009-bu7_contract.pdf.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

75

generally only you know, in the room with the trainer, and all. So, that was kind of
revolutionary, and well-supported by our department head, head of cataloging. I
don’t know how we came up with the idea. [laughs] And then, the aspect of, moving
from tape-loaded OCLC work to live on-demand OCLC cataloging, that was, I
thought it was inevitable, and it would save a lot of time, actually, because, it, the
tape-loading I think only happened quarterly, so, if we did some cataloging and in
the three months before our tape went in, some other library put in that same record,
or did something which duplicated our efforts, then we wouldn’t know about it for
months, and it’s kind of [a] waste of our work, in a sense. Plus, the transition from
OCLC dedicated terminals to workstations to the PC, to do your work, those three
things all happened while I was in the cataloging department. And fortunately, our
department head, who came from the Library of Congress, was really open to any
kind of technological improvement, and when he convinced the library
administration to get us all PC’s, he said, “Ok, we’re all gonna get PC’s.” And many
people [had] never touched a PC before. He says, “You’re not gonna be afraid of
it. Everyone’s gonna get one, on your desk, and we’re not gonna start doing any
work on these right away. Your first assignment is to play with it. Play games, play
Tetris, or whatever it is, and just get accustomed to how the keyboard works, how
the cursor arrows work, and back and whatnot. Cuz I want everyone to get
comfortable with using a PC before we actually start loading apps. And then, you’ll
be more comfortable actually learning the app rather than learning the app and the
PC at the same time. I’d been working with computers since my very first job in
1968 and actually got into the data processing and punching cards, and in library

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

76

school I took programming, and so, the advance of technology didn’t really scare
me. I could see the benefits of it and I was willing to do whatever was necessary to
learn it and help other people come along for the ride, more or less [laughs] and this
still is going on in cataloging. There’s no end. [laughs]
When asked to describe any particular challenges she faced over the course of her career
at UH, Horie reiterates that catalogers are the blue-collar workers of the library—something she
said she first heard from one of her department heads—and they are measured by how many
items they cataloged. Something she specifically mentioned occurred when she was the newest
cataloger in the department; she was told she was the most productive cataloger. It was both
disturbing to her, and an accomplishment. Her interpretation of the event is unexpected to me, as
a white millennial; I can only guess that her attitude toward praise has some roots in her
culture—either as a Japanese American or a Hawaiʻi local—or her generation (or some
combination).
We had a new department head… who was born and raised in Hawaiʻi but actually
spent most of her career on the mainland, but returned home… She [pause] for
some reason she was really oriented toward productivity, which I was in favor of,
generally speaking, because I could see the size of the backlog and how, you know,
how time-consuming everything is… She came up to me one day and asked me,
she said, “Ruth, you are the, by the statistics, you are the most productive cataloger
in this department.” And I was the newest cataloger in the department, and that was
a big shock. And she said, “What’s your secret and how can we impart it to
everybody else?” And that was really disturbing to me, that I would even presume
to give advice to anybody else who was senior to me in the department. I said, “I

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

77

can just tell you that I try to find shortcuts. Not that I’m gonna do less than fulllevel cataloging, or sloppy work, or anything, but I try to gather together things that
are similar, and catalog them together, rather than ten separate things, maybe, five
similar things, and another five similar things. And it takes less time to do it that
way.
Evidence of Horie’s unique positionality as a Hawaiʻi local is how she begins this story
by revealing that the person who offended her117 was from Hawaiʻi but had “spent most of her
career on the mainland.” That is the only piece of information118 Horie reveals about that person,
indicating that in her view, it was a defining characteristic (at least in this situation). This story
illuminates and underscores Horie’s investment in hierarchy, or what she has referred to as the
“establishment;” her preference for collectivism over individualism; and her innate tendency to
efficiency, which clearly served her well in the course of her career as a cataloger and librarian.
When asked about these beliefs and preferences, Horie attributes them to her personality, to
something innate within her; however, when critically viewing her positionality within context,
the argument could be made that these particular traits are more typical of Hawaiʻi in particular,
where there is a “local cultural ethic of humility” (Rohrer, 2010, p. 56). Possibly, some of
Horie’s tendencies and preferences might have been influenced by her Japanese heritage;
“Unlike Westerners, who valued spontaneity and individuality, the Japanese emphasized
predictability, control, and selflessness” (Tamura, 1994, p.33). There was also a sort of glass
ceiling for Japanese American women:

117

My interpretation.
Rohrer (2010) writes that, given its history, “it should not be surprising that race operates differently in the
islands than it does on the continent, or anywhere else, for that matter” (p. 5). I would extend that concept to include
not only racial categories but also local/nonlocal in/out groups/distinctions, as well.
118

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

78

The progress of Nisei occupational advancement in Hawaii differed markedly
between males and females, reflecting the status of Japanese males within families.
Japanese men moved up the occupational ladder quickly, but Japanese women
advanced slowly. (Tamura, 1994, p. 221)
Horie, however, was very good at her job, and other people recognized that. She was
especially talented at finding the most efficient way to complete her tasks. Perhaps this is part of
the reason she excelled as a librarian.
Laws 2-4119 were the ones that stood out for me in relation to cataloging ...we had
some assigned work, because this is current, this is rushed, or whatever. But we had
some leeway as to what we wanted to pick to do, to do cataloging for, based on
combing the backlog. It all needs to be done, so just, whatever, have at it, right?
And I kinda enjoyed combing through the backlog and looking for things. Like, if
I was assigned an art auction catalog for this week, I would go look in the backlog
for other ones. And, because, they all needed to be done. It [was] just easier if I did
them all together. Or, if, say the Hawaiian Collection received a big donation of
archaeological reports from the H3 tunnel surveys, I asked the Head of the
Hawaiian Collection at the time to just give me all of the archaeological reports at
one time. I felt it would be easier for one person to segregate the reports by author
and location and assign call numbers accordingly… cuz the Head of the Cataloging
Department told the Head of the Hawaiian Collection “you have to dole these out
to the catalogers, you must not overwhelm them, cuz they have their regular weekly
work.” So, she would give me, like, two or three a week, and that’s difficult because

119

She is referring to the famous Five Laws of Library Science. Number two is every reader their book; number
four is save the time of the reader (Ranganathan, 1931).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

79

they’re all on the same topic, right? Archeological work. And they’re all done by
different archeologists, but each archeologist did numerous reports and mostly on
certain locations.

Sabbaticals
In over two decades as a UH librarian, Horie took two sabbaticals. Each required an
application, but she describes the process as having been relaxed and informal. The sabbaticals
were for six months each at full pay but could be broken into smaller periods.
For her first sabbatical, Horie spent three months in the spring of 2000 helping her
previous employer, Bishop Museum library, with its cataloging backlog. She cataloged an
impressive 1,000 books over the course of only three short months.
Since none of the 1,000 the books were held by the UHM Library, the cataloging
supported Senate Concurrent Resolution 176 (1999) “Requesting the University of
Hawaii to Partner with Bishop Museum for Research Assistance.”
The second half of this first sabbatical (the Spring semester), she spent helping UH
transition to Colorado Alliance of Research Libraries (CARL), an automation system software
that was the precursor to the Voyager system the library still uses today. Used until the year
2000, “UHCARL, as the local system became known, served as a host site for a state network of
libraries, including nine external library sites in the University of Hawaiʻi system, the Hawaiʻi
Medical Library, and the Bishop Museum” (Morris, 2006).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

80

The following is an email Horie sent requesting her second sabbatical, during which she
cataloged 60 e-books for the Ulukau120 database and assisted in testing a major redesign of the
Ulukau website:
Sabbatical leave for 6 months: June 1 - Nov. 30, 2010. My last sabbatical leave was
for 6 months: Sept.-Nov. 1999 and Feb.-Apr. 2000. These are activities that I plan
to undertake:
1. Create catalog records for the next group of electronic resources to be added to
Ulukau,121 the Hawaiian electronic library. These resources include but are not
limited to: digitized print materials, sound recordings, and video recordings.
2. Add links to electronic versions of print materials in the Library online catalog.
3. Add catalog records for electronic resources that the Library does not hold in
print form to the online catalog.
4. Contribute catalog records for electronic resources to OCLC, an international
bibliographic database.
5. Develop improvements to the name and title browse functions of Ulukau so that
multiple names and titles associated with any given resource may be indexed and
retrieved consistently.
6. Develop a curriculum outline for staff at school libraries in Micronesia to learn
how to apply the Dewey Decimal Classification system and the Sears subject
headings, to be presented at the Nov. 2010 Pacific Islands Association of Libraries,

120
121

http://ulukau.org/.
From 2003 onwards, when e-books were new, Horie volunteered cataloging new books for Ulukau.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

81

Archives and Museums conference in Chuuk, Micronesia, at the request of the
Chuuk Library Association.
7. Spend one week in Chuuk following the PIALA122 conference on site visits to
school libraries to assist library staff in applying the Dewey Decimal Classification
system and the Sears subject headings in cataloging their holdings.
This second sabbatical provided Horie with an opportunity for further professional
growth and development. She successfully turned items 6 and 7 into a copy-cataloging workshop
at the 2010 PIALA conference in Chuuk, FSM. She also found meaningful ways to contribute in
several directions simultaneously:
The community of users of Ulukau, including UH faculty, staff and students, would
have enhanced access to electronic resources related to Hawaiian language,
Hawaiians, and Hawaiian studies. The Library would receive monetary credit for
each catalog record for an electronic resource that I contribute[d] to OCLC. The
library staff and students in Chuuk, Micronesia, and the attendees of the 2010
PIALA conference would be able to start applying the Dewey Decimal
Classification system and the Sears subject headings to their holdings.

2004 Mānoa Flood123
In several unexpected ways, Horie’s life has been impacted dramatically by floods.
Exactly four decades after the flood that caused her family to eventually relocate off-island, a
flash flood rushed through Mānoa valley, where UH is located. Horie recalls:

122

Pacific Islands Association of Libraries, Archives, and Museums
Photos from the flood can be viewed at: http://manoa.hawaii.edu/library/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/A-RiverRan-Through-It.pdf.
123

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

82

The Saturday night October 30, 2004, flood from Mānoa Valley swept into and
through Hamilton Library, destroying all departments in the ground floor124 and
causing a lesser degree of damage to departments near the loading dock on the first
floor. We could not work. When it happened, I was on the mainland. I returned
home on Sunday evening, October 31. When I came in on Monday, November 1, I
could not park in the lower campus structure, which had layers of mud deposited
by flood waters. The Library was closed. It was barely accessible. The power was
out. We could not walk down the staircase to LIS.
According to an official University of Hawaiʻi statement (2004), the flash flood damage
“included about 230,000 rare maps and aerial photographs, more than 100 computers, thousands
of government documents and books, collection services and the Library Information Science
(LIS) school.” During the flood, several LIS students and their professor, Dr. Andrew
Wertheimer,125 escaped through a window. Luckily, there were no fatalities or major injuries.
However, the damage was substantial.
Hardest hit were the government documents and maps collections. The building of
the government documents collection dated back to 1907; of the some two million
items, about 95% were damaged or lost. Similarly, 65% of the maps and aerial
photographs were destroyed. Tens of thousands of mud-covered maps had to be
painstakingly cleaned by hand over a period of years. The ground floor also housed
collection services; an estimated 36,000 items awaiting processing were lost.
Furniture and computers were destroyed. The library’s electrical system was

124
125

Systems, Acquisitions, Serials, Cataloging, Government Documents and Maps, and the LIS Program.
He is also the chair of this thesis.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

83

destroyed, necessitating emergency generator power for many months…. Two
Texas corporations, the Belfor document recovery company and the BMS CAT
company126 were contracted. (Morris, 2006)
Damage was estimated at upward of $48 million. For the two months after the flood, all
hands were on deck for recovery. The LIS school temporarily relocated to the Pacific Ocean
Science and Technology (POST) and Bilger Hall buildings.
I assisted with flood recovery. My first role was as a gatekeeper. On the morning
of November first, I volunteered to sit on a stool in the main entrance (which could
be manually forced open about 18 inches) and tell people that the Library was
closed until further notice.127 I only let in those who worked in the library or needed
to be here. When the front entrance was closed and all entrance and exit was
controlled at the loading dock, and later at the side entrance to Science and
Technology, I coordinated library security guards, campus security guards, and
staff security volunteers, helped organize the check-in table, patrolled the perimeter
of Hamilton Library to prevent unauthorized access and looting, worked with the
campus fire safety officer and the Honolulu Fire Department captains of the three
closest fire stations to implement their approved measures to re-open without
working fire alarms, issued air horns to each department, arranged to purchase
flashing pagers for use by hearing impaired library patrons in the event a fire alarm
sounded and an evacuation was called, posted signs inside the Library where fire
extinguishers were situated, trained staff in what to do if anyone smelled smoke or

126

A commercial company that deals with water and fire damage, and mold restoration.
These were the days before smartphones and social media; no emergency alert or status updates could be
distributed to all students’ persons via computer program or social media.
127

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

84

saw flames, served as liaison with the Honolulu Police Department when several
signs of arson were discovered, attended some administration meetings to report
progress and make recommendations.
Everything was soaked… it was kind of miserable, actually. And in fact, we
couldn’t even open the drawers because they couldn’t really get to the interior parts
of the ground floor right away… a contractor was called in from Texas, that is a
disaster recovery big contractor and they took charge, they hired local people and
they planned it out. They worked on every single building on campus… every
building on campus was affected. And we dragged the PCs that came from the
offices in the basement, out onto the sidewalk to hose them down, because we knew
we had to contract with some agency to try to recover what was on those PCs, so
we could continue working. And for the most part, a majority of the PCs were
restored, and everything was downloaded onto CD-ROMS, and handed to us later
on. That was miraculous.
…for the first two months, November and December, I was working fulltime with flood recovery. My first role was to keep people out of the library. And
then, I was eventually in charge of all security, including campus security, library
security, HPD,128 and library volunteers129 to patrol around the building, in shifts,130
and make sure people didn’t take things that were sitting outside, and didn’t bother
us while we’re trying to recover… So, I was coordinating the library security

128

Hawaiʻi Police Department.
This refers to library employees who volunteered to be on security duty.
130
In shifts, “because you can’t expect us to be walking around all day, right? It’s too tiring.”
129

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

85

guards, the campus security guards, the police, and the, eventually, the Fire
Department to help us do various things.
The flood recovery put my work completely on hold for two months, and
partially for six more months, until June 2005. My work as a cataloger resumed in
January 2005 when our temporary space was assigned and we each got a table,
chair, PC, and shelving space. At first the catalogers searched donated materials in
Voyager to see if any could be added to the collection as replacements. Twice we
pitched in to help sort the tremendous number of donations that poured in. As time
went on, I began to do original cataloging as usual. I did some flood recovery work
in researching and making purchase recommendations for equipment that was lost
in the flood: copiers, typewriter, microfilm readers, microfiche readers. I also took
the paper FEMA flood recovery work time sheets that were given to us by the
Library Fiscal Office and converted them to Excel sheets with formulas for
calculations. After we began using these in Cataloging and Serials, I offered the
Excel files back to the Fiscal Office in case they wanted to issue them for use in
other Library departments too. At the end of my flood recovery work I turned over
all my flood recovery documents to Library Administration.
Horie might have been extremely averse to paperwork and administration, but she was
still proactive, thorough, and compliant.

Teaching Cataloging (2009)
Five years after the flood, after the LIS Program moved back into Hamilton Library’s
basement, Horie taught a course in the Library and Information Science program. The graduate-

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

86

level course was LIS 605, Basic Cataloging and Classification, required of all LIS students.
Horie taught the course during a summer session in 2009. Prone to either like or dislike things,
Horie actually both liked and disliked teaching:
I was asked by my department head to help LIS offer the course with a local
instructor rather than hiring a visiting professor, because the faculty member who
usually taught the course was finishing her Ph.D. The need was for only that one
summer session… I enjoyed it when students seemed to absorb and appreciate the
material. I found the time in preparing for daily classes and handling bureaucratic
paperwork less enjoyable… The students represented a wide range of levels of
exposure to cataloging and how it related to other functions in libraries. I
appreciated the questions, some very basic, and others more nuanced. I felt that the
students’ questions motivated me to work harder at understanding my own role as
a cataloger… I think it went fairly well. The majority of student evaluations were
positive. My syllabus was selected by the UHM Assessment Office as exemplary
and was included in the syllabi exhibit for the Western Association of Schools and
Colleges (WASC) re-accreditation visit in December 2009. I was especially
grateful to Ms.131 donna Bair-Mundy, the usual cataloging instructor who was on
leave, for allowing me to use her course materials.
Teaching the course had an impact on Horie’s previous conceptions of teachers, in that it
confirmed her suspicions. During childhood, she saw how much work went into being a
schoolteacher, and that observation specifically deterred her from pursuing teaching as a career.

131

Horie said “Ms.” but her title is currently Dr. Bair-Mundy, as she completed her Ph.D.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

87

I believe the teaching experience reinforced my previous conceptions of how hard
teachers need to work. The experience also reinforced what I learned from my
existing teaching or coaching sessions with other librarians and library
paraprofessionals with regard to how the teaching method(s) needed to be tailored
to the subject as well as to the students in the class.
When she taught cataloging, Horie shared with the students that catalogers wield power
in terms of correcting the record and empowering people versus perpetuating misleading,
discriminatory, or incorrect information.
I did say that catalogers are empowered to do so through procedures established by
the Library of Congress Program for Cooperative Cataloging. I felt that it was
important for students to know this so that some of them might be inspired to take
similar steps and make a difference.

Master’s Degree in Linguistics (1996-1999)
Horie was a Librarian II, considered entry-level for UH librarians, when she enrolled in
her second master’s degree program. She was admitted to the program to begin the Fall semester
of 1996, but she had started thinking about the program about a year prior. She then began to
take classes, before applying for the program, so that she would be able to stay on schedule when
she started. Her M.A. in Linguistics took her about three years to complete—she graduated in
1999—while working full-time, so she stayed on track. Her friends and family supported this
new endeavor: “Yes, they did, and so did my colleagues as well as the Library Administration. I
applied for and was granted a one-semester study leave to complete my M.A. in fall 1999.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

88

Horie can speak and understand HCE, English, and Hawaiian, and has “very limited
speaking and listening comprehension” of Japanese. She has cataloging fluency/bibliographic
familiarity with French; German; Spanish; Dutch; Latin; Samoan; Tongan; Tahitian; Pohnpeian;
Kosraean; Marshallese; Guamanian / Chamorro; and Maori. She did not consider pursuing a
master’s degree in Hawaiian Studies, because she felt that her B.A. in Hawaiian Studies (1979)
was sufficient, and the next logical step was to study the language.132 She only studied Hawaiian
language in detail during her studies (as opposed to learning additional languages in the course
of her M.A. program), but her course assignments included short studies in Korean, Marshallese,
Pohnpeian, and Turkish.
I was given a choice between pursuing the M.A. first, followed by the Ph.D., or
pursuing the Ph.D. directly. I decided to pursue the M.A. first, for two reasons: [a]
I wanted to break the effort into two manageable segments, and [b] as a terminal
degree, an M.A. would have been one criterion to apply for promotion, while a
Ph.D. would have taken me longer to acquire, and would not necessarily be
considered a criterion for promotion. I could have taken additional Hawaiian
language courses through the same tuition waivers as an unclassified student
without pursuing a degree. But the UHM Linguistics Department provided the
easiest way to study the language itself without moving out of state or trying to
pursue a degree through distance education. I worked full time and received UH
tuition waivers for most of the required courses. I paid resident tuition for one
elective course so that the minimum enrollment could be met. If I had not done this,
that course would have been cancelled. I paid for the books myself.

132

She had completed Hawn 301-302 by fall 1979, and Hawn 401-402, and Hawn 435 (translation) by spring 1981.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

89

When asked what it was like studying Hawaiian language—and culture, previously—as a
non-Hawaiian, Horie says:
In linguistics, many scholars are not members of the ethnic or geographic group
that speaks the language being studied. It is more important to have familiarity with
or fluency in that language. So I did feel comfortable as a graduate student… My
fellow linguistics students came from all over the world. I recall two other students
from Hawaiʻi. Neither of them were studying Hawaiian. Likewise, the faculty came
from outside of Hawaiʻi, but most had lived here for many years. Several faculty
members specialized in Pacific Islands languages: Byron Bender, Marshallese;
Kenneth Rehg, Pohnpeian; Albert Schütz, Fijian and Hawaiian; and Miriam
Meyerhoff, Solomon Islands Pidgin.
Horie did not write a master’s thesis, but she did complete original research. A copy of
her paper, Language variation in Hawaiian: How do you say “Hawaii”? (Horie, 1999) is
included in the UH Hawaiian Collection. When asked how her graduate education in linguistics
influenced her work as a librarian, Horie said:
I was able to use the M.A. as one of the criteria in my application for promotion
from Librarian III to IV in Fall 2003… I believe the impact on my confidence was
significant. My sociolinguistics professor praised the way I wrote the interview
questions and designed the research. My Plan B paper133 was selected for inclusion
in the fall 2003 UHM Linguistics 102 course bibliography. My graduate education
in linguistics did have an impact on my job performance. I was able to improve my
cataloging of materials in various Pacific Islands languages and better understand

133

The paper mentioned previously: “Language variation in Hawaiian: How do you say “Hawaii?” (1999).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

the historical relationships among the languages. In the course of my cataloging
work, I was able to apply that knowledge to propose new subject headings and
classification numbers for some lesser-known Pacific Island languages to the
Library of Congress.
For example:
Mandara language (Papua New Guinea) sh2009008405
Menya language sh2009008433
Nek language sh2009008462
PL5417.4

Moken

PL5417.5

Moklen

PL6303.5

Satawalese

PL6516

Takuu language

These are examples of Pacific Islands languages that were used in certain books
that the library acquired. The languages did not already have Library of Congress
subject headings, so I proposed them, successfully. The “sh” number is the LC
subject heading authority record number in their database. The “PL” class numbers
are for Pacific Islands languages that did not have specific assigned class numbers
before I proposed them.

90

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

91

Doctoral Work on the Americanization of Hawaiian Language
Next, Horie considered a Ph.D. in the Americanization of the Hawaiian Language; she
even applied and was accepted into the program, but ultimately chose not to pursue it.
I applied for the Ph.D. program before I completed my M.A. in 1999. I was
encouraged by Michael Forman, my first linguistics professor during my
undergraduate years, who later became department chair, and William O’Grady,
the graduate chair, when I was admitted into the M.A. program, to treat my M.A.
coursework as preparation for the Ph.D. They both agreed that my Ph.D. topic was
a logical extension of my M.A. work because I would be studying sound recordings
to identify generational differences in how Hawaiian and Maori languages were
spoken by native speakers who had a common influence of English (Anglicization)
as the dominant language in society. I formulated this topic based on the numerous
video recordings of talk shows in Hawaiian and in Maori that I had been cataloging
as part of my work in the Library.
Ever practical, Horie ultimately decided that going for her Ph.D. was unnecessary. “After
I received my M.A. and was accepted into the Ph.D. program, I decided not to enroll in it
because I felt it was time for me to refocus on my cataloging responsibilities in the Library.” She
also mentioned that she did not think it would increase her chances for further promotion, and,
personal factors also influenced these decisions: “I also felt that it was time to get a life and
refocus my attention on my husband, who had been so very supportive throughout the process.”

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

92

Challenging Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH)
Cataloging is the action of creating a catalog, “usually distinguished from a mere list or
enumeration, by systematic or methodical arrangement, alphabetical or other order, and often by
the addition of brief particulars, descriptive, or aiding identification, indicative of locality,
position, date, price, or the like” (Oxford University Press, 2018). It is essentially the act of
organizing or classifying a library’s collection so that items and information can be retrieved.
“Classification is at the heart of the work of a library. A library is arguably nothing more—or
less—than a set of materials classified according to some set of standard principles” (Drabinski,
2008, p. 198). Horie herself says, “library cataloging is part of the holistic life of the library.”
Two of the main U.S. cataloging standards, both by the national Library of Congress
(LC), are the LC Classifications (LCC) and LC Subject Headings (LCSH). These are both
“languages” and each, “despite its unique methods, shares the same goal: to distill the aboutness
of an item” (Tuttle, 2012, p. 264). The LC is based on Cutter’s dictionary catalog; LC modified it
with controlled vocabularies, at the end of the 19th century (Tuttle, 2012).134 LCC is primarily
used so that library users can locate physical items within a library (or at least, historically, this
was so) and LCC primarily indicates an action (such as the practice of biology), and then a topic
within it (Tuttle, 2012). However, this creates a problem, because life is not so simple; often,
actions and topics cannot be so rigidly divided. Subject headings were therefore invented as a
sort of “third dimension” (Tuttle, 2012, p. 266) that users could utilize to follow a topic or
subject across the entire classification system. Further rigidifying the classification systems and
schemes is the fact that many online systems still require posting in only one category. The

134

The age of these systems might partially explain why difficulty in modernizing them persists; much has changed
since their creation.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

93

reality is that life is too complex to be reduced to simple hierarchical structures, much less single
categorizations. However, human brains are limited, and as such, so are our information systems.
The apparent redundancy of two LC systems (LCC and LCSH), while limiting, is actually
necessary to create a complete structure (Tuttle, 2012).
Deodato (2010) applies Derrida’s135 deconstructivism to LIS, the key concept being that
nothing has an inherent meaning; all meanings are contextual, or inter- and intra-dependent, and
therefore never fixed, but rather dependent upon their relationships. Derrida rejected universality
and absolute truths. Instead, he believed that all “attempts to represent meaning and fix it in time
and space are necessarily repressive; acts of exclusionary ‘violence;’” he “explicitly disavowed
the possibility of immutable, fixed meanings” (Deodato, 2010, p. 76). To Derrida, words and
language can have no stable meaning; his philosophy emphasizes ambiguity and plurality, in
which everything is determined by its context.136 Classification systems are “closed” in that they
are necessarily limited (Deodato, 2010, p. 83). In fact, that is their whole purpose: to limit
ambiguous or multiple meanings in order to clarify. This is not necessarily or inherently a good
or bad thing; in fact, establishing a reliable system for information access is necessary for
information retrieval (Deodato, 2010). Cataloging, which is essentially knowledge organization,
exists precisely to create fixed and stable meanings. With controlled vocabulary, RDA rules, and
other imposed structures, cataloging forces rules onto knowledge, positing an exact
correspondence between signifier and signified, or text and meaning (Deodato, 2010).

135

Jacques Derrida was a contemporary of Michel Foucault.
While this definitely complicates cataloging, it also rings true. We see this contextuality of meaning in users’
(and even various librarians’) reactions to items. What one librarian might classify as X, another [equally intelligent
and qualified] librarian might classify as Y. The conditions affect the outcome; a librarian is not a superhero, but a
person. Each librarian brings to her work her own background, knowledge (or lack thereof), biases, etc. Even
something as mundane as what someone ate in the morning might affect their work performance that day. Librarians
are only human, and are therefore [understandably] fallible.
136

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

94

Cataloging rules are specifically designed to combat ambiguity. As such, cataloging creates a
fixed “reality,” an imposition that can impact how users will interpret knowledge and materials.
In this way, libraries do not simply organize information; they also construct it (Deodato, 2010).
Catalogers are tasked with the near-impossible goal of reducing all of life to a
multidimensional yet singular language system, that is legible to all users, front- and back-end. It
is therefore a necessary—yet near-impossible—task to be fair, accurate, and transparent when
cataloging. Further complicating catalogers’ work is that, as are other United States’ and
Western institutions, the LC “is rooted in historical structures of white supremacy; as such, the
catalog presumes White to be the normative term” (Drabinski, 2008, p. 198).
Starting in the 1970s, corresponding to the various social, cultural, and civil rights
movements of the time, librarian Sanford Berman began some of the deconstructivist work
Derrida might have imagined for libraries. Deodato believes, as did Berman, that there is an
exclusionary bias within the cataloging standardization, and that it limits interpretation by both
naming terms and defining their relations (Deodato, 2010). In this way, catalogers are
responsible for determining not just meaning, but also context. Both Berman and Deodato
acknowledge that classification schemes reflect the basis of the culture that creates them; this is
an important clarification, as it removes the responsibility from individual catalogers, and puts
the burden on their context, or the structures and systems in which they live and operate.
However, just because the onus is not totally on individuals to right history’s wrongs, does not
mean that individual librarians cannot or should not attempt to correct apparent injustices.
Catalogers are products of society, so they should not bear 100% of the burden of bias in
information. However, as both stewards and creators of knowledge—especially systems—they
do have a responsibility to be self-aware. Using Derridean theory to examine LIS illuminates the

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

95

fact that organizing information is not a neutral activity, and perhaps it can never be. It is up to
catalogers to decide how to move forward, given that constraint.
Horie saw her role as primarily a cataloger, and not as an activist. When she found
inconsistencies and mistakes in classification systems, she felt that it was her duty as an
information professional to correct the record. The positive social implications of her work were
a side effect, and not her primary intention. When asked what inspired her to act, Horie says “For
the most part, the new subject headings and subject heading changes came up in the normal
course of my cataloging work.” While she received the support of and peer review from the other
catalogers as well as the department head, Horie spearheaded the effort. “It was up to each
cataloger to initiate whichever action seemed appropriate.” She went through the UHM Library
Cataloging Department, which is a member of the Library of Congress Program for Cooperative
Cataloging (PCC), which has set guidelines and procedures for proposing new subject headings,
changes to existing subject headings, new classification numbers, and changes to existing
classifications under the Subject Authority Cooperative Program (SACO).137
Whether or not she registers it as such, these efforts Horie voluntarily and proactively
undertook were progressive, activist, and vitally important, for “Settler colonial claims only hold
if the narrative of discovery and disappearance hold” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 13). Horie was
instrumental in changing several LC subject headings, most notably from “Hawai‘i– History –
Revolution of 1893” to “Hawai‘i– History – Overthrow of the Monarchy, 1893.” Horie’s work
on this one specific subject heading demonstrates how catalogers produce knowledge, and has
obvious social implications: The impact of the story of Hawai‘i’s “discovery” by Captain Cook

137

http://www.loc.gov/aba/pcc/saco/index.html

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

96

is huge, particularly for Kanaka Maoli, “because it vanishes centuries of their habitation and
their understanding of how they came to be in the islands” (Rohrer, 2010, p. 14).
Horie first noticed subject headings, including the one mentioned above, that she simply
believed to be inaccurate, in 1994. Then-President Bill Clinton had just signed the Apology
Resolution (Fujikane, 2008).138 Perhaps partially due to Hawaiian sovereignty issues suddenly in
the national spotlight, Horie happened across multiple inaccuracies—in total, she identified
roughly 12— that were factually incorrect, erroneous or misleading in nature, or both:
1. from: Kahoʻalowe Island Reserve (Hawaiʻi)
to correct a misspelling by LC: Kahoʻolawe Island Reserve (Hawaiʻi)
2. from: Moku'ula (Lahaina, Hawaiʻi)
to change apostrophe to ayn: Mokuʻula (Lahaina, Hawaiʻi)
3. Annexation to the United States
cross reference from: Hawai‘i– History – 1893-1900
4. from: Forgiveness
to add cross reference: Unforgiveness
Several years later, in July 2008, Horie made a “professional visit” to LC in Washington,
D.C. She was already traveling there for a National Education Association (NEA)139 meeting,140
for her university work. She was escorted on a walkthrough of the various processing work
areas. She also met with Tom Yee, assistant chief of the Cataloging Policy and Support Office,

138

S.J.Res. 19 (103rd): A joint resolution to acknowledge the 100th anniversary of the January 17, 1893 overthrow
of the Kingdom of Hawaii, and to offer an apology to Native Hawaiians on behalf of the United States for the
overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii: https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/103/sjres19. “Despite the passage of
this law, white and Asian settlers have launched multiple legal assaults against Native entitlements” (Fujikane, 2008,
p. 14).
139
http://www.nea.org/
140
The meetings are held in Washington, D.C. during presidential election years.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

97

about the process for subject heading and classification proposals. She recalls that Yee grew up
in Hawaiʻi. She also met with Remé Grefalda, LC’s area specialist and curator for the Asian and
Pacific Islands, to view the Library’s Asian and Pacific collections. Lastly, she took an
architectural tour of the Thomas Jefferson Building, which she says that her tour coordinator
called “probably the most beautiful building in Washington, and in any case it’s not to be
missed.”

Professional Memberships, Organizations, and Affiliations
University of Hawai‘i Professional Assembly (UHPA)
Horie joined the UHPA, the union that represented the UH librarians, when she began
working there in 1991. About a decade later, she served on the Board for two terms, from 20022008 (the period directly following the HIDOE strike; see next section). During that six-year
period, she served in a number of positions:
1. Women’s Committee, member
2. Nominations and Elections Committee, chair, co-chair, and member
3. Martin Luther King, Jr. Parade Committee, chair and co-chair
4. Faculty Forum Committee, co-chair and member
5. Executive Committee, secretary and member at large
Horie describes herself as a “neophyte” when she first joined the UHPA, but said that as
time went on, she learned “more about union organizing and the power of the executive director
versus the power of the board versus the power of the membership.” In 2008, when Horie was
UHPA Director, she disseminated an American Association of University Women (AAUW)141

141

https://www.aauw.org/

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

98

survey entitled “Ask a Working Woman,” so the opinions of the UHPA members could be
included (University of Hawai‘i Professional Assembly, 2008). In partnership with Working
America, the community affiliate of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of
Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO), the AAUW survey asked questions such as, “What do you
do if you have to take time off work to care for a sick child or parent?” (University of Hawai‘i
Professional Assembly, 2008).
Horie was also part of the core group that formed a special committee, the UHPA
Women’s Committee. It was founded to give women a voice in decision-making in the union. As
of 2014, the Ad Hoc Women’s Committee was comprised of Teresa Bill (UH Mānoa); Maggie
Bruck (Maui Community College); Joyce Chinen (UH West Oʻahu); Monisha Das Gupta (UH
Mānoa); Ruth Horie—she is a lifetime member of the UHPA—(UH Mānoa); Joyce Lighthill
(Leeward Community College); Priscilla Millen (Leeward Community College); Ming-Bao Yue
(UH Mānoa); and Kenith Simmons (UH Hilo) (University of Hawai‘i Professional Assembly,
2014).

Statewide Public Education Strike (2001)
Horie became actively involved in the union when then-Governor Cayetano142 proposed
budget cuts that would negatively affect all teachers who were 9-month employees.
In the weeks leading up to the statewide public education strike in spring 2001, it
became crystal clear to most of us UH non-instructional faculty that Department of
Education teachers and UH instructional faculty work all year-round, whether they

142

Benjamin Cayetano, a Filipino “local,” has attempted to protect his own political investment in settler control
over Native people and resources, publicly stating, “I’ve lived in Hawaiʻi long enough to feel I’m Hawaiian”
(Fujikane, 2008, p. 16).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

99

have actual classes or not. The crucial issue for me was that Governor Cayetano
proposed to remove medical coverage and retirement credit for the summer months
when instructional faculty did not teach. I and the majority of my colleagues, as
well as the majority of the public agreed that this was neither safe nor fair… it
would not be safe for 9-month instructional faculty members to be without medical
insurance during the summer, if an accident or illness affected their health.
The University of Hawaiʻi Professional Assembly (UHPA) and the Hawaiʻi State
Teachers Association (HSTA)—both members of the NEA union—ended up going on strike at
the same time, statewide, against the UH Board of Regents and the Hawaiʻi State Board of
Education, respectively. UHPA and HSTA spent months planning; during that nine-month
period, Horie saved up enough money to forgo paychecks for up to an entire semester, if need
be; this is even more impressive when considering that the proposal in question did not actually
apply to her.
I had no real idea of how long the strike might last. I was told that for government
employees, two weeks might be expected, but who knew? I also forestalled
replacing the air-conditioner unit in my condo.
The entire state system of kindergarten through graduate school went on strike; UHPA
and the Hawaiʻi State Teachers Association143 (HSTA) walked out on April 5, 2001, in what the
Los Angeles Times noted was “the most far-reaching walkout ever in American education”
(Essoyan, 2001). Horie was picket captain at Maile Way, the road that Hamilton Library is
located on at UHM. The strike was successful, and UHPA settled with the UH Board of Regents
on April 17, only twelve days in.

143

HSTA and UHPA were, at the time, both affiliated with NEA.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

100

University of Hawai‘i Library Faculty Senate
Horie was involved in the Library Faculty Senate, in several capacities, including as an
individual member, a member of the Elections Committee, as parliamentarian, as secretary, and
as elected representative to the UH Mānoa Faculty Senate (MFS).144 As a member of the MFS
Committee for Academic Policy and Planning (CAPP), which is concerned with establishment
and modification of degree programs and curricula (an area in which the adequacy of library
resources for given programs is considered), she
successfully proposed that the procedural checklist for new degree programs [at
UH] include a line for assessment of library resources in support of the program.
Until this line was inserted, the assessment was usually done at the last minute and
rushed through with little time for the Library to plan how it would support the new
program.
She was a staunch library and librarian advocate, and also successfully proposed that the
Mānoa Council of Chairs routinely include on its roster and invite Library department heads to
meetings; that the All-Campus Council of Faculty Senate Chairs routinely include on its roster
and invite the chair of the Library Faculty Senate to meetings; that the Library Personnel
Committee145 not be involved in any tenure applications for Library administrators;146 and that
the then-Interim University Librarian not be supported in her plan to reorganize the Library
before a permanent University Librarian was in place.

144

https://hawaii.edu/uhmfs/
This committee has a role in librarians’ applications for contract renewal, promotion, and tenure.
146
Library administrators are not faculty members so are not eligible for tenure.
145

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

101

Hawai‘i Library Association (HLA)
The Hawai‘i Library Association (HLA)147 was founded in 1922 and became affiliated
with the American Library Association (ALA)148 two years later (Hawai‘i Library Association,
2018). As mentioned, Horie had joined HLA as a student member when she entered library
school in the fall of 1979. She attended her first HLA annual conference in the spring of 1980,
along with many other LIS students. “My impression was that it was quite a large organization,
with members from a wide variety of libraries and institutions. It was the thing to do, and it
seemed interesting.” The president at the time was Lucretia Fudge. After Horie graduated with
her MLS, she changed her HLA membership to regular member, and served as co-chair of
HLA’s Hawaiiana section.
“I was recruited by the Nominations Committee in late 1996 to run for Vice President.”
The HLA board was comprised of a President, Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer. Initially,
Horie was not interested, but says she decided to run because it was a service to the group, and
then she “progressed as expected. I was elected and served from 1997-1998.” Usually a Vice
President is expected to become President the next year, and Horie did, serving as President from
1998-1999. She also served HLA as journal co-editor; conference coordinator (1998);149
Director, which is an advisory position on the board (2003-2005); and chair of the Audit
Committee, an annual committee that audits the organization’s finances (2008).150 As we will
see, Horie used her presidency to advance Pacific ties.

147

http://hawaiilibraryassociation.weebly.com/
http://www.ala.org/
149
At the time, this was one of the duties of the President; however, it is such a large job that later it became its own
separate position.
150
This is a short-term commitment of usually three people that are recruited by the board.
148

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

102

Pacific Islands Association of Libraries, Archives, and Museums (PIALA)
Horie was also actively involved long-term with the Pacific Islands Association of
Libraries, Archives, and Museums (PIALA). In November 1998, she attended her first PIALA
conference; HLA awarded her $500 toward the costs, and she used her own airline miles for the
plane ticket. That year, the HLA board and the PIALA board passed resolutions to establish a
permanent international partnership.151 Practically, this meant that the two associations agreed to
exchange newsletters; link homepages; attend each other's conferences; discuss common issues;
and share ideas and expertise. Additionally, funds were set aside for one PIALA member to
attend the annual HLA conference; Horie remembers that this scholarship was unidirectional
because librarians in Hawaiʻi tend to earn more money and have more funding opportunities than
those on other Pacific Islands. She says the HLA/PIALA partnership was both a grassroots
initiative, and directly influenced by ALA’s similar efforts at the time:
In 1998 ALA President Barbara Ford set her theme as “Global Reach, Local Touch”
and called on the chapters to forge international partnerships with international
library associations in neighboring library regions. For example, the Texas Library
Association partnered with the Mexico Library Association. Here in Hawaiʻi, HLA
president Helen Wong Smith and I decided that HLA could partner with the Pacific
Islands Association of Libraries and Archives (PIALA). I believe the partnership
did foster closer relations between the two organizations. One tangible outcome

151

The ALA Chapter Relations Office (http://www.ala.org/aboutala/offices/cro) was informed of the partnership.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

103

was the establishment in 2013 of the Karen M. Peacock Memorial Scholarship,
which enables a PIALA member152 to travel and attend the HLA annual conference.
Horie attended PIALA conferences and gave workshops in 1998 (Kosrae, Federated
States of Micronesia (FSM)), 2002 (Chuuk, FSM), 2003 (Pohnpei, FSM), 2004 (Marshall
Islands), 2005 (Kosrae, FSM), 2007 (Tinian, NMI), 2008 (Yap, FSM), 2009 (Pohnpei, FSM),
2010 (Chuuk, FSM), 2011 (Kosrae, FSM), and 2014 (Palau). The conferences were held each
November, and usually between one and five people from Hawai‘i attended. Horie received
partial funding from UH Libraries for some of the conferences. Following the 17th and the 18th
Annual Conferences (November 12-17, 2007 and November 17-21, 2008, respectively), Horie
edited the conference proceedings: It Can Be Done: With Advocacy, Libraries Can Thrive on
Pacific Islands: Selected Papers from PIALA 2007, Pacific Islands Association of Libraries,
Archives and Museums 17th Annual Conference, November 12-17, 2007, Tinian and Saipan,
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (Horie, 2010) and New Beginnings: The
Library as an Information and Resource Basket: Selected Papers from PIALA 2008, Pacific
Islands Association of Libraries, Archives and Museums 18th Annual Conference, Colonia, Yap,
Federated States of Micronesia (Horie, 2009).
I learned so much from the people who attended the conferences. I believe that
visiting the different countries and entities deepened my knowledge of Micronesia
and broadened my perspective on librarianship… Getting involved with PIALA
was intentional on my part but incidental to my work as a librarian.
The mission of PIALA is to enhance the quality of leadership in order to support and
strengthen libraries, archives, and museums across the Pacific Islands. “I feel I contributed to the

152

The two organizations jointly review the applications and select the awardee.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

104

mission by reaching out to PIALA, helping to establish the international partnership between
HLA and PIALA, attending conferences and offering cataloging workshops, and doing what I
could to enhance the cataloging of Pacific Islands materials at the UHM Library.” PIALA
agreed; in 2014, they awarded Horie their PIALA Lifetime Achievement Award (Library &
Information Science Program, 2014). To this day, Horie does not know what the nomination
process was. The decision to make the award is not annual, but it is made by PIALA’s executive
board.
Receiving the award was a complete surprise. It was announced at the closing
dinner of the PIALA conference in Palau. I was deeply honored and appreciative.
Jane Barnwell, former Director of Library and Information Literacy Initiatives at
the Pacific Resources for Education and Learning (PREL) also received a Lifetime
Achievement Award that year. PIALA also presented a special “Partnership
Award” to HLA in recognition of 20 years since the international partnership
between HLA and PIALA was established in 1998.

Retirement and Legacy
Retirement (2012)
Horie announced her plan to retire in December of 2011, a year prior to what would be
her final day of employment. Multiple factors led her to conclude that it was time to retire. She
wanted to visit her mother, who now lived on the continent and required caregiving, more often.
She felt she had “succeeded in nearly everything [she] set out to achieve.” There were also some
challenges she had been experiencing with what she describes as the “bureaucracy,” and she was
finally fed up with the administrative aspects of the job.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

105

I retired in December 2012. It was the earliest possible date on which I could
retire… I wouldn’t have access to the campus health services, which was really
convenient, you know… my income would go down… I think those were the only
two disadvantages that I could think of. I refinanced my mortgage so that I could
pay it off within one year after retiring. Also, my mother who lives on the mainland
was aging and needed more help.
The library threw a joint party for Horie and other retirees (another librarian and a
paraprofessional). When asked if she had accomplished everything, professionally, that she
wanted to, Horie said: “I started on a guide to cataloging Hawaiian language materials but did
not go as far as I wanted to. Whatever I contributed has been posted on the Cataloging
Department’s processing manual under “Guide, lists, cheat sheets.”153 There were downsides to
retiring, of course, which included a reduction in income. Previously unaware that asking for a
raise was even an option, the activities Horie engaged in over the course of the rest of her career
had resulted in her becoming almost an expert on salary issues. Interestingly, she says she was
happy with her $80,000 annual salary—the amount she was making by the end of her career—
and that she did not feel that potentially earning more money would be worth the paperwork.
Horie felt that between her state retirement fund and her private one, she had saved enough. She
would receive a state pension—about 50% of her former salary—and by 2013, she paid off the
mortgage on her condo. Eventually, she figured, she would be able to apply for Social Security.
Yet, Horie feels that she did not save enough early on; she began saving for retirement in 1991,
quite late, at age 41. Still, Horie believe she retired at an ideal time.

153

http://www2.hawaii.edu/~hlibcat/index2.html

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

106

Despite her family obligations, ever the productive and involved librarian, Horie took
only one month off (December 2012). In January 2013, she began volunteering at Hamilton
Library, for roughly six hours per week. When news of her imminent retirement spread
throughout the Oʻahu library community, Horie received “too many offers” of places to
volunteer; upon reviewing these offers she ultimately chose to donate her time and expertise to
several, mostly pertaining to Hawaiian collections, such as Ulukau, Bishop Museum, and
Hamilton Library’s Cataloging Department, among others.

Thesis Committee (2015)
In 2015, three years after she retired, Horie served on the thesis committee for a Native
Hawaiian LIS student named Shavonn Matsuda. The LIS master’s thesis dealt with Horie’s
specific expertise: Toward a Hawaiian Knowledge Organization System: A Survey on Access to
Hawaiian Knowledge in Libraries and Archives (Matsuda, 2015). When speaking about this
thesis, Horie points out that the LC as a whole system is Western. At first she was unsure
whether she qualified to serve on a thesis committee, since she was retired, and not emeritus. She
also had never been on a thesis committee, but she drew on her previous experience cataloging
hundreds of theses.
The chair of the student’s thesis committee invited me to be the third and “outside
of UH” member of the committee. The committee chair154 made the case to the
Graduate Division that even if I was retired and no longer a UHM faculty member,
my knowledge and expertise were needed.

154

The committee chair was Dr. Rich Gazan, and the third committee member was Dr. Andrew Wertheimer
(Matsuda, 2015), who is committee chair of this thesis.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

107

Renaming the UH Hawaiian Cataloger Position
Horie succeeded in convincing the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa to change the title of
her former cataloger position to “Hawaiian Cataloger” at Hamilton Library, but they were unable
to find a fully-qualified candidate to fill the position. “After two unsuccessful searches, the
position was filled in January 2017.” This person is a haole, a Standard English native speaker
who does not speak Hawaiian, but is currently enrolled in Hawaiian language courses at UH.
I had originally proposed that the position title be changed from “Cataloger” to
“Hawaiian Language Cataloger.” When the search process began the title was
“Hawaiian Materials Cataloger/Metadata Librarian.” I proposed the change
through the levels of hierarchy in the Library, and with people I knew in the
Hawaiʻinuiākea School of Hawaiian Knowledge.
It was important to Horie to have the position, which was the one she vacated upon
retirement, renamed.
There had been Chinese, Japanese, and Korean language catalogers designated for
many years. In spite of the past success the Library had in filling vacancies so that
there was at least one cataloger with expertise in Hawaiian, I felt that the Library
and the University needed to recognize the importance of Hawaiian language by
designating an existing cataloger position for it.155

155

No cataloger with the word “Hawaiian” explicit in the job title is currently listed on the Hamilton Library
website as of December 1, 2018. When I mentioned this to Horie, in February 2018, she looked into it and said that
none of the language specialists have their languages included even in their job descriptions, which is very odd to
both of us. Horie said: “I don’t know why the full titles of the four catalogers (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and
Hawaiian) whose position titles are language-specific are not listed as such on the Library’s or the Department’s
websites. I would expect accuracy and transparency.” I concur, especially since the online listings are probably how
many library users choose who to contact with queries.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

108

Again, Horie’s goals of accuracy and social justice intersected:
I envisioned that the role would include a function that I and other catalogers before
me had already been performing: cataloging any and all library resources in
Hawaiian or that had Hawaiian text or a name in the title, content, authorship,
publisher, subject, or geographic coverage. I also firmly believed that a required
qualification was Hawaiian language proficiency, just as Chinese, Japanese or
Korean language proficiency was already required for any applicants for cataloger
positions in those languages.
Horie is not sure if there was a formal process in place for such a request, but she
… perceived that there was widespread support because nearly everyone I spoke to
about it readily agreed with me. The only opposition I received was from one of
my fellow catalogers who expressed that there would not be enough library
materials in Hawaiian to make it worthwhile to designate a cataloger for them. My
answer to that opposing opinion was that I, as the de facto Hawaiian language
cataloger, did routinely catalog other materials in English, and in any other
language that I could read. I also maintained that I was also routinely assisting the
Chinese, Japanese, Korean language catalogers, and any other librarians and staff
in answering their questions about Hawaiian language. I believe that a critical mass
of people who supported the change and who had the authority to make the change
was reached through word of mouth.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

109

Ongoing Volunteer Work
Horie is a busy volunteer and has been ever since retirement, taking only the December
holidays off between her last day at work and her first day as a volunteer. Her most important
ongoing project is helping compile a Hawaiian legal dictionary; this came out of the 1979 grant
project she worked on translating and coding metadata. Her colleagues on this project had
already been keeping index cards. She started working on the dictionary in the fall of 2014, and
in February the following year (2015) they held the first advisory meeting. By now the team has
completed 1,200 words; their goal is 5,000. Horie spends about 10 hours per week working on
this dictionary from her desk at Hamilton Library. Her volunteer weekly schedule is currently:
Mondays: Bishop Museum Library (afternoons)
Tuesdays: The Congregation of the Sacred Hearts U.S. Province Archives
(mornings); Hamilton Library (afternoons)
Wednesdays: Hamilton Library (all day)
Thursdays: Hamilton Library (all day)
Fridays: free day156
When asked if she would like to do anything for herself during retirement, such as travel,
she says she wants to go to Cologne; she has a friend there, whom she visited about two years
ago. She says she loved Germany and would like to go back.

156

In 2018, Friday afternoons were scheduled for meeting with me to conduct recorded interviews for this thesis.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

110

Bishop Museum
I’ve been a volunteer in the Bishop Museum Library since January 1991. My
contributions have been in original cataloging and database consultation. Over the
years I’ve converted their card catalog records into their online catalog for all the
Hawaiian language titles. I’m in the process of converting the records for titles in
Pacific Islands and Southeast Asian languages.

Ulukau
Ulukau,157 also known as “the Hawaiian Electronic Library,” is a digital online library for
mostly Hawaiian language and some English language materials; it includes “searchable
Hawaiian language dictionaries, online newspapers, books, the Hawaiian Bible, genealogy,
māhele and other place name resources and much more” (Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 2018).
Founded in 2005, it now involves dozens of partners and is spearheaded by two organizations:
Hale Kuamoʻo of Ka Haka ʻUla O Keʻelikōlani College of Hawaiian Language at UH Hilo and
Ka Waihona Puke ʻŌiwi Native Hawaiian Library at ALU LIKE, Inc.158 (Office of Hawaiian
Affairs, 2018). Using open-source Greenstone159 software, designed specifically for digital
libraries, the purpose of Ulukau is to make resources available “for the use, teaching, and
revitalization of the Hawaiian language and for a broader and deeper understanding of Hawaiʻi”
(Ulukau, 2018). Ulukau is a unique, Indigenous database and resource, and Horie is particularly

157

http://www.ulukau.org/
ALU LIKE, Inc. (https://www.alulike.org) is a private nonprofit organization that assists Native Hawaiians in
efforts to achieve social and economic self-sufficiency.
159
Greenstone was developed with UNESCO support at the University of Waikato, Aotearoa (New Zealand)
(Ulukau, 2018).
158

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

111

qualified to provide support for their information and cataloging needs, as one of the rare
professional and experienced catalogers fluent in both English and Hawaiian. She has worked
with them for fifteen years, on an unpaid basis.
Since 2003 I’ve been volunteering to catalog electronic sources in Hawaiian or
about Hawaiiana in English. Mahealani Merriman, the head of the Native Hawaiian
Library, referred Bob Stauffer, the Ulukau manager, to me. At the time, Ulukau
was a project of ALU LIKE, Inc., the umbrella organization of both the NHL160 and
Ulukau.
The federal Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) was created in 1996, when
Congress passed the Museum and Library Services Act; IMLS is the primary source of federal
support for over 123,000 libraries and 17,500 museums in the United States, and since 1998, it
has been providing funding support for Native American and Native Hawaiian library services
(Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2018), including Ulukau. In 2010, IMLS granted
ALU LIKE, Inc. $420,000 to provide access to its Native Hawaiian Library (NHL) resource
materials from Ulukau, with the goal of making reference materials Web-accessible, providing
much-needed support to Hawaiian language immersion programs “and to those who work in and
with the Hawaiian language” (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2010). In 2018, IMLS
announced funding for the Lau ā Lau ka ‘Ike project, which will provide “culturally-appropriate
organization and representation within library catalogs and other digital collections by improving
access for Native Hawaiian users, particularly Hawaiian language speakers, information
professionals, and the Hawaiian community as a whole;” the project is a partnership between

160

ALU LIKE’s Native Hawaiian Library (NHL) was established in 1985. Its purpose is to provide library and
information services to Native Hawaiians and others interested in the history, culture, and contributions of Native
Hawaiians (ALU LIKE, Inc., 2017).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

112

Ulukau, The World Indigenous Nations University Hawaii Pasifika, Nā Hawai‘i ‘Imi Loa, the
Hawaiian Librarian Association (HLA), and Hawai‘inuiakea: School of Hawaiian Knowledge at
the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (Institute of Museum and Library Services, 2018).

King Kamehameha V Judiciary History Center
Located in Ali‘iolani Hale161 in downtown Honolulu, the Judiciary History Center162 is an
administrative program and permanent educational institution created by the Hawai‘i State
Judiciary “to inform and provide learning opportunities about the judicial process and Hawai‘i’s
legal history from pre-contact to present” (King Kamehameha V Judiciary History Center, 2018).
From 2014 to 2017 I volunteered 1-3 days a week to provide Hawaiian language
translations of Hawaiian Kingdom era letters and documents from the Hawai‘i State
Archives,163 and helped to create their Hawaiian English Legal Dictionary.

Congregation of the Sacred Hearts U.S. Province Archives
Stuart Ching, the archivist of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts U.S. Province
Archives, introduced Horie to a volunteer opportunity in their rare books library. Horie had
already known Ching, who was another former Bishop Museum employee. The Congregation of
the Sacred Hearts U.S. Province Archives are housed in and belong to the Congregation of the
Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary, in Kaimukī. The archive’s mission is to collect, preserve, and
access the history of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts U.S.A. Province. The congregation
came to Hawai‘i from France in 1827 and was the first group to set up a permanent Catholic

161

This historic building also houses the Supreme Court of the State of Hawai‘i.
http://www.jhchawaii.net/
163
http://ags.hawaii.gov/archives/
162

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

113

mission in the islands. The archives contain scrapbooks, rare manuscripts, general interest books,
records of burial locations, photographs, private personnel records, and objects connected to one
of the most famous members of the Sacred Hearts congregation, St. Damien of Moloka‘i (Hawaii
Catholic Herald, 2018).
Since January 2015 I’ve been volunteering one morning a week to catalog their rare
books in Hawaiian and other languages. Last month I began cataloging their regular
book collection in English and other Western languages.

Hamilton Library
When asked if it felt strange immediately volunteering to do the work she used to be paid
to do, Horie said no, because it eliminated what she disliked about the job, and just left what she
loved; she no longer had to deal with the administrative aspects, or the bureaucracy. Additionally,
as a volunteer, Horie is limited by library policy in what work she is now permitted to do.
Since January 2013 I have volunteered in the Cataloging Department to assist with
two low-priority cataloging projects: upgrading Hawaiian and Pacific Collection
brief records to full, and converting bibliographic records of Hawaiian and Pacific
microfilm titles from catalog cards to the online catalog.
The brief records that Horie mentioned existed from a previous “rapid cataloging” effort,
and her work converting brief records to full, and/or from physical to online, can be especially
important in terms of helping promote access to Hawaiian language materials. Several years
before Horie began working in the Cataloging Department, Kengo Yasumatsu, head of
cataloging, initiated a project to reduce the large backlog of monographs and make the items
accessible to library users. The bibliographic records had minimal information: author, title,

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

114

imprint, pagination, publisher. The call number was based on the main letter of the class (such as
L for education); the letter Z (to force shelving at the end of the alphabetical range); and the date
the bibliographic record was created (850826.25 for 1985 August 26, the 25th rapid cataloging
record created in that class number on that day). For example, LZ 850826.25 was the rapid
cataloging call number for a book entitled “Analyzing pupil-teacher interaction,” published in
1966 by the Hawaii Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. Horie’s volunteer
work therefore involves searching for a full-level OCLC record, updating holdings, exporting the
record, importing it into the Voyager cataloging module, merging the OCLC record with the
rapid cataloging record, and sending the book to be remarked with its new LC-style call number
and returned to the Hawaiian and Pacific Collections.
I am allowed to replace a minimal level rapid cataloging record with a full level
OCLC record (with an LC-style call number, subject headings, and access points).
If I cannot identify such an OCLC record, I mark the rapid cataloging record—on
an Excel spreadsheet for the project—as needing to be “re-cataloged” and move on.
If an OCLC record matches the rapid cataloging record but lacks one or more key
elements (call number, subject headings, etcetera), I record that OCLC record
number as the likely match, and move on. Through this process, a number of
minimal-level bibliographic records get upgraded to full, so that library catalog
users are more likely to retrieve materials that match their search statements. And
the library makes a small bit of progress in the lag time between acquisition and
cataloging. For example, I upgraded a rapid cataloging record created in 1987 for a
children’s book which was published in the 1950s, with an OCLC record input in

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

115

2005 by a member library. This was an English language children’s book, but
published in Hawaiʻi, and is important because it’s out of print

Volunteer Projects Completed
UHPA Disaffiliation from NEA (2013)
Horie spent about a month involved in the UHPA disaffiliation from NEA, in 2013:
The only activist activity I decided to engage in after retirement was the effort to
prevent the University of Hawai‘i Professional Assembly from disaffiliating from
the National Education Association.164 In early 2013, along with a handful of
current and retired faculty, with some assistance from NEA regional staff, I helped
to compile a list of pros and cons, [and] asked the NEA to clearly outline the
procedure for UHPA members to retain their individual NEA memberships and
NEA member benefits—such as life insurance, periodical subscriptions, vendor
discounts.
Horie is a lifetime member of both UHPA and NEA. Horie was a strong advocate for
both organizations, and thought that their union had been extremely beneficial, particularly
during the 2001 strike, during which the UHPA “received a lot of help” from the NEA, “both in
terms of personnel and expertise.” However, J. N. Musto, the UHPA executive director,165 “had
not really been a strong proponent of the NEA.”
… due to various things that happened between the NEA and the HSTA during the
last several years before this came to a head, he determined that it was not to the

164
165

And the HSTA.
Musto was also the UHPA executive director and chief negotiator during the 2001 statewide education strike.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

116

advantage of the UHPA to stay affiliated… we would save money to not have to
cover a portion of the dues… and also he felt, I believe, that the UHPA will be
better off not being affiliated also with the HSTA, in terms of bargaining…
collective bargaining was done separately, of course, for the different unions.
Through the affiliation, UHPA members were receiving NEA member benefits, such as
life insurance, subscriptions, and vendor discounts. Acting on her commitment to accuracy and
access, Horie volunteered to join a group of current and retired faculty to go around and talk to
then currently-employed faculty members to see if they had any questions or concerns regarding
the possible disaffiliation.
I wanted to find out, okay… many of the individual members of the UHPA also
had life insurance and other benefits from the NEA. Now, what’s gonna happen to
those? And I felt that the local union, in other words, the UHPA, really owed it to
the members both current and retired to get these facts straight and disseminate
them to the membership so they can really make an informed decision and not feel
like this is a kind of top-down decision which isn’t considering the consequences
on an individual level… I thought, sure, okay, you can influence… the requisite
number of members, of the board of directors to force it through—all it takes is a
majority—but if you don't have member buy in, it doesn't seem like there was
enough transparency or democracy involved. And that was my point.
It is significant that Horie emphasizes that her involvement was to advance democratic
ideals; she herself was undecided as to whether disaffiliation was a good idea. Her main concern
was that every person’s voice was heard.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

117

I was really surprised when we went around to the… some different offices on
campus… many of the faculty members who came from the mainland, you know,
they’re haole, full professors. They’ve been here for a long time. They know which
end is up. [They] really didn’t want to leave the NEA because they said, okay, this
is an isolated place. There’s only one university here… only one higher education
union. We need the power of the parent organization to help us in terms of due
process and certain grievances and certain elements that can be supported, like
lobbying in Washington, D.C., lobbying congressmen, getting on higher education
committees, and actually trying to steer national policy in terms of the state of
faculty life… I was kind of encouraged by that, actually, that yeah, maybe there is
an overriding benefit to stay even though it’s a chunk of change. We need it… as I
tried to delve and get the information as to how the current and retired members of
the UHPA were going to handle any kind of continuity of any NEA memberships—
can we get the UHPA to put this information out to the membership just in a
nonjudgmental way, just in case people were concerned—I was really surprised at
actually how much pushback I got from the UHPA. And that to me was even more
disappointing. It wasn’t exactly a gag order, but I felt they were being less than
transparent, which could easily be done. And, and on the NEA side, of course, they
didn’t want anyone to disaffiliate; they felt, you know, this is important. You should
give people the opportunity to really understand both sides of the issue, and they
were happy to provide whatever information we wanted as to how to continue with
your life insurance and other benefits… A narrow majority of the UHPA board
voted on February 23, 2013 to disaffiliate, effective September 1, 2013.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

118

The final vote consisted of 13 ayes, 10 nays, and 1 abstention. Horie was disappointed
that although there were some board members who could not attend, the board went ahead and
voted anyway. For one board member who could not attend in person, from a neighbor island,
the board
arranged a conference call… The connection kept getting dropped and they couldn't
hear, and I thought, you know, I was just sitting in the room as an observer. I didn’t
have any standing whatsoever. I just really got furious when the board decided not
to consider that person’s vote, not to try to call them up or at least fix the technical
issue, which was preventing him from participating fully in the meeting… [the
vote] wasn’t really that close… it really didn’t make any difference. To me it was
the principle of the thing.

Hawaiian Language Web Feasibility Task Force (2015)
In Fall 2015 I was invited to join the Judiciary’s Hawaiian Language Web
Feasibility Task Force166 by chair Judge Richard Bissen. The task force was
mandated by the Legislature’s House Concurrent Resolution 217 SD1, Requesting
the Judiciary to Convene a Task Force to Examine Establishing Hawaiian Language
Resources for the State of Hawai‘i Judiciary.167 I volunteered to serve on the
Content Integrity Subcommittee by chair Larry Kimura,168 UH Hilo. As a member

166

http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/news_and_reports_docs/Final-HawaiianLangTF_report_12-17-15.pdf

167

https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/Archives/measure_indiv_Archives.aspx?billtype=HCR&billnumber=217&year=201
5
168
Larry Kimura is an associate professor of Hawaiian language and Hawaiian studies at Ka Haka ʻUla O
Keʻelikōlani College of Hawaiian Language, University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo. See page 46 for Horie’s previous
connection with Dr. Kimura.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

119

of the task force, I attended meetings, gathered information about average salaries
for language interpreters and translators, and shared what I was doing to help the
Judiciary History Center create the Hawaiian English Legal Dictionary. In [the]
Spring [of] 2016, along with other Task Force members, I testified in support of
House Bill 2180 and Senate Bill 2162, Relating to Hawaiian Language.169
Four committees were formed to study and propose findings to the full Task Force for
future implementation. Horie served on the Hawaiian Language Committee (Content and
Integrity) and was listed as a Hawaiian Language Resource Expert with the Judiciary History
Center (Office of the Chief Justice, 2015). Three budgets were proposed, the first totaling
$480,200 for “ideal” efforts that would allow for the establishment of long-term resources and
capacity building to train experts in the field; a second totaling $309,800 for a “sustainable” oneyear effort; and a third totaling $174,280 for minimal/core efforts to generate Hawaiian presence
in the Judiciary web resources. Horie says that unfortunately, all three proposed budgets were
deemed too costly.

Hula Preservation Society (2016-2017)
Horie also became involved with the Hula Preservation Society (HPS)170 through Bob
Stauffer. A nonprofit, HPS is “dedicated to documenting and sharing the amazing life stories of
our eldest living Hula Masters and their efforts to perpetuate hula, so their legacies live on to
inspire and educate;” it “grew organically out of a desire to come to know more about what our
senior masters from different hula lines and families had seen, heard of, experienced, and learned

169
170

The proposal did not pass; Horie says it was unsuccessful mainly due to financial concerns.
http://www.hulapreservation.org/

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

120

in their lifetimes about the hula of old, from the time when Hawai‘i was a sovereign land” (Hula
Preservation Society, 2014). This was a time-limited effort, contingent on the life of the two HPS
grants Horie volunteered under (she was not paid):
During 2016 and 2017 I provided metadata support171 to HPS under two grants
from the Hawai‘i Council for the Humanities: A Visual history of Hawaii’s PostWorld War II Decade Through the Lens of Hula, consisting of approximately 200
photographs172 taken by Kent Ghirard and the Lipinski family, and ʻIolani
Luahine173 moving images, 10 videos and 3 motion pictures.

Part II: Intersectional Feminist Analysis
Author Self-Identification
If the word “feminism” is to confer any meaning, it necessarily must aim at social
transformation, challenge “neutrality” or “objectivity,” and include a critique of traditional
structures “that have marginalized women materially and psychologically, in the world and even
in their own souls;” as scholars, we must also scrutinize our own practices (Patai, 1991, p. 138).
This master’s thesis, a woman’s life story told largely in her own words, is ultimately about
subjective experiences involving identity factors, put into a contextual framework. Oral history is
a collaboration between two parties, the interviewer and the interviewee. The separation between
the narrator and the interviewer, especially any power imbalances that might exist,174 must not be

171

Library of Congress Subject Headings and Hawaiian words and names.
Horie selected which 200; she thought it should be a group choice, but they asked her to make the selection.
173
Luahine was a renowned hula dancer.
174
In many oral history interviews the interviewer has the scales of power and privilege tipped in her favor, since
usually she is the one who is more educated, and the process will result in her own professional recognition (Olson
& Shopes, 1991). In this thesis, the interviewee happens to be more professionally accomplished, formally educated,
and financially well-off than the interviewer. But, I still have power as the author of this work.
172

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

121

ignored (Gluck & Patai, 1991), for “none of us is innocent or politically pure, even if at times we
forget that and pretend to be” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 165). Since “there is no such thing as an entirely
objective treatment” and “we write from a certain position, constructed by our history,
nationality, race, gender, class, education, beliefs” (Lee, 2009, p. 12), here I attempt to clarify
mine. Since neither the interviewer nor the interviewee in this project is objective nor “innocent,”
and since feminist researchers “must raise questions about the ethics of our behavior in relation
to those on and with whom we do our research” (Patai, 1991, p. 138), it is important for me, the
interviewer, to introduce and identify myself to the reader. Vis-à-vis this section I hope to avoid
what Rohrer (2016) describes as “the danger in not discussing my positionality,” which would be
“complicity with native dispossession and fictions of objectivity tied to nonnative “expertise.”...
As numerous scholar-activists have noted, there is no comfortable resolution to this situation” (p.
16). My own particular blind spots are, of course, inherently invisible to me. My hope is that in
providing this context—which not only introduces me, as the interviewer, but also, crucially, the
milieu in which both I and the interviewee currently exist—the reader will be invited in as a third
party to this collaborative learning process, a project that has feminist and social justice
aspirations. The reader might be able to interpret this work more accurately and completely by
knowing who its writer is. The reader likewise arrives to this thesis with their own particular life
experiences, ideas, biases, etcetera, and so no two readings of this thesis will be the same; each
reading will hopefully contribute in a unique way to my project’s goals of furthering selfawareness and social justice through critical engagement. I hope that this thesis provides an
opportunity for reflection and collaboration both among and between those within and outside of
academia.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

122

At the time that I am writing this, I am a twenty-eight-year-old, unmarried, cisgender,
heterosexual, able-bodied American citizen whose ancestry is Eastern European, Ashkenazi
Jewish, and Balkan. I only speak English fluently, and that has never been a barrier for me in any
significant way. I live in Hawai‘i, where I am part of the 25% of the population (U.S. Census
Bureau, 2017) that is haole, and I visibly present as such. Being Jewish complicates my
whiteness, as Jewish might mean religion, race, and/or ethnicity in the United States; I do not
practice Judaism, and neither do my parents, but my genetic makeup includes Jewish heritage.
While anti-Semitism is and has been rampant historically, presently, and worldwide, to any
person on the street I would be visually-registered as only Caucasian, and being part-Jewish has
not in any way impacted my interactive experience in the world.175
In Hawai‘i, racial and ethnic dynamics are different than in the first 49 states. The fiftieth
state is the most racially and ethnically176 diverse.
One of the things visitors and scholars frequently note is the extent to which people
in Hawai‘i openly categorize each other by race. This makes many “mainlanders”
uncomfortable, since they are used to a culture that politely pretends to be

175

Much of my family history is unknown to me. My Jewish paternal grandfather fled persecution in Crimea,
arriving to the United States as a teenager. My paternal grandmother tells me that her parents came to the United
States from the USSR, but that her father returned after a short time and ended up in one of Stalin’s Gulags. As far
as I know, all four of my maternal great-grandparents immigrated to the United States from Eastern Europe. I
suppose this makes me fourth-generation American, although I must admit that I had never given it any thought
prior to embarking on this thesis project. Not having to ever consider what generation American I am, because I
have never had my personal citizenship questioned, is one of my privileges as a white person in the United States of
America.
176
I am using ethnicity to mean people who share certain traditions, possibly including but not limited to religion,
language, history, and geography or geographical origin (Tamura, 1994).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

123

colorblind.177 One of the mainstays of local178 culture is the way it marks,
stereotypes, and pokes fun at the different groups in the islands. (Rohrer, 2010, p.
53)
In Hawai‘i it’s not uncommon to ask, “What are you?” (meaning ethnically) rather than
“What do you do?” and I am not infrequently asked “Where are you from?” by locals. When I
respond that I live here, the question is usually repeated. I then counter with, “I grew up here,”
which is not technically wholly-accurate, but is the closest thing to a concise and truthful answer.
At this point, the skeptical gazes usually do not abate; I have been told by people in Hawai‘i that
I do not sound local, but I have also been told by people in the other 49 United States that the
way I pronounce words is odd. My personal authentic way of being is not consistent with the
social norms of any either place, and so my belonging is tenuous, if it exists at all; it is always
inadequately and insufficiently “performed,” as feminist scholar Judith Butler (1996) might
say,179 and therefore it is never truly achieved. Significantly, I have never experienced this
interrogative interaction in Hawai‘i with other haole people. In a way, I appreciate this closedoff-ness on the locals’ part, because it represents to me a small but significant resistance to
allowing white domination to exist unchecked, to spread comfortably. On the other hand, it also
strikes me as annoying, as a silly squabble, a mutually-unjustifiable, indignant, territorial

177

Horie commented on this in our first interview: “if I’m on the mainland or someplace else outside of Hawaiʻi…
and someone asks me where I’m from, I might say the U.S. I might say Hawaiʻi… So, and I might say, yeah, I’m
Japanese American, my ancestors came from Japan, but I’m American. That comes up occasionally, on the
mainland… Sometimes somebody on the mainland might ask me what is my nationality, and I understand that to
mean your country. You know, so I say that I’m American, but then they wanna know ethnicity, maybe… Like
maybe they don’t even know that word, ethnicity.”
178
The term “local” has positive and negative associations, depending on who you ask. It gained force as a uniting
term in Hawaiʻi in the 1960s working-class community struggles but has since been criticized for being “used by
privileged classes of Asian settlers to claim a history of oppression for themselves. This is not to say that all local
Asians fall into these privileged classes, but the term “local” is often used to mask the political power that Asian
settlers have historically exercised, often against Hawaiians” (Fujikane, 2008, p. 27).
179
Butler writes that gender identities are constantly unstable, requiring repetitive effort to continue to exist or be
enforced.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

124

posturing between two non-Indigenous groups, possibly neither of whom have a true right to
claims of belonging here.
I was born in New York City but grew up primarily in the British Virgin Islands. My
family moved to Oʻahu when I was in eighth grade. After college back in New York state and a
few years working in the city there afterwards, I returned to Oʻahu to attend graduate school, and
I have now lived on Oʻahu for a combined total of only nine years (although my family moved
here fifteen years ago, so that is how long I have referred to it as “home”). It is important to
acknowledge my place in (and resulting framework and perspective, having grown up in) the
complex colonial history of these two sets of islands (the Virgin Islands and Hawai‘i). As a white
person in majority non-white places, I have always felt like the minority, because in terms of
numbers, I was. I want to clarify that while this sometimes (but very rarely) resulted in a feeling
of discomfort or annoyance—such as being asked where I am from in Hawai‘i, my longtime
place of residence, as mentioned, or being refused a kama‘aina (resident) discount because of my
race—that is all. The feeling of being in the minority that I wish to convey here is literal, and not
one of perceived oppression. I have just always noticed my whiteness in a way that I do not think
most white American citizens ever need to, because they are usually in the visible majority; 77%
of Americans are racially “white alone” (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017).180 My interpretation is that
growing up not surrounded by white people has shaped the way I view the world, a fact I want to
disclose at the outset of this project. While I do not claim to be immune to the privileges nor

180

I mention this here because before I moved to a small town in upstate New York to attend a liberal arts college, I
was unfamiliar with the feeling of being surrounded by people who looked like me. I was shocked in majority-white
places like upstate New York, and later Sweden, Norway, and Germany (where I visited), by the intense experience
of being surrounded by white people, as a white person. There is a feeling of privilege and security that comes with
being in a dual position of power: Possessing both the historical advantage of white supremacy and the implicit
invulnerability of being surrounded by people who look like you. However, I did not feel more comfortable being
around white people. Since it was a new, unfamiliar experience to me, it felt profoundly uncomfortable, eerie, and
distinctly, viscerally, not-good.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

125

innocent of the violence of colonialism and white supremacy, I hope that my self-awareness as a
white person and compassion as a human have been expanded by the colonial and multiethnic
contexts to which I belong and from which I emerge.
Being one of the only white children in many situations growing up, and not speaking the
local dialects or languages (patois in the V.I., Hawaiian Creole English in Hawai‘i),181 I always
knew that I did not truly belong to any specific place. While I did not possess the sufficient
knowledge nor vocabulary to identify it, I nevertheless knew that as the minority white people,
we were still in a position of power. Children are observant; no one had to tell me that there was
a legacy of colonialism in the islands for me to notice its repercussions. All this confused and
troubled me, but no one ever spoke of it outright. I always knew not to call (or even consider)
myself “local” in either Hawai‘i or the Virgin Islands. I do not remember how or when I learned
that localness was correlated to race. Even though these were the places where I grew up and
considered home, in the Virgin Islands local meant black, and in Hawai‘i local meant Hawaiian,
Asian,182 or mixed race.
Today, I think often about these complex and sometimes conflicting, porous definitions,
boundaries, and borders. Whenever I am asked where I am from, either here in Hawai‘i or when
I am traveling, my anxiety spikes. I know that the person asking is usually just being polite and
does not care to hear my whole life-story, but I have no concise answer to give that feels
authentic and/or accurate. Which definition/s fit me? Who am I, and what is my kuleana
(responsibility), in 2018, as an adult in Hawai‘i? I am not simply a mobile, transient (by choice),

181

As a child, my parents vigilantly prevented any organic osmosis of these local languages.
“Today, modern Hawai‘i, like its colonial parent the United States, is a settler society… Native people and
territories have been overrun by non-Natives, including Asians. Calling themselves “local,” the children of Asian
settlers… claim Hawai‘i as their own, denying indigenous history, their long collaboration in [Native Hawaiian]
continued dispossession, and the benefits therefrom” (Trask, 2008, p. 46).
182

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

126

Millennial, American when I inhabit a colonized place, this contested, stolen land; I am what in
Hawai‘i might be called a “local haole,” but more often I just hear “haole” used, and I personally
am more comfortable with it. To me, even if separated from race, localness invokes a sense of
ownership, which I am not necessarily comfortable claiming (and which, as mentioned, has
sometimes been denied me by others in Hawai‘i). Localness intuitively feels at least partiallyachieved by familial roots, and/or a childhood spent in a place. There seems to be something
crucial about either being able to trace one’s family back in a location and/or spending formative
years in a place and its culture, and I do not have either of those levels of connection nor
personal familiarity/familiality with/in Hawai‘i.
Of course, I probably have more cultural awareness in Hawai‘i than a white American
who just arrived in the islands from the continental United States, by virtue of time spent here.
My haole-ness has been in contact with Hawaiian and local culture in myriad ways and for many
years. In middle and high school, I danced hula and wove hala baskets and bracelets and read
Hawaiian myths and legends. My classmates and I chanted in [rote] Hawaiian when we went on
a class trip to an active volcano, and we all had genuine respect for Pele (the Hawaiian goddess
of lava) and the ‘āina (land). Since eighth grade, my friends and I have openly chastised tourists
when they litter or act disrespectfully in sacred places such as volcanoes and heiaus (temples).
Since I was thirteen I have been eating rice for breakfast with my eggs; giving and receiving leis
for special occasions; casually attending Bon festivals; and throwing shakas when I merge lanes.
But these partial assimilations to contemporary island culture do not in any way indigenize me,
nor obscure my whiteness, nor give me any right to be here. The culmination and implications of
my assimilation to island culture—whatever “island culture” means, anyway—can really only be
called a baseline cultural competency. I know some Hawaiian words and phrases, but I cannot

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

127

string together a single sentence, even after fifteen years. I am still constantly aware of my
whiteness, do not call nor consider myself “local,” and do not feel that I truly belong anywhere,
which includes here. I would certainly never, ever call myself Hawaiian. This is an obvious
statement to anyone reading this in Hawai‘i, but it is common for people outside of these islands
to ask me if I am Hawaiian (once they find out that I live there), and to use the word “Hawaiian”
to mean anyone who lives in Hawai‘i.183 This is not a kosher practice within Hawai‘i; geographic
and residential signifiers, such as people living in New York referred to as “New Yorkers,” are
incompatible with Hawai‘i “because “Hawaiian” is not a residential category but an Indigenous
designation” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 126). As Horie put it:
network news, major network news… they say “The Californians” or “New
Yorkers” or whatever, but we know in Hawai‘i, those of us who’ve grown up here,
that it’s not really polite to call yourself a Hawaiian unless you’re of Hawaiian
blood. It doesn’t have to be 100% Hawaiian blood.
As Horie and I both noted, in Hawai‘i, “Hawaiian” colloquially means of Hawaiian
ancestry; whereas, in the Oxford English Dictionary it is defined as: “Of or relating to the island
of Hawaii, or to the whole group of the Hawaiian Islands in the North Pacific; A native or
inhabitant of Hawaii” (2018). If the Oxford English Dictionary definition were accurate, I would
be Hawaiian, because a Hawaiian is a native or an inhabitant. I am indeed very related to the
islands of Hawai‘i; I am certainly an inhabitant; it could even be said that I am of these islands,
since when I visit places that are not Hawai‘i, Hawai‘i is where I say—with some trepidation—
that I am “from.” This Western definition strikes me, however, as simply wrong (although it is
usefully illuminating in regard to the Western worldview). It is inaccurate, it is too forgiving (of

183

Especially continental United States journalists, I have noticed. To them, any resident of Hawai‘i is Hawaiian.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

128

colonialism/imperialism), it is too loose, too unspecific, too removed from the reality of lived
experience, to be correct.
Kanaka Maoli (Native Hawaiians) insist on genealogy as the basis of their community, so
from their perspective (which ought to be privileged in their own home, no?), Hawaiian means a
person with a Hawaiian ancestor (Rohrer, 2010). Therefore, there is also an element of
inaccuracy within the better, but still problematic colloquial contemporary use of the word
“Hawaiian” to mean of Hawaiian blood. This informal usage likely came from the formal United
States government definition; in 1921, the United States Congress set aside 200,000 acres (of 1.8
million seized) for “Native Hawaiians,” which they defined as those with at least 50% Hawaiian
blood quantum (Goodyear-Kaʻōpua, 2014, p. 14). Not only is defining indigeneity by blood
quantum an imposition by a government that illegally overthrew the Hawaiian monarchy, it is
also inaccurate from the Native Hawaiian perspective, and downright antagonistic and whitesupremacist. The blood quantum standard can be considered violence because it attempted to
redefine Hawaiian identity as
separate from genealogy, fortifying the myth of the vanishing Hawaiian, and
ensuring that property continued to accumulate in the hands of haole. It also firmly
established the haole as the normative citizen in Hawaii—and this was decades
prior to statehood. (Rohrer, 2016, p. 119)
Words and their definitions are clearly important, not only in academia, where we are
indoctrinated into specific and often rigid discursive practices (including vocabularies), but in
lived experience. Words and their definitions have real-life, material consequences, and “words
do not exist outside of the discursive, temporal, social, and political contexts that give them

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

129

meaning, and that they help create” (Rohrer, 2010, p. 75). In fact, neither do people.184 The
situation here, clearly, is complicated. Who gets to define words? How is information classified?
Who gets to decide what is privileged or prioritized? Who belongs where, and why? Whose
stories are memorialized?
Speaking of academia: Indigenous Studies questions the [Western] academic privileging
of published, “scholarly” texts over stories, oral histories, songs, and other traditional practices
(Rohrer, 2016, p. 20). The incongruence between conflicting Western and Indigenous
worldviews and practices is one of the reasons why I believe the work I am doing via this thesis
is imperative for the historic record—particularly in a place as complex as Hawai‘i. To me, oral
history as an academic methodology honors the Indigenous worldview, by privileging oral
tradition and narrative history over authoritative and “objective” biographical scholarship.
This is also a feminist185 project, especially since the topic is a woman’s life story; it
takes power from the privileged [Western] scholar and redistributes it to the [historically
marginalized] narrator via a traditionally-Indigenous method. This acknowledgement is not
intended to co-opt an Indigenous practice, nor to indigenize myself, my interviewee, or my
thesis. It is simply an admission that I am attempting to conduct Western research in a manner
reminiscent of and respectful to the indigeneity of the place I am researching. This is not
Hawaiian Studies research, and neither I nor my interviewee in this project are Kanaka Maoli.
However, this life history exists in a context, the most important of which is Hawai‘i, so the
place and its people deserve and receive attention in this thesis.

184

And, as we saw in this thesis, in my analysis of a woman’s career as a librarian, neither do subject headings.
Feminism is officially defined as “Advocacy of equality of the sexes and the establishment of the political,
social, and economic rights of the female sex; the movement associated with this” (Oxford University Press, 2018).
185

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

130

A shortcoming of this project is that, as a white American, and one who knows little of
her own genealogy, I risk inadvertently perpetuating the legacy of settler colonialism and white
supremacy in Hawai‘i. I don’t have a sense of belonging to any place [or land] which makes it
easy for me to refuse responsibility whenever I please. This mobility, while a privilege, also
makes it difficult for me to understand an Indigenous perspective, especially in Hawai‘i, where
Indigenous identity is inextricable from land and water. I compensate for this by learning about
and remaining respectful of Hawaiian culture and Indigenous Studies as much as possible
throughout this project. I also hope to overcome or at least combat my complicity with an honest
discussion of both my and my interviewee’s kuleana.
Judy Rohrer, a self-identified haole and cultural studies professor/scholar who also lived
in Hawai‘i, acknowledges the complicated nature of doing research about settler colonialism; I
cite her often throughout this thesis, because like her, I am a haole with immediate family in
Hawai‘i, and am studying at the University of Hawai‘i. I aim to continue Rohrer’s project of
building accountability into how we haole. It is my opinion that while their input is appreciated,
asking Hawaiians to determine how we should haole in Hawai‘i would be asking them to do
more work that is not their kuleana, because we are occupying their land; it is up to us to figure it
out if we are here. Like Rohrer (2016), I attempt to engage with the triangulation of Hawaiianlocal-haole to “think about how recognizing the dynamism, porosity, and contingency of those
categories might help us envision a more just future for the islands” (p. 151). By engaging with
her work, I hope to in some ways remedy my own complicity in the ongoing settler colonialism
in Hawai‘i. Our work is also dissimilar; she provides a thorough and useful overview, a macro
analysis that is heavily theoretical, while I am going into the micro, focusing on the materiality
of one person’s life.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

131

While scholars aim for objectivity, no scholarship is ever completely neutral; still, I wish
to explicitly state from the outset that this thesis is not neutral. This is my attempt at furthering
the cause of feminism by highlighting a woman of color’s story in a white- and male-dominated
profession and country. It is not meant to in any way be a complete nor representative analysis of
librarianship, of contemporary or twentieth-century Hawai‘i, or of all women’s experiences. It is
but one small point in an existing constellation of personal narratives and subjectivities, and one
that I hope will be continuously added to, in many diverse ways, by many different people, for
many years to come.

Introduction
There is a clear correlation between the treatment of women in American society and the
low status of the library profession, a purportedly “feminized” field which is in reality maledominated in terms of organizational control (Hildenbrand, 1996; Radford & Radford, 1997;
Olin & Millet, 2015; Baker & Bobrowski, 2016). Browse the table of contents of the recentlypublished book The Librarians of Congress (Nappo, 2016) and you will find thirteen chapters,
each about a man. It was only in 2016 that the first-ever woman and first-ever person of color
was hired to hold the prestigious position,186 which is arguably the highest-status, or at least most
visible “librarian” job in the country. This woman was also the first person who was an actual
librarian to hold the position in the library’s 217-year history, sending the public the message
that to be qualified to be America’s librarian, you either need to be a white man, or be actually
qualified.

186

Dr. Carla Hayden is the fourteenth and current Librarian of Congress.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

132

And yet, ask any American—librarian or not—if they imagine a man or woman when
they hear the word “librarian,” and chances are they will tell you they imagine a woman. This is
a remarkably ubiquitous, and in some ways accurate, American stereotype; librarianship is
comprised of more women (75-85%) than men (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017). This 4:1 ratio
has remained remarkably steady over time (American Library Association, 2011). However,
research shows that although “librarianship is stereotyped as a female occupation, managerial
positions are stereotyped as masculine” and, specifically in academic libraries, “women are still
not found in executive positions in proportion to their representation” (Irvine, 1985, p. 6 and
146). Women librarians in academic libraries specifically have had to overcome “long-standing
and oppressive social traditions, which not only circumscribed their opportunities but also buried
their contributions” (Grotzinger, 1978, p. 175).
Ask any American to name the most famous librarian—or even just any librarian—by
name, and chances are they either will not be able to think of one, or they will say Dewey,
because they grew up using the Dewey Decimal System in public and school libraries. This most
famous man of American librarianship was indeed extremely influential. Unfortunately, some of
his most lasting legacies in our profession include systemic sexism, racism, antisemitism, and
religious intolerance.
While much progress has been made in recognizing the contributions and achievements
of women in the field of librarianship, clearly the project is far from complete. While women
continue to do the bulk of the work of librarianship—80% of it, to be exact—men continue to
occupy places of power and prestige. Even worse, salary data for librarians (U.S. Census Bureau,
2016) show that women earn only 87% of what men earn, and Asian American librarians earn

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

133

less than Caucasian librarians (although Asian American men still out earn Asian American
women).
White privilege is pervasive beyond salaries; even where feminist progress has been
made, there remains an elitism within feminist research that privileges white women (EtterLewis, 1991). And, despite the fact that most librarians believe that library staff should reflect
the diversity of the communities they serve, the demographics of library employees remain stable
over time, with the average library worker a white woman in her mid-fifties (Roy, 2015).
In setting out on this project, it was my goal to simply add one person of color (POC)
woman’s story to the official record and history of librarianship. What resulted was a complex,
nuanced, and [hopefully productive] intersectional,187 feminist, and reflexive thesis.
While women represent 80 percent of the professional library workforce, they are
underrepresented in the elite or dominant group. This imbalance exaggerates the
need of the library elite to manage myth and memory in order to both distance itself
from the non-elite and to scapegoat it. Not surprisingly then, the same elite male
minority that dominates the field also dominates the writing of its history as authors,
journal editors, and reviewers and readers for publishing houses. (Hildenbrand,
1996, p. 2)
This project aims to contribute to the official library history a true story by and about
women, thereby redistributing a very small piece of the management of the memory within
Library and Information Science (LIS).

187

Intersectionality is defined as “the interconnected nature of social categorizations such as race, class, and gender,
regarded as creating overlapping and interdependent systems of discrimination or disadvantage; a theoretical
approach based on such a premise” (Oxford University Press, 2018).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

134

My collaborator in this oral history project is Ruth Horie (in this thesis referred to by her
surname).188 Born in what was at the time the territory of Hawai‘i, in 1950, Horie is Yonsei, or
fourth-generation Japanese American, and a librarian. She is an activist who continues to work189
in libraries, and whose official career as a cataloger spanned over thirty years, from her first fulltime library job in 1981 until she retired in 2012.

Research Questions
My thesis is that this particular interviewee’s subjectivity, her unique life-story, is
important in the history of librarianship and Hawai‘i, and that it can contribute to a more
complete feminist archive and a more complete historical record of librarianship. Her story can
serve as a reference point for librarians or library workers, women, Asian Americans, Japanese
Americans, students, activists, and historians, and in particular those from and involved in
Hawai‘i.
The notion that there are several perspectives or alternative views is intrinsic to an
intellectual approach. Libraries, universities, or any place in which scholarship
occurs would be unimaginable without that principal. (Arth, 1994, p. 98)
This thesis was derived in large part from Hildenbrand’s stance that there is “still much to
be learned about library herstory” (1996, p. 18); she calls for LIS scholars to complete studies on
individual women’s personal identities, and asserts that these biographic studies ought to
emphasize both the context of opportunity and the subject’s individual development.

188

“Naming is just one signal of the biography’s approach to its subject” (Lee, 2009, p. 130); using “Horie” rather
than the more personal, casual “Ruth” elevates her status and importance to that of at least equal-to men, whose
biographies almost never use their first names (whereas women’s biographies typically do).
189
As a volunteer.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

135

Horie is an ideal interviewee for this oral history project because as a linguist, as a
librarian, and as a POC woman from a working-class family, several pertinent themes emerge
that are relevant to our understanding of the silencing of women in library history (Hildenbrand,
1996): class and race; language (which is relevant to librarianship in terms of information
classification and access, but also to multiculturalism, diversity, inclusion, and discrimination);
indigeneity, colonialism, and immigration; how gender shapes career-building in librarianship;
and activism and social justice. As a librarian, she rejected neutrality, instead taking a stance;
yet, she was not anti-establishment. While it is unwise to generalize one person’s experience
across an entire reality, Horie’s story can still provide a blueprint for how a librarian can work
within an imperfect system to make positive and productive changes, despite a
racist/sexist/colonial shared history.
Questions that framed and informed my thesis research are:
1. How might sexism and misogyny have impacted this individual’s library
career? Hildenbrand (1996) notes that “women in librarianship continue to
negotiate their way between the expectations of them as women and as
librarian, and these stereotypes have a direct or indirect effect on all members
of the female-intensive profession of librarianship” (p. xii).
2. Can Horie’s experience serve as a successful model for how a librarian can
effectively take a social justice stance in her career?
3. How does Horie’s life and professional career fit within a larger intersectional
feminist framework and library history as a whole?
4. In what ways did Horie’s career and social/historical positionality/context
interact with and influence one another?

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

136

5. How did Horie’s achievements (as an activist, a working woman, and
librarian) contribute to decolonizing librarianship (and in particular,
classification systems)?
6. What can current and aspiring librarians learn from the setbacks, triumphs,
failures, and successes she experienced and/or achieved in the course of her
library career? “Even short-term exposure to the past experience of women…
has the most profound psychological effect on women” (Lerner, 1986, p. 3).

Methodology
Biography, or life-writing, is a well-established academic discipline, and the University
of Hawaiʻi has had a Center for Biographical Research190 since 1978 (Lee, 2009). I have chosen
oral history191 as my qualitative research method for this life-writing project because my
professional philosophy, personal approach, and theoretical framework are feminist. From a
feminist perspective, it is crucial to allow the interviewee to tell the story of her own lived
experience, in her own voice; oral histories “provide an invaluable means of generating new
insights about women’s experiences of themselves in their worlds” (Anderson & Jack, 1991, p.
11). Giving a voice does not mean speaking for someone; it requires listening and consciously
providing space for their own, unique voice and perspective to be empowered through expression
and acknowledgement.
Before a feminist oral history interview, the researcher and the narrator should meet to
“promote collegiality and to engage in mutual self-disclosure” (Minister, 1991, p. 36). Horie and

190

http://blog.hawaii.edu/cbrhawaii/
This thesis is an oral history research project that adheres to the Oral History Association’s Principles and Best
Practices for Oral History (see Appendix A).
191

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

137

I met informally for two hours in the Fall 2017 semester, in the UH cafeteria next to the library
where she used to work and in which I now attend LIS graduate school. This was a casual and
comfortable but neutral place for us both, and we met to chat informally about the project and
her life.
The subsequent recorded interviews were loosely based on the questions (Appendix B)
included in the thesis proposal, but were largely open-ended, relaxed, and freestyle, as that
approach fit Horie’s personality and communication style. From a feminist oral history
perspective, general questions are acceptable because then “women can choose for themselves
which experiences and feelings are central to their sense of their past” (Anderson & Jack, 1991,
p. 17). Controlling the interview topics is “a hallmark of the male interviewing norm” (Minister,
1991, p. 36), so I allowed Horie to control much of the narrative, even though I asked the
questions and prepared/updated them before each session. The exercise of remembrance can be
deeply personal, and memory is an active process in which meaning is generated (Ritchie, 2015).
Additionally, all oral histories are joint products shaped by both the interviewer and the
interviewee (Ritchie, 2015). Therefore, the questions were preliminary and incomplete. They
were further shaped by the process as it progressed, and subsequently elaborated upon over the
course of the interviews. The questions were dependent in large part upon the course of the
conversations and were further developed and expanded as the process unfolded.
While I was not critical of her expression or personal perspective, I applied a critical
theoretical framework to my contextual analysis of her experience, which I observed through her
storytelling and the interview sessions. Presenting the narrator with drafts of the interpretation
allows the narrator to share authority (Borland, 1991). To share agency of her own story with
Horie, I submitted my first draft of this thesis to her before submitting it to my thesis committee.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

138

I formally interviewed Horie for one to two hours every Friday afternoon during the
Spring and Summer 2018 semesters. Feminist interviews proceed at a leisurely pace (Minister,
1991) and indeed, by the summer of 2018 our interviews had resulted in twenty hours, ten
minutes and 48 seconds of total recorded interview time. The interviews were audio-recorded on
my iPhone and saved digitally. The first meeting occurred in a group study-room in Hamilton
Library, on the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa campus. The subsequent meetings all occurred in
a vacant office at the University of Hawai‘i Cancer Center, in Kaka‘ako.192
Before beginning the recorded interviews, I prepared a copyright release form (Appendix
C) as well as a human subjects research release (Appendix D), both of which Horie signed. The
University of Hawai‘i Internal Review Board approved this human subjects research (Protocol
2017-00907, Appendix E). Leilani Dawson, Manuscript Collections Archivist in the University
Archives and Manuscripts Department at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa Library, said that
she would be delighted to acquire the audio-recorded digital files for their archives. The full
audio recordings and transcript of the audio recordings will be prepared and submitted to the
University Archives and Manuscripts Department at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa Library
via Leilani Dawson upon completion of this thesis. By thus contributing my raw data to a larger
repository, I will be adding an important historical resource to the University’s Archive, from
which future historical evidence can be mined (Ritchie, 2015).
Oral history is a systemic attempt to obtain a more complete record of the past (Ritchie,
2015), and as such, this project contributes to that broader goal and to the writing of history
“from the bottom up” (p. 7). Oral history refers to both the method of collecting and preserving
history, as well as the product of the process; it is an agreement made between an interviewer

192

This is where I am employed and is located closer to Horie’s residence.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

139

and interviewee with the intention of creating a permanent record that contributes to a new
understanding of the past (Ritchie, 2015). In using one person’s story as my focus, I am able to
examine the factors which might have had an influence on, or been influenced by, her life.
Oral history has been an interview method since Harvard-educated Joseph Gould was the
first to practice it as such, in the 1940s; the first modern oral history archives were created in
1948 at Columbia University; the University of California, Berkeley and the University of
California, Los Angeles followed suit in 1954 and 1958, respectively; and the Oral History
Association was formed in 1967 (Ritchie, 2015). The Oral History Society was founded in 1973
and by 1987 the International Oral History Association had formed (Ritchie, 2015). Although
oral history originally focused on [white] elites, by the 1970s, it became a more common
approach among scholars of the “other”193 (POC, women, the working class), who may not have
otherwise left much of an archivally-recorded existence.
Oral histories have been credited with reviving truths and unearthing buried identities,
thus promoting healing on both the personal and national scale. However, oral history has also
been criticized for being too partial, too imprecise, or too Freudian; therefore, in this thesis I
supplement and analyze the raw data from my interviews by contextualizing and grounding it in
social history, as former Historian of the United States Senate Donald A. Ritchie (2015)
recommends for a more complete and accurate narration. In this way, I utilize oral history as a
tool to incorporate the marginalized into the larger historical narrative. While one person’s story
cannot be generalized or necessarily directly applied to others’, it can potentially provide a useful
case study, that will help build a richer herstory of our profession. I also hope this method or

193

This reflected the rise of Ethnic Studies, Women’s Studies, and labor historians, as well as more affordable and
portable recording technologies.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

140

framework might aid future LIS students and professionals, especially those who face similar
setbacks or challenges as those faced by the interviewee.
In her book Sewing, Fighting and Writing: Radical Practices in Work, Politics and
Culture, Maria Tamboukou (2016) synthesizes renowned political theorist Hannah Arendt’s
postulation on the usefulness of storytelling:
By evading the abstraction of universal principles, qualities or categories, stories
throw light on a wide range of historical, sociocultural and political structures; they
ground abstractions, flesh out ideas and thus create a milieu of critical
understanding… There is a strong link between the cognitive and political aspects
in the act of storytelling. (Tamboukou, 2016, p. 29)
By collecting and preserving one person’s story told from her point of view, I will be able
to, as Tamboukou (2016) explained, “ground abstractions” (p. 29) and create a historical data
source from which important historical evidence can be extracted (Ritchie, 2015) even beyond
this thesis. The creation of this personal account/historical record, analyzed through an
intersectional feminist lens, will illuminate and illustrate a range of historical, sociocultural and
political institutions and structures pertaining to the history of libraries and librarians.
Collecting a librarian’s specific career/life story is a productive academic activity because
specificity is required when oversimplifications proliferate, obscuring women’s role in library
development (Hildenbrand, 1996). Each person’s individual story is therefore highly relevant
and significant in moving toward a more accurate, nuanced, and complete record and
understanding of library [and Hawai‘i] history. This is especially the case since there persists a
lack of progress in recruiting librarians of color, particularly in academic settings (Chang, 2013).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

141

Oral history, in particular life stories, are of great use for the study of history. Life stories
highlight
the complexity, the ambiguities, and even the contradictions of the relations
between the subject and the world, the past, and the social and ideological image of
woman—i.e. how women live, internalize, and more or less consciously interpret
their status. Thus, the life story approach has to be considered as a methodological
tool providing access to a body of information that is more detailed, more
discerning, but also far more complex… (Chanfrault-Duchet, 1991, p. 89)
Oral history involves interpretation and analysis, along with gathering data. The oral
historian must use an interpretive framework, a specific interpretive model, designed to take into
account the narrative, social context, themes and symbolism, and the relationship between these
various elements (Chanfrault-Duchet, 1991). Within the methodology of oral history, it is
necessary to select an appropriate theoretical framework. Oral history has always been
multidisciplinary (Ritchie, 2015) which means that it can be conducted and analyzed from
multiple disciplines, perspectives, or approaches, all equally valid, but some perhaps more wellsuited to a particular interviewee’s life story. For this thesis, I have identified feminist theory as
the most synergistic theoretical approach for my research, myself, and my interviewee, for
several reasons. Firstly, feminist interviewing has enriched the practice of oral history (Ritchie,
2015) and since the 1980s, feminist scholars have advocated for an “integrative, transdisciplinary
approach to knowledge, one that would ground theory contextually in the concrete realm of
women’s everyday lives” (Stacey, 1991, p. 111). Knowledge “produced through the actual lived
experience” is valid from a feminist pedagogical standpoint (Accardi, 2013, p. 37). Renowned
scholar and historian Gerda Lerner (1986) goes so far as to claim that women’s history, in

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

142

particular, is “indispensable and essential” to women’s emancipation—however, she also notes
that a distance persists between feminist criticism and historical scholarship (p. 3).
History is a both a burden and an opportunity for feminists, since “whoever controls the
interpretation of the past controls the politics and economics of the present” (Mayo, 1994, p. 59);
this is why oral history can be a democratization or “egalitarization” of both history and power.
As opposed to setting one “Great Life” center-stage, which “can be read as… consolidating a
hierarchical, anti-egalitarian social structure” (Lee, 2009, p. 14), here I present one regular
woman’s life story in an effort at advancing the anti-hierarchical, egalitarian social structure I
hope to achieve as a feminist.
LIS is a profession with a historical and ongoing gender divide, in which, over the past
century, and still currently, women have dominated the workforce, but men occupy higher-level,
higher-paying management positions (Baker & Bobrowski, 2016). This disparity is clearly
divided by gender, making feminist theory and Women’s/Gender Studies an appropriate lens for
any LIS research, but particularly research on a librarian and woman’s career trajectory; a critical
feminist framework is necessary to identify historical and contemporary issues in librarianship,
specifically. Adding women librarians’ stories in their own voices to the history of a feminized
but not feminist profession is productive from a feminist standpoint. As Hildenbrand (1996)
poignantly notes, library history is not that which actually transpired, but rather, it is what is
included in the written record of the past.
Feminist librarians presumably share a goal of overcoming this unfair gender divide, and
part of my personal ethos, project, and goal is to be an activist / progressive librarian.
Specifically, I am a feminist, so feminism underlies all my personal and professional goals.
Using a feminist-framed method of oral history as research has positive social repercussions

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

143

beyond the confines of academia because it empowers the women whose stories are told in their
own words, allowing them to define themselves, and, if they wish, to forge “new modes of
femaleness” (Chanfrault-Duchet, 1991, p. 90). This is why “all women must tell their own stories
in their own words” (Etter-Lewis, 1991, p. 44). Part of the goal of feminism is “decentering
oppressive power relations and transforming them into something egalitarian and democratic.
This includes listening to and creating space for marginalized voices” (Accardi, 2013, p. 9).
Feminism and oral history are therefore particularly synergistic and mutually-reinforcing,
because both empower. Using the feminist practice of oral history to collect women’s life-stories
is particularly useful because it allows us, as scholars, to think through the ways in which women
relate to and possibly confront the institutions that dictate and reproduce social models for and of
women (Chanfrault-Duchet, 1991). These institutions are enacted within the structures of racism,
sexism, and other modes of oppression.
Oral history is obviously and necessarily interdisciplinary, which is another reason why
feminist theory is the most appropriate specific framework for this thesis; Women’s Studies has
“always aimed at crossing disciplinary boundaries and challenging subject
compartmentalization” (Woodward & Woodward, 2005, p. 3) Since feminist theory (in its most
progressive and arguably best iteration) is now intersectional, it is nuanced, complex, and
flexible enough to allow for appropriate analysis of the entire context of a life in Hawai‘i—a
racially-complex and contested geopolitical place—as well as an activist career in librarianship,
a feminized profession. By using feminist theory, there is room to include multiple aspects or
factors (racial, gendered, historical, socio-cultural, political, economic, etc.) and to approach the
project without excluding nor obscuring the interconnected and intersecting factors that
contribute to women’s life stories and library careers. By applying an intersectional feminist lens

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

144

in my examination of one woman’s experience, I am able to critically explore the complex
interplay between thought (theory) and action (practice, or in this case, life). From a historical
standpoint, it is easier to separate theory and practice; the traditional study of history mandates
separation of practice (or current life) with the aid of critical distance. However, feminism is
difficult to extract purely from its implementation, and Horie is a very real person who is still
very much alive and active, so there can be only very limited critical distance in this case.
Therefore, rather than pitting theory and reality against one another, by reducing them into clearcut, separately-defined functions that are able to operate independently, I will demonstrate how
theory and practice are indeed different and yet inextricably-linked categories or concepts, when
it comes to feminism and activism.
This shared characteristic—an inextricable interplay between theory and practice—in
both feminism and activism is another reason why feminist theory is the most appropriate lens
through which to examine a female activist’s life and career. Intersectional feminism is a
complementary and synergistic approach to an oral history project where, specifically, the
interviewee is a 67-year old, multilingual, divorced [and remarried], Japanese American woman,
from a working-class family. The result will be one woman’s complicated but true history as
well as its implications and illuminations within the broader context of herstory.
Crenshaw (1991) coined the now-ubiquitous term “intersectional feminism” and The
Combahee River Collective Statement (1977), one of the first feminist works to take a truly
intersectional approach, rejects the notion that race, sex, class, ability, etcetera can be neatly
separated into singular oppressive forces that can be removed by chipping away at them one at a
time. The Combahee River Collective acknowledges that these complex systems of power and
violence are inextricably linked. This is perhaps what self-described “feminist killjoy” and queer

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

145

theorist Sara Ahmed (2017) would call a “sweaty concept”: it is ugly, messy, and complicated,
but it is reality, and pretending that it is neat and tidy might be easier, but does not lead anywhere
productive. I hope to take this same nuanced, interrelational, intra-relational, intersectional
approach to my analysis of one person’s life and library career, in order to achieve an
interdisciplinary and contextual approach to oral history, especially since it can be all too easy to
identify the diversity of our librarian workforce in monolithic terms (Irvin, 2016).
Tucker (2000) argues that since the history of libraries intersects with myriad issues,
American librarianship can be studied in much the same way as American history, and using
overlapping resources. He also notes that professional historians do not yet adequately recognize
library historians; this is particularly harsh when you consider how much historians owe to
libraries and librarians. It seems that the history of libraries will only be relevant once it is
viewed as interdisciplinary and contextualized within the larger framework of history
(sociologically and/or politically); this echoes an intersectional feminist approach in which
considerations of context and enmeshment are crucial to critical analysis. Echoing Hildenbrand,
Tucker also notes that while women dominate the demographics of librarianship, they have not
dominated its historiography. This thesis addresses all these contemporary LIS/history concerns.
Hawaiʻi is construed from many angles but “always within the parameters” of the male
gaze (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p. 104). Feminist theory is therefore a useful framework for
Hawai‘i in particular, a place whose history includes
several centuries of the order-producing narratives of strangers to these islands who
saw what was new to them through the gendered lenses of what they expected to
see. In their eyes, Hawaiʻi was notably passive and lacking, in need of their projects

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

146

to fulfill its promises, supplement its voids, and evade its entrapments. (Turnbull &
Ferguson, 1997, p. 96)
The result of these gendered metaphors in a charged colonial [and patriarchal] context is,
unsurprisingly, not good for marginalized people—including women—or the ‘āina (Turnbull &
Ferguson, 1997).
More materially, Horie’s family has lived in Hawai‘i since the 1800s, and she was born,
grew up, worked, and still lives in Hawai‘i. She formally studied Hawaiian language and culture
for over a decade, and significant events in Hawaiian history occurred during her lifetime. One
of her most inspiring achievements as a librarian is correcting some official LC Subject Headings
related to Hawaiian history. Her entire story is infused with this place and cannot be separated
from this geopolitical context.
“As countless scholars have established, race is spatially, temporally, and relationally
contingent” and race functions differently in Hawai‘i than in the continental United States,
although still within the larger framework of white supremacy (Rohrer, 2016, p. 79). Hawai‘i is
comprised of roughly 50% women; 2% Black or African American; 10% “Native Hawaiian and
Other Pacific Islander, alone”; 10% Hispanic or Latinx;194 24% two or more races; 22% “White
alone,” (not Hispanic or Latinx); and 26% White alone (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017).195
In addition to its idiosyncratic196 multiracial setting, another reason why feminist theory
is the right approach for this particular story is that “Hawai‘i provides a unique location for
developing more sophisticated understandings of multiple claims to place staked in complex

194

I use Latinx to include multiple gender identifications, but the Census uses “Hispanic or Latino.”
The difference between “White alone, not Hispanic or Latino” and “White alone” is not clear to me, and possibly
not to those self-identifying, either.
196
By this I mean unique for the United States, as it is a primarily Caucasian country in both population and
mindset.
195

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

147

relationships between indigeneity and race, relationships that exceed native/settler binaries”
(Rohrer, 2016, p. 3). Because I am aiming to advance feminism in the Hawaiian context, this is
necessarily also about de/colonization. “If colonization relies on tidy categories and bright lines
of demarcation, decolonization gains strength in choppy waters with multiple, fluid
subjectivities” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 103). Just by sharing Horie’s story, she and I will be
contributing to the fluidifying effect of having multiple and diverse subjectivities on record, and
therefore, hopefully, to the project of decolonization.
Perhaps due to its complicated history, or perhaps due to its geographic isolation, despite
its official incorporation into the United States, Hawai‘i does not regularly receive a global (or
even national) audience; a search for peer-reviewed, academic articles with the subject heading
“Hawaii” published in the past 15 years yields only 32 results in EBSCO’s Library, Information
Science & Technology Abstracts database. Even less encouragingly, a search for “Japanese
American” in the same database with the same criteria yields only 10 results.197 So, despite the
fact that “No major - or, increasingly, minor - figure, in any field, now goes unbiographized”
(Lee, 2009, p. 91), biographies of women who are Asian American librarians, Japanese
American librarians, and/or Yonsei librarians are either unwritten, obscured, or both. Very little
has been done to correct the gender imbalance in academia, even though much can be done, and
it is clear that even now women have not been given “their rightful place in history” (Talbot,
1994, p. 68). There is a “direct correlation between the historical visibility of women and its
relationship to power, economics, and the equalization of gender in the present” (Mayo, 1994, p.

197

The Director of the Japanese American National Library (http://www.janlibrary.org/) wrote me (via a March 26,
2018 email) that their collection does not have any autobiographies or biographies of Japanese American librarians,
in any format, for any time period.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

148

60). Currently, Japanese American librarians are nearly completely absent from the historical
record.
…as a quintessentially social field, LIS is interested (in one way or another) in how
society, people, institutions (including but not limited to libraries), governments,
and information technologies work, and the interactions among them. Furthermore,
LIS is also very interested in the betterment of society, from the development of
national information policies, to the provision of user-friendly and equitable access
to information, the inclusion of diverse and /or marginalized clienteles, the support
of citizen lifelong learning, the nurturing of the library in the community, and many
other proactive areas of research and practice. (Leckie & Buschman, 2010, p. xiii)
Oral history, feminist theory, and LIS make for a synergistic and useful triangulation
approach to interdisciplinary research. Library women’s history is already “rooted in library
feminist activism” (Hildenbrand, 2000, p. 51) but, despite the fact that it is a feminized
profession, women’s contributions to library history have still been sorely marginalized
(Hildenbrand, 1996). To make matters worse, POC librarians’ contributions have been largely
ignored. More specifically, there is a distinct lack of literature outside of the black/white binary,
excluding other races and ethnicities, such as Asian Americans (Velez & Villa-Nicholas, 2017).
Additionally, in LIS research there remains “a dearth of intersectional understanding of
identity”(Gardner & Galoozis, 2018, p. 184). I hope to bring the story of a multilingual, Japanese
American, female librarian from Hawai‘i to the forefront, as a perspective and experience that is
not yet included in the historical record. Feminist librarian scholars such as Hildenbrand (1996)
have called oral history a strong potential remedy for the previous marginalization of women—

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

149

especially in the LIS field—focusing specifically on gender as an essential conceptual tool of
historical research.
In 1883, Dewey was the first to hire [white] women as professional librarians (Wiegand,
1996). While Dewey did believe that these college-educated women satisfied the criteria for
professional librarianship, his intention was not necessarily to empower women by offering them
jobs outside the home. His aim—which he was successful in—was to find the most qualified but
also, crucially, cost-effective, persons. While he can be credited with the initial import of women
into the library profession, he paid them only half the salary of their male counterparts (Wiegand,
1996). Dewey was by no means a socially-progressive librarian,198 and as we have seen,
Dewey’s initial gross undervaluing of women/women’s work haunts the profession to this day.199
…women could be hired to do the work at much lower salaries than men. This
became a standard pattern in small- to medium-sized libraries, but in larger
institutions, where the top administrative jobs required more skill, more
intelligence, an ability to make decisions, and a firm hand of authority, maledominated boards generally thought it wiser to hire men as directors. This practice
quickly stratified the large library institutional bureaucracy by gender. (Wiegand,
1989, p. 103)
Charles Ammi Cutter, a contemporaneous [white] librarian similarly “cast a long shadow
on the field”;200 he drew on Dewey’s decimal system to develop what later became the basis for
the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) (Winke, 2013, p. 122). Radical librarian

198

His anti-Semitism eventually lost him his post as the New York State Librarian, and he also disallowed
“negroes” in his clubs (Wiegand, 1996, p. 324).
199
An additional barrier to equality that women at that time had to overcome was “discrimination faced by the
working woman as she moved outside of her traditional role as nurturer and housewife” (Grotzinger, 1993, p. 353).
200
Specifically, of cataloging and classification.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

150

Sanford Berman (1971/1993) sums up the residual bias in these LIS classification schemes best
when he notes that the LCSH dealing with humans
can only “satisfy” parochial, jingoistic Europeans and North Americans, whitehued, at least nominally Christian (and preferably Protestant) in faith, comfortably
situated in the middle-and higher-income brackets, largely domiciled in suburbia,
fundamentally loyal to the Established Order, and heavily imbued with the
transcendent, incomparable glory of Western civilization. (Berman, 1971/1993, p.
ix)
After Dewey opened the gates, there was an influx of women into the LIS profession at
the turn of the twentieth century. At that time, librarianship was feminized by design as a sort of
“housewifely role” (Sloniowski, 2016, p. 646). Hildenbrand’s essay, “Library Feminism and
Library Women’s History: Activism and Scholarship, Equity and Culture” (2000) places the
development of library women’s history within the context of library feminism and American
history from the 1950s through to present day.201 Building on earlier women librarians’ histories,
Hildenbrand writes that in the 1950s, many educated women were holding jobs outside of the
home, and many began working part-time in libraries; by then, women had established their right
to work outside the home and in libraries, and simultaneously, more uneducated men were filling
up higher-paying administrative library roles (that they were arguably unqualified for). The
1960s brought about second-wave feminism, and with it, a reform agenda and a desire for greater
academic study of women who had been largely invisible or hidden in traditional history.
Around this time and into the 1970s, feminist activism included the rise of Women’s Studies on
university campuses. Simultaneously, there was an emergence of feminist librarians’ groups and

201

At time of publishing.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

151

committees, including the American Library Association (ALA) Social Responsibility Round
Table’s Feminist Task Force (FTF), founded in 1970 to address sexism in libraries and
librarianship (ALA Feminist Task Force, 2016) and COSWL, the Committee on the Status of
Women in Librarianship (American Library Association, 2018).202 Although these professional
groups meant progress in terms of research and discussion on women in the profession, very
little attention was paid to women of color.203 Progressive librarians and library students,
inspired by the Civil Rights and attendant, aforementioned social justice movements, advocated
for challenging the status quo in librarianship as well; one result was the Library Bill of Rights
(Asato, 2011).204 In 1972, Title IX of the Education Amendments extended equal opportunity to
all persons receiving federal assistance in educational institutions, “thereby including higher
education under the umbrella of the federal laws and regulations prohibiting sex discrimination
and requiring implementation of affirmative action guidelines” (Irvine, 1985, p. 141). (Hawaiʻiborn Japanese American Patsy Takemoto Mink (1927-2002), the first woman of color elected to
Congress, “built critical support” for Title IX (U.S. House of Representatives, 2018).) In 1980
the Asian/Pacific American Librarians Association (APALA) was founded in response to the fact
that Asian/Pacific American librarians had to that point been virtually “unnoticed and
unrecognized” (Yamashita, 2000, p. 96). During this decade, library women’s status improved
somewhat, as many initiatives begun previously came to fruition. As Betty Jo Irvine pointed out
in her book Sex Segregation in Librarianship: Demographic and Career Patterns of Academic
Library Administrators (1985), since Title IX was implemented in the 1970s, by the 1980s it had
resulted in increased opportunities for women to become academic library administrators. The

202

http://www.ala.org/aboutala/committees/ala/ala-coswl
An additional disappointment is that it appears that the FTF website has not been updated in nearly two years,
indicating a lack of progress or enthusiasm, whether or not that is actually the case: http://www.libr.org/ftf/.
204
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/librarybill
203

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

152

1990s were an ambiguous period for both feminism in general and library women’s history in
particular, and Hildenbrand (1997) noted that while ALA’s COSWL had resulted in some gains,
there had also been setbacks and stagnation and women in the profession were decidedly “still
not equal” (p. 44). However, she remained optimistic about the future, and suggested that in
order to have a greater synthesis in library history, we ought to move “beyond celebration and
toward explanation,” and reexamine library history while asking questions about what elements
of race, gender, sex and class issues were at play.205
These are questions we must still ask today, both in the present moment and when
examining the past. Librarians continue to be predominantly white women. Hildenbrand noted
that “women, facing the new, harsher economic and political realities of the twenty-first century,
may turn again to activism,” and with the historically-significant Women’s March (Bynum,
2017), #MeToo206 movement (Hudson, 2018), and other feminist activism revived since 2016,
she may have been prescient.
As we are witnessing in the national climate of 2018, identity is more political than ever.
The current LIS leadership literature does not adequately acknowledge the politics of the
profession and LIS scholars must adapt grounded insights from other fields—in other words,
conduct interdisciplinary research—in order to be productive (Buschman, 2016). Additionally,
LIS can benefit significantly from more critical-theoretical approaches (Leckie & Buschman,
2010). This interdisciplinary oral history project uses insights from feminist theory to create a
product (this master’s thesis) that will contribute to an environment of greater critical

205

To her list, I would add ability, age, religion, and more.
A “moment that is embracing the sanctity—and, with it, the political power—of the individual story” (Garber,
2018).
206

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

153

understanding of the history, current state, and future trajectory of the library profession. An
intersectional207 approach is the most appropriate framework for this interdisciplinary project.

Intersectional Feminist Analysis
As detailed in the “Methodology” section, my analysis is primarily within an
intersectional feminist framework. “Biography is never just the personal story of one life. It
always has political and social implications” (Lee, 2009, p. 63). There are additional identity
factors that merit analysis, but here I simply begin by examining gender.
Horie self-identifies as a feminist, and personally defines feminism as “Being in favor of
equal treatment and opportunity for girls and women.” When asked about the current #MeToo
Movement, she said, “It’s about time!” Horie’s feminism is apparent in her life’s work, way of
communicating, and in the following very feminist letter she sent to the editor of ALA’s
American Libraries:
I find the remarks about how “sexy” librarians are in the last paragraph of the
interview with John Perry Barlow (Sept., p. 49-51) offensive and trivializing of
librarians. It’s disappointing that you chose to print Barlow’s remarks but it is
appalling that AL’s interviewer made a rejoinder that the comment will “make a lot
of friends.” I can't imagine many librarians agreeing with that point of view. (Horie,
1996)
The article in question lauded Barlow, a cofounder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
as “one of the country’s most original and provocative thinkers on the subject of high tech”

207

Additional identities such as religion, ability, and other identity factors that can result in marginalization are
included in my approach to intersectional feminist analysis.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

154

(Chepesiuk, 1996). I personally found the comment Horie wrote in about even more offensive
than she described it, because it is also condescending:
AL: Anything you wish to add?
JPB: I hope librarians take heart. I don’t know if they realize how sexy they are.
AL: [Laughter]208 Say that this afternoon and I’m sure you will make a lot of
friends.
Horie was clearly angry about common sexist condescension, and I find it inspiring that
she took action, even if and when the impact of something such as a letter to the editor is
uncertain. Even small gestures such as that can provide solidarity and encouragement to
feminists, and hopefully help influence future feminists’ thinking and conversations.
Another insight into Horie’s [perhaps subconscious] feelings regarding men and women,
is a near-death experience she had in her forties, when she was home alone and gravely ill. She
said god appeared to her, as
a white woman, a Disney-esque fairy godmother. She gave me to understand that
everything was going to be alright with my illness. And as far as the world was
concerned, that it didn’t matter if people believed or didn’t believe in god, or a
religion. That the world and everything in it would still function, atoms would keep
working, etcetera, but that we must stop fighting and killing each other over
differing religious beliefs.
Later she added that the devil had also appeared to her at this time. He was male, but not
exactly a man—sort of resembling a beetle, he did not speak. She emphasizes that this
experience was not a dream, and she was quite awake. It was a turning point of sorts; it had a

208

From the tone of this interaction, I cannot help but be reminded of the deplorable 2005 “locker room talk”
exchange between Donald Trump and Billy Bush.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

155

profound and lasting impact on Horie’s outlook and attitude. The insight that the worst thing that
humans were doing was fighting over religion, and the feeling of reassurance, were not fleeting,
but rather, stayed with her from then on. It has become her worldview.
Just as we are now looking to Horie’s worldview, work, and personal life and experiences
for insight, Horie consistently looked to other people as models for how to shape—or what to
avoid for—her own life. This is perhaps of consequence for working women in particular, who
tend to “identify positions that had been held by other women as more accessible to them”
(Irvine, 1985, p. 143); representation matters. Horie’s mother Irene was likely her first strong
female role model. Irene Horie worked full time, from her teens—when WWII started—through
retirement, and that likely had a positive impact on [Ruth] Horie’s career. Recent analyses of two
surveys from over 100,000 people in 29 countries found that adult daughters—but interestingly,
not sons209—of employed mothers are more likely to be employed and “more likely to hold
supervisory responsibility, work more hours and earn higher incomes than their peers whose
mothers were not employed” (McGinn, Ruiz Castro, & Lingo, 2018).
Research shows that for librarians in particular, mentors play “an important, perhaps
critical” role in the career opportunities of their mentees (Chatman, 1992, p. 506).210 Hildenbrand
(1996) notes that women who are librarians “continue to negotiate their way between the
expectations of them as women and as librarians, and these stereotypes have a direct or indirect
effect on all members of the female-intensive profession of librarianship” (p. xii). Other than
noting the fact that the “feminization” of the profession negatively impacted compensation and

209

It also appears that working mothers have a positive, balancing effect on all their children’s gender roles: “sons
raised by employed mothers spend more time caring for family members and daughters spend less time on
housework;” and women like [Ruth] Horie, who do not have children of their own, can still be positive role models
for children: “childhood exposure to female employment within society can substitute for the influence of maternal
employment on daughters” (McGinn, Ruiz Castro, & Lingo, 2018).
210
This study examined public library leaders.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

156

prestige/status overall, Horie says that she does not feel that her career was impacted by sexism
and/or misogyny. Somewhat contradictorily,211 she was a founding member of the UHPA
Women’s Committee, which leads me to believe she might have perceived some disadvantages
for women in the library [and/or academic] profession. She later elaborated:
The committee members were mainly concerned with disadvantages for women
faculty members in academia. I being the only librarian on the committee could
impart a different perspective now and then. Such as, most UH librarians worked
all year long.
Related to the feminization of librarianship, volunteerism is a system criticized by some
feminists as undervaluing women’s work (Mercier & Murphy, 1991). This is significant here,
since a big part of Horie’s life and ethic is volunteering; she spends much of her time in
retirement doing professional volunteer work (and has since early in her career). The ongoing,
pervasive presence of volunteer workers in libraries “signals the failure of librarians to prevent
the use of unpaid workers and the failure of communities to provide adequate funding for their
libraries” (Malone, 1996, p. 293).212 However, when it comes to well-meaning volunteers
inadvertently lowering wages, Horie does not think she is part of that problem; she thinks the
lack of good pay for librarians is due to the feminization of librarianship. As previously
established, data backs her up on this. And, when asked if there is anything she thought would be
better and/or different by now, in terms of social justice issues, she muses that what has gotten
much worse over the course of her lifetime is wage discrepancies and conspicuous consumption.

211

This is merely an observation, and not a problem; “our stories are multilayered and contradictory” (Prins, 2006,
p. 281).
212
“The presence of volunteers provokes, however subtly, the traditional roles and services previously performed
for no pay. Alongside the professional woman toiling for pay resides the image of the woman who asks nothing in
return for her giving” (Malone, 1996, p. 290).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

157

Indeed, it has been over half a century since the passage of the Equal Pay Act, yet “women who
work full time, year-round in the United States are typically paid only 79 cents for every dollar
paid to their male counterparts” (National Women’s Law Center, 2015). This is a gendered
problem, but it is also a class issue: In 2017, the CEO-to-worker pay ratio was 361 to one (The
American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, 2018).
Wage discrepancies between the administrators and workers in libraries was not
addressed in this thesis, but of note is that Horie was not interested in leadership positions, so her
sex was not a barrier to her in that regard, since it was not a path she chose to pursue. However,
equally of note is the aforementioned question of the legitimacy of university librarians’ faculty
status, which Horie did not mention in connection with misogyny, but I believe might be related
to the prejudiced belief in the inferior status of women and therefore the feminized status of the
profession of librarianship. The undervaluing of the profession was also possibly a factor when
she divorced and could not make ends meet as a single person on her Bishop Museum salary; is
it not unjust that a multilingual, highly-educated, and highly-productive employee could not live
off her salary (and that is even after working at the library for five years)? 213 While she never
overtly strove toward leadership positions, thanks to the encouragement and mentorship of
several trusted and successful individuals, Horie was able to perhaps achieve more than she
otherwise would have.214 Horie was lucky to find at least one mentor in every academic and
employment setting she experienced. Usually, these mentorships were organic and informal.
They were all, with one exception, specific to her contemporaneous pursuit and career stage;
once she moved from one place to another, she might keep in touch, but would also find new

213

“One job should be enough” is the slogan of over eight thousand Marriott hotel workers currently on strike
across the country, including in Hawaiʻi; they are demanding a living wage from a company that made $3.2 billion
in 2017 (Philp, 2018).
214
This assessment is not in any way meant to downplay her own effort or accomplishments.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

158

mentors in her new work environment. While she sought advice from people she admired and
respected, and many people were willing to help her and/or impart advice, Horie never liked
being told what to do, and always ultimately followed her own internal compass.
This internal compass also guided her away from motherhood; Horie never wanted to
have children, and that decision likely benefited her career, although there is no way to know for
sure. Joan C. Williams, director of the Program on WorkLife Law at American University, notes
that academia “is a job structure that systematically excludes mothers… It shows that so long as
we continue to identify the ideal academic worker as someone who works full time, 60 hours a
week for 40 years straight -- surprise! -- that will overwhelmingly be men” (Wilson, 2003).
Historically, men have monopolized library leadership roles for a variety of reasons (Irvine,
1985). More recently, studies show that having children increases men’s chance of achieving
tenure, but drastically decreases women’s (Wilson, 2003), a phenomenon that is objectively
unfair. I am additionally interested in whether women who are not in tenure and/or leadership
roles in the library are qualified yet passed over, or if they consciously chose not to pursue career
advancement within in the library; and, whether factors such as motherhood have negatively
impacted their chances at career advancement. Of course, we know from Horie that she was not
interested in library leadership positions, but considering how many de facto leadership roles she
ended up assuming, I cannot help but wonder if her aversion to paperwork was the complete
story. One of the factors leading to children having a negative impact on mothers’ careers is that
only 48% of men who were married full professors had wives who worked full-time, but 91% of
women who were married full professors had spouses that worked full time; the bottom line is
that marriage hurts women’s careers while simultaneously boosting men’s (Harvey, 1961; MuttiDriscoll, 2015). Women must choose between babies and tenure. The unpaid caregiving that is

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

159

expected of females but not males is the lifeblood of both individual families and the overall
economy (Crittenden, 2002). Men in academia do not have the problem of these societal
expectations, which detract from career achievements. Horie eliminated this problem
(consciously or not) by choosing not to be a mother. But, we do not know to what extent her
husband/s provided support, although she did mention she perceived her husband as supportive.
Horie did say that when she was living alone (unmarried), she was the head of her household,
and that presently, she feels there is no clear head of the household, as she and her husband share
the household labor and expenses. “My husband and I both do housework. He does more
cooking and I do more laundry.”
Horie’s aversion to official leadership does not negate any of her professional
accomplishments, but I believe that she would have made a strong addition to library leadership.
The reasons libraries should work to ensure representation of women in leadership roles are
manifold, but are summed up by Chamorro-Premuzic (2003), who notes that the current state of
leadership is “a pathological system that rewards men for their incompetence while punishing
women for their competence, to everybody’s detriment.” One of the top issues in academic
libraries today is organizational policy, which concerns the recruitment, education, and retention
of academic librarians, especially in library leadership roles; the environment lacks diversity
(Hisle, 2002). Academic library leadership is important, among many other reasons, because it
helps increase a library’s presence on campus (Bell, 2015). Even when women have become
administrators—which, historically, is not often—they have been associated with the smaller and
less-prestigious research libraries (Irvine, 1985). Horie did not aspire to leadership, even though
she often found herself in those roles (sometimes by default) and other people encouraged her in
them. I think she probably would have been very successful in leadership roles, especially since

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

160

research has shown that organizations led by women have a greater return on investment (Barsh
& Yee, 2011). While men consider themselves smarter and more capable than women (Stumm,
Chamorro-Premuzic, & Furnham, 2009), arrogance and overconfidence are inversely related to
leadership talent. In fact, traits and characteristics more commonly found among women, and
that Horie displays, such as humility and emotional intelligence, are exactly those that contribute
to successful leadership (Collins, 2001).
The paradoxical implication is that the same psychological characteristics that
enable male managers to rise to the top of the corporate or political ladder are
actually responsible for their downfall. In other words, what it takes to get the job
is not just different from, but also the reverse of, what it takes to do the job well.
As a result, too many incompetent people are promoted to management jobs, and
promoted over more competent people. (Chamorro-Premuzic, 2003)
Whether or not she was interested in becoming an official leader herself, Horie seems to
have learned from and benefitted by other people, mainly people she considered trusted mentors.
Onsite mentors, crucial to success at work, are not (and previously have not been) as available to
women as to men (Olson & Jackson, 2009) so it is somewhat atypical that she had several
mentors encouraging her to extend her comfort zone in terms of her career. She attributes many
of her professional advances to outside encouragement, and indeed, research indicates that
“women should be vigorously encouraged to apply for administrative posts” if they are to strive
for advancement (Irvine, 1985, p. 143).
Career and administrative opportunities are not the only arena in which women face more
barriers to success than their male peers. Women, “compared with men, are at greatly increased
risk of all forms of sexual assault” and female victims of all types of violence are more likely to

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

161

be attacked by their known acquaintances and partners (Acierno, Resnick, & Kilpatrick, 1997, p.
59). As previously mentioned, early in her career Horie worked under a male supervisor who
everyone knew to watch out for. Her statements and actions are slightly at odds in her own
interpretation of this occurrence; she says that he did not impact her much, but also that she
would pull out her desk drawers when he came to see her, creating a physical barricade for her
own protection. She does not necessarily think that this man’s habit of coming too physically
close to women employees for their comfort constitutes sexual harassment. She is the ultimate
authority on her experience, and she is the one who was there. From what she describes, I think
that this man at the very least created a hostile work environment. Horie tended to quite
nonchalantly mention several experiences and incidents that are perhaps symptomatic of largerscale, societal sexism and misogyny. For instance, further investigation could be made into what
happened with her biological paternal grandfather, who possibly was a domestic abuser; Horie
mentioned that the reason he returned to Japan from Hawaiʻi was that he tried to kill his wife and
he was sent back by friends and neighbors—who had also come from Toyama-ken, Japan, where
her paternal grandparents were from—who got together to raise the money. This is,
unfortunately, still not uncommon; statistics hold steady over the past several decades and show
that, annually, nearly two-thousand women in the U.S. are murdered by their intimate partners
(Acierno, Resnick, & Kilpatrick, 1997; Violence Policy Center, 2017). Another example is when
Horie mentioned that, when she was a young child, a haole acquaintance of her father’s offered
to purchase her: “he wanted to buy me, because he thought I was so cute. I mean, it's sort of a
horrific thought, right? In this day and age. Anyway, my father refused to sell me to Mr. Camp
so thank goodness. [laughs]” She clearly has an understanding of the shifting lenses through
which we individually and collectively view incidents such as these, over time. She can laugh

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

162

and say it is horrific in the same sentence; as we can see from her tone and phrasing, she might—
understandably— experience conflicting emotions and interpretations surrounding incidents such
as these.
VBS: Did you know that at the time?
RH: Um, no I didn’t. I didn’t really know what to think of that.
VBS: Like did you find out later, that he had said that?
RH: Yeah, later as an adult, probably, I thought, yeah, that was horrible. Why
would he want to say such a thing, right? Teasing or not…
While some of her experiences might have been expressed as mundane, inconsequential,
or even unsurprising, because objectification and violence are normal parts of most women’s
lives, it should be noted that these incidents are possibly indicative of the larger frameworks of
systemic sexism, misogyny, and racism in which Horie has lived. As a woman, she215 existed
and continues to exist within the structure of patriarchy, so I cannot completely separate sexism
nor misogyny from her life story, but I can observe whether or not she identifies those structures,
mechanisms, or effects, in the telling of her own story. I can also observe certain manifestations
of those structures, even if they are not mentioned overtly. Calling them out as such here is in the
hopes of learning something from them; identifying sexism (or racism, etc.) is not anti-sexism
(or anti-racist work, etc.) but is at least somewhere productive to begin.
Speaking of racism, Horie says that personally, she felt no real antagonism against her in
Hawaiʻi, but has perceived and experienced some racial discrimination against Japanese people
in the continental United States. Horie recalls an experience with racial discrimination once
when traveling in the continental United States. She was at Dallas/Fort Worth International

215

And I.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

163

Airport, which is very large; it was very early in the morning, and she was the only person
awaiting the inter-terminal shuttle. She stood directly below the sign for the terminal that she
wanted to go to, where the shuttle was meant to stop. The driver—she remembers it was a man,
but she does not remember anything else identifying about him—drove right past her. She
walked the distance to where he had pulled over, greeted him, and boarded the shuttle. He would
not acknowledge her, did not help her with her suitcase, and did not announce the stops, although
that is customary. Again, we cannot say certainly whether this disrespect was due to Horie’s
gender or race, but she said she could not be sure if this man’s rudeness was specifically targeted
toward her, and that it “didn’t feel very good.”

Activism
Antidotes to sexism and racism, as well as other forms of discrimination, include
feminism and activism. When it comes to both feminism and activism, it is not necessarily
possible nor productive to distinguish between theory and practice. Part of what makes women’s
oral history ripe for critical analysis and scholarship is also what can make it problematic: It has
traditionally assumed a singular feminist methodology, and such assumptions “had the effect of
foregrounding gender while obscuring the possible centrality of other factors” (Gluck & Patai,
1991, p. 2). Here, through an analysis of Horie’s activism, I attempt to discuss other factors in
addition to gender. Beyond its own inherent worthiness, Horie’s story and career have much to
teach us about the tensions that exist in our multidimensional world, and how we might be able
to exist within complex and even conflicting dynamics—she turns out to be a wonderful role
model for best practice.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

164

I told Horie that I identified her as an activist librarian and asked her if that is ok. She
replied, “Yes, I suppose so.” It seems that there is something she does not completely agree with
in my interpretation. Following her own logic, my interpretation is that she probably sees the
social justice benefit of some of her work as a pleasant result of, but not the reason for, doing it.
She says she does not “really” consider herself an activist librarian, but that others may view
some of her activities as activist. When asked about this, she identified activities that are more
overtly activist than her overall stance as an information professional. When asked if she could
share her professional identity and philosophy, she said: “I’ve tried to work within the rules and
accomplish what needed to be done. I don’t think I’ve really thought about it.”
I marched with UHPA in several Martin Luther King, Jr. parades, participated in
the October 31, 1995 “death of education” march from UHM to the Capitol to
demonstrate against Governor Ben Cayetano’s cuts to the UH budget.216 I also
joined UH faculty in a peace march from Ala Moana Park to Kapiʻolani Park to
demonstrate against President George W. Bush’s decision to invade Iraq in 2003.
While she does not wholly embrace her designation as an activist librarian, she also does
not dispute it, and she has advice for other librarians and LIS students who want to make a
difference:
Do your homework. Get the facts. Examine the relevant foundational documents.
Meet with those involved so as to understand different sides of the issue. Consult
with mentors.217 Join or create a network. Work with like-minded others. Find out
how to advance your proposal through appropriate channels.218 Pick your battles.

216

https://uhlibs.lib.hawaii.edu/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=18205
She later added: “and people who have gone through the process before.”
218
As mentioned, Horie is adamantly pro-establishment in many ways, although she also is aware of structural
implications.
217

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

165

When the opportunity presents itself, take action! Go back to the controlling
documents and see how it’s supposed to work. Find out who has responsibility to
amend or enforce.
In terms of when to act, sometimes Horie felt it appropriate for her to be involved in an
issue, and others she did not. She is willing to become involved in taking a stance on an issue
even if it does not affect her personally, such as when she went on strike with the UHPA/HSTA
for all teachers in 2001. Other times, she perceived issues to be in separate spheres, or reserved
for certain people or groups, that did not include her.
In the late 1970s, building on the momentum of earlier community-level struggles,
the Council of Hawaiian Organizations and Alu Like sponsored “Pūwalu sessions”
that brought together hundreds of individuals and representatives of different
Hawaiian associations. Many ideas about how to improve the collective conditions
of the Hawaiian people came out of these sessions. (Goodyear-Kaʻōpua, 2014, p.
14)
Horie might have been interested in the “Pūwalu sessions” but “was not aware” of them
and therefore did not attend. On January 17, 1993, for the centennial anniversary of the
overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy, there occurred the “largest known protest of Kānaka
Maoli and supporters in history,” and “roughly twenty thousand marched through Honolulu to
‘Iolani Palace” (Goodyear-Kaʻōpua, p. 17). Again, Horie did not attend, although this time she
was aware it was happening. “I did not march because I thought it was reserved for those with
Hawaiian blood.”
I heard about some of the other protests like downtown, there was the old Vineyard
Boulevard group… there was a community like between Queens Hospital and the

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

166

Department of Ed[ucation] building that was a whole small community over there.
They all had to move and there was Kalama Valley which was farming at the time.
So these things were starting to percolate up and I've told other people, you know,
all of this happened with my parents' property before these organized protests
started coming up. So I guess I didn’t really have it in my mind that you could even
protest at all, if it would do any good at all, other than [you] yourself might be
arrested or get into trouble and get in the newspaper. That would be the worst thing.
VBS: Do you think it’s fair to say based on that assessment or experience then that
it’s important to see other movements succeed in order to feel empowered?
RH: That’s right. If you don’t have any personal knowledge of friends or other
people in your neighborhood who are talking about the issue or getting upset about
the issue, then it’s difficult to be a self-starter and start the protest yourself. That
takes much more courage and energy to do that.
Horie’s story imparts the lesson that representation is important, and providing examples
and role models can positively affect and inspire further social justice action and initiatives.
Interestingly, despite the fact that she still does not necessarily self-identify as an activist, and
that she says she did not take real activist action until after college, Horie’s earliest memory that
she associates with activism was when she was quite young.
There was a period when we went to the zoo downtown in Waikiki couple of times
and I noticed that the water buffalo didn’t have a pond. It was kind of a dry area
and he had sort of a muddy hole. I mean, I knew what a water buffalo was because
they had them in where we lived in Kahalu‘u. And they love to be in the water.
That’s why they’re called water buffalo. And I’ve never seen another water buffalo,

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

167

like the poor one at the zoo was in this dry pen. And so my father said, “Okay, why
don’t you write to the zoo keeper?” So he helped me write a letter to Mr. Paul
Breese.219 You know, “We noticed that the water buffalo doesn't seem to have a
pond. He doesn’t look too happy. Think could make a pond for him because I know
[where] we live water buffaloes had running water, you know, when they’re not
working because some of the farmers in the back of Waiāhole Valley, had taro and
other crops that require water.” And he actually wrote back to his credit and he said,
“Oh, thank you for writing and we’ll, we’ll think about it. It’s true. You know,
where they come from in the Philippines and other places in Asia, they do work in
water. But this one, you’re right doesn’t have water.” So he didn’t promise, you
know, he was gonna fix it. But at least he responded, which I thought was amazing.
And unfortunately I lost that letter. I don’t have it now, but probably that was it,
actually writing to somebody in authority to seek some restitution or remedy for
some perceived problem.
Horie says that her stance is “not anti-establishment.” That is illustrated in her activism as
detailed in the oral history, and above, in how she addressed the first instance during which she
felt compelled to act in the pursuit of justice. Luckily, there can still “be room within institutional
agendas for political activism” (Accardi, 2013, p. 68), and therefore, there is room for both proestablishment and anti-establishment stances in activism. It makes sense conceptually that a
cataloger would be more willing to work within existing structures. When asked about library
neutrality, Horie said:

219

The zoo director.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

168

Cataloging includes efforts to recognize and acknowledge diversity in how authors
and others express themselves. An example would be the way several different
terms used over time for “African Americans” are still preserved in Library of
Congress subject authority records… I feel that the rules for subject headings
enable catalogers to convey information to library users regarding changes in how
ethnic groups are named over time, in a neutral format.
She sent me the below example, and said to “Notice also that the “scope note” instructs
us that “Blacks” is the preferred term for members of the same ethnic group outside the U.S.”
LC control no.: sh 85001932
LCCN Permalink: https://lccn.loc.gov/sh85001932
LC classification: E184.5 E185.98
Topical subject heading: African Americans
Variant(s): African Americans --United States
Afro-Americans
Black Americans
Colored people (United States)
Negroes
See also: Africans --United States
Ethnology --United States
Blacks --United States
Subdivision African Americans under individual wars, e.g. World War, 19391945--African Americans; and headings beginning with African American

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

169

Scope note: Here are entered works on citizens of the United States of black
African descent. Works on blacks who temporarily reside in the United States,
such as aliens, students from abroad, etc., are entered under Blacks--United
States. Works on blacks outside the United States are entered under Blacks-[place].
Subject example tracing: Example under United States--Race relations
Note under Blacks--United States
As a follow-up to the question regarding library neutrality, I asked, “How would you
describe power (not a dictionary definition; your definition, or word association, or feelings
about it)?” Horie replied:
Power is the ability to get things done by influencing others. It can be acquired by
gaining knowledge, rising in a hierarchy, gaining wealth, attaining political office.
With power or the exercise of power come accountability and the potential for good
or bad consequences.
When asked how she would personally describe “knowledge,” Horie said:
This is probably too simple, but I would describe knowledge as a fact known
through personal experience or scientific study. It could range from a single fact
(plants need water to grow) to a whole cultural practice (certain varieties of taro
grow best in a loʻi, which is similar to a rice paddy). Knowledge is connected to
expertise (knowing how to grow taro), and can be transmitted to the younger
generation or to those wanting to acquire it.
After discussing such big-picture items, there were several current issues that have
particular salience in Hawaiʻi that I wanted to ask Horie about. For example, genetically-

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

170

modified organisms (GMO) are more contested in Hawai‘i than anywhere else in the United
States (Gupta, 2017) because here the issue is sometimes articulated and enacted as
biocolonialism, the commandeering of “knowledge and biological resources from an indigenous
people without compensation” (Segen’s Medical Dictionary, 2011). Horie says that she is “aware
that patents have been awarded to certain hybrid varieties of plants that researchers have
developed for commercial use.” I asked Horie, rapid-fire style, her opinion on several additional
social justice issues that are currently in the news, nationally and locally:
Q: Gun control/the Second Amendment
A: I’m in favor of (1) universal and timely background checks, (2) enforcement of
existing laws on restricting certain classes of people from using, purchasing or
owning guns, (3) making such laws consistent across the country, and (4) banning
the use, purchase and ownership of military style assault weapons. I respect the
Second Amendment but I believe its misinterpretation along with the “stand your
ground” laws and insidious racism have led to many preventable deaths.
In response to this question, she elaborated, and I found it extremely worthwhile to
include her response in its entirety:
When I was living at home I didn’t really think about gun control. My father taught
me and my brother about gun safety. I did target shooting but not hunting. I wasn’t
in favor of big game hunting. I ate anything that my father shot and my mother
cooked… My father learned to shoot in the Army. Later he took up target shooting,
then hunting on Molokaʻi for deer and goats. He also helped the local “dump” on
the windward side by shooting rats at night. He helped farmers in Waiheʻe Valley
by shooting nuisance (non-native) birds such as doves and pheasants. His ability to

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

171

clean and keep guns in good repair qualified him to get a job as a gunsmith at
Honolulu Sporting Goods. As part of my family’s move to the mainland in 1974
my father’s boss arranged a transfer to another sporting goods store in New Mexico.
Once there, he told me he turned down many requests from owners of semiautomatic rifles to convert their weapons to fully automatic action, which would
fire many more bullets each time the trigger is pulled. He felt it was not only wrong
but could get him arrested and fired because the conversion was illegal. In an effort
to mitigate the effects of mass shootings there are now proposals in various parts
of the country to ban “bump stocks,” which essentially enable that same type of
conversion without the necessity of going to a gunsmith.
Q: Black Lives Matter (BLM)
A: I agree.
Q: Would you tell people to vote?
A: Yes! Everyone should vote if they are eligible.
Q: Should incarcerated people be able to vote?
A: Yes.
Q: #MeToo
A: It’s about time!
Q: Donald Trump
A: No comment.
Q: Some allege that Airbnb and other similar rental properties are negatively
affecting the availability of housing for Native Hawaiians and other residents of
Hawaiʻi. Do you agree?

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

172

A: I agree.
Q: Advice for anyone living in Hawaiʻi
A: Don’t be afraid… make friends, join in activities and keep [your] eyes and ears
open; and like any other host culture, try to be respectful and try to learn… attend
events and get involved… look at what you’re doing in terms of recycling and
wasting and buying stuff on Amazon instead of locally. Buy local, shop local. I
think that’s going to help us in the long run in any society.
Q: Use of Hawaiian language; to this day the use of the Hawaiian language
continues to be a fraught and oft-contested issue (Boneza, 2018)
A: I believe Hawaiians in particular and people who understand Hawaiian in
general deserve the right to use the language as they wish, given that Hawaiian is
one of the two official languages of the State of Hawaiʻi. I commend the Legislature
and the Judiciary for their recognition and support of Hawaiian language use.
Q: Hawaiian Sovereignty220
A: I believe Hawaiians deserve to have sovereignty and they should be
empowered to determine what form it would have.
When asked what she would hypothetically do if Hawaiians were to gain sovereignty—
an outcome she would support, but also thinks would be unlikely due to economic concerns and
the fact that not all Native Hawaiians desire sovereignty—Horie said:

220

In 1993, a resolution was introduced in the United States Senate to “acknowledge the 100th anniversary of the
January 17, 1893 overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii, and to offer an apology to Native Hawaiians on behalf of
the United States for the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii”; it was passed into law the same year. In 2005 a bill
was introduced in the United States Senate to “express the policy of the United States regarding the United States
relationship with Native Hawaiians and to provide a process for the recognition by the United States of the Native
Hawaiian governing entity” (Civic Impulse, 2018). However, in 2018 when Hawai‘i marked the 125th anniversary
of the overthrow of the Hawaiian Monarchy, sovereignty had not yet been re-implemented, nor has the United States
formally recognized a Native Hawaiian governing entity.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

173

… it’s my home, but I feel like the Hawaiians should be in charge. I’m just gonna
wait and see, I really don’t want to move to Japan or the mainland, the U.S.
mainland. I’d rather stay here. If there’s an opportunity to gain citizenship in the
new government, I certainly would want to be a citizen of whatever government
there is and see how it is. Basically, I think, you know, I just have to deal with
whatever comes to pass.
Hawaiian Sovereignty deserves some additional consideration, since the Indigenous
perspective is crucial to any intersectional feminist analysis and since Horie’s activism revolved
in large part around Native Hawaiian issues. In addition to supporting Native Hawaiian selfdetermination, Horie has dedicated her career and personal life to advancing the use of and
access to Native Hawaiian language, materials, and culture.
There are two seemingly conflicting interpretations of the geo-political history and
present situation in Hawaiʻi. The first is that Japanese Americans have overcome adversity to
achieve the American Dream in the fiftieth state (Okihiro, 1992), and the second is that everyone
non-Native is displacing Kanaka Maoli in their homeland (Fujikane, 2008). While these
interpretations might appear to be mutually-exclusive, it is my opinion that both can be true
simultaneously.221 From a critical intersectional feminist analysis standpoint, regardless of
whether or not we individually support Kanaka Maoli right to self-determination and selfgovernance, in Hawaiʻi, every non-Native resident possibly “benefits from the colonization of
the Hawaiians, the theft of their lands and resources, and the commercialization of their culture”
(Kosasa, 2008, p. 203). Importantly, individuals such as Horie are not personally guilty of
colonization, but rather, they may inadvertently find themselves within its pre-existing structure

221

And are.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

174

(Fukjikane, 2008). Addressing the wider context and legacy of colonial domination in which
Horie’s life and work occurred—and, notably, against which she intentionally and tirelessly
worked—does not diminish her extensive efforts toward social justice. Conversely, I point out
colonialism here to underscore the importance of her accomplishments.
In terms of settler colonialism, Horie acknowledges a tension between her identities as a
local and a settler; she says she sometimes almost feels guilty because Hawaiians felt land was
stolen from them, but she also feels like this is her culture too, because she was born and raised
here, and her grandparents arrived here in the 1800s.
The Japanese American men were making inroads into the political and business
hierarchies222 and there was some point where I kind of felt, almost… somewhat
apologetic, maybe, or… I didn’t want people to think that I took it for granted that
we had these opportunities just because we were Japanese American. And this is
now being talked about more and more… in regards to, for example, white
privilege. In Hawaiʻi it’s almost like Japanese American privilege.223
Horie is demonstrably aware of the complex and sometimes contradictory history and
social strata of these islands, probably because she highly values lifelong learning and selfawareness. She has absolutely been successful in not obstructing Native Hawaiian struggles for
justice, which is the most-important corrective that settlers can achieve (Fujikane, 2008). She has
also gone beyond that minimal aspect: Horie acknowledged her own possible relative privilege—
which does not negate any struggle, discrimination, or adversity she also might have
experienced—and spent her entire life and career serving Kanaka Maoli, the most

222

The “democratic revolution” of the 1950s put many Japanese locals into power (Rohrer, 2010, p. 8).
Japanese Americans in Hawai‘i can in some ways be considered a privileged group, including those whose
families came here originally to work on plantations (Rohrer, 2016).
223

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

175

disenfranchised population in her home. She stated unequivocally that Kanaka Maoli deserve the
right to self-determination, and she takes concrete actions that support her claim; for example,
she does not vote for Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) representatives, even though it is her
legal right, because she believes doing so would be disrespectful to Native Hawaiians.224 Horie
views her pursuits and accomplishments in Hawaiian Studies as a way for her to give back to her
community, and it is true that educating themselves is the first and crucial step locals in Hawaiʻi
can take to ensure that they are informed regarding Hawaiʻi’s history and ongoing struggle for
self-determination (Fujikane, 2008). Horie understands and can speak Hawaiian, which is a
major commitment and highly unusual; Hawaiian is a “critically endangered”225 language
(Moseley, 2010) and only 5.7% of all multilingual people in the state of Hawaiʻi speak Hawaiian
(Hawaii State Data Center, 2015).226
Horie has participated in the revitalization of Hawaiian language and culture throughout
her life, notably during the Hawaiian Renaissance of the 1960s and 70s. She worked tirelessly to
correct the official historical record, removing inaccuracies, falsehoods, and bias regarding
Hawaiʻi, its Native people, and its history. What Horie chose to do when confronted with
inaccuracies and misleading information and standards pertaining to Hawaiʻi in the official LC
records is particularly inspiring considering that it was not necessarily her responsibility to
address those issues, and “Few question the authority base of the collections for which they have

224

In 1996 Freddy Rice, on a ridiculous reverse racism premise, argued that it is unconstitutional for the state to
restrict voting to Hawaiians only in elections for OHA (Fujikane, 2008); he won Supreme Court Case Rice v.
Cayetano, 528 U.S. 495 (2000), but Justices Stevens and Ginsburg dissented (Horie clearly sides with the
dissenters). Rice’s argument is a textbook example of “the most egregious of ironies” in which “settlers proclaim
that Native Hawaiians are depriving them of their civil rights, but they do so in order to use the argument of equal
rights to take from Natives their rights and resources as indigenous peoples” (Fujikane, 2008, p. 15).
225
This is on a scale of vulnerable, definitely endangered, severely endangered, critically endangered, extinct
(Moseley, 2010).
226
The survey asked what languages other than English were spoken at home.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

176

a social responsibility” (Wiegand, 1989, p. 106). Horie has obviously spent—and continues to
spend—significant time and effort, almost entirely uncompensated, on activities and projects the
goals of which are to preserve, make accessible, and disseminate Hawaiian language, culture,
and materials. She has personally initiated Native Hawaiian-specific advocacy, and has been
integrally involved in initiatives, groups, grants, and organizations that advocate for Native
Hawaiian language, culture, and materials, and access to them. While Horie might be structurally
implicated in the displacement of Native Hawaiians via settler colonialism—and, critically, I
mean she along with all non-Native Hawaiians residing here—as demonstrated, she chose a
social justice stance toward Hawaiʻi, Kanaka Maoli, and their culture, and her work is especially
important for precisely that reason.227

Issues and Shortcomings
Tokenism
Even it if exists, it is not always obvious where to find information about women in the
public record (Bogadóttir, 2013). As I made clear in the methodology section, biographies of
Asian American women librarians are extremely difficult to come by, if they even exist at all.
Horie is clearly not well-represented in the literature. My hope is that this thesis helps chip away
at that historical omission. However, sharing one person’s story is not enough, and I hope that
Horie’s story will not stand alone. Horie ought not to have the burden of speaking for all Yonsei
librarians, nor all Japanese American librarians, let alone all Asian American librarians. While

227

Especially in LIS, where the majority of librarians are in a position of relative privilege as highly-educated white
women, providing Horie’s experience serves as an example of someone who might have enjoyed relative privilege
in a certain context, but wielded it both gracefully and responsibly.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

177

her life is presented here in overview and analyzed within a broader context, she is nevertheless
an individual.

Authorial Credit
“All biography is an attempt to take possession of the subject” (Lee, 2009, p. 135) and
that would endanger my feminist mission. As a potential solution, I used feminist oral history,
not pure biography, as my methodology. While this project aims to empower the woman whose
life story is shared in these pages, a clear shortcoming is that in some ways power is necessarily
skewed [in my favor, as the oral historian], due to the academic format. It is my name that is
credited with this work, despite the fact that Horie met with me for around 30 hours, and spent
additional (uncounted) hours collecting information, doing research, preparing for the interviews,
and providing feedback. Despite the fact that I have called this a collaborative process
throughout, in fact, my name appears solely as the author of this paper. While the practice of
feminist, ethnographical, or oral history research positions “the researcher and her informants in
a collaborative, reciprocal quest for understanding… the research project is ultimately that of the
researcher, however modified of influenced by the informants” (Stacey, 1991, p. 114). This
places ultimate control in my hands, as the author/researcher, since although Horie chose what to
tell me and what to omit, ultimately I decided what of that to include or omit here, how to
organize it, how to interpret it, etcetera. This imbalance is partially negotiated in the following
additional issues.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

178

Conflicting Interpretations
It is essential to emphasize that this thesis is my framing of Horie’s narrative, and is
informed not only by contemporary feminism but also by my own particular views, experiences,
knowledge, and shortcomings (Borland, 1991). Therefore, the final authority of this project is
mine, but I have respected her wishes throughout the process and presentation. We have
disagreed at times, regarding interpretation of her experience; the ultimate authority should be
hers. However, not all “disagreements” are final nor representative of actual conflict. Often any
differing interpretations we had resulted instead in mutual learning. For example:
VBS: Do you agree with this identity categorization of you: upper middle-class,
multilingual, cisgender, woman, able-bodied, neurotypical, heterosexual, person of
color, Yonsei, American? Please correct, omit, and/or elaborate as you see fit.
RH: These are ok except I would say middle-class, and Asian-American.
She calls her parents working-class, but also at one point said of her mother, who had a
career in finance, “She was a professional worker, definitely.” Her father worked for many years
at a garage, and later as a repairman at a retail store. She addressed her own fluid and sometimes
conflicting interpretations of her family’s socioeconomic status:
Well, we were aware of the rich people, and since my father ran a gas station,
service station garage, he dealt with all kinds of people rich, poor and whatever, in
between… I sort of compared, maybe compared our family to some of the people
we saw and I kind of knew we weren’t rich and we weren’t poor. We were sort of
in between, but I really didn’t know how to process that, I guess.
I did not ask her what criteria she considered in her estimations (then, as a child, and
now, as an adult). While I completely respect her right to self-determination, especially where

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

179

identity is concerned, I offhandedly suggested more than once that Horie is upper-middle class,
and she always replied that she is not. To me, her extensive formal education, home-ownership,
lack of dependents (children), and significant pension intuitively indicated upper-middle class
status. Technically, if only accounting for income, Horie is correct that she is middle-class
(however, it is not a government- or legally-defined category, and it is contextually-dependent).
After following up with her on this, I felt that my initial perception of her was possibly
inaccurately skewed by my own positionality as a Millennial. Journalist and author Eddo-Lodge
(2017) notes that “many consider their class to be about their preferred culture and politics,
rather than their relationship to assets and wealth” (p. 194), and at first, I wondered if that
applied to Horie, who has described herself several times both as middle-class and workingclass. Later, she added that, looking back on it, in the 1950s her family was upper middle class,
but then after her father’s car accident, their total income was reduced, and they became middle
class. Horie had also told me that catalogers are the blue-collar workers of the library world, so
that might frame her opinion as well. It is true that catalogers, considered technical services
librarians, are regularly paid less than other librarians (Reser & Schuneman, 1992; Triumph &
Beile, 2015), but luckily for Horie, foreign language proficiency and fluency is highly-valued in
cataloging (Triumph & Beile, 2015) and the UHPA negotiated on all UH employees’ behalf for
minimum salaries, regular increases, and special salary adjustments. But, that does not
necessarily mean that the salaries kept up with Honolulu’s high cost of living. The real estate
market is volatile in many places, but especially in Hawaiʻi, and Horie bought her fee simple
condo with a high interest rate loan, but at a time when real estate prices were “reasonable.” All
my thinking is framed by my own positionality, so both of us are looking through lenses of our
own particular positionality, which are subjective and constantly changing. These class

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

180

categories are not fixed nor clearly-delineated, so there is room for various interpretation.
Additionally, class definitions change contextually, which accounts for our differing
interpretations of her socioeconomic status (which also might or might not have changed over
the course of her life). This applies to any and all interpretive disagreements we had, which were
really very few. Horie providing additional details, context, and her own interpretation often
helped reframe my understanding. Another similar example in the opposite direction was when
Horie read my initial draft and responded to my interpretation of her experience with a
borderline sexual-harasser work supervisor: “I did say “borderline sexual harasser” but in
hindsight, Valerie’s characterization that he “created a hostile work environment” may be more
accurate.”

Insights and Themes
Key phrases “arise on the surface of the text as formal markers that accent the narrative”
and serve to illustrate the conflict between society and the self who is speaking (ChanfraultDuchet, 1991, p. 79). Myths “reveal speakers’ value-judgements of their life experience” and
allow them to communicate the way they give meaning to their experience (Chanfrault-Duchet,
1991, p. 81). Myths are stories we tell ourselves; they shape our lives by defining what is
possible. As I will elaborate on next, themes, motifs, and the way Horie told her story can reveal
deeper layers of meaning. However, any interpretation I present is my interpretation of her
interpretation of her lived experience, so it is partial, subjective, and imprecise. For Horie, key
words and phrases I noticed were related to humility and an aversion to self-congratulation, such
as “didn’t deserve,” “not interested,” “they saw ____ in me.” When asked about her sense of
humility and group-orientation, Horie attributes it to her innate sensibility and personality. I

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

181

interpret it as additionally possibly emblematic of some combination of Japanese/Japanese
American culture, Hawaiʻi/local culture, and socialization or learned behavior as a female in
patriarchal societies.
A motif in her life story is Horie’s aversion to pressure, and a feeling of not working up
to her potential, albeit a potential that was identified and/or defined by others. This constant
recognition seemed to irritate her; whenever acknowledgement of her intellectual achievement
was offered, she insisted that it had been effortless, and was therefore underserved. She feels that
because she just enjoys learning for its own sake—an approach that ironically is likely what
makes her so successful—she does not deserve recognition for such pursuits or related
achievements.
Horie’s oral history testimony is ultimately a case study of the power of empathy. Since
childhood, she observed other people and imagined what it might be like to stand in their shoes.
She then took concrete action to work toward a more equitable future for those who were most
disenfranchised. In June 2018, Horie said she thinks “it’s only a matter of time before the
Hawaiian language reaches a critical mass… of people who want to use Hawaiian on a daily
basis.” That same month, language-learning app Duolingo announced228 it would be adding
Hawaiian to its offerings, making it accessible and free to learn for any person with access to the
internet. When asked whether the onus is on individuals or structural institutions to implement
Hawaiian language, Horie says, “I think both things would need to go on for the language to
thrive and succeed and continue.” She encourages everyone to try to use Hawaiian, even if they
butcher the language; she notes that television news and other media play an important role in
reviving the Hawaiian language and notes cheekily that all languages get butchered on the news,

228

https://forum.duolingo.com/comment/27728072/Hawaiian-is-coming-to-Duolingo

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

182

anyways. Her impressive capacity for human empathy is evident again when she responds to a
question about why using the Hawaiian language is important:
I think it’s important because there are still Hawaiians alive, and it’s a Hawaiian
language and [part of] Hawaiian culture and we are in Hawaiʻi. So to me that’s why
it makes sense… Hawaiian Studies is very broad. It can include Hawaiian language,
but it doesn’t have to, necessarily—you can learn about Hawaiʻi, you know, totally
in an English context, but in order to talk about the food, cultural elements, place
names, etcetera, you must say those in Hawaiian, and so it makes sense to learn
Hawaiian along with Hawaiian Studies.
In addition to her impressive professional accomplishments, Horie is a refreshing
example of someone who lives within a capitalist society but is not seduced by it; she was never
greedy and never wanted more than her fair share (e.g. her salary). I believe this was another
result of her excellent capacity for empathy, and was perhaps also transferred to or from her
opinion regarding how libraries are run:
I believe that if you just start sloughing off things that you don’t think are conducive
to the bottom line, ultimately it’s going to degrade the quality of the library and its
quality as a resource.
Just one example of her selflessness is when she paid her own way to take a UH course
even though she should have received free tuition, as a UH employee, because otherwise the
course would have been cancelled. Another example of Horie’s capacity for human empathy,
justice, and lack of personal greediness emerged tangentially—in the following statement, she
manages to clearly describe her experience and her opinion, which is that one should try to do
what is right over what is personally most-beneficial, but she also extends understanding and

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

183

compassion to those who are unable to make that choice, due to systemic constraints and
disadvantages:
I really feel sad sometimes when I see things happening like the demise of Aloha
Airlines, one of the two major airlines, Hawaiian being the other one, just because
of the emergence of a third airline that was undercutting both of them. Aloha just
succumbed because they didn’t have deep pockets enough. And some of the people
I used to work with would say, “Oh yeah, we’re going to fly on that airline because
it’s so cheap.” But I [would] try to point out, ”Or what about Aloha Airlines?
They’ve been here, they’re established,” and [their response was] “Oh well, who
cares, it’s just cheaper.” I mean, that really is the bottom line for a lot of people and
that’s what’s probably unavoidable, maybe, but I believe there are other systemic
issues going on in politics and the economy and the inequality of wealth and earning
power to where you really can’t ignore the fact that you have to buy things the
cheapest, no matter how damaging that might be to other companies or other
environmental factors.
Horie’s life is also a case study in affecting positive organizational change. She is a
lifetime member of the UHPA, the NEA, and the HSTA. As mentioned, there is room within
activism for both anti-establishment and pro-establishment action, and Horie was firmly proestablishment. Because of the consistency of her stance across time and contexts, she provides a
great example for others who wish to take a similar stance in their own activist endeavors. Horie
knows that she has accomplished a lot, but she believes that anyone who is determined can make
a change. Regarding cataloging specifically, Horie hopes to empower other catalogers via
education:

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

184

Sometimes when I’m invited to speak to a class and the professor has already
primed the students with this big story about how I went up against the Library of
Congress and whatnot, I always try to tell the students, yeah, this may have been
an exceptional event, but you can do similar things. It’s not antiestablishment. This
is built into what is called Cooperative Cataloging. And there’s a Library of
Congress bureaucracy… they don’t know everything, they don’t collect everything.
They don’t catalog everything. That’s why they created this program for
Cooperative Cataloging, because they want to empower catalogers, [put them] back
in charge of local subject headings, knowledge of languages, knowledge of whether
this is a name of an organization or this is a name of a musical group or things like
that… catalogers all over the country are empowered, actually, by default. It’s just
a matter of getting aware and learning how to do it.

Narrative Production as a Pedagogical and Research Tool
The feminist theory informed practice of oral history did, as hoped, provide unique and
multilayered insight.
We are both actor in and co-author of our own life-story, our (individual and
collective) actions can be perceived as enacted narratives. Identity cannot be
grasped by a list of characteristics that informs us about the ‘what’ of a person. It
is about ‘who’ someone is, and that, as Hannah Arendt (1998) aptly remarked,229
can only be shown through storytelling. (Prins, 2006, p. 281)

229

And as I cited in the methodology section.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

185

Listening to the interviews between Horie and myself has been immensely instructive on
multiple levels. Not only have my interview and active listening skills improved—you can hear
the progression and improvement over the course of the 20 plus hours of recorded interviews—
but by spending so much time together, Horie and I were able to establish more of a comfortable
rapport. Often—and this is not always accurately reflected in the interview transcripts—we
would talk over one another, an organic phenomenon common in collaborative communication
settings (Minister, 1991).
The process truly was collaborative in every sense of the word. Horie did work for this
project; she researched her own past, often providing me with dates, names, links, and materials,
such as emails, newspaper clippings, and more. She and I were both actors in, and affected by,
the process.
In the interviews, multiple layers of meaning were generated. For example:
RH: He230 moved when he was fifteen, to New Mexico, and then graduated from
high school in New Mexico and then after he got his college degree he moved to
Texas and—
VBS: He has a Southern accent and everything?
RH: He does. He has a Texan accent. And to me it’s very disconcerting. I mean,
I’m used to it, of course, but… I’m learning from him too, how to understand
Texans. [laughs]
VBS: Hm…like, culturally?

230

Here she is speaking about her brother.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

186

RH: Culturally, yeah, and speech wise. I do know that because I visit Texas so
often, when I’m there I do consciously change my speech somewhat, in order to be
better understood.
VBS: Ok. Do you mean by that, like, the actual words that you use? Or, more the
cadence, or..?
RH: Yeah. Plus, you have to speak louder. [laughs]
VBS: Hm yeah ok. Just to compete with all the other voices?
RH: Just to compete, yeah. Just to get somebody’s attention.
VBS: Hm, interesting. That to me illuminates how language and culture are
different but also the same. Cuz yeah there’s something about the culture of needing
to take up space, but also, maybe people aren’t listening, if you aren’t speaking
loudly. So—
RH: You have to assimilate somewhat. Otherwise you’re going to continually
struggle.
From this small snippet of an interview, first, factual information is obtained via the
content of what Horie is saying (her brother has lived in these places; she visits often). Second,
we learn that there is some process by which a person can go from performing their “localness”
(Hawaiʻi localness) to losing that performance (their accent, or how they sound), perhaps
unconsciously, but noticeably to observers (here, Horie observing her brother’s transformation).
Third, the interviewer (me) demonstrates learning; my understanding of an idea or concept is
affected by what the interviewee has said (when I connect language and culture). Fourth, we
learn about what it might be like to have family move between states; we learn about processes
of belonging, and also of communication (or cultural barriers to communication between groups

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

187

of/from/in different geographical locations). Finally, and perhaps most interestingly, we learn
that the interviewee, while just relaying something she has noticed about a place (“you have to
assimilate…otherwise you’re going to struggle”) has possibly revealed something essential about
her character, attitude, or worldview. By giving us what might appear to be information about
someone else (here, her brother), by hearing it in her own words, we learn so much more, about
her lived subjectivity and positionality. In this brief conversation, we can observe her approach
and attitude in addition to the content of her words.
Horie’s narrative has also provided insights regarding Hawaiʻi, specifically. This is a
potential remedy for the fact that many of the narrative productions in Hawaiʻi have been by
colonizers (explorers, missionaries, sugar planters, soldiers, tourists), who often tend to judge
what Hawaiʻi has to offer them, and what it lacks, from their perspective (Turnbull & Ferguson,
1997). In direct contrast, Horie seems to view Hawaiʻi for what it is, not for how it could benefit
her: Horie does not appear to “read” Hawaiʻi (nor anyplace else, for that matter) through the lens
of her own desires.
Horie’s unique subjectivity has provided interesting and illuminating insights into
multiple histories and across a wide range of areas. Completing this project has enabled me to
engage with material in a way that would not have been possible without Horie sharing her story.
Collaborating with her was a rewarding learning experience for me, and a process I would
recommend to others. Horie’s experience can serve as a successful model for how a librarian can
effectively take a social justice stance in her career. Her professional output is almost
unbelievable in that it is at once broad and voluminous, yet of quality, depth, and importance.
She is awe-inspiring in that she did so much and still found the time to correct old injustices
whenever she encountered them—this is no simple task, especially when considering that any

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

188

such encounter and acknowledgement was inherently an interruption of her regular and ongoing
work. Her unwavering commitment to accuracy is a form of social justice, and is something we
must all aspire to accomplish, despite the immensity of the task, despite the fact that it “in the
past has probably seemed too difficult or insufficiently pressing to confront due to the sheer
volume of traffic, of other things to do” (Berman, 1971/1993, p. xiv). The LC subject headings
are but one small aspect of librarianship, yet they reflect the way information professionals are
organizing the information of the world, and unfortunately, they reflect “a host of untenable—
indeed, obsolete and arrogant—assumptions with respect to young people and women” (Berman,
1971/1993, p. x).231 If we do not right injustices when we come upon them, we instead reinforce
them. As librarians, “the burden is fully and immediately upon us to at least recognize the worst
features of all aspects of library practice” (p. x). What is at stake is twofold: We risk providing
incorrect information, and we risk perpetuating harmful, universalizing hegemonies that
obfuscate or otherwise erase entire groups of people (Drabinski, 2008). As previously detailed,
classification schemes are inherently limited, structurally; power is ineluctably centralized in the
first term, at the top of the hierarchy (Drabinski, 2008). Correcting the catalog might be a
Sisyphean task, but regardless, “simple honesty and our own commitment—as professionals—to
elemental decency require that we try” (Berman,1971/1993, p. xi).

231

Berman originally wrote during the 1970s, but in 2005, Knowlton checked to see what progress since then had
been made; he found that “36% of Berman’s suggestions show some patterns of thought that persist in the Library of
Congress–for example, many subject headings pertaining to the Christian religion remain unglossed...The main
biases found in this study are the persistence of the assumption that unglossed religious headings refer to Christian
topics, and unglossed terms relating to United States history and geography” (p. 128).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

189

Social Justice Impact
While I have outlined perhaps idealistic and lofty goals for this project, I must concede
that whether or not this thesis will have any immediate social impact is unclear; the only thing I
can say certainly is that it has expanded my own thinking, awareness, and knowledge, and that
adding Horie’s story in her own words to the academic and historical record is itself a social
justice project that succeeds upon completion. As outlined in the preceding sections,
representation is crucial because it is inspiring and instructive, and Yonsei, Asian Americans,
and Japanese Americans in general, women in general, and Yonsei, Asian American, and
Japanese American librarians, are underrepresented in the historical records. Additionally, “Even
short-term exposure to the past experience of women… has the most profound psychological
effect on women” (Lerner, 1986, p. 3), so if women read this thesis, its social justice impact will
expand.
When I initially invited Horie to be my collaborator in this project, I did not offer her
anything in return; so, after the interviews concluded, I wondered what the implicit benefit of
this project was—she must have perceived some benefit, because otherwise, why spend the time,
money,232 and energy to participate? After hearing her story in her words for the better part of a
year, I guessed she would say that she felt it was her duty to participate if it was useful, and that
if she had been identified as a candidate for this project, it must be because she had something
useful to offer. But I wanted to see what she would have to say, so I emailed her this question:
“Why did you decide to participate in this project?” and she replied that there were several
reasons. Dr. Asato, one of the thesis committee members, thought the thesis was a good idea.
She wished to be supportive when an LIS student expressed interest in pursuing the thesis option.

232

Parking fees.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

190

And, she has been encouraged to write about herself, “so now is [a] good opportunity to
collaborate on it.”

Reflection of the Interviewee
In this thesis, I have attempted to balance human sympathy—a stance that “should fuel an
ideal biography”—with honesty and critique, since what can go wrong when writing life stories
include “flattery, idealization, flatness, inaccuracy, distortion” (Lee, 2009, p. 3). The oral history
interview process can force us to confront our own social roles as interviewers (Olson & Shopes,
1991). By being reflexive in our practice we can “move toward a more sensitive research
methodology” (Borland, 1991, p. 65) and “reflection itself is a feminist act” (Accardi, 2013, p.
76). This thesis has prompted me to be more considerate of my own context and kuleana than I
have ever been before. My own extensive reflections are included in the previous “Author SelfIdentification” section. I asked Horie to reflect not only on her life, during the course of the oral
history interviews, but also to reflect upon the process, after we had completed the interviews
and she had read my thesis draft. It is important to note that “it would be illusory and ethically
questionable to use the narrative as a means to transform the conceptions held by the interviewed
woman. This would be to practice a kind of savage social therapy” (Chanfrault-Duchet, 1991, p.
89) and is not my intention in asking Horie to share her reflections on this process. In order to
include her in the full scope of this collaborative process, I asked Horie if, after the interviews
were complete and she had read my draft, she had any thoughts, feelings, concerns, questions, or
reflections to share, but she did not feel the need to write a response for inclusion here.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

191

Conclusion
This oral history biography covered the life and work of Ruth Horie (1950- ), a Japanese
American librarian in Honolulu, Hawai‘i whose work centered mainly on preserving and
providing access to Native Hawaiian culture, language, and materials. Horie grew up and lived
during significant events in Hawaiʻi and in American history. She earned her undergraduate
degree in Hawaiian Studies and two master’s degrees, in Library Studies and Linguistics, from
the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. She worked for a decade as a reference librarian at the EastWest Center and then Bishop Museum, and then spent twenty-two years as a cataloger at
Hamilton Library at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. Horie was one of the rare nonIndigenous librarians who deliberately studied and understood Hawaiian, a critically endangered
language. While focused primarily on Hawaiian language and culture, and providing access to it,
over the course of her career, Horie proactively assumed leadership roles, often unprompted, and
was successful, despite her claimed aversion to such roles. Several examples include when she
spearheaded the plan for the EWC’s libraries’ consolidation; when she became a de facto
coordinator after the UH flood of 2004; and when she took it upon herself to provide information
to UHPA members regarding the possible NEA disaffiliation. She continues to volunteer
significant time and expertise to various projects, grants, and organizations.
The intersectional feminist analysis examined the unique positionalities Horie embodied
and attempted to extract insights from her experience. A mutual learning process was enacted, in
which introspection was required of both parties (both the interviewer and interviewee). Because
of her extensive intentional activist pursuits, Horie’s life and work turned out to be an excellent
example for all who wish to take a social justice stance in their careers; her myriad impressive

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

192

accomplishments provide one possible blueprint for best practice not only in cataloging, but for
all aspiring activist librarians.

Further Questions
When examining someone’s entire life, there is always more that can be told, more that
can be asked, more that can be reflected upon—especially when the person is still actively
engaged in living. Given that Horie shared the story of her entire life, which spans nearly seven
decades, and I provided historical context, there is plenty of detail that I hoped to include, but
could not, due to time and space constraints.233 Additionally, there are many things Horie shared
that require follow up interviews. For example, the possible or “borderline” sexual harasser was
a person in her life whose actions deserve further investigation and analysis, especially since
society’s understanding of harassment and consent changes over time.234
A question there was insufficient time to address in this thesis is whether Horie has done
more than possibly anyone else to provide access to materials in Hawaiian. Further analysis of
Horie’s mentors is warranted; how did those relationships develop, and what were their
outcomes? What were the demographics of her mentors, and what can we learn from that?
Volunteering has always been part of Horie’s life; where did that ethos come from? There are
several further questions I have for Horie, specifically:
1. Do you consider yourself a progressive librarian?
2. What does “progressive librarianship” mean to you?

233

In fact, that is an understatement.
“As biography is always involved with the social and cultural politics of its time and place, so its assumptions
change about what is major or minor, permitted or shocking, mainstream or alternative” (Lee, 2009, p. 126).
234

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

193

3. Is there anything you wish to say to other women, Japanese Americans,
catalogers, etc. (advice, encouragement, warnings, etc.)?
4. What was this oral history project like for you? What would you have done
differently? How do you think it fits into your life's work and story?
5. What do you hope readers take away from this thesis?
Follow-up research is required to directly address and reassess Irvine’s 1985 finding that
even when women have become administrators—which, historically, is not often—they have
been associated with the smaller and less-prestigious research libraries.
Horie’s story is important, and as mentioned several times in the “Methodology” section,
more life-stories, biographies, autobiographies, and oral histories are needed not only of women
in general and librarian women specifically, but especially of Indigenous librarians and librarians
of color, including but not limited to Asian American and Japanese American librarians. More
research is needed on Indigenous librarians, who are especially marginalized; research “less
frequently discusses librarians who are American Indian, Alaska Native, First Nation, or
affiliated with another indigenous community than it does Black, Latino/a or Spanish Speaking,
or Asian librarians” (Roy, 2015, p. viii). More on/from/about Asian American, Japanese
American, and Indigenous librarians in Hawaiʻi in particular, over a diverse range of time
periods, would be ideal.
More research is needed on not only the processes of racialization in Hawaiʻi but also of
what those processes look like in people’s lived experiences. Humans everywhere have
constructed complex systems of power and control, and Hawaiʻi of course is not unique in that
regard. However, as established, Hawaiʻi is unique in in terms of its multi-layered, ethnically
diverse, historicity. For example, when talking about her Japanese family, Horie said:

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

194

I’m aware there’s a certain racial prejudice among Japanese and local Japanese,
Japanese Americans, some of us, or some of them, I’m not sure, have some
prejudice against Okinawans. And, but see, I really didn’t feel that way, even
though I was aware of it, cuz we had so many, I believe Okinawan friends in school.
And to me, they were just like anybody else. They weren’t really different. Like,
you can tell who’s white, you know, that a Caucasian student is white, or a black
student. We had very few black students in the school.
She defines her ingroup first as Japanese, then as local Japanese, then as Japanese
Americans. These are all accurate in describing her and her family. And yet, they are also all
different groups of people. A Japanese tourist in Hawaiʻi is different from a local Japanese
person whose family has lived here for generations, and those are both different than Japanese
Americans in the continental United States. Yet, Horie is also all three designations. The
complexity is further muddled when Horie mentions the prejudice between Okinawans and
Japanese, despite the fact that Okinawans are Japanese.235 Processes of racialization are also
implied in the above passage, when Horie points out that people who visibly appeared different
could therefore be treated differently. While the processes of this racialization might not be
colloquially analyzed or understood by locals236 the demarcations and attendant expectations and
prejudices are known, observed, and reinforced en masse. The implications are diversity and
multiculturalism on the one hand, and discrimination and systemic disadvantage on the other.

235

Horie later added: “Okinawa used to be a kingdom, just as Hawaiʻi was. And Okinawans are an ethnic group,
just as Hawaiians are. This idea was shared with me by members of a group from Okinawa visiting the Bishop
Museum a few years ago. When I spoke of Okinawans to you, I was referring to members of the ethnic group.”
236
Here only, by “local” I mean any person who has resided in Hawaiʻi for long enough to understand local culture,
groups, dynamics, customs, and biases.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

195

The processes of racialization in Hawaiʻi are currently best summarized in Rohrer’s
(2010) ethnic triangulation of Indigenous / local / haole. Additional categories will possibly need
to be accounted for in future scholarship because there are new behaviors and trends, people
acting and existing in ways that allow them to be grouped together, though they are not
ethnically or racially homogenous; these people might try to self-identify as local, but they are
not local. For example, the military families who are stationed here are not uniquely accounted
for in Rohrer’s triangulation; tourists, especially those who own second homes in Hawaiʻi, are
increasing in number and frequency; and foreign investors, who have business and own property
in Hawaiʻi, but only live here part-time, are increasing. Because islands are inherently limited in
terms of geographical capacity, and increased demand for homes in Hawaiʻi drives up costs for
all, rightly or not, these groups are implicated in Indigenous—and, perhaps for the first time in
recent memory, local—displacement. Who is defined as haole, local, or Indigenous depends on
the relations between those groups, so if there are new categories introduced, that will likely
have implications, whether they manifest as changed definitions, power redistribution, both, or
something else entirely.
In this project, I engage in feminist pedagogy in action, which “seeks to bring about
social change by raising consciousness about oppression and that values personal experience and
testimony” (Accardi, 2013, p. 25). Women’s voices have historically been silenced, and their
lived experiences invalidated; to combat this, feminist pedagogy
seeks to reclaim women’s experiences, voices, feelings, and ideas in educational
settings… Instead of the teacher serving as the ultimate authority on all knowledge
and information, knowledge is collaboratively discussed and created by the
students and the teacher together. (Accardi, 2013, p. 25)

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

196

In the case of this thesis, rather than assert my knowledge as the “master” of information,
I have engaged in a collaborative process (with Horie) to produce new knowledge and
understanding with a research participant who is consequently humanized and empowered.
Further feminist pedagogical projects that aim to empower the research “subjects” by
transforming them from subject of inquiry to co-producer of knowledge, as collaborators, is
encouraged.
Further questioning about low-stakes personal issues seems to me an effective way to
gain insight into important personal views and experiences when interviewing. At the end of the
process I was left with the impression that the most effective way to gain insight into Horie’s life
and experiences was indirectly, such as when I asked her about her favorite books and formative
reading experiences. Not only did she talk for the longest stretches of time, in response to that
particular prompt, but she shared her experiences in a way that more deeply illuminated her
thinking and feeling vis-à-vis her relationship with various texts at various points of her life. For
example:
So those, I think were the influential books and, and going back to existentialism
in high school the thing I got out of it, unfortunately it was probably said to me,
maybe it was tied into the nuclear bomb threat, but you know, I had already started
doing, I’m not going to live to adulthood, right? So nothing really matters. It doesn’t
matter what I do when I grew up, I don’t think gonna grow up, but this sealed the
deal about existentialism and, and maybe nihilism, that nothing really matters…
things just happen. There’s no divine guidance. There’s faith, yes. But there’s no
luck, right? And I may be totally misrepresenting what, what some of these authors

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

197

were trying to get at with their writing about existentialism, but that’s what I got
out of it.
This particular style of question (open-ended, tangential, personal) also allowed me to
learn and think about Horie as a whole person, as a human with a rich inner life (in addition to
the facts of the events and situations that occurred over the course of her lifetime). This approach
allowed her to reflect and share her narrative regarding the effects that certain experiences had
on her, both personally and professionally. Further questions can always be asked, and I
conclude this project with the sense that all the questions I asked Horie are only the smallest
portion of what I wish we had time to cover.
“Biographers may - and probably ought to - end their work feeling that there were many
things they never discovered” (Lee, 2009, p. 138). This is how I feel, and an inconclusive
conclusion is the only logical end to this project because “what can be said/written/understood is
always already interacting with what-can be seen/grasped/seized in ways that are both mutually
constitutive and condemned to incompleteness” (Turnbull & Ferguson, 1997, p. 99). And, a
“desire for narrative closure, the quest for a life that is unitary and whole is like the longing for a
lost paradise; it will remain unfulfilled” (Prins, 2006, p. 288). “Indigenous genealogy suggests
that we look to the past to guide us in the future and that we attend to interrelations between
people and place” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 176). This thesis cannot be easily categorized as belonging
to feminist theory methodology. Everything about this thesis complicates the academic borders
and territories it inhabits and traverses. This might make it more difficult to catalog, classify, or
even to accept, for some scholars, but I think it is productively complicated. Just as this project
cannot be easily classified, neither can it be neatly concluded. This is the oral history of a
person—a person who is still living. A neat conclusion would undermine the feminist

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

198

methodology of the project, as a neat conclusion would close it off to further questioning,
conversation, and possibilities. Due to these constraints, my whole project might be
uncomfortable, but it is a productive discomfort. We cannot fix what we cannot admit exists.
Learning to face and then accept and live with—or, ideally, correct—our own contradictions is
profoundly uncomfortable, but it is also the necessary foundation for progressive social change.
While my aim was to provide space and an audience for people who are less likely to
come by privileges—which is why I chose a woman of color—my own privilege showed in that
I at first only considered my own subjectivity, which is as an American woman living in the
United States.237 Once I began to delve deeper into the geo-political-historical context of this
specific place, the setting of Horie’s story, I realized that I had privileged the colonial/American
version of the story before I had even begun my project. While that might be one failing of this
project, I believe it also demonstrates the usefulness, importance, and ultimately the necessity of
this type of work.
With its diverse population, Kanaka Maoli cultural foundation and strength, and
hybrid local culture, Hawai‘i is an ideal location for practicing intersectional, rather
than strict identitarian, politics. Among other things, this means mining one’s own
multiple mobile subjectivities for resources to build understandings and points of
convergence for political action [emphasis mine]. This, of course, is genealogical,
knowing who we are and from whence we came. We are the set of stories we tell

237

When I set out to identify someone to collaborate with on this project, I focused on finding a collaborator based
on three criteria: 1) the person would identify as a woman; 2) the person would have significant social justice and
library related achievements; 3) ideally, this would be a person of color, since librarians are mostly Caucasian.
While part of my goal was politicized, in that I wanted to highlight a woman’s story in a feminized profession that
still manages to undervalue women, and I would ideally highlight a woman of color’s story, since white women are
at the top of the female hierarchy, I did not think about this in the specific context of Hawai‘i until the project was
already well underway.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

199

ourselves, the stories that tell us, the stories others tell about us, and the possibilities
of new stories… All stories are political; they involve power that has structural
underpinnings and material consequences. (Rohrer, 2016, p. 189)
My story is political, as is Horie’s, as is the reader’s. My hope at the conclusion of this
project is that other librarians, particularly but not limited to those in Hawai‘i, will heed this call
to productively locate their own frameworks, subjectivities, and genealogies. This involves many
layers, including but not limited to the profession of librarianship; biological and chosen families
and their histories; and, especially, geo-socio-political and economic contexts. Horie herself said,
in general, she tries “to understand different points of view and there’s usually more than two
points of view on any given issue.”
This practice of self-reflexivity has the potential to help librarianship progress, if not
transcend, its white Judeo/Christian patriarchal beginnings. Especially in Hawai‘i, our kuleana as
librarians starts here, with awareness and knowledge of the self, before we can turn our attention
toward others. Only with a baseline of self-awareness will we be able to serve our communities
from a place of cultural awareness and sensitivity, rather than imposition, imperialism, and
prescription. It is how we will be able to empower our library users and communities, rather than
submit them to outside hegemony.238 It is how we will be able to identify systems of oppression,
and our space—which is likely to include complicity—within them.
Acknowledging our positionality, recognizing there is no innocent/pure location…
these steps are key to reconceptualizing/rearticulating the world we want to live in.
And there is no way to get there but together. (Rohrer, 2016, p. 189)

238

“Coalitional politics cannot be built from positions of innocence” (Rohrer, 2016, p. 188).

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

200

A vital aspect of librarian epistemology is that, as professionals, we must challenge
ourselves to reflect upon our “own culture, heritage, and identity” (Irvin, 2016, p. 152). I further
propose that reflexivity, especially telling our stories, situating ourselves, and identifying our
complicity, is the first step forward, particularly as activist librarians. Horie told me: “I don’t
count myself as being totally non-imperialistic either… but just being aware, I think, of the
issues, and thinking them through, and trying to avoid knee jerk reaction[s]” is our best way to
move forward. As Horie’s impressive life, work, and words demonstrate, there are many things
we can start working on right now toward social justice ends, specifically, reviving endangered
languages, and promoting representation, access, accuracy, and equity. As activist librarians, we
must advocate for a multiplicity of stories and subjectivities; work to give marginalized peoples
space for their own voices; provide access to cultural heritage materials, especially to and for the
peoples from which that culture originates; and identify the most marginalized members of our
communities, so that we can provide equitable, not homogenous, service.

Ruth Horie: An Oral History Biography and Feminist Analysis

201

Glossary239
1.

Hānai: nvs. Foster child, adopted child; foster, adopted. Keiki hānai, foster child. Lawe
hānai, to adopt a child. Makua hānai, foster parent. Kāna hānai, his adopted child.

2.

Kalo: n. Taro (Colocasia esculenta), a kind of aroid cultivated since ancient times for
food, spreading widely from the tropics of the Old World. In Hawaiʻi, taro has been the
staple from earliest times to the present, and here its culture developed greatly, including
more than 300 forms. All parts of the plant are eaten, its starchy root principally as poi,
and its leaves as lūʻau.

3.

Kamaʻāina: nvi. Native-born, one born in a place, host; native plant; acquainted,
familiar, Lit., land child.

4.

Kanaka Maoli: n. Full-blooded Hawaiian person.240

5.

Kuleana: nvt. Right, privilege, concern, responsibility, title, business, property, estate,
portion, jurisdiction, authority, liability, interest, claim, ownership, tenure, affair,
province; reason, cause, function, justification.

6.

Loʻi: vt. To look over critically; to look at as through searching for flaws, scrutinize.

7.

ʻŌlelo: nvt. Language, speech, word, quotation, statement, utterance, term, tidings; to
speak, say, state, talk, mention, quote, converse, tell.

239

Does not include individual people or place names. All definitions from Horie and the Ulukau Hawaiian
Electronic Library: http://wehewehe.org/.
240
This is not reflective of how I use the term in this thesis. My usage reflects anyone of any percentage Hawaiian
blood/ancestry who also self-identifies as Indigenous to the Hawaiian Islands.