ADAPTING SELF-DIRECTED ONLINE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR
NEBRASKA PUBLIC LIBRARIANS
Holli Kay Duggan, Ed.D.
University of Nebraska, 2018
Advisor: Edmund Hamann
From Ainsworth to Yutan, from library systems with twelve branches (i.e.,
Omaha) with a legal service area population of 537,709 to single libraries serving a
population of less than 1,000 (which describes 60% of all public libraries in Nebraska),
the Nebraska Library Commission serves very different constituencies all with different
needs and different resources. Given that diversity of librarianship, as a “Problem of
Practice” (Carnegie Program for the Education Doctorate, 2014) I needed to learn how to
optimize the continuing education opportunities offered by the Nebraska Library
Commission to this diverse constituency. This included attending to the learning needs of
public librarians who were enrolled in the Nebraska Public Librarian certification
program and, more specifically, the online Basic Skills classes.
My problem of practice centers around questions of optimizing continuing
education opportunities and tools for public librarians who then are better equipped to
continue providing quality and equitable services to their communities. Working with
instructors, who are made up of Nebraska Library Commission staff members and
Regional Library System Directors, as well as with the students who are enrolled in the
Basic Skills classes provides the opportunity for collaboration and partnerships to apply
scholarly inquiry directly to practice in order to improve continuing library education in
the state. This dissertation seeks to illustrate the connections between my specific

problem of practice, the development and evolution of a meaningful solution while
exploring future directions as new questions of practice arose, and my role as a
practitioner, educator, and scholar of CPED.
This dissertation includes discussion of the first self-paced cataloging module and
writing about the design process. This design process included critically reviewing
previous Basic Skills courses, several redesigns of the Organization of Materials course,
as well as the development of an online practice course for the Moodle learning
management system. Finally, this study includes the self-paced Organization of Materials
module and evaluation of this first iteration followed by discussion of next steps or how
this program will progress as this study continues to evolve past this dissertation.

This dissertation is dedicated to my husband and family who have provided unwavering
encouragement, support, and understanding every step of the way.

CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION
From Ainsworth to Yutan, from library systems with twelve branches (i.e.,
Omaha) with a legal service area population of 537,709 to single libraries serving a
population of less than 1,000 (which describes 60% of all public libraries in Nebraska),
the Nebraska Library Commission serves very different constituencies all with unique
needs and varying resources. Given that diversity of librarianship, as a “Problem of
Practice” (Carnegie Program for the Education Doctorate, 2014) I needed to learn how to
optimize the continuing education opportunities offered by the Nebraska Library
Commission. This included attending to the learning needs of public librarians who were
enrolled in the Nebraska Public Librarian certification program and, more specifically,
the online Basic Skills classes.
Through my previous coursework in Library Science (M.A.) and Education
(M.A.), and through the last four years in the Carnegie Program on the Education
Doctorate (CPED) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (during which I have changed
jobs), my professional practice has focused on issues of online learning, distance library
services, and digital learning tools. In my current role, as the full-time Continuing
Education Coordinator for the Nebraska Library Commission, my focus and
responsibility are developing professional development resources and tools for the
librarians in Nebraska, who range from full-time to part-time and from those with years
of experience to those with little formal training.
The vision of the Carnegie Program on the Education Doctorate is to “apply the
CPED framework to the preparation of educational leaders to become well-equipped
scholarly practitioners who provide stewardship of the profession and meet the

2

educational challenges of the 21st century” (n.d.) and the Guiding Principles have helped
to shape this scholarly inquiry, although working primarily with public library systems as
a part of a state agency is different than the public education domain where most CPED
scholars reside. Although the education context may be different, my practice as an
educator remains relevant, even though I’ve had to convert the guiding principles to my
own practice tying them to both the role libraries and to the goals of the Nebraska Public
Librarian Certification program.
Within each community, the roles of public libraries are many, including
providing open and equitable access to information, encourage community engagement
and inclusion, and acting as a bridge to community resources. The American Library
Association’s Code of Ethics (2008) states that the first principle is that “we [librarians]
provide the highest level of service to all library users through appropriate and usefully
organized resources; equitable service policies; equitable access; and accurate, unbiased,
and courteous responses to all requests.” The intent of the continuing education and
certification program in Nebraska is to:
●

Improve library service throughout the state

●

Motivates librarians to acquire, maintain, and develop skills through basic
and continuing education

●

Provides guidelines for public library boards to use in selecting and
retaining personnel

3
●

Recognizes public librarians who update their knowledge and skills on a
continuing basis to provide better library service for the community
(Nebraska Library Commission, 2017)

My problem of practice centers around questions of optimizing continuing
education opportunities and tools for public librarians who then are better equipped to
continue providing quality and equitable services to their communities. Working with
instructors, who are made up of Nebraska Library Commission staff members and
Regional Library System Directors, as well as with the students who are enrolled in the
Basic Skills classes provides the opportunity for collaboration and partnerships to apply
scholarly inquiry directly to practice in order to improve continuing library education in
the state. This dissertation seeks to illustrate the connections between my specific
problem of practice, the development and evolution of a meaningful solution while
exploring future directions as new questions of practice arose, and my role as a
practitioner, educator, and scholar of CPED.
Discussion in this introductory chapter is organized into the following sections:
(1) the project summary, (2) Nebraska public libraries and public librarian certification,
(3) Nebraska public librarian certification program and Basic Skills coursework, (4)
research project limitations, and (5) definition of terms. These sections are intended to
provide context to this “Problem of Practice” (Carnegie Program for the Education
Doctorate, n.d.), as well as an introduction to Nebraska public libraries, the public
librarian certification program, and the Basic Skills classes. This first chapter is then
followed by: a literature review in chapter two, the design research process in chapter

4

three, the development of a self-paced cataloging module in chapter four, and evaluation
and future directions discussed in chapter five.
Project Summary
According to Gerald Pine (2009), “Action research is change research, a
nonlinear, recursive, cyclical process of study designed to achieve concrete change in a
specific situation, context, or work setting to improve teaching/learning” (p. 30). The
intent of this dissertation project is to begin that iterative research process with a small
design study. How can these classes be made more readily accessible and more relevant
to their needs while working within the constraints of my own practice? First, I discuss
the design and development process for the initial self-paced online learning module,
Organization of Information, which is the first step in learning cataloging concepts.
Creating self-paced modules will allow subsequent instructor-led classes to focus on
more advanced topics to build deeper skills while not losing time teaching students how
to use the learning management system or other basic library concepts. The self-paced
module will also include an evaluation component that, per tenets of design research
(Collins, 1992; Cobb, et al., 2003; Joseph, 2004; Bannan-Ritland, 2003), will allow
iterative processes of review and redesign “aimed to improve educational practices
through iterative analysis, design, development, and implementation, based on
collaboration among researchers and practitioners in real-world settings” (Wang &
Hannafin, 2005). This dissertation includes the proposed class structure, the self-paced
cataloging module, and writing about the design process. Second, I explore a new online
class structure that would include specialized learning tracks and a blend of self-paced

5

modules for the introductory library science concepts and instructor-led classes for
higher-level topics within each learning track. These two parts are preceded and
introduced by a larger discussion of professional development challenges in public
library systems, description of how the module topic was identified, and how this
module, and future ones, will fit into the overall professional development structure of
the Nebraska Library Commission.
Librarians enroll in the Public Librarian Certification Program and the Basic
Skills classes at different points in their careers and with different education
backgrounds. There are librarians with graduate degrees (in fields outside of Library
Science) while others’ highest educational attainment is a high school degree. Some
librarians are familiar with online learning, but others have trouble with basic technology
concepts such as attaching or uploading a document through email. At many different
levels, there are librarians in these classes who are brand-new to librarianship, some as
library staff and some as new library directors in rural areas of the state. Others have been
working in libraries for years, but need formal certification as their library works towards
accreditation or because their director (or library board) has made librarian certification
an employment requirement.
The creation of a preliminary, self-paced, online module along with a new
proposed structure for specialized learning tracks will allow students to have a common
starting point for their subsequent instructor-led coursework. Currently, each of the Basic
Skills classes are offered only once a year and are scheduled for two weeks, with the
exception of the Organization of Materials cataloging class which is scheduled for four

6

weeks. Librarians enroll in these Basic Skills classes whenever they can, but many have
to withdraw due to work or personal schedule conflicts during the class. This is especially
true during the busy summer reading season. Once they drop a class or if they just don’t
finish for whatever reason, they have to wait another year before the class is offered
again.
“I spoke with my supervisor today about the assignments required, and since it is
our Adult Reading Program, there is just not enough time to complete all of the
required assignments and all of our programming on top of our day-to-day job
requirements.”
“Due to limited time to work on the courses as a part-time clerk and not having
internet at home, I am unable to devote as much time as I need to take the CEC
courses anymore. I have tried my hardest thus far to work on these courses in my
free time, but unfortunately, it is too inconvenient at this time. I hope I will be in a
position that will allow more time for me to continue my library education.”
“I’m going to need to drop out of the upcoming class :( That starts a CRAZY
couple of weeks for me and I realistically can’t see myself able to successfully
complete the class. I registered last year and was unable to do it and I really
didn’t even have anything else going on, so I can’t imagine being able to do it this
time. Maybe 3rd time will be the charm!”
“Is there a way a director can take a class that they missed and is due so they
may apply for accreditation. It would be great if there was a way for a director to
do so if there is only 1 or 2 classes preventing accreditation.”

7

“This course is WONDERFUL, but the content is way too much to get through in
a two-week time period! There were several videos that were nearly an hour or
more, many, MANY readings, and more extensive assignments than the courses
I've taken in the past. I can't point to anything and say, "we should get rid of that"
because it's ALL really good -- but that said, it's been very difficult to get through
everything in the two-week time period. (And my having an unexpected out-oftown funeral that I had to travel for definitely didn't help.)”
The above quotes were collected from just a few of the many emails and
messages that I’ve received from frustrated librarians over the last two years who are
working on their continuing education classes as part of the Nebraska Public Librarian
Certification program to “acquire, maintain, and develop skills through basic and
continuing education” (Nebraska Library Commission, 2017). Additionally, many
students don’t drop out but don’t complete the classes because, for unknown reasons,
they don’t finish the work or never start. I started asking myself, as the Continuing
Education Coordinator, how can I make these classes better? How can they be made
more accessible when librarians need them most? Are students really learning from these
classes? Are the frustrations really with the content of the classes or with the learning
system? What can I do?
Self-paced modules would be beneficial for two key reasons. First, the self-paced
modules would be available throughout the year with open online registration. Second,
this preliminary module, and the planned development of future self-paced modules,
would also free the time and resources of the instructors to lead more advanced

8

coursework. The current two-week schedule is not long enough to get past many of the
most basic concepts of class topics if/when participants do not already understand these
contexts. Not surprisingly, when this happens, instructors can also become frustrated.
Highlighting the current heterogeneity of enrollment, some students struggle with
simply navigating the online class system in Moodle and they miss the actual content of
the class, while other students feel stymied as they seek more advanced discussions. A set
of introductory modules would allow students to have time to learn the system at their
own pace with more structure, so once they get to the instructor-led classes, they are
better prepared to fully participate. In turn, instructors would also be able to focus on
building more advanced content or discussions instead of focusing solely on the
introductory-level skills. The design and creation of a preliminary self-paced module
(described in the following chapters) has been the first step in exploring the creation of
specialized learner-centered professional development that would ideally be more
immediately relevant to the students’ positions in their individual libraries (Boyd, 2012).
Participation and interest in the existing Basic Skills courses has continued to
increase each year as enrollment in the certification program also grows. As of May 30,
2018, there were 1,011 individuals enrolled in the Nebraska Public Librarian
Certification program. This participant number was up from the 884 participants enrolled
in the 2017 financial year. The Basic Skills classes were intended to improve library
service in Nebraska by providing training in basic skills of librarianship and are offered
for free. From July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017, twenty Basic Skills classes were provided

9

with 173 individual participants who registered for one or more classes during the year
for a total of 620 enrollments.
In Table 1.1: Basic Skills Registration Numbers, the registration numbers from
2011 are compared with 2017 and the first six months of 2018. The increase in
registration has forced us to start dividing classes into multiple sections in 2017 as some
instructors felt fifty to sixty students in one class was too many. These additional sections
were offered at the same time and kept the same content, it was simply adding another
instructor to a second duplicate Moodle section. Already in 2018, we’re hitting the sixty
student registration limit with each class with ten to twenty additional students on the
waiting list with no signs of interest in these classes slowing down as enrollment in the
certification program is continuing to increase each year.

10

Table 1.1
Basic Skills Registration Numbers
2011

2017

2018
(Jan - June)

Collection Management*

53

60

-

Communication*

15

48

86

Customer Service*

48

45

78

Intellectual Freedom & Core
Values*

48

59

73

Organization of Materials*

26

59

68

Community & the Library*

32

54

-

Leadership

10

50

-

Library Finance

14

28

44

Library Governance

8

34

65

Library Policy

24

42

-

Library Services to Children &
Youth

18

63

-

-

44

71

Management & Supervision

14

38

-

Programming & Outreach

36

43

-

Readers’ Advisory

33

46

67

Reference

32

47

-

Total

414

760

501

Library Technology**

*requisite class

**Library Technology was added in 2013

11

This project was not created in a vacuum; feedback from the instructors, students,
librarians, and other Nebraska Library Commission staff has supported the idea of selfpaced professional development and more structured specialized learning tracks since I
started as the Continuing Education Coordinator in February 2016. Funding for these
classes and half of my position comes from federal funding through the Library Services
and Technology Act (LSTA) granted from the Institute of Museum and Library Services
(IMLS). Throughout 2017, the Nebraska Library Commission has been working on
evaluation of the state’s 2012-2017 Library Services and Technology Act five-year plan
(Dale, 2017) and developing the next five-year plan for 2018-2022 (Wagner, 2017). One
of the focal areas of this current plan is "Institutional Capacity" which includes
improving the library workforce users’ general knowledge and skills (p. 21). The need for
self-paced modules came up in both the meeting with the State Advisory Council on
Libraries concerning both the evaluation and discussion of the 2018-2022 plan, and in the
focus meetings with staff members from the Nebraska Library Commission. One of the
goals in that five-year plan states that “Library staff and supporters will have the tools
and skills to provide and sustain needed programs and services to their target audiences”
(Wagner, 2017, p. 18). As part of this goal, the Nebraska Library Commission “will
provide continuing education opportunities for library staff and board members” with the
following expected results:
●

Improved ability of library boards to govern and advise

●

Change in knowledge, skills, and abilities of library staff and board members
participating in NLC’s continuing education efforts

12
●

Increased confidence of library staff to provide quality library services

●

Sustaining the quality of Nebraska’s public libraries (p. 15)
There have been additional discussions with the Regional Library Directors and

instructors about the idea of specialized learning tracks, such as a set of recommended
classes for those librarians in administrative roles (library directors), Youth Services
librarians, or cataloging and Technical Services. The 2017 Library Finance class first
experimented with this idea with separate discussion topics. Two separate forum prompts
were written that asked library directors to focus on their library’s overall budget while
library staff were asked to focus on finances for a specific program or for a grant that
they would like to plan in their library. Feedback collected from the students at the end of
that class about the separate discussions was positive, which reinforced the prospective
value of specialized professional development offerings.
Nebraska Public Libraries and Public Librarian Certification
In a 2013 report of the Institute of Museum and Library Services, The State of
Small and Rural Libraries in the United States, a “small library” was defined by “the
population size of a library’s legal service area” of 25,000 or less. These libraries can
then be divided into three subcategories of “10 to 25k,” “2.5k to 10k,” and “less than
2.5k” (Swan, p. 2). Table 1.2 illustrates the breakdown of the Nebraska public libraries.
According to the data collected for the Nebraska Library Commission’s annual public
library survey for the 2016-2017 financial year, there are 245 public library systems in
Nebraska or 261 individual public libraries. The number of individual public libraries
includes the separate branches of both the Omaha Public Libraries system and the

13

Lincoln City Libraries system, the only two systems in the state with multiple branch
locations.
Nebraska libraries with a legal service area population of less than 2,500 comprise
the majority of the total number of public libraries with 194 (80%) individual libraries in
Nebraska. Of the 146 total full-time librarian positions in these smallest public libraries,
only four currently have a Library Science graduate degree from a program accredited by
the American Library Association, compared to the ninety-eight FTE librarians employed
in medium-to-large libraries where eighty-one have an accredited Master of Library
Science degree.

14

Table 1.2
Legal Service Area Populations and Librarians Employed in Nebraska Public Libraries
Population of
Legal Service
Area

Medium to
Large
(>25k)

9
Number of NE
(25 including
library systems
branch
(245 total libraries)
libraries)

Small
(10k to 25k)

Smaller
(2.5k to 10k)

Smallest
(<2.5k)

9

33

194

% of Total NE
Library Systems
(total libraries)

3.67%
(10%
including
branch
libraries)

3.67%
(3% including
branch libraries)

13.46%
(13% including
branch
libraries)

79.18%
(74%
including
branch
libraries)

Total Librarians
(FTE)

98.13

47.86

96.70

145.78

# of ALA-MLS*
Librarians
(FTE)

81.25
(67% of total
ALA-MLS
Librarians)

19.13
(16% of total
ALA-MLS
Librarians)

16.60
(14% of total
ALA-MLS
Librarians)

3.80
(3% of total
ALA-MLS
Librarians)

Total Paid Staff
(FTE)

396.59

89.74

143.84

163.02

*Master of Library Science from an American Library Association accredited graduate
program
The number of librarians who may have an undergraduate degree or other
certification in Library Science and are currently participating in the Nebraska Public
Librarian certification program is not available through the annual statistics, but can be
found through reports accessed within the Nebraska Library Commission’s Omnibase
database and are recorded below in Table 1.3: Librarians in Certification Program
Education. The numbers listed include everyone enrolled as of May 30, 2017, including

15

individuals employed in Nebraska libraries either full-time or part-time and Nebraska
residents who were not yet employed in a library but were enrolled in the certification
program as they sought employment. These numbers do not include librarians with
lapsed certification dates before 2017. Job seekers included both those new to
librarianship who were trying to find their first library position and those who were
returning to the libraries after an extended absence (due to parenthood, retirement, or
other employment opportunities, for example). An example of recent job advertisements
for a part-time paraprofessional Library Specialist position with Omaha City Libraries
with the specific requirement of enrolling in the public librarian certification program is
included in Appendix A. The Omaha public library system has been particularly focused
on the professional development of their employees who constitute the majority of
participants from one library/system in the Nebraska Public Librarian Certification
program (286) at the time of this study, but more libraries are requiring certification as a
part of their employment. Of the 1,011 librarians currently enrolled in the certification
program, 688 (68%) needed to complete or had already completed the Basic Skills
courses. As the certification program continues to grow each year, and this project
remains an LSTA priority over the next five years for the Nebraska Library Commission
(Wagner, 2017, p. 17), the majority of learners will need these Basic Skills courses.
While the certification program and the Basic Skills classes are not designed to be a
replacement for a formal Library Science degree, the classes are intended to help these
learners grasp the basic concepts and skills in order to be more confident and

16

knowledgeable in their individual practices as the work with their library patrons, library
boards, and fellow librarians.
Table 1.3
Librarians Enrolled in the Certification Program and Levels

Certification
Level

Number of
Librarians

I
II

202
162

II-L

36

III
III-L

247
58

IV
IV-L

77
16

V

213

Higher Education
(from an accredited
college or university)
Completed at least 60 semester
hours or 90 quarter hours
A.A. Degree or Professional
Certificate
(in Library Science)
Bachelor’s Degree
Bachelor’s Degree
(in Library Science)
Graduate Degree
Graduate Degree
and
Bachelor’s, A.A. or Professional
Certificate in Library Science
Graduate Degree
(ALA accredited Library or
Information Science program)

Must Complete
Basic Skills Courses
Yes
Yes
-

Yes
Yes
-

-

Nebraska Public Librarian Certification Program and Basic Skills Coursework
Librarians apply to the Nebraska Public Librarian Certification program online
and indicate their library, position, and education level which determines their
certification level. Below, in Figure 1.1, the certification process is illustrated. All
librarians in the certification program need to earn forty-five hours of continuing
education during each three-year certification period. These hours can be completed

17

through in-person or online planned learning activities such as watching library-related
webinars, attending conferences, or participating in workshops. The certification levels
II-L, III-L, IV-L, and V (Table 1.3) indicate that the librarian holds a certificate or degree
in Library Science. These librarians do not need to complete any of the Basic Skills
classes. They only need to focus on completing forty-five hours of other continuing
education activities during their three-year certification period. Librarians who are
enrolled at the remaining certification levels (I, II, III, and IV) are those who do not hold
a certificate or degree in Library Science and do have to complete the Basic Skills class
requirements as part of their forty-five continuing education hours during their first threeyear certification period.
Figure 1.1: Certification Program Enrollment

Individual applies
and enrolls in
certification
program

With previous
Library Science
certification

Earn 45 hours of
continuing
education credit

or
Without previous
Library Science
certification

Earn 45 hours of
continuing
education credit +
complete Basic
Skills requirements

These Basic Skills courses have been delivered online via the Moodle learning
management system since January 2011. Six required Basic Skills classes and an
additional ten electives are offered once every year and each class lasts two weeks.
Organization of Materials, the introductory cataloging class, is the one exception in the

18

schedule; it lasts four weeks. Required courses are not necessarily more or less advanced
than the elective courses. The six required courses include: Collection Management,
Community and the Library, Communication, Customer Service, Intellectual Freedom
and the Core Values of Librarianship, and Organization of Materials. All students must
complete these six courses as part of the Basic Skills requirements, plus an additional
seven elective courses though there is no suggested or required order that the courses
must be taken. The courses listed as “electives” are simply so that librarians may choose
which additional seven courses that they would like to complete (out of the ten elective
classes offered each year): Leadership, Library Finance, Library Governance, Library
Policy, Library Services to Children and Youth, Library Technology, Management and
Supervision, Programming and Outreach, Readers’ Advisory, and Reference. These
elective choices are intended to allow students some flexibility in their learning and to
take classes most relevant to their individual positions.
If time commitments, other work responsibilities, or personal factors keep an
individual from completing any one of the Basic Skills courses, they have to wait an
entire year before the class is offered again, according to the current scheduling process.
There have been numerous librarians who have reached their recertification date before
they were able to complete the Basic Skills requirements. While we are able to work with
librarians on extensions, it becomes a frustrating process for the librarian and, in some
cases, for their director and their library board. Not meeting the Basic Skills requirements
and certification lapses may ultimately affect their library’s eligibility for accreditation

19

which then may affect their state aid funding and opportunities to apply for certain
federal and state grants.
Many of the public librarians enrolled in the Basic Skills classes are located in
small or rural parts of Nebraska and may not have much experience with online education
or have the support needed to be successful. They may not have taken any formal classes,
online or traditional, in years and may not have any background in librarianship. Costs,
staffing, and time can impede their professional development, but online learning through
self-paced modules should be a more easily accessible tool to help improve library
services throughout the state.
The Omaha Public Library system had the largest number of librarians in the
certification program with 286 at the time of this study. They were working on their own
training materials and had purchased their own learning management system. While the
needs of librarians in Omaha (a library system with a service population of 537,709) were
much different than for those working at libraries in much smaller cities like Lyman (a
single library with a service population of just 328), Omaha’s decision to develop their
own supplemental basic trainings made clear that the existing classes were not meeting
some essential needs for Nebraska librarians. The difficulty in finding continuing
education opportunities to meet their librarians’ needs, in addition to the issue of yearround immediate access has been echoed in conversations with many librarians. A
premise of the design research described here is that the development and adoption of
self-paced modules could help to address some of these issues in order to provide a more
relevant on-demand professional development curriculum for Nebraska public librarians.

20

Before the Basic Skills classes were moved online to the Moodle learning
management system in 2011, they were offered as intensive in-person workshops
throughout the state. Topics covered in these workshops included customer service,
communication with library stakeholders, intellectual freedom, cataloging, finances,
library policies, technology, outreach, and readers’ advisory. The traditional in-person
format didn’t transfer perfectly into the online setting due to the extensive reading lists
and reliance on discussion boards taking the place of the handouts and in-person
activities. Online assignments in these courses have been limited to reading articles and
posting short responses in discussion boards which seems to have lost some of the
connection to real-world practice. The in-person workshops included binders of
materials and while there were still a lot of handouts, there were much fewer articles. For
example, in the 2002 Organization of Materials binder, there are a number of handout
copies of what a MAchine Readable Cataloging (MARC) record looks like and the
different fields with activities that asked students to write out their own MARC record
(included in Appendix B). Activities like this handout gave the students an opportunity to
practice identifying the different pieces of a MARC record and to connect those pieces to
the physical item, echoing to what they might do in practice. A similar worksheet was
included in the original online class, but students were asked to download the worksheet
file, complete it, then upload it back to Moodle in order to submit the assignment.
Understanding if the worksheet activity was truly helpful or not in the online class was
unclear. The technical barriers within the Moodle system have caused students some
frustration and many need more support early on in these Basic Skills online classes

21

(Francis, 2013). For example, one student printed out the worksheet, completed it by
hand, then submitted her assignment by fax, simply because she was more comfortable
doing so over using Moodle and Word.
Making the transition to online classes in 2011 was a great undertaking by the
previous Continuing Education Coordinator and now that librarians in the certification
program expect more online continuing education opportunities and know that the Basic
Skills classes are only offered online, we have the opportunity with this research in
practice, to optimize those continuing education offerings.
Working closely with several of the instructors, since I was hired in February
2016, we began redesigning several of the Basic Skills courses. The Library Policy class,
for example, requires students to work through the process of writing a new policy or
rewriting an existing policy to be used in their library. A new final assignment in the
latest Readers’ Advisory course asks students to film themselves giving a short booktalk,
as they might be asked to do in their library, and then to post the video of their booktalk
on YouTube to share with the instructor and classmates. Concurrent with the redesign of
coursework, a new evaluation infrastructure has also begun to be introduced. Previously,
there hasn’t yet been much evaluation incorporated into the classes. Since I came to my
position, short course evaluations have been added into each course. These evaluations
ask if the course was what the student expected, what they liked best, what they liked
least, what they would like to have covered, and how long they spent each day on the
course. While some of the feedback generated from these questions has been helpful, the

22

first forays have not captured the students’ actual learning progress through these classes.
Evaluation design remains part of the larger design experiment.
Research Project Limitations
Several limitations to this dissertation study have been considered. First, this
research project focused on the design of a preliminary self-paced learning module for
cataloging. During the design process, I’ve outlined additional modules and how the
structure of the instructor-led courses within specialized learning tracks could look, but
this study was limited to the development of this first introductory cataloging module.
Second, limiting this study to the design of the module largely excludes data collection
from students. This introductory module was completed in March 2018. Testing of this
self-paced module with students began in April, and initial feedback from instructors and
other Nebraska Library Commission staff members was collected, but learning and
impact data for the final dissertation is limited. Of course, that is more a limitation of the
dissertation than of the larger effort of which the dissertation is only a piece. After this
dissertation was completed and accepted, iterative (re)designing, implementing, and
evaluating librarian training remained a central premise of my job description. Additional
study, testing, and edits to the modules and learning tracks continued post dissertation, as
I continue to evaluate student completion, student and instructor feedback, and input from
other Nebraska Library Commission staff and other state Continuing Education
Coordinators.

23

Definition of Terms
1. Basic Skills - A set of online asynchronous courses offered to Nebraska residents

or those employed in a Nebraska library that focus on foundational skills of
librarianship. Since 2011, these courses are delivered via the Moodle learning
management system and are offered by the Nebraska Library Commission.
Instructors include the regional library system directors and members of the
Nebraska Library Commission staff.
2. Bibliostat - An in-house database used and maintained by staff members of the

Nebraska Library Commission. This database includes information about
Nebraska libraries, Nebraska librarians, and Nebraska library board members
collected through regular updates and annual statistics gathered from library
directors and staff.
3. Continuing Education (CE) - Participation in planned learning experiences and

activities which are designed to increase library-related knowledge by attending
either in-person or online, such as webinars, conferences, or lectures
4. Continuing Education (CE) Coordinator - Please see Appendix C for the full job

description.
5. Library Accreditation - By incorporating community-based guidelines, library

accreditation encourages improved library services throughout Nebraska by
establishing standards of services and benchmarks that public libraries must meet.
Accreditation is based on a points system, with twelve minimum guidelines that
the libraries must meet in addition to submitting a strategic plan every three years.

24

Accredited libraries are eligible for state aid funding from the Nebraska Library
Commission, as well as additional yearly grant opportunities.
6. Library Board (or Trustees) - A group of elected or appointed community

members responsible for the governing or advising of a public library
7. MARC - MAchine Readable Cataloging record
8. Moodle - An online open source learning management system used by the

Nebraska Library Commission to offer Basic Skills classes, as well as several
courses for databases and for the cataloging certification program
9. NCampus - The Nebraska Library Commission’s Moodle website which is used
for the Basic Skills classes, the online cataloging certificate classes, and several
database training classes
10. Nebraska Library Commission (NLC) - A state agency that “is responsible for the

statewide promotion, development and coordination of library services”
(Nebraska Library Commission, n.d.) Services available to Nebraska libraries and
librarians include information technology, planning and statistics, reference and
information, government information, technology (including databases), Talking
Book and Braille, continuing education, librarian and board certification, and
library accreditation
11. Online learning – Courses offered via the internet to distance students which

allows students to learn on their own time without traveling or attending
synchronous in-person sessions

25
12. Public Librarian Certification – To improve library service throughout the state

and encourage public librarians to continue learning and expanding their skills,
the certification program requires forty-five continuing education hours every
three years, certification of library directors and staff members factor into public
library accreditation status
13. Regional library systems – Four nonprofits in Nebraska that are led by a Regional

Director, governed by a board, and work closely with the Nebraska Library
Commission to provide library services to all libraries located in the counties of
each specific region (Western, Central Plains, Three Rivers, and Southeast)
14. Rural public library/librarian – A library or a library system with a legal service

population of less than 25,000
15. Urban public library/librarian – A library or a library system with a legal service

population of 25,000 or more

26

CHAPTER 2 - REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Learning is a series of complex interactions between the learner, the content to be
learned, and how the class is presented (whether online or in-person). Malcolm Knowles
(1950), considered to be the first authority on adult learning throughout academic
literature, stated of learning that the “teacher guides the process on the basis of his
understanding of both student and materials so as to create learning experiences that will
be meaningful to the student” (p. 31). In order to better understand and assess the needs
of adult learners in a continuing education context utilizing online self-paced modules via
the Moodle learning management system, theories of adult learning and constructivism
are first explored. Questions for this research initially focused on 1) how do adults, in
their role as public librarians in Nebraska, learn or increase their professional knowledge
and 2) how can learning theories and principles be applied more directly to online
learning practices within this context. In this section, I review literature focusing on adult
learning theories and constructivist learning principles.
The discussion in this chapter is organized into the following sections: (1)
theoretical framework, (2) online professional development, (3) design and delivery of
online learning experiences, and (4) professional development of librarians and
continuing education in Technical Services. This includes an adaptation of the CPED
guiding principles to apply them to both employee professional development and
librarianship as a vehicle of education.

27

Theoretical Framework
The learners who are participating in the Nebraska Public Librarian certification
program are adults who are currently employed in a Nebraska public library or are
Nebraska residents interested in librarianship. Those who enroll in the Basic Skills
classes are these learners enrolled in the certification program who do not have a
professional certificate or degree in Library Science. These classes are intended to be
immediately relevant to and connect with varying levels of library experiences and
knowledge in order to improve the learner’s current practice as a librarian. Self-paced
modules will address the heterogeneity of experiences and education, as students more
familiar with these introductory concepts will move more quickly through the materials,
while other students are able to take their time. The learners may be employed in a fulltime or part-time position in various departments within their libraries, or currently
looking for a library position, but each learner is an active participant in the context of
library education. The advanced instructor-led coursework then goes beyond the basics,
to connect more specifically with librarians’ roles within their practice and to explore
new issues that are important or timely to the larger librarian profession. Malcolm
Knowles’ theories and assumptions of adult learners are examined then are followed by
critiques and alternative perspectives on adult learning. With the understanding of
learning as an internal process, constructivism and experiential learning are two key
theoretical perspectives, especially studies that incorporate these perspectives into online
learning settings. A brief discussion of the connectivism and why it was not used as a
primary approach for this problem of practice follows.

28

Adult Learning and Self Direction
Malcolm Knowles, who researched and wrote extensively about adult learning,
differentiated between pedagogy and andragogy (or adult learning) related to assumptions
of dependency. (Pedagogy implies a teacher; in contrast andragogy can be self-directed.)
A student does not automatically become an “adult learner” once they reach a certain age
or pass a particular grade level. In his 1977 article, “Adult Learning Processes,” Knowles
writes that “the andragogue has a value system that places self-directiveness on a much
higher level than dependency and so will do everything one can to help a learner become
increasingly self-directive in his or her learning” (p. 207). Thinking about adult learning
still today as a continuum of self-direction (Figure 2.1) helped guide this research in
order to encourage public librarians to take on an increasingly active role over their
continuing education in an online environment and move towards the goal of selfdirected learning.

Figure 2.1: Dependent Learner to Self-Directed Adult Learner

29

Beginning as a dependent learner, a student has little or no active participation in
the planning or direction of his/her learning. Without prior experience or knowledge to
connect with, the teacher’s role is one of “transmitter” or giver of information,
responsible for building context and experiences for students. As students move towards
self-directed learning, teachers increasingly take on the role of “facilitator” as they step
back and guide the learner to take more ownership of their learning. As an active
participant in their own learning, adult learners need the content to be immediately
applicable to their practice as they connect new ideas with prior knowledge and
experiences that they bring with them into any educational setting. These students need to
be able to understand why they are learning the materials or skills being taught and how
that information can be used as soon they leave the classroom.
While Knowles’ theories attempt to make adult learning distinct from the learning
and teaching of children, Sharan Merriam (2001) states that “Some adults are highly
dependent on a teacher for structure, while some children are independent, self-directed
learners” (p. 5). This seems to be especially true for adult learners who are completely
new to online learning and dependent on the instructor for step-by-step instructions. As
they become more familiar with the systems and the digital tools being used, learners can
then become more independent and ready to take an increasing control of their learning.
Assumptions and Principles of Adult Learning
In 1980, Knowles first published four assumptions of adult learners:
1. As a person matures, his or her self-concept moves from that of a dependent
personality toward one of a self-directing human being.

30

2. An adult accumulates a growing reservoir of experience, which is a rich
resource for learning.
3. The readiness of an adult to learn is closely related to the developmental tasks
of his or her social role.
4. There is a change in time perspective as people mature – from future
application of knowledge to immediacy of application. Thus, an adult is more
problem centered than subject centered in learning.
Two additional assumptions were later published:
1. The most present motivations are internal rather than external.
2. Adults need to know why they need to learn something
(Merriam, et. al., 2012, p. 84)
Taking these assumptions into consideration, a simple model for adult learning is
illustrated below. Adult learners enter an educational activity (a workshop or webinar, for
example) with different expectation, experiences, and knowledge, they are motivated to
learn something that will be immediately applicable to their life or to their practice, and
they are ready to learn and apply the new knowledge. The instructor’s role then, as
facilitator, is to take this prior experience into consideration and frame the content into a
learning experience where the application and relevance to the learner is clear.
Continuing this process then moves the adult learners closer towards self-directed
learning as they begin to recognize their own learning needs, seek out additional
resources, and take charge of their professional learning.

31

Much debate has surrounded Malcolm Knowles’ writings on adult learning as
questions arose if these assumptions were truly a theory of adult learning, a model for
learning, a model for instruction, or something else. Holton III, Swanson, and Naquin
(2001) suggest this may be due in part as Knowles “refined his thinking” and published
additional assumptions over the years (p. 120). Anne Hartree (1984) questioned these
assumptions, asking if they are “to be read as descriptive of the adult learner, or would it
be more accurate to see them as prescriptive, statements about what the adult learner
should be like” (p. 205). Stephen Brookfield (1986) suggested that “the concept should
be treated exactly for what Knowles claims it to be – a set of assumptions” (p. 91), noting
that while the idea of “self-directedness” is absent in many other cultures, it should
remain as a goal for educators (p. 95). Self-directed learning allows students to be active
and engaged with their own learning processes as the facilitator guides the learner
through relevant content. He wrote though that “facilitating learning is a transactional
encounter” (p. 98) between the learner and the instructor. Holton III et al. (2001) follows
this idea of a transactional model of adult learning stating that “Adult learning occurs in
many settings for many different reasons” including adult education, human resource
development, and higher education (p. 125).
Instructors facilitating learning should take the learner’s needs and preferences
into consideration, but Brookfield warns that “it is just as misguided for a facilitator to
completely repress his or her own ideas concerning worthwhile curricula or effective
methods and to allow learners complete control over these” (p. 97). Challenging
preconceived notions or presenting challenging situations is an important part of learning

32

and necessary to the process. Especially with professional development and introductorylevel knowledge like the Basic Skills classes, the instructors need to make decisions
about the content in order to ensure certain competencies are being met, such as those
published by the American Library Association.
The librarians who are enrolled in the certification program or any of the Basic
Skills classes should expect that the content will be immediately relevant to their practice
in their library, whether they are learning how to more effectively manage their library
finances, how to write library policies, or how to improve their services for community
members through better planned programming, information organization, or readers’
advisory services. The existing Basic Skills classes heavily rely on short discussion
forum activities. Librarians can post about what’s been done in their libraries, what’s
gone well or has gone badly, and what they’re planning on doing to move forward (with a
new collection or program), then get feedback from the rest of the group. Some students,
who are at a higher level of self-directed learning, take a more active role in discussions
and express a desire to learn more and ask questions while other, more dependent,
students may post short one-sentence replies and express frustration (to me) about the
process.
Keeping Knowles’ assumptions in mind, but focusing on the role of experience
and the importance of delivering relevant and applicable content, I approached my
research through a constructivist perspective.

33

Constructivism: Learning as a Process
Constructivism is defined as “a collection of perspectives all of which share the
common assumption that learning is how people make sense of their experience”
(Merriam & Bierema, 2013, p. 36). Learning is a process through which the learners are
active and engaged participants. Piaget “stressed the importance of the child as an active
organism as he or she progressed in cognitive development” (Tracy & Morrow, 2012, p.
91). Through the constructivist learning process, new knowledge is integrated with a
student’s existing knowledge which “can only occur when the learner is actively engaged
in the learning process” (Tracey & Morrow, 2012, p. 58). Learning from a constructivist
viewpoint is a continuous internal process that can’t be observed. Constructivist learning
works well for adult learners as they move towards that goal of self-directed learning.
Lev Vygotsky’s theory of social constructivism believes that “children learn as a
result of their social interactions with others” (Tracy & Morrow, 2012, p. 127). Learning
occurs through interactions with others, especially those people around them who they
interact with often through “sign systems” or “language, writing, and counting systems.”
Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development (Figure 2.2) is the idea that development
occurs when learning tasks are at a level in which students can be successful with
support.

34

What I
know

What I can
learn with
support

Figure 2.2: Zone of Proximal Development
As John Dewey (1933) states “the best thinking occurs when the easy and the
difficult are duly proportioned to each other…Too much that is easy gives no ground for
inquiry; too much that is hard renders inquiry hopeless” (p. 290). Learning doesn’t occur
if the task is too easy and doesn’t require effort from the learner, but if the task is too
challenging, learners struggle and won’t learn. Learning occurs in that space in between.
Activities which include collaborative problem solving among the learners themselves in
group discussions or between the learners and the instructor allow interaction that provide
support when needed and can challenge the learner’s thinking.
Incorporating Constructivist Principles into Online Learning
Learning online offers flexibility to adult learners as they are able to access the
content at any time and from any place, as well as offering a variety of learning tools
such as discussion boards, interactive quizzes, or videos. Examining andragogy in the
context of online/distance education “for enhancing the teaching and learning
environments”, Hsiu-Mei Huang (2002) wrote about the challenges and issues of utilizing
a constructivist approach for online learning. These challenges include the dependence on

35

technology itself and challenges with the learners. As distance learning must be delivered
electronically, students may feel isolated from fellow students and from the instructor in
this kind of learning environment. Even with conferencing technologies, Huang states
that “It loses some humanity” (p. 31) as students lose the face-to-face discussion and
immediate feedback of a traditional classroom while seeing only what is being displayed
on screen. Conferencing technology relies on having and using webcams, microphones,
and instant messaging which may be challenging for some learners. At the same time,
learners who are comfortable with conferencing software and/or for those who don’t
speak up or chat for some other reason, it can become difficult for the instructor to tell if
they need help or if they are engaged with the content at all.
As adult learners move towards self-direction of their learning, the instructor must
act as facilitator, in conjunction with technology (Huang, 2002, p. 31), while also
encouraging authentic, learner-centered instruction that connects with each individual’s
prior experience. Shieh Ruey (2010) recommends a facilitation model for constructivistbased online learning where the facilitator (instructor) acts as mentor, “focusing on
guiding learners’ self-directed, high-quality learning” (p. 717). Ruey suggests student
learning contracts which help learners articulate their learning needs and objectives
which the instructor then helps the student achieve through critical thinking, reflection
activities, and meaningful feedback. Personalized learning contracts may be beneficial,
but for the two-week limitation of Basic Skills courses, they may not be effective.
However, this concept may connect with the previous discussions with Nebraska Library
Commission staff and the Regional Library Directors about the idea of the specialized

36

learning tracks. Having a set of recommended classes for those librarians in
administrative roles (such as library directors) or having separate assignments and
discussion groups would provide more relevant content for these specific professional
roles or groups. The 2017 Library Finance class experimented with this idea with
separate discussion topics. Directors were asked to focus on their library’s overall budget
while other learners were asked to focus on finances for a program or a grant that they
would like to plan or have planned. Feedback collected from the students at the end of
this class about the separate discussions was positive.
As more classes move towards online offerings, the transition from in-person,
synchronous structure is not always simple. Catherine Lalonde (2011) describes an inperson graduate class which met weekly on a university campus that transitioned to an
online class in education utilizing a constructivist approach. Lalonde’s work is notable as
the transition was conducted with clear intention and careful thought, focusing on
“flexibility, constructivist approaches to teaching and learning, and communities of
engagement” (p. 410). Lalonde was attentive to the fact that not all previous assignments
which may work well when students are able to meet together don’t translate to the
online format. Instead of keeping a major group presentation in the course, Lalonde asked
online students to complete an assignment which “each student using a theory to analyze
a particular critical education issue with the help of teacher-oriented and student-oriented
resources…to build links to how said student would help his or her future students better
understand this theoretically analyzed topic” (p. 412). The students’ reflection papers
would then be posted to gather constructive feedback from the other students in an online

37

forum. Utilizing a constructivist approach, the students connect theory with their practice
as teachers, analyze how they may use the information in their future work, and gain
valuable interaction as they practice critically evaluating each other’s work as well as
benefiting from the increased number of different perspectives (p. 413). For online adult
learners, the connection between experience, reflection, and relevance remains key.
When the Nebraska Basic Skills classes were moved online in 2011, the same
format of discussion boards and a list of assigned readings were created for every class.
There are online discussion forums with questions, but asking students to simply describe
their current library collections, for example, doesn’t necessarily encourage the kind of
more meaningful interactions that Lalonde has described. In addition, responses can seem
shallow as learners simply post the minimum to fulfill the assignment requirements.
While I continue to work with instructors on redesigning some of the assignments, this is
an opportunity as the Continuing Education Coordinator to optimize the learning content.
The implementation of self-paced modules as a starting point will allow the basic or
“shallow” information to be moved, saving time and resources so that the instructor can
then focus on building the more interactive and in-depth discussions in subsequent
instructor-led advanced classes.
The Role of Experience in Adult Learning
Daniel Pratt (1993) stated that adult learning “appears to rest on two implicit
principles…knowledge is assumed to be actively constructed by the learner” and that
“learning is an interactive process of interpretation, integration, and transformation of

38

one’s experiential world” (p. 17). Examining the theory of experiential learning as part of
the constructivist perspective is another important piece to this problem of practice.
Based on the work of Dewey, Lewin, and Piaget, David Kolb (1984) wrote that
“learning is the process whereby knowledge is created through the transformation of
experience” (p. 38). This process can be illustrated below through Kolb’s experiential
learning cycle which is made up of four stages:
1. concrete experience
2. reflection
3. abstract conceptualization
4. experimentation
The concrete experience acts “as a reference point with textures, feelings,
meanings, and emotional impulses” (Baasanjav, 2013, p. 576). Learners then reflect on
that experience in order to develop an initial theory or abstract conceptualization. The
learner then uses this concept to solve a problem or experiment. As new information or
experiences are gained, the cycle continues, requiring the student to continuously reflect
and build new meaning.
Pratt, focusing on Knowles’ research of adult learners, stated that learning “is the
construction of meaning through experience” (p. 16). Looking at incorporating
experiential learning principles into learning online, Carver, King, Hannum, and Fowler
(2007) present a model of experiential e-learning that they believe addresses some of the
weaknesses of online learning. The authors suggest a taxonomy or “continuum from

39

simple content sharing and recall of prior experience at one end to direct
experience/action learning at the other end” (p. 249).
Learners are “passive” at the lower levels, taking a more active role as courses
incorporate more experiential learning towards the higher levels of this continuum (p.
250), similar to Knowles’ learning continuum described above. Currently, the Basic
Skills classes could be considered within the “Type 2” experiential e-learning as much of
the assignments depend on responding to discussion board prompts and commenting on a
required number of classmates’ posts. This model emphasizes the professional role of
learners by utilizing real-world work scenarios or challenges as the basis of the learning
activities. As experiences and student interactions are incorporated more into the course
design and activity planning, the more effective online learning becomes as it becomes
more learner-centered, increases the learner’s sense of agency, and increases competence
through relevant practice of knowledge and skills. Undrahbuyan Baasanjav’s 2013 case
study explored the integration of experiential learning principles into an online digital
media undergraduate course based on the work of Carver, et al. (2007). The course was
designed to encourage the students “to reflect upon and analyze their digital media
experiences” (2013, p. 586) through discussion boards and assignment topics chosen by
the students. While this study was a semester and aimed at undergraduate students, some
of the principles may be applied to the online Basic Skills classes as instructor-led course
projects are redesigned to relate more closely to the public librarian’s work and specific
projects. For example, in several of the classes, such as Readers’ Advisory, the

40

instructors have altered the final project based on a real work challenge, such as
recording a booktalk or writing a new library policy.
Connectivism
Connectivism, a learning theory advocated by George Siemens (2005) and
Stephen Downes (2010), seeks to explain the role of the internet and technology in
education. The Nebraska Public Librarian certification program and the Basic Skills
courses are more formal continuing education activities and I don’t believe this theory to
be optimal for this particular problem of practice. However, I felt it important to briefly
discuss because this theory as it does focus on self-directed learning through communities
of practice or networked learning and as it appears throughout the literature in regards to
online professional education (Bond, 2013; Goldie, 2016; Guder, 2010; Neubauer, et. al,
2018; Transue, 2013).
Due to the multitude of existing technology tools, students have the ability to seek
and share information across vast online networks. Siemens (2005) defines connectivist
learning as “a process that occurs within nebulous environments of shifting core elements
– not entirely under the control of the individual” (para. 23). As learners seek information
through an ever expanding number of diverse formats, they build personal learning
networks. Information is accessed from expert or specialized resources (or nodes) which
the learner connects to new ideas or practice. Part of this learning also requires students
to distinguish between the important and unimportant information, making connections
between sources which then facilitates continual learning.

41

Siemens (2005) describes the importance of “information flow” within an
organization, stating that “Creating, preserving, and utilizing information flow should be
a key organizational activity” (para. 26). The cyclical learning process suggests that
learners have their personal networks which are connected to others and may be changed
or expanded as new information is sought. Downes (2010) states that “we need to see the
educational system itself as adaptive rather than prescriptive” (p. 28).
Emerging technologies like social networks allow educational content to become
“decentralized” and learning to become increasingly self-managed. Learners seek out
information that they need or want. This leads to increasing connections and discoveries
which they can then take back and share within their personal networks. The newly
updated network is then shared with others, creating increasingly larger communities of
self-directed learners.
Downes even describes using Moodle as a course management system for
discussion boards for his online Connectivism course. However, he and his team of
instructors went further, creating a tool that collected feeds and links from “170 blogs and
websites” (p. 30) which were then sent out daily to student along with more links to
separate learning events, such as webinars or Skype discussions. The students were told
to “select and sample course content” (p. 30). Evaluation was based on learners’
interactions and participation within the course.
Considering the emphasis on online learning and information flow, the
connectivist learning theory initially appeared to match well with my problem of practice.
Libraries are built around the idea of open information and the Association of College

42

and Research Libraries’ framework is based on the ideas of creating, sharing, and finding
information. However, I didn’t approach this problem of practice through the connectivist
lens for several reasons. First, while Moodle is the current course management system for
Basic Skills, the course structure does not mirror that of Downes’. The Basic Skills, and
the requirements for the Nebraska Public Library certification program, are structured by
separate topics of librarianship. While learners may seek out additional information and
added resources that are available within the course, the learning is not designed for an
open exploration of materials. There isn’t an encouragement to “sample” course content.
Students engage in lessons that will ideally build on one another within each class, rather
than an open discovery network. In addition, the motivation for taking and completing
these classes is not based entirely on curiosity or discovery. Motivation comes first from
becoming certified which must be done by library directors and by a certain number of
staff within a public library in order for that library to be accredited. Accreditation may
affect federal or grant money available to them. Motivation may also come from Library
Directors or Library Boards encouraging or requiring their library staff to enroll in the
certification program. While there are many librarians who are excited to participate in
the certification program for numerous reasons, including the opportunity to enhance
their own learning or skills, the Basic Skills courses are part of a larger certification
requirement.
While the connectivist approach may be appropriate for other continuing
education opportunities, such as librarians who want to explore more information about
the latest library trend or new technology tool, I don’t feel it’s the right approach in

43

focusing on this specific problem of practice or these self-paced modules and the
advanced instructor-led classes. The Basic Skills classes are meant to focus on public
librarians in need of foundation-level knowledge in librarianship. In order to be a
connectivist learner, an internal motivation and a familiarity with online learning need to
exist that I’m not certain most learners in the Basic Skills classes have yet. These learners
may eventually reach that point of self-directed learning where they are confident enough
to explore online continuing education opportunities more freely without an
instructor/facilitator, but for this current research practice study, I believe it’s important
to focus on a more structured and guided approach for learners.
Online Professional Development
Teresa Dalston and Philip Turner (2011) proposed “an evaluation framework for
public library staff online training courses” (p. 13), based on their public library system’s
employee policies and competencies, which includes both long- and short-term
knowledge acquisition and efficacy, as well as “changes in on-the-job performance that
can be attributed to the training” (p. 14). The study evaluated the same online utilizing
four different implementation strategies of differing instructional interventions in order to
compare the data from each level from a constructivist approach. A pretest, posttest, and
a delayed posttest were all administered through an online survey. The study found that
facilitated online learning had the greatest short- and long-term knowledge improvement,
though with a complex topic such as dealing with difficult patrons, they noted a decrease
in long-term self-efficacy in the respondents. They note that more research is needed on
integrating this training into improved on-the-job performance. The current Basic Skills

44

classes are all facilitated by an instructor, though the instructor participation occurs
completely online through forum posts or emails to the students. This format seems to
align more closely with one of Dalston and Turner’s levels (2A) which “utilized an online
facilitator with explicitly defined duties and communication tools within the
courseware…the facilitator introduces the lesson, provides examples, leads asynchronous
discussion on course topics, and contacts learners to ensure they are making satisfactory
progress” (p. 16). The research found this level of facilitation, along with the online
curriculum, did appear to lead to long-term knowledge acquisition based on the delayed
posttest results.
A study by Peeters, et. al (2014) of the relationship between formal learning
experiences, like classes, and informal learning, such as conversations among peers,
found that participating in formal learning led adult learners to increasingly seek out
additional self-directed learning opportunities. Informal learning was found also to lead
to better understanding through increased explanations as multiple people had the
opportunity to discuss from differing perspectives (p. 188). While Peeters’ study focused
on in-person classes, the idea may be echoed in discussion boards where adult learners
have the opportunity to talk with each other. In the Basic Skills classes, discussion boards
have been the primary discussion tool for our learners. Part of each forum assignment is
to make one original “substantive” post and reply to at least two others. Within the
assignment description, learners are encouraged to discuss and some instructors post a
summary of ideas, but this kind of participation is more formal and not always
productive. In the 2017 Community and the Library class, four students didn’t technically

45

complete the class as they didn’t post enough replies. After discussion with instructor, the
students were allowed to go back and add comments so they could pass and wouldn’t
have to wait an entire year to retake the course, but adding short discussions after the
class has already ended isn’t useful for the class as a whole. The discussions then
becomes busy work or “superficial”, rather than encouraging conversation or learning
(Sandars & Langlois, 2006).
The digital classroom and the constantly changing nature of technology tools that
are available in both distance education and in libraries have altered the approaches to
instruction for online instructors, as well as for adult learners. Online education allows
learners to connect with instructors and other classmates in addition to accessing their
classes any time and from anywhere while the information can be distributed
immediately and updated continuously. A survey of teachers found that online
communities to be a meaningful professional development opportunity as they allowed
flexibility of time and an extended professional network as they connected with other
professionals and could discuss issues that were immediately relevant to their work
(Duncan-Howell, 2010).
An increasing number of Nebraska’s continuing education activities are being
offered virtually, such as the Nebraska Library Commission’s “Big Talk from Small
Libraries” which is an all-day digital conference that is streamed online with recorded
sessions posted soon after with 470 attendees last year. For the Nebraska Public Librarian
certification program, this means more librarians can enroll and participate throughout

46

the year than were able to do so when the continuing education activities were offered
primarily as in-person workshops, including the Basic Skills classes.
A 2010 survey of 328 members of three national professional associations, found
that respondents preferred the face-to-face format for continuing education activities. The
authors suggested that online learning was not as engaging as face-to-face or at least was
not perceived to be as engaging by the participants (Lynn, et al.). This echoed Connie
Haley, in 2008, who stated communication, networking, and technology as a barrier for
reasons to use face-to-face training while online training offers flexibility, time savings,
lower costs, and convenience (p. 37). Another later study of synchronous online webinars
concerned about the loss of in-person interaction between participants and instructors
found that the learners didn’t feel like it was a disadvantage as they were still able to chat
through the conferencing software through messages or by speaking through a
webcam/microphone (Yates, 2014). This is supported by the research of Huang and
Hsiao (2012) who examined asynchronous and synchronous communication in online
learning. The delayed feedback of emails and discussion boards may lead to feelings of
isolation between learners and instructors while instant messaging or conferencing
software can bring back that more immediate feedback and an aspect of social
collaboration (Hendrix, 2017).
Design and Delivery of Online Learning Experiences
In 1983, Malcolm Knowles wrote an article entitled “Malcolm Knowles Finds a
Worm in His Apple” in which he describes “feeling increasingly archaic” (p. 12) as
personal computers were being used more regularly in both classrooms and professional

47

settings. Deciding to buy an Apple computer, he describes his increasing frustration with
trying to learn how to use it, noting in a diary how the manual “violates many principles
of adult learning” through memorization of commands and uninteresting computer
games. Knowles makes the interesting point that while machines may be ‘user friendly,’
the instruction materials are not learner-centered (p. 15). As Huang (2002) states,
“appropriate types of technology can really assist learners to improve their achievement”
(p. 31). The design of meaningful learning experiences for adult learners should be
carefully considered, whether we are teaching them how to use specific technology tools,
such as Moodle or email, or using that technology in order to deliver continuing
education content. Similarly, James Gee (2005) writes of education and the notion of
video game manuals as learners struggle with large amounts of information that is “out of
contexts of application” (p. 11). Reading these manuals before playing the game (or
understanding the larger context) isn’t helpful as “All one gets is lots of words that are
confusing, have only quite general or vague meanings, and are quickly forgotten.”
Designing online coursework, this overload of text or reading can be a barrier for learners
as they don’t make the connection to their real-world practice. Those students who do
enroll in these Basic Skills classes, for example, with previous experience working in
libraries may find the information (or manuals) to be helpful resources as they are already
familiar with the “game-related words” or concepts. Students who lack this context need
the additional support to build that foundation with the information spread out over
several “levels” or, in this research, self-paced modules.

48

As Margaret Britt (2015) writes about online learning opportunities, early “elearning was more or less dressed up traditional methods of delivery” utilizing strategies
such as narrated PowerPoint slides to “provide a simplistic approach to delivery of elearning without little consideration of learning effectiveness and engagement” (p. 401).
This still seems to be true in many cases of online webinars where a slide presentation
appears on screen while the presenter narrates. The Organization of Materials Basic
Skills online class originally included recorded lectures from the previous Continuing
Education Coordinator and the previous Cataloging Librarian which were paired with a
series of PowerPoint slides. The affordances of technology and online learning would
enable instructors to keep a similar format, but encourage greater participation and
engagement. For example, presentation tools that allow on-screen polls or quizzes that
ask learners to interact or “break-out” rooms that would encourage participants to chat in
smaller groups periodically about the content. The Nebraska Library Commission does
have a license for GotoMeeting software which is primarily used for NCompass Live
(Nebraska Library Commission, 2018), which is a weekly webinar series with guests
discussing a variety of library topics and issues. This popular webinar series, and other
similar ones, have exposed many Nebraska librarians to this kind of tool, as well as
Nebraska Library Commission providing access to Nebraska Librarians to WebJunction,
an online learning service (Mason, 2009; Schadt, 2016). Similar to finding the right tool
for the content, it’s important to avoid incorporating too much. Miller (2014) argues that
technological multitasking with different apps, devices, or online environments/learning
management systems can be detrimental to online learning and teaching. Paul Clayton

49

Campbell (2014) also warns of new technology in library instruction that “without a
thoughtful process to effectively incorporate it into an instructional program, could have
a more negative effect than positive when instructional design thinking is left out of the
process” (p. 140). Students trying to learn or use multiple technologies in addition to
learning the course content can become overwhelmed. Developing advanced instructorled courses alongside the self-paced modules would then incorporate some of these more
interactive features in a structured, supportive, and thoughtful way.
In designing and developing a new instructional approach, Gagné, Wager, Golas,
& Keller (2005) write that “A teacher or trainer using instructional design principles to
design a lesson may need only a simple model for lesson planning” (p. 13). One of the
most common flexible instructional design models is ADDIE (Analysis, Design,
Develop, Implementation, and Evaluation). While most of the library science literature
that focuses on utilizing ADDIE to develop instruction centers on working with
undergraduate or graduate students, lessons can be learned from their research as well as
looking to other professional literature outside of libraries. As universities increase online
programs and distance education opportunities, academic librarians have turned to
developing an increasing number of self-directed web-based learning tools (Swanson,
2006). One such project from Julie Ladell-Thomas (2012) describes the process of
developing a self-directed module to learn more of the research and literature review
process. Their basic steps through the ADDIE model included analyzing “various
considerations, including the audience, the instructional goals, the delivery options, and
any constraints...design phase involved determining strategies to achieve instructional

50

objectives...next step involved actually developing the content and creating multimedia
components, and finally, the project could be implemented and evaluated” (p. 382).
Following a similar process for an evidence-based medical course taught by collaborating
librarians and physicians, Sarah Reinbold (2013) adds that “Although the ADDIE model
phases are written in a linear order, it is more iterative and cyclical” (p. 246) suggesting
that this instructional design model is flexible enough for continual redesign and testing,
rather than limiting instructors and designers to strict steps that must be followed and can
be utilized for both short and long-term design projects to more effectively incorporate
technology with regard to library instruction (Campbell, 2014). Following this ADDIE
model and the concept of developing a prototype module allowed us to critically examine
the Basic Skills classes in their current state and the Moodle system itself. The design and
implementation/testing of this first module offered initial lessons and feedback from the
learners and the instructor necessary to continued assessment and future developments
and improvements.
Professional Development of Librarians and Technical Services
Looking more closely as professional development of librarians, specifically in
Technical Services for the development of this first cataloging module, continuing
education recommendations from the First Congress on Professional Education,
sponsored by the American Library Association focused on coordinated approaches to
professional development and identifying “needs and requirements of specific levels of
personnel” (Varlejs, 2000, p. 143) in order to develop education programs. As Rebecca
Blakiston (2011) states “Librarians of any specialty require continual training and

51

development in order to be effective in their shifting roles” (p. 729). Professional
development opportunities for librarians through national and state organizations, such as
the American Library Association, the Nebraska Library Association, and the Mountain
Plains Library Association, offer continuing education through conferences and
committee participation available to librarians. State agencies, like the Nebraska Library
Commissions, and the four regional library systems in Nebraska are able to offer
localized opportunities such as summer reading workshops around the state or online
trainings such as the Basic Skills classes and NCompass Live weekly webinars.
Continuing Education Coordinator (or similar) staff positions exist in every state with
federal funding from the Institute of Museum and Library Sciences as professional
development continues to be a priority for librarians though time, money, and necessary
support often prove to be barriers for many (Hull, 2009; Pinkston, 2009; Terrill, 2014).
Librarians rely on free online continuing education in many cases, as they can find it.
Lori J. Terrill’s 2014 survey of cataloging librarians found that journal articles,
conferences, and electronic discussion lists were reported as primary professional
development resources while blogs, microblogs such as Twitter, and social networking
platforms were utilized as less formal tools for librarians.
Determining what professional development a librarian needs most and in what
format has been a question throughout the literature for many years. John Dale Russell
(1942) wrote that it “hinges on the answers to two questions: (1) What does the librarian
have to do or have to be? (2) What educational experiences should the perspective
librarian undergo in order to develop the characteristics and the abilities that are required

52

for effective service in his profession?” (p. 12). Paul Dunkin, in 1962, wrote that a
librarian trained only in historical or traditional cataloging methods “is wrapped up in the
details of technical services that the technical services have ceased to be services because
they leave no time for public service” (p. 131). Cataloging librarians need to be
knowledgeable in both the standards of practice, but also be adaptable as librarianship
changes in order to best serve our communities. In 1987, J. Bradford Young examined
literature of the time still exploring the tension between “training” and “education” in the
context of cataloging and librarianship. He stated that:
Training refers to instruction in the techniques and routines of library cataloging
procedures aimed at achieving skill-based competencies…In contrast, education
refers to instruction in the principles, theoretical basis, and philosophy of library
catalogs aimed at achieving concept-based competencies which support
professional interpretation, administration, and implementation of library
cataloging systems within the context of general librarianship (p. 150).
Training, by itself, then doesn’t allow librarians the “conceptual foundation” that helps
them as librarianship and cataloging changes. Education alone then gives librarians this
theory, but they are unable to do basic tasks in real-world practice. Due to the more
technical nature of cataloging, Young writes that traditional cataloging courses tended to
be more “training” prospective catalogers. This balance of theory and practice described
by Young and Moulaison (2012) is aligned with both the concept of the Carnegie Project
on the Education Doctorate’s “Problem of Practice” as “a persistent, contextualized, and
specific issue embedded in the work of a professional practitioner, the addressing of

53

which has the potential to result in improved understanding, experience, and outcomes”
as well as American Educational Research Association Division I: Education in the
Professions (AERA, 2018) who focuses on the “development of professionals” in
different disciplines. Similarly, Park and Tosaka (2017) found that a survey of cataloging
librarians indicated that “CE interests and activities are linked more closely to specific
topics or contexts that are being discussed…rather than an abstract need for training” (p.
167). Practitioners (catalogers) are often the experts teaching cataloging classes,
including those offered by the Nebraska Library Commission.
A 2008 study from Sylvia D. Hall-Ellis analyzed 355 position descriptions in
various library types and 289 survey responses to identify the competencies required by
employers for cataloging and technical services librarians over the previous ten years.
While this study focused on graduate Library Science education, the author states that
“basic and advanced cataloging courses should include metadata and classification
schemes, a bibliographic utility, electronic resources, integrated library systems,
interoperability technologies, human-computer interactions, networking, and
telecommunications” (p. 324). For the public librarians in Nebraska, specifically focusing
on the Organization of Materials course, developing the self-paced module that
concentrates on the introductory level skills that librarians can use in their daily practice
is the first step, as we then develop the in-depth instructor-led courses to explore more
specific topics and allow space to explore creative projects and timely issues in
librarianship, helping librarians to connect standards and theory of practice with more
forward-thinking practice.

54

CHAPTER 3: ITERATIVE AND REFLECTIVE DESIGN PROCESSES: PART I METHODOLOGY
The design processes used throughout this study to develop the self-paced module
and the proposed specialized learning tracks are discussed in this chapter. This
information is organized into the following sections: (1) research questions, (2) initial
research design, (3) self-paced modules leading into advanced instructor-led classes, (4)
initial steps to self-paced cataloging module, (5) simplifying systems, clarifying
expectations, and focusing content, (6) development of a Moodle practice course, and (7)
second redesign of the Organization of Materials instructor-led course.
Research Questions
As I began the CPED program in Fall 2014, my initial research questions centered
around a better understanding of the general learning needs of online students and
faculty. Over the last four years, and having left a university librarian position for my
current one at a state agency, my problem of practice evolved as these research questions
then narrowed to the professional development needs of public librarians in an online
learning environment. Focusing this still broad idea even further into an actionable
project, the following research questions consider students who are enrolled in the
Nebraska Public Librarian Certification program, who are all starting with diverse
backgrounds and levels of experiences, and the development of a new online instructional
approach for the continuing education of these public librarians:
1. As the Continuing Education Coordinator for the Nebraska Library Commission,

what can I do to optimize the response to online learning needs of Nebraska

55

public librarians who are enrolled in the Nebraska Public Librarian certification
program?
2. How could foundation-level skills and knowledge needs be addressed as a set of

online self-paced learning modules utilizing the Moodle learning management
system?
3. How could an online instructional approach based on self-paced modules be an

effective tool for the professional development of Nebraska public librarians?
Reexamining the principles set forth by Knowles in the context of the professional
development of public librarians utilizing Moodle, in order to achieve the goal of
andragogy, concentrating resources at the beginning is important so learners are
supported as they progress to increasingly self-directed learning. Illustrated in Figure 3.1:
Self-Paced Learning Module Development Cycle below and based off of the ADDIE
model, I began this research by analyzing what the current Basic Skills curriculum
comprised, including both content and delivery, which then led to the question of what
could I develop over the next year to move Basic Skills education forward. The lofty goal
of developing and implementing self-paced modules and specialized learning tracks over
the next year needed a starting point or some kind of pilot project implementing an initial
set of test modules (which later became the Moodle practice course and the first
Organization of Information cataloging module as described in this chapter). The target
audience of this project, as described in Chapter One, is the librarians enrolled in the
Nebraska Public Librarian Certification program. Planned implementation for these
modules include the testing phase, iterative redesign of the test module, and development

56

of additional modules in collaboration with Nebraska Library Commission staff and
Basic Skills instructors. As the cycle continues and new modules are created, they will
replace the current instructor-led courses over the next year. The process of evaluating
where we are and where we hope to go in the next year may seem simplistic, but this
process encourages reflection as I ask these questions of the classes and the delivery
methods. As I work on future modules or, ideally, expand the continuing education
offerings of the Nebraska Library Commission, this process remains relevant whether our
current focus is on the larger group of public librarians or narrows to the more specialized
roles, such as youth services librarians or rural library directors, and offering more
advanced instructor-led classes.

Figure 3.1: Self-Paced Learning Module Development Cycle
Initial Research Design
As J. Lindsay O’Neill writes of their library’s weeding/deselection training
project, the “bulk of design work for this project happened before actually developing the
training” (p. 111). In May 2016, I met with members of the Nebraska Library
Commission computer team, the Library Development Director, and the instructors of the

57

Basic Skills classes. I had just recently started in my role as the Continuing Education
Coordinator in February 2016, and this was an opportunity for us to all discuss what the
current state of the Basic Skills classes and where we wanted to go with them. Concern
was echoed about the constrained two-week schedule. Many of the instructors agreed that
it was too short of a time to delve into everything that the instructors wanted to cover
with the students. They could only “scratch the surface” of each topic while struggling to
help students learn the Moodle system at the same time. Additionally, some of the
instructors voiced how they were frustrated that it could be difficult “relearning” the
Moodle system themselves, as they only teach one class and don’t use it on a regular
basis throughout the rest of the year and small (or at times large) changes to the Moodle
system are made with each version update. As instructors, they should be more focused
on the content while I, along with members of the computer team, could be focused on
the settings and the back-end of the courses (such as adjusting course dates and setting up
activity completion). Discussion then turned to whether or not Moodle was really
meeting our needs and the idea of looking at other learning management systems was
proposed by several instructors. However, arguments against this idea were voiced that
by looking at other learning management systems, we would just be causing confusion
with yet another system to manage and more logins for students, as well as another new
system to learn for the instructors. Moodle was originally chosen in 2010 as our learning
management system as it is free and open-source and the Nebraska Library
Commission’s computer team has been able to manage all updates and installations as
needed. From this meeting, I made notes that the instructors most wanted a simple

58

system that tracked students’ progress. Identifying the settings and activities in Moodle
that would make the system itself easier to use became a priority, such as setting activity
completion tracking or looking at assignments that required downloading worksheets
then uploading them back to Moodle.
The concept for separate learning tracks first emerged through this meeting, as
well as continued in different conversations over the last two years with instructors as
we’ve been working on updating the content of the existing Basic Skills classes.
Meetings with the regional system directors who work more closely with individual
librarians, especially with the new library directors have also supported this idea. These
“learning tracks” could include focused classes in specialty content areas such as Library
Directors, Youth Services, Adult Services, Technical Services, and Reference. The
content of the current Basic Skills classes is intended to be a general introduction to
librarianship. However, this current content and the related learning activities may seem
as though it’s not always relevant or effective for librarians in different positions. For
example, in the Library Finance class, the budget process looks very different to a library
director trying to keep the library doors open in their community than it does to a library
staff member trying to organize a craft project for storytime or to a librarian trying to
write a grant proposal. Is there a way to optimize the content for these different positions
or what kind of assignment would be more relevant for each of them?
One assignment from the Readers’ Advisory course asks students to read a book
in a genre with which they are unfamiliar and to then record themselves giving a short
booktalk and upload that video to YouTube. Sample comments on the evaluation from

59

the recent March 2018 course include the following when asked what part of this course
they found least useful or interesting:
● “Having to do a video, I don’t have the ability to do one, I don’t have a computer
with that capability so couldn’t do it.”
● “Trying to do a U Tube video.”
● “I did not care for making a youtube video. Just not my cup of tea. I thought the
assignments for this class were very time consuming. Had I taken this course at a
different time of year it might not have been a big deal, but graduation, end of the
year things at school, etc it was just overwhelming at times.”
● “Doing the Booktalk was the hardest part, but good to know.”
● “I did not like the assignment about reading something out of my norm and then
doing a review of it. My spare time is precious and I found it hard to make time to
read a novel about which I was unenthusiastic. Sorry.”
● “It was all interesting...creating the Book Talk Video and uploading it to U-Tube
was an unfamiliar and was time consuming especially when the tutorial didn’t
work.”
I’ve also had multiple librarians call me in frustration or panic for both this year’s class
and the 2017 class, saying if it weren’t for their more “tech-savvy” employees, or even
their children, they wouldn’t have been able to complete this assignment. Students have
also dropped the Readers’ Advisory classes, citing that they didn’t believe recording
themselves giving a booktalk would be relevant to their position, it’s not something they
would ever have to do, or they weren’t comfortable with the skills required to record and

60

post a video to YouTube. The two instructors for this class do allow students to submit a
written booktalk as an alternative if students contact them, but students continue to drop
out. While there are many students who do finish this assignment, and even seem to
enjoy it, the question remains - is this the optimal framework for professional
development of librarians?
The frustration, and at times embarrassment, experienced by librarians trying to
complete some of these classes is certainly not aligned with the goals for the Public
Librarian Certification program and the intent for these class, to improve library services
throughout the state, and certainly doesn’t motivate or encourage librarians to pursue
other continuing education opportunities. The Basic Skills classes and the larger
certification program are not intended to act as a replacement for formal academic
coursework in Library Science. These classes, as other professional development
opportunities, are meant to supplement and enhance the work being done by public
librarians and to give them information and skills that they can use immediately in the
context of their individual practice. While some libraries, such as the Omaha public
library system, have dedicated staff development priorities, other smaller or more rural
libraries are only open a few short hours each week. These part-time librarians must fit
their continuing education in between front-desk duties and other library programming.
To expect librarians to spend hours and hours of their personal time outside of the library
to complete these classes seems unrealistic and too demanding, rather than optimizing
these classes so we encourage librarians to participate fully and see the Nebraska Library
Commission as a critical resource in their professional development. Considering how to

61

optimize our learning content and delivery, and using the specific recorded booktalk as an
example, the assignment may work much better in an advanced instructor-led course as
part of a specialized learning track which could be designed more specifically to
presentation skills. Foundation-level knowledge (what is a booktalk rather than how to
do one) would be included in a required prerequisite self-paced module. This approach
would give librarians the knowledge and vocabulary to understand basic Readers’
Advisory issues. For those who are interested or need to learn more about how to give
booktalks, they could then continue on with the kind of advanced instructor-led courses
that would allow additional time to create and explore different topics with more time for
troubleshooting and questions as the basic information would already have been covered
in the self-paced module. Creating and incorporating more specialized learning content
could then be tailored more specifically for what each intended audience needs to know
in their individual professional roles based on “intellectual skills” as described by Gagné,
Wager, Golas, and Keller (2005, p. 49) in order to gain “the capability to do something.”

Librarian
enrolls in the
certification
program
without
Library
Science
background

Specialized
Learning
Track
Begin SelfPaced Basic
Skills
Modules

Figure 3.2: Certification Program Pathway

Specialized
Learning
Track
Specialized
Learning
Track

Complete
Provisional
Certification

62

As the idea of self-paced modules and specialized learning tracks continued to
develop, I began mapping out how they might work within the certification program, as
illustrated above in Figure 3.2: Certification Program Pathway. As a librarian first
enrolls in the certification program without a formal library science background (at least
an Associate’s degree or other professional certificate), they would complete a set of
required self-paced modules before going on to complete more advanced instructor-led
coursework in order to complete their provisional certification in the first three years of
enrollment.
Self-Paced Modules Leading into Advanced Instructor-Led Classes
The impetus for change began with schedule and accessibility as librarians need
continuing education options at different times throughout the year, as well as instructor
workloads and attending to the concerns of the state budget for these classes. Currently,
each of the Basic Skills courses are offered only once a year, lasting for two weeks, with
the exception of the Organization of Materials class which lasts for four weeks. This is
how the schedule has been set since the courses started in 2011 and how they’ve worked
with instructors’ schedules. Instructors are not full-time teachers and help teach these
classes around their existing workloads, lending their professional expertise in different
subject areas. As the Continuing Education Coordinator, my position is the only one with
time specifically intended to focus on professional development in this way.
With a set of introductory self-paced modules as a common requisite starting
point, learners will be able to access the information more easily as content will be
available immediately whenever they need it. While the Basic Skills classes are only

63

offered once a year, public librarians are hired throughout the year across the state and
while Nebraska libraries may have some common busy seasons, such as the Summer
Reading program, each library has their own schedule which may or may not include
specific time for staff development. April may not be the ideal time of the year for a staff
member to take the Organization of Materials class because of other projects or programs
in their individual communities, but currently that’s when it is offered each year. The
Omaha Public Libraries have started building their own training courses for staff
development and I’ve been told by their Staff Development Manager that one reason was
that they need their new hires to know certain things sooner rather than later:
...in any given year, we onboard between 50 and 100 new staff at the clerk level
and up. So to bring each new staff person up to speed throughout the year, we
can't wait for a Basic Skills class to come around. That's why we've purchased
our own LMS and created some of our own courses. We initially thought we
could create all the content and courses we needed to populate the Learning
Paths we've established for different job classifications. But it's way too difficult
and time consuming for two staff (it's just me and Danielle doing this work) to
build all of these courses from scratch. So now, we are doing more "curation", by
pulling in webinars and content from other sources...I'm totally behind your hope
to make the Basic Skills classes asynchronous / self-paced. It's the direction that
training as a profession is going.
I’ve talked with multiple instructors about the possibility of adding more classes
throughout the year, which would mean multiple classes running at the same time. While

64

offering more classes at a time may help, adding identical sections of the already existing
classes wouldn’t be evaluating the content of the classes themselves or the delivery
system. Due to the number of enrollments in each class, as discussed in chapter one,
we’ve already added an extra section and instructor to most classes. Additionally, adding
even more classes affects the Nebraska Library Commission’s budget. For the 2018
schedule, we have three instructors who are Regional Library System Directors and one
retired Director teaching twelve classes or sections at different times during the year.
These instructors, as they are not employed directly by the Nebraska Library Commission
and teach on their own time, are paid $250 for each class (for a total of $3,000 per year).
Increasing the number of classes would then, obviously, increase this amount for the
Library Commission’s budget which relies on state funding and may fluctuate each year.
Incorporating self-paced learning modules for the introductory content will allow
the instructors additional time and resources so that they could teach more advanced
courses or in-depth topics throughout the year leveraging their professional expertise,
rather than paying them to repeat the basic content. These additional instructor-led
courses could also be available to any public librarian in Nebraska eventually, not just
limited to those who only need to fulfill the Basic Skills requirements. More advanced
courses and topics have been requested by both individual instructors and students who
would like to delve deeper into topics, such as advanced cataloging or developing social
media strategies in libraries. For example, one instructor, the Children’s Librarian at the
Nebraska Library Commission, has expressed her interest in adding a course specifically
focused on library services to teens (which would split the current Basic Skills course

65

Library Services to Children and Youths into two classes), but currently is limited by her
existing Basic Skills workload. As an organization, self-paced learning modules will also
allow us to offer more responsive continuing education for library practice needs or
issues in a more timely fashion, such as, the issue of “fake news” in public libraries or
gender inclusivity guidelines in cataloging practices. While some of these topics may be
determined to work better as a webinar or as an in-person workshop, we’re currently
limited to the existing class schedule, though this research hopes to propose a structure
that will allow identification and development of new opportunities for both instructors
and students.
The self-paced modules will act as a set of prerequisites that a public librarian will
need to complete as part of their provisional certification (first three years) after
enrollment. These modules will cover the most basic of library skills and knowledge as
identified by the American Library Association’s “Core Competences of Librarianship”
(2009) and other specific professional sections or roundtables, such as the Association for
Library Collections and Technical Services’ Cataloging and Metadata Section (2017),
and through the design research process working collaboratively with the instructors.
These prerequisite modules will need to be completed before a librarian moves on to the
specialized content which will then be the advanced, in-depth instructor-led courses.
Collaboration with the instructors will be necessary to create the additional modules, as
well as data from the initial implementation of the cataloging module prototype which
will be discussed further in Chapter Five. Each module will contain a brief introduction

66

to the content, objectives, lessons, and an evaluation component which can all be
completed by the student at any time.
Initial Steps to Self-Paced Cataloging Module
The cataloging self-paced module was developed based on analysis of the existing
Basic Skills class, in collaboration with the Cataloging Librarian, Allison Badger, over
the last year and using the American Library Association’s Core Competences (2017) and
from the Association for Library Collections and Technical Services’ Cataloging and
Metadata Section (ALCTS, 2017) as guidance.
The following section in this chapter describes the process leading up to the
development and testing of the self-paced module. Chapter Four details the module and
the initial testing with the volunteer students. Ms. Badger started as the Cataloging
Librarian at the Nebraska Library Commission in January 2016, shortly before I was
hired as the Continuing Education Coordinator. She teaches the Organization of Materials
Basic Skills class, as well as additional cataloging classes as part of the Nebraska Library
Commission’s Cataloging Certificate program. This second certificate program includes
classes such as Authority Control, Cataloging Sound Recordings, and Understanding
MARC21 Bibliographic Records. She was eager to help and willing to be the “guinea
pig” for developing a self-paced cataloging module. Building this prototype self-paced
module, our primary goals were to simplify the existing content, encourage more
participants to then go on to some of the cataloging certification classes, and free some of
her time and resources so that we could then develop more specialized and advanced
offerings for Nebraska librarians working in Technical Services. The opportunity to use

67

this self-paced module as a “lead-in” to her other cataloging classes, such as
Understanding MARC21 Bibliographic Records which was offered in May 2018, would
potentially give us an idea of how a possible framework might look utilizing a mixture of
self-paced modules and instructor-led courses, similar in ways to the modular webassisted approach to cataloging education described by Moulaison (2012).
As Ms. Badger and I both started working at the Nebraska Library Commission
early in 2016, the Organization of Information class was the first experience with the
Basic Skills classes for us both. As she was still new in her position, the March/April
2016 class was taught by the Technical Services Supervisor and the previous Cataloging
Librarian, but this gave Ms. Badger and I a chance to start looking at the content and
some of the issues reported by both instructors. One assignment in particular asked
students to download MARC records from the Library of Congress online catalog.
Students didn’t have to open the document (because the format is unreadable), but it was
supposed to walk them through the process of how to download MARC records and then
save the file. Many students struggled with this as they were trying to open the file after it
downloaded, instead of simply uploading the records back to Moodle (which also
required the student to know how to compress a file), then thinking something went
horribly wrong. As they struggled to download the files from the Library of Congress
online catalog and then to upload them to Moodle or email, the original goal of the lesson
was lost (i.e. why librarians would need these kinds of files and how the files might
actually be used in cataloging). This example pointed to a larger issue of the Basic Skills
courses as students become lost or frustrated by the mechanics of the assignment and by

68

the Moodle system itself and the learning content gets missed. Below (Image 3.1) is a
screenshot taken from that 2016 course homepage as it appeared when Ms. Badger and I
started reviewing this class for the 2017 section. This image is intended to illustrate the
number of readings, forums, different resources, and Moodle “blocks” (appearing on the
right-hand side of the screen) that students encounter as soon as they logged in to the
class. Most of the Basic Skills classes appeared in very similar formats.

Image 3.1: Organization of Materials 2017 Homepage Screenshot

69

To put it simply, there was an overload of information going on with this
homepage. This illustrates what students first saw when they logged in. There were
numerous articles, some were URL links to online publications while others are Word
documents that need to be downloaded first. There was a narrated PowerPoint that took
about an hour to listen to that was presented by the previous Continuing Education
Coordinator which would have needed to be redone by myself or Ms. Badger in order to
update some of the information and contacts. There were numerous resources and extra
credit webinars listed throughout, as well as multiple assignment icons/links and forum
assignments. The most confusing part, for both instructor and students, about the
ASSIGNMENT links were that the ones listed immediately above or below the FORUM
ASSIGNMENT links, were identical and not separate assignments. As I understand from
discussions with instructors, these first assignment links acted as a placeholder so that the
forum activity would then be included in the gradebook. This may have been required in
previous versions of Moodle, but is no longer necessary as most classes have now set up
the “Activity Completion” feature in Moodle, where activities are automatically “checked
off” as soon as the student completes the requirements. For example, as soon as a student
would create a discussion thread and post two replies to other students’ discussion board
posts, they would get a blue checkmark in a small box next to the forum assignment link
on the Moodle homepage.
A lot of good content existed in each topic of this 2016 class, but it seemed to be
buried in different files and links that all open in different windows. Students are
supposed to work from top to bottom, going through each topic and then completing the

70

assignment at the end of each lesson. However, one primary concern identified was that
there didn’t seem to be meaningful connections between each activity or resource.
Students are expected to go through and read these articles, but then what? What
information are they supposed to be getting from each article? How do these activities
relate back to their libraries or to their work? Are these assignments more frustrating than
they are helpful in promoting any meaningful learning? For example, in examining
“Topic Five: Assigning Classification” more closely, a lot of different links about the
Dewey Decimal System and classification numbers were listed, but several of these links
seemed out of place. The “NLC Dewey Services” link took the student to a page on the
Nebraska Library Commission website that has information about Dewey products and
group memberships. Are students supposed to do something with this? Is it supposed to
be labeled as a resource instead? The Dewey Shelving Order Game opened a link leading
to a training game which is supposed to help someone learn call numbers and how to
shelve materials. But in the context of this class, were students supposed to play it and
learn something? Or were they supposed to just try it out? Or just know that something
like this is available? Lastly, there were two links in this topic that discuss alternatives to
the Dewey Decimal system: genre-based classification and the Monarch Method. Did
students need to know the details of these alternate systems? Or did they just need to
know that they exist and that some libraries classify materials in different ways? What
were we really asking our students to know? The forum assignment for this topic asked
students to find call numbers of books based on titles, as shown in the screenshot below
(Image 3.2). This assignment realistically (and easily) could be done without having read

71

any of the included articles or resources, it would just require a librarian to look at their
(or another library’s) shelves. However, the student replies to each other’s posts were
interesting as there were many comments where students were surprised to learn how
other libraries organized their materials, such as having separate biography or cookbook
sections which indicates that students were at least interacting and learning from one
another in some way. Outside of the forum discussions and the submitted assignments,
there was no evaluation component or feedback collected from students for the course
overall.

Image 3.2: Forum Assignment Screenshot
Simplifying Systems, Clarifying Expectations, and Focusing Content
As I began working with Ms. Badger more closely on the first redesign of
Organization of Materials, the first goal was to simplify the system and to clarify course
expectations, so students would have an easier time getting started and going through the

72

course. We tested the self-paced cataloging module alongside an instructor-led section in
March to May 2018. This decision and process is explained in more detail in Chapter
Four. The images below are from the March 2018 instructor-led course, but are included
here to illustrate several points in the design process over the last year. Trying to decrease
the amount of information on the screen, I removed the extra “blocks” as students don’t
need them for this kind of introductory two-week class and the instructors don’t make use
of many extra features in Moodle (Image 3.3). These blocks included recent activity,
online users, a course summary, a search forums box, a calendar, a list of upcoming
events, latest news, people, course categories, and activities (Moodle, 2018). As with
other Basic Skills classes, I turned on and set up the activity completion function (the
blue checkmarks in the boxes as shown below). This feature allows students to more
easily track their own progress throughout the course. While we can’t know for certain
that students actually read the materials, the “Activity Completion” for the articles and
documents was set to “Require view - Student must view this activity to complete it.”
Forums were set to complete as soon as the student created and posted their original
discussion thread and replied to two of their classmates’ posts. These settings from the
administrative and editing side can be seen in Image 3.4: Activity Completion Screenshot.

73

Image 3.3: Updated Organization of Materials Homepage Screenshot

Image 3.4: Activity Completion Screenshot
For many librarians, these Basic Skills classes are the first experience with online
classes and they are new to discussion boards. Many don’t know what to expect or where
to start. To help address this, I wrote and posted a syllabus to this and the other Basic

74

Skills classes (included in Appendix D). Since I began as the Continuing Education
Coordinator, there have been three incidents in which a student submitted or posted
another student’s work as their own. Additionally, there was concern about inappropriate
comments made in some of the forum discussions in several of the classes. Before this
syllabus, there weren’t any posted guidelines or code of conduct for students. This
syllabus was intended to set some expectations for the course, how to interact in an online
classroom, to answer some basic questions such as how to drop the class or to earn CE
credit, and some basic tips for success in an online classroom.
Next, I worked with Ms. Badger on breaking up the content into smaller, more
manageable pieces. We took out the PowerPoint slides and extra webinars, then identified
which RESOURCE links we wanted to keep in the class, such as the Nebraska Library
Commission Cataloging Services and Resources, and moved all of those links to a
separate section at the end which was specifically labeled as “Cataloging Resources” with
“The following links are resources that you may find useful:” written underneath the title.
In each topic, we added a short description to give the students a better idea of what that
topic would be covering and what they were to be learning, as well as trying to connect
the topics together to help the flow of the class as students move through the different
topics. For example in “Topic 2: Cataloging,” the description now reads:
Topic 2 focuses on cataloging, or the process of creating records for library
resources. We’ll not only look at the rules that guide catalogers, but we’ll also
examine the different parts of a catalog record. We’ll conclude by reviewing
various OPAC displays. There are many ways that libraries can display the same

75

information. It’s important to realize there isn’t a right or wrong way to catalog
or display data. Libraries need to focus on what’s best for their users; hence, the
variety in OPAC displays.
We did decrease the number of articles included, based on currency of information and
repeated content. At that point in the redesign process, we didn’t delete all of them as we
were still reviewing the course content as a whole and how we wanted to present the
information.
Development of a Moodle Practice Course
As I continued to see or hear from students who were struggling with some of the
basic technical aspects of using Moodle, such as uploading a document, and others who
were calling me frustrated or embarrassed because they had never used discussion forums
before, I wanted to create a space for them outside of a “graded” class that they could use
to explore the system and practice using different tools in Moodle. Alongside the
redesign of the Organization of Information course, I then developed a short self-paced
course to practice Moodle which was posted in April 2017. The purpose of this course
was to walk students through the different parts of Moodle and how to complete course
tasks that they may encounter in the Basic Skills classes. These tasks included identifying
the News Forum for class announcements, identifying the different icons, opening online
resources (such as URL links for articles), how to post and reply in discussion boards,
how to download Word and PowerPoint documents, how to upload a document from
their computer in order to submit an assignment, and how to send a message to someone
in Moodle. My goal for this practice course was to keep the information very simple and

76

clear to help students become more familiar with the system itself and relieve some of the
anxiety that some librarians expressed when enrolling in any of the Basic Skills classes.
Screenshots of the Moodle practice course and the login details to explore the module
further are included in Appendix E.
Since it was designed to be practice and only open to those librarians taking Basic
Skills classes, it was not available for open enrollment and not listed on the Nebraska
Library Commission website. I realized that simply having the course available and listed
on the Moodle course homepage wouldn’t be enough. Only two people have completed
the practice course and I haven’t had any new students contact me about enrolling.
Reviewing this practice course in context of designing and creating additional self-paced
modules, I considered that this could possibly be the first prerequisite, even before the
self-paced modules as it would provide an additional support as learners enroll in these
potentially unfamiliar online learning environments.

Second Redesign of the Organization of Materials Instructor-Led Course
After the 2017 Organization of Materials course, I met again with Ms. Badger to
review the changes we had made and to discuss the next round of editing for the 2018
class which also became the basis for the self-paced module. Starting with the
“Feedback” activity, we reviewed the students’ replies to identify what worked well and
what didn’t. We found that students were still not understanding why we were asking
them to learn about MARC, as some students seemed to think it was “outdated” or “not
used in my library.” We also found that this edited class was still taking students hours

77

and hours. One of our goals for the next class was to streamline the class so that librarians
could more realistically complete the class during their regular work hours, similar to
other professional development opportunities such as watching webinars or attending
workshops. Starting this process, we stripped everything from the class, including all
articles and activities so that we could spend time examining and evaluating each one.
We reviewed the Core Competences of Librarianship from the American Library
Association (2009) and the Core Competencies for Cataloging and Metadata Professional
Librarians (2017), focusing the content on the “knowledge of foundational cataloging and
metadata principles” (ALCTS) which includes the historical context for metadata
principles, systems and technology, and “big picture” understanding of the connection
between cataloging and other areas of librarianship. The intent behind this decision was
that this Basic Skills class was just the introduction, so we wanted to start with the most
basic concepts so that future, more advanced cataloging classes could then build off these
and address the remaining competencies. Below are screenshots from the 2018 course
with explanations of what was updated. To examine the class in more detail, the login
and additional screenshots are included in Appendix F.
Starting at the top of the updated course, a separate “Housekeeping” topic was
added (Image 3.5). This included a new welcome message posted by Ms. Badger that
described in more detail what the class would be covering, certain activities within the
class, and a brief introduction to the Moodle system. A copy of this welcome message is
included in Appendix G: Welcome to Organization of Materials. We also set up a
separate discussion forum for “Question/Answers” that encouraged students to ask

78

questions, if they had any. We kept the syllabus as written, although after reflection, this
information could’ve been combined with the introductory welcome message.

Image 3.5: Updated Housekeeping Section Screenshot
Moving to “Topic 1: Organizing the Library,” we focused on breaking down the
content of the class into manageable and accessible section that were clearly labeled to
help students move through the class in a logical way (Image 3.6).

Image 3.6: Topic 1: Organizing the Library Screenshot
One identified priority was encouraging students to make connections between
what they were learning in this class and what happens in their library, as well as why

79

they were learning about some of these topics. For example, in “Section 1: Meeting Our
Users’ Needs” why do students need to learn about S.R. Ranganathan and his Five Laws
of Library Science? Students may be unconsciously aware of these five laws affecting
general library practice, but his ideas have influenced library science for decades and will
continue to do so. This knowledge is also listed as part of the Core Competencies for
Cataloging and Metadata Professional Librarians (2017) as published by the Association
for Library Collections and Technical Services, a division of the American Library
Association. To further encourage students to connect the content and learning tasks with
their own practice and attempting to build in some “cognitive strategies” (Gagné, Wager,
Golas, Keller, 2005, p. 51), we added “Reflection Questions” to each section. The
“Section 1” questions include:
● Think about the library you work in. Is it organized in such a way as to enable
users to find the items they need?
●

Can patrons easily find the resources that answer their questions?

●

Can they locate items that appeal to them? When a customer walks into your
library, what are their options for finding the items they want?

These reflection questions weren’t initially intended to be assignments as I explored some
of the features in Moodle searching for a way for students to best respond to these
reflection questions without simply adding yet another discussion board assignment.
Rather, we wanted students to start thinking about how library patrons find information
within each section. “Section 2” then builds on these questions asking how their libraries
are organized and if there are ways in which their organization could be improved.

80

“Section 3” asks students to think about different search strategies and how, as librarians,
we can help accommodate these differences. Finally, in “Section 4” we ask students to
think about their own search strategies and introduce the concept of catalog records and
access points. The readings and reflection questions then led to the Forum assignment at
the end of the topic/lesson (Image 3.7).

Image 3.7: Updated Forum Assignment Screenshot
Adding the goals of the forum, we hoped that students would then see the reason for this
activity. The updated questions focused on their library’s organization, trying to make the
first connections between the library’s online catalog record and the physical item on the
shelf. As identified in previous courses and conversations with librarians, most of the
students in this course are not catalogers and struggle to see the point of learning this
information. By focusing the content more on what cataloging is and how it can improve
library service, even non-catalogers will then find useful information that they can then
apply to their own library collections to make materials more accessible to their patrons,
such as providing more relevant search results. Knowing the library catalog’s structure

81

and understanding how the catalog works then makes it easier for librarians to conduct
better searches which in turn helps them better serve the library users in their
communities.
Using this first topic as a template, I continued working with Ms. Badger to
update and redesign the content. Updated activities included comparing their library’s
record to a digital library, searching “big bookstores” for common authors to demonstrate
authority files, and several short quizzes. In “Topic 2: MARC” we experimented with the
idea of a pre/posttest evaluation. Students were asked to take the quiz at the beginning of
the lesson, then to retake that same quiz at the end. We found that students did do better
on their second attempt, but as the quiz itself was one of the few leftovers from the
previous year’s class, we found that the questions may have been too advanced for the
updated material covered for this class. Students were asked to identify the different parts
of a MARC record within a single example. The updated content within this section
focused primarily on the concepts and background of MARC records, but the questions in
the quiz didn’t align with the readings.
The evaluation/feedback for this course included the same questions as previous
evaluations. I made this decision so that we could more easily compare the different
classes. The 2018 evaluation/feedback is included in Appendix H: Organization of
Materials Instructor-Led Course Student Feedback. Out of twenty-four responses, only
three students reported that they spent more than three hours per day to complete the
class while the others indicated that they spent either less than one hour or between one
and two hours per day on course activities (forums, reading articles, email). Looking at

82

the feedback overall, student responses were very positive. One issue emerged that has
echoed previous feedback, is some students expected more on the physical organization
or layout of the library collection. Discussing this with Ms. Badger, we thought that the
title of the class, Organization of Materials, may itself be misleading. Renaming the class
to either “Introduction to Cataloging” or “Cataloging 101” may be more accessible.
Organization of Materials is used in many formal Library Science programs for their
introductory cataloging classes, but may not be as relevant in this professional
development context. Additionally, the section on MARC, especially the challenging
pre/post quiz, seemed to be most frustrating or confusing which is something that needs
to be reviewed in more depth for the next iteration to better align the updated content
with the learning activities. Additionally, some of the other topic areas that students noted
that they would’ve liked to be addressed, such as the bookstore method of organization,
needs to be evaluated if it should be added in this introductory module or should be
included in a more advanced instructor-led course. However, many other students
reported that they found the MARC content most helpful or interesting. Two comments
in particular, from self-identified non-catalogers stuck out as a great improvement from
last year’s course (even though one was a reply to what they found least useful or
interesting): “I am not looking to become a cataloger, so the information about MARC
records and subject headings wasn’t the most helpful to me, but I did like learning what
I’m looking at, so it was still useful information to have” and “I’m not a cataloger, so it
was a good introduction to this world.” Other comments included:

83

“I appreciated how the class was organized and broken down into manageable
chunks.”
“I really liked the way that each section was set up. I loved how the lessons were
written in a simple and straight forward manner that made sense and was easy to
understand.”
“Plus it was not overwhelming! It was enough to tell me about classification.”
“I am new to my position and I am still learning things, so without having the
proper training or knowledge of this information, this was great and very
helpful!”
“It was very well done. I got an overview that will help with my work.”
“How to read the MARC record. I was struggling with this and now it makes
more sense to me.”
“The MARC coding system. I can read the catalog records more easily now and
ascertain more information from them. It really is a genius system in many ways,
that consolidates and reorganizes millions of records. I think that is neat.”
Looking at the evaluation feedback and completion data, it seems as though the updates
to this course were successful overall. Students seemed to gain a better understanding of
basic cataloging concepts and indicated that they would be able to apply these skills to
their work, even if it was simply the ability to read a catalog display more effectively.
Along with the more positive feedback on this course and shortened time demands, only
three people dropped this class. One student dropped because she got another job outside
the library world and no longer needed or wanted to participate in the certification

84

program, and the other two students never started any of the activities or responded to
emails. With only structure updates and minor changes to assignments, this class became
the foundation for the self-paced module offered in April/May 2018 which is discussed in
the next chapter.

85

CHAPTER 4: ITERATIVE AND REFLECTIVE DESIGN PROCESSES: PART II
- LESSONS AND REDESIGN
The design and development of the Organization of Information self-paced
module is reported in this chapter. This information is organized into the following
sections: (1) the design of the self-paced Organization of Materials/Cataloging module
(2) the testing of the self-paced Organization of Materials/Cataloging module.
Design of the Self-Paced Organization of Materials/Cataloging Module
Starting the second cycle of analysis and redesign, using the work I had done with
Ms. Badger on her instructor-led section of the class as a template, I began building the
self-paced module in January 2018. The Nebraska Library Commission Computer
Services Director was able to set up another Moodle site on a test server. I had contacted
him about setting this up as I wanted a “clean slate” to explore some of the additional
features and settings of the Moodle system without unintentionally affecting any of the
existing courses with potential changes. Screenshots of the self-paced module homepage
and the login information is included in Appendix I.
Starting with “Topic 1: Organizing the Library,” I tried to utilize Moodle’s
“Lesson” activity. The description of this activity, available on the administrative side,
when editing and adding activities, shows the following description (Image 4.1).

86

Image 4.1: Moodle Lesson Activity Description
Documentation on using lessons is available on the Moodle website in the section on
“Lesson Activity” (2017). The emphasis on self-directed learning, instead of presenting
the information as a “Page” with content as used in Ms. Badger’s section, was appealing.

87

My intent was that each lesson would be small “chunks” of information that students
would then click through more easily without having to return to the “home” course page.
Evaluation and reflection of this decision is discussed in more detail in Chapter Five. In
the first lesson of “Topic 1,” I included reflection questions, but changed them into an
ungraded essay assignment as this would ask the students to pause and think about their
libraries in connection with what they had just read. Asking students to write a few notes
would encourage them to stop and think for even just a minute instead of just clicking
through, and I could then better evaluate how they were interacting with the course after
they submitted their answers. This lesson was the only one to require reflection
responses, as I wanted to test the idea and I was concerned it would become tedious if I
included them in every lesson.
In “Lesson 3” I added a short activity that included a screenshot of a book search
using the online catalog of Omaha Public Library. The activity then asks students to
identify different “access points” and match them with the correct information. This was
intended to help students connect what they see on search results as part of online library
catalog display that they may be much more familiar with and these concepts and
technical cataloging terms. In “Lesson 4,” I added a true/false question that simply asked
“Good cataloging allows librarians to help their patrons find what they need and
increases the value of the collection.” Again, this was trying to reinforce the idea that
even non-catalogers benefit from this knowledge and making that real-world connection
between improving library services and what they’re learning. The next activity in this
section is a short matching activity of five terms and their definition. Even if librarians

88

aren’t catalogers, it’s important for them to be familiar with some basic common
vocabulary when they’re working with their own catalog, other librarians, or their
vendors.
Following through the remaining sections, I worked on dividing the content into
smaller pieces. However, starting in “Topic 3,” I began to worry that I was trying to
break it up too much and that I wasn’t utilizing the “Lesson” activities fully. More on this
concern and other reflections are discussed in Chapter Five as I went back and reviewed
this first testing phase. Activity completion for the quizzes was set for students to receive
a passing grade which I set low with multiple attempts available for students. The activity
completion for each lesson was set with two conditions:
● Students must view this activity to complete it
● Students must reach the end of lesson page to complete this activity
As I was finishing this self-paced module, I again had discussions with Ms.
Badger and the Library Development team at the Library Commission about
implementation and testing. As the Basic Skills classes were increasing in size between
sixty and seventy students, we often were splitting classes into two sections with one
instructor for each one. Registration for the Organization of Materials course opens each
March and since we hadn’t actively been marketing or communicating the new self-paced
format option, I didn’t want to force all students into this self-paced module without
testing it in a smaller group first. Additionally, with the updates to Ms. Badger’s course,
running an instructor-led section alongside the test section of the self-paced module

89

allowed for some interesting comparisons with how some of the content was presented
which is discussed in more detail in Chapter Five.
Testing of the Self-Paced Organization of Materials/Cataloging Module
Registration for the 2018 Organization of Information course opened on March 5,
2018 through the Nebraska Library Commission’s online Library Training and Events
calendar. As registration closed on March 23rd, sixty-eight students had already
registered to start the class on April 2nd. I decided to essentially split the course in half,
seeking thirty-five or so volunteers from this registration list to move to the self-paced
prototype section. On March 28th, I sent the following email to all registered students and
to those students who were on the waiting list:
You are currently registered (or on the waiting list) for the upcoming Basic Skills:
Organization of Materials class.
Due to the number of students interested in the class and the Nebraska Library
Commission’s ongoing evaluation of the Basic Skills classes as a whole, we have
decided to open a second self-paced section of the course.
As this is a new format and the first offering, we are asking for volunteers to
enroll in this second section (with a limit of 35 students). The content between the
two sections will not be different, but this new module will be self-paced, instead
of the instructor-led format that you may be familiar with from other Basic Skills
classes.
If you’re interested in this second section, please reply to this email as soon as
possible.

90

A couple minutes after this email was sent, I began receiving responses from students
volunteering for the self-paced version. Below are some of their replies, which are
included here because they speak to some of the reasons for implementing self-paced
modules, specifically accommodating schedules that are more flexible and alternative
continuing education formats:
● “I can do the self-paced. I like to get everything done as quickly as possible any
way.”
● “Yes, I would be interested! Thank you for providing that option!”
● “I am definitely interested in this class, I want to participate in the second
sectio[n] mentioned above.”
● “I am indeed interested. Thank you for this opportunity.”
● “I'd be happy to sign up for this option. I'm always late on my assignments
anyway :)”
● “I volunteer! This will be my final course, and I am interested to see this new
format!”
● “I would love to do the self-paced course if there's still opportunity!”
● “I am interested in taking the self-lead second section of this course! Thank you
so much for being so accommodating!”
Other responses were more neutral like the following examples, but still indicated that
they would volunteer:
● “Yes, I am interested in either course.”
● “Yes, I would be interested.”

91

Finally, some responses were from volunteers but included questions:
● “I would be interested in the self-paced module. There will still be someone if I
have questions, right?”
● “I am flexible. I would really like to take this class so if all that is open to me is
the self-paced option, I will gladly take it. I'm assuming that if I have any
questions during the class time that I will be able to ask someone.”
● “I would be interested in volunteering for the Organization of Materials class! I
assume that the credit received will be the same?”
● “I could go to the self-paced section if it would help you. Do we direct questions
to you if we have them in that scenario?”
There were students who didn’t reply to my email, but there were no negative responses
from anyone saying that they would not want to be in the self-paced section. Following
up with these volunteer students, I explained that I would be the contact for any questions
they may have during the course and that they would still receive two continuing
education hours for completing the module. Thirty-four students were then enrolled in
Ms. Badger’s instructor-led course and thirty-four students were enrolled in the selfpaced module. We decided to stagger the start dates between the two sections by a week
with the instructor-led section starting on April 2nd and the self-paced module opening
on April 9th. I hadn’t announced this change in the initial call for volunteers as I didn’t
want to confuse students who weren’t going to be in the self-paced section. As this was
the first test of this new format, I decided to have the module close on May 4th. Future
self-paced modules will remain open and available at any time, but I wanted to set a

92

timeframe on this prototype to give myself and Ms. Badger time to evaluate the initial
completion data. On March 30th, I sent the following email to the volunteer students:
Thank you so much for volunteering for the second self-paced section of Basic
Skills: Organization of Materials! Again, due to the number of students and this
new format, we have decided to stagger the start dates for the two sections. This
self-paced module will open on Monday, April 9th. There will be no assignment
due dates within the course, but all work will need to be completed by May 4th.
I will be sending you all another email early next week with details about logging
in and accessing the course. Although there isn’t an instructor (technically) for
this self-paced course, you are always welcome to contact me with any and all
questions.
The second email with login details was sent on April 6th:
Welcome to Basic Skills: Organization of Materials (Self-Paced Section)!
The class starts Monday, April 9th. Although there are no due dates within the
course, all work needs to be completed by Friday, May 4th.
●

Course website: moodletest.nlc.state.ne.us
○

This is a different website from the other Basic Skills classes (but
the same Moodle system).

○

The course isn’t open until 8:00 a.m. on Monday morning.

○

Once you log in, you can start going through the lessons at your
own pace. I’ll be here to answer any questions and to review
grades and things. You won’t be left completely alone!

93
●

Your user name is:

●

Your initial password is:
○

(lower case, no spaces)
(case sensitive)

Even if you’ve taken other Basic Skills classes in the past, this is
your password for *this class* since it’s on its own right now.

○

Once you log in, you will be prompted to change this and you can
change it to what you would like it to be.

In designing and implementing this class, especially using the secondary testing website,
there were concerns that accessing the new course may be a barrier or a challenge for
some students. Attending to the possibility that Moodle may not be the permanent
learning management system, due to changes in technology or changes in
state/department needs, and the fact that students would be logging in to the self-paced
modules at various points on their own, it was important to note any issues that this first
group had logging in. With each of the Basic Skills classes, there are always one or two
students who need their passwords reset or who try clicking the wrong section and
contact me for help, so I was anticipating similar issues over the first few days as students
started working on the course, especially as the module was on the second testing website
and I did have to set up a second Moodle account for these volunteer students with
different passwords, but kept their usernames the same. On the morning of April 9th,
when the self-paced module opened, two students emailed that they were having trouble
logging in and accessing the course. After following up with these two students, however,
one of them replied that the course opened right up after she switched from her iPad to
her computer, though I’m still unclear as to the reason it wouldn’t work on her iPad as the

94

Moodle system should work on mobile devices. With the second student, I had asked her
to provide her IP address so that our computer team could make sure she wasn’t being
blocked by the firewall. Later that afternoon, this student called from her library to let me
know that her home computer was having problems outside of just accessing this class
and that she was able to log on using her work computer. Even though this self-paced
module was on a different website than other Basic Skills classes, I was encouraged that
students were able to access the course without too much trouble.
The first student completed the course on Monday at 1:24 p.m. (about five hours
after the course opened). She emailed me immediately after she finished:
I just completed the Organization of Materials Course (self-paced) and when I
looked at grades it shows some areas as uncompleted. When I went back into it
thinking I had missed an assignment or quiz I don't see anything that needs to be
completed.
I enjoyed the course very much! It was very helpful to me! Thank you for all the
work that went into it!
As I reviewed her course activity, I realized that the grading wasn’t set up to be
completely automatic, as I had hoped. I responded and let her know that she had
completed the course and apologized about the grades not appearing correctly. This issue
is explained in more detail in the next section, as this student wasn’t the only one
concerned. The following day, I posted an announcement in the course which was then
emailed to all participants about the grading:

95

Just a quick note since a few people have asked about grading. Since this is the
first test of the self-paced format, the grading isn't completely automatic yet. The
grades will look a little off at first, but I'll be updating them as the class continues.
Just work your way through the lessons and if you have any questions at all,
please feel free to contact me.
Several students emailed me as they completed the course indicating that their grades,
especially on the quizzes, weren’t appearing. Some were worried that they hadn’t
completed the course successfully and others questioned if they needed to retake the
quizzes multiple times to get a grade. I responded to each of these students, after
reviewing the course activity, that they had successfully completed the class and
apologized again for the grading errors.
On May 7th, I sent a final email to participants about finishing up the course and
updating their continuing education records:
Just to let you all know, we'll be updating CE records this week. If you have any
questions at all, please let me know. The grading isn't 100% automatic (which is
something I'm definitely looking into for next time), so if you've done the quizzes
and it still shows blank, don't worry. I can see your progress in detail from my
side.
Thank you all so much for your willingness to try this new self-paced format! It's
given us a lot of really great feedback as we continue working on the Basic Skills
classes and what we can offer in the future.

96

The completion for this class was surprisingly similar to Ms. Badger’s instructor-led
section. Only two students didn’t complete the self-paced module, but they also never
started any of the activities. Looking at the feedback activity, I decided to keep similar
questions as the instructor-led section as I was hoping to get some comparative data
between the two sections and with the 2017 course. Twenty-nine students responded and
were quite positive overall. The complete responses can be found in Appendix J:
Organization of Materials Self-Paced Module Student Feedback.

97

CHAPTER 5 - EVALUATION & FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The initial data collected, evaluation, and future directions will be discussed in
this chapter. This information is organized into the following sections: (1) reflections on
the initial design process, (2) evaluation of the preliminary self-paced module, (3)
changes to the existing Nebraska Public Librarian Certification Program, and (4) next
steps and considerations.
Reflections on the Initial Design Process
As detailed in Chapter Three, much of early 2017 was spent on redesigning or
editing the existing Basic Skills classes, focusing on the Organization of Information
cataloging class with Ms. Badger, and building that first self-paced practice course. On
June 13, 2017, after working and meeting with my committee advisor, Dr. Hamann, I had
sent an update email to my doctoral committee. I had been feeling as through I was
struggling over the previous few months as I just wasn’t sure which direction would be
ideal for this research that would be most relevant in practice or what would be most
beneficial for the public librarians I was working with as I was evaluating the current
continuing education offerings. As a scholarly practitioner in CPED, addressing complex
problems of practice, the project concept sought to connect the work I had been doing
with the instructors to update the Basic Skills classes with optimizing the professional
development and addressing those research questions, as well as laid out a plan for
moving forward through this dissertation stage of the research.
In that first project summary, I had initially set out to build a set of multiple selfpaced modules. However, as I worked with Ms. Badger through the second half of 2017

98

on the Organization of Materials 2018 redesign and the outline for the self-paced module,
I realized that I would have to examine the certification program in more depth and how
this project would fit within the existing structure. Focusing on developing one
introductory cataloging module to be tested with a small group of students on a secondary
test website allowed me to experiment with some of the Moodle features, such as
utilizing lesson paths, and to evaluate what worked well and what didn’t in order to build
a template for future self-paced modules. On January 8, 2018, I sent a second update to
the committee, after discussions with Dr. Hamann:
This email is just a quick progress update as this new semester starts. Below is a
link to the summary of my dissertation project that I've developed with the help of
Dr. Hamann. I'm currently working with the Commission's Computer Team,
trying to set up a separate Moodle website for the new module. As I started
working on this project and in Moodle, I realized that I needed to focus on the
larger structure of the certification program. If I build this module (and future
ones), how would this affect the current database, CE credits, and the existing
requirements? My project will now include a detailed outline of how specialized
learning tracks would be set up, how the modules would fit, and how I will review
and continue developing this program. This is a slightly different direction, but I
believe having this plan in place will help implement these changes more
effectively.
The design process then continued as described in Chapter Four and the testing of the
self-paced module in April 2018. Two weeks after the self-paced module went online, I

99

sent Dr. Hamann another email on April 21st, as I was again concerned about the
direction of this research. Part of this email, included here as a reflective memo on this
design process, reads:
I'm really not happy with how the module turned out. People are finishing it and
I'm getting positive feedback so far, but there's so much already I know needs
changed.
And I'm really struggling with the idea of the specialized learning tracks, which
were a big part of this. But I've been really trying to work out what exactly they
would be (tracks for directors, children's librarians, technology, for example) and
how they would work and with which classes...but then I think maybe they
shouldn't be a part of this project right now. Maybe that needs to be part of the
future directions? The idea of the self-paced modules is to enable instructors to
build more advanced in-depth classes, so I don't really know if it makes sense for
me to be trying to pre-plan what those would be. If that makes sense?
Two major concerns were identified in this reflective memo. The first, I had started
making a list of changes that I would already need to make in the next iteration of this
self-paced module. More details are described in the next section of this research, but
these changes included the flow of the class, how the lessons were set up, and issues with
the grading functions. Second, and more concerning, was that the concept of the
specialized learning plans had been such an important part of my initial research plan and
conversations up until this point. However, I was struggling to outline how they could be
implemented and what that framework might look like within the certification program.

100

Taking a step back, I realized that I might need to let this idea go or at least reframe the
conversation. The goal behind the specialized learning plans was to provide the most
relevant learning opportunities to public librarians in their various professional roles in a
clearly structured way. Looking back for a moment at the self-paced modules, one goal
for them was to allow instructors time and resources to develop more advanced in-depth
courses available throughout the year. As I was working on the specialized learning
tracks, I found that I was trying to anticipate these future instructor-led classes and would
then be repeating the current problem of only offering a limited variety of courses. If I
hope to collaborate with instructors and emphasize their professional subject-expertise in
different areas of librarianship, I shouldn’t be telling them what classes or topics that they
need to cover as “instructional design expertise and subject-matter competence are two
different things, and even though it is possible for a person to play both roles, it is not
necessary for an instructional designer to be a content expert in order to work effectively
with the content expert” (Gagné, Wager, Golas & Keller, 2005, p. 26).
Instead of specialized learning tracks that are already written and designed, a
better alternative that would still help students identify the most relevant courses, would
be to utilize the competency frameworks and learning plans that are available features
within Moodle (Figure 5.1). Competencies within Moodle can be assigned to different
courses and activities in multiple courses (Moodle, 2017, Apr 24). Learning plans can
also be assigned to multiple learners (Moodle, 2017, Aug 31). By utilizing these two
features, I believe that I can set up a more effective version of the specialized learning

101

track idea that would allow greater collaboration and input from the instructors and
continued feedback from the students.
For example, if I were to set up a learning plan for Youth Services with
competencies based on those from the Association for Library Services to Children
(2015) such as “conducts reference and readers’ advisory interviews to assist children and
their caregivers with the identification and selection of materials and services, regardless
of format and according to their interests and abilities” which falls under section II
“Reference and User Service,” it would not be limited to just one class. Working with the
instructor, advanced classes could be designed to meet this competency through activities
like booktalks or developing social media strategies in different instructor-led classes.
Learners would then be able to demonstrate this knowledge through participation in the
classes that they feel are most relevant for their position. Classes wouldn’t have to be
limited in what they covered each year, as they are currently, and no one class would
have to cover everything.

Figure 5.1: Course Categories and Competencies

102

Within Moodle, when creating a new course or editing the settings on an existing
course, an administrator is able to assign “Course Categories.” Currently the Nebraska
Library Commission has four categories: Basic Skills, Cataloging Certificate,
Miscellaneous, and Public Access Computers: Management and Support. These
categories could act as those specialized learning tracks in a way as the new advanced
classes are developed and course activities are assigned competencies, I can identify to
which category they would belong, such as, Technical Services, Technology,
Management, or Young Adult Services. This will allow librarians to easily find relevant
classes and modules, as well as help monitor progress within Moodle. As more courses
develop and I continue the design process after this dissertation, the Nebraska Library
Commission could easily offer additional “certificates.” For example, much like the
already existing Cataloging Certificate program, once a student takes a set number of
courses within one of the “Course Categories,” we could send them a certificate of
completion in that specialized area which would then act as encouragement for
participation as well as recognition of their professional development efforts.
Evaluation of the Preliminary Self-Paced Module
While evaluation, formal and informal (Williams, et al, 2011) has been ongoing
with this research project as a scholarly practitioner through reflections and decisions
made over the redesign of Ms. Badger’s class and throughout the development of the
self-paced module, reflection on what went well and what didn’t work is important as I
continue working on the second iteration of this self-paced cataloging module. First,
librarians appreciated the self-paced opportunity for continuing education. They were

103

able to complete the module on their own time, working with their schedule without the
need to go back and complete additional discussion board replies. From the
administrative side, I did monitor the class and checked in continuously on student
progress, especially as this was the first test of the module. The most time consuming
detail once the module was live were the emails concerning grading and course
completion. Once this issue is fixed in future iterations, my own time commitment should
diminish as the modules become more automated.
Examining each of the lessons and topics, in “Lesson 1: Meeting Our Users’
Needs,” the first activity is the reflection questions. These were intended to help students
start making the connection between how library users search or find information and the
library catalog, as well as thinking about their own library. The assignment reads:
Write down a few notes or thoughts in response to the following questions:
● Think about the library you work in (or visit most often). Is it organized in
such a way as to enable users to find the items they need?
● Can patrons easily find the resources that answer their questions?
● Can they locate items that appeal to them? When a customer walks into your
library, what are their options for finding the items they want?
Student responses to these questions were similar to discussion board posts used in other
existing Basic Skills classes and Ms. Badger’s concurrent section. Some students wrote
brief one-sentence replies, while most of the students wrote longer, more detailed
responses. Although not part of the questions, students identified several barriers that
library users may encounter when finding information such as signage in the library or

104

information overload, as well as accessibility concerns. Many wrote about the physical
layout of their spaces, acknowledging the importance of welcoming and knowledgeable
staff who are willing to help anyone who walks in. Three example responses are included
below.
Response #1:
● I do believe that the library I work in is organized to enable the patrons to find
what they are needing. While saying that, I do think there are some areas that
could use a little ‘update’ to the organization. For example our DVD section is in
an easy to find manner, but it has grown to the point that we are using the shelves
at the very bottom and this makes it difficult for the older patrons to find what
they are looking for. I happened upon an elderly gentleman just the other day on
his hands and knees trying to read the titles of the DVD’s on the bottom shelf. So
we obviously need to rethink that section of the library. But as for the
organization of the library, I do believe that it has a ‘nice flow’ to it from the
minute they walk into the door.
● Patrons have access to our library catalog online and can see for themselves if we
have what they are looking for. We give them their username and password for
that when they become a library patron. The patrons can also use the public
computers at the library to access the online catalog, or they can always ask me
to help them!
● Absolutely! Each library will be different for what is popular among the patrons
and our new releases are the hot tickets for us. We have a section for new

105

releases and keep the display near the front desk. We have an area that we keep
popular authors, such as a shelf for just John Grisham and a shelf for just James
Patterson etc. Some genres that are well liked such as Christian fiction is kept in
it’s own area as well. All these areas (and others) are labeled or have signs. So
when patrons enter the library they can always wander and find the items they
want, or they can ask me, the checkout desk is one of the first things they see when
entering the library. And again, there is always the online catalog that they can
access either from home or using the library computers.
Response #2:
● Yes, for the most part. Adult fiction items are alphabetical by author’s last name.
Adult non-fiction are by Dewey decimal system. Teen fiction is alphabetical by
author’s last name. Teen non-fiction are by subject & category, then by Title.
Teen Graphic novels are by series or title order. Children’s non-fiction are by
Dewey decimal system. Children’s chapter books are alpha by author. Children’s
easy readers are alpha by author. And, finally, paperbacks are alpha by author
(with category stickers for Romance, Sci-fi, Mystery/Thriller, Novel, Western).
● Anything that is not a standard system is a hybrid created by patron request –
sections are clearly marked & catalog locations reflect this system. New patrons,
mostly, are able to find things easily – otherwise, we – the staff, are more then
ready to assist.

106

● Usually, yes. Otherwise, they may utilize the shelf markings & signage, the
electronic catalog & library staff (or, electronic resources & ILL). We, also,
consider patron requests when purchasing new materials.
Response #3:
● We here at the public library do a good job to help readers find what they need.
Could, we do better? Of course, but i’m not sure that is where our biggest
challenges lie.
● We are blessed with many computers, and knowledgeable staff. I for one feel like
they can.
● Our sections are clearly labeled, and we do what we can to provide good patron
service.
With these reflection questions, they are technically set up as “graded essays” which
meant that I had to go in and make them as completed. I tried to set up Moodle in such a
way that these essays wouldn’t be graded, but the assignment module required at least
one point to be added. One benefit to this is that I can email students’ a copy of their
essays which would allow them to keep their reflections (if they would like to). However,
this issue contributed to the larger grading issues in this self-paced module and would
require me to check for new submissions on a regular basis. Several students submitted
more than one response at different times, most likely due to the fact that they weren’t
sure if the first response was accepted before I had a chance to update the grade. I
included reflection questions throughout the different topics, but this was the only set of
questions that required students to respond as I wanted to test how they would work in

107

practice and was concerned they would become tiresome for students. The thoughtful
responses were encouraging, but it became confusing when there were other reflections
in other lessons that didn’t have actual responses. In future iterations of this self-paced
module, I’m looking at the Moodle system to find a way in which I can incorporate this
kind of activity without requiring an actual grade, instead going back to the “Activity
Completion” function. One option would be to use the discussion board format, but mark
the activity complete when the student creates a new thread/post. In this way, students
could see responses from other students if they would like to read about other libraries
which has proven to be beneficial in the existing classes, but it wouldn’t require replies to
one another so the self-paced format would still be viable.
Moving into “Topic 2: Cataloging” we looked at the process of creating records
and the online catalog displays. With Topic 1 and Topic 2, I tried to break down the
content into bite-sized pieces, as students in Ms. Badger’s course seemed to appreciate
the “chunks” of information. However, with this “Lesson” feature of Moodle, I didn’t
utilize this in an optimal way. I broke the information down too far and I think it
interrupted the flow of the class. This is especially apparent in “Lesson 2: Cataloging
Guidelines” where there is only one page of content. This issue was due to my own
misunderstanding of how Moodle lessons function. Navigation within these lessons
becomes cluttered at times. There is a button on the bottom of each screen to go to the
next page within a lesson. These buttons should read “continue” or “next.” However,
when I set them up, I used the title of the next page. In this “Lesson 2,” for example, if
students click on the grey button that says “The Puzzle of Content,” it takes them to the

108

“Congratulations - end of lesson” page (Image 5.1). There is also a blue link below this
that says “Lesson 3: The Puzzle of Content” with a small blue arrow. Which one will
students click on? Were they confused with this navigation? In addition, there are links
for the previous lesson, to review the lesson, to return to the course homepage, and to
view grades. The problem of too much on the screen is being repeated with these lessons.

Image 5.1: Lesson Navigation Screenshot
Another navigation concern appears when a student navigates away from the lesson page
and tries to go back, they encounter a message asking them if they want to start back at
the last page they saw (Image 5.2). While this may not be a major issue for most students,
it could be confusing if they click one of those links that they didn’t mean to or forget
what page they were looking at. It also doesn’t encourage easy navigation between pages
within lessons.

109

Image 5.2: Lesson Review Screenshot
Starting with “Topic 3: MARC,” I did try longer lessons and renamed the
navigation buttons to “next” and “end” which was much more clear than the previous two
topics. This topic also included the “How Well Do You Know MARC?” pre/posttest that
challenged many students in both Ms. Badger’s class and this self-paced module. I set
this quiz to allow multiple attempts and reviews, but this prevented students from actually
getting grades as the system was waiting until the student made all five attempts and
would then take the highest grade of those attempts. This would be an easy fix for the
next iteration. The pre-test really should only have one attempt if we are trying to gauge
what students know and there’s no reason the post-test should need five attempts. I have
to ask if we are really capturing student learning at that point. Discussing this assignment
with Ms. Badger, we have already decided that this quiz needs to be redesigned. Students
were more focused on the graded points of the quiz, rather than recognizing the
importance of becoming more familiar with the terminology and basic structures of
MARC so that they would be able to have knowledgeable discussions with their library
vendors, their catalogers, directors, board members, or other librarians. The questions are
too technical for the content covered. We’re asking students to become more familiar

110

with introductory cataloging concepts and understand basic vocabulary, but this quiz asks
students to have a deeper knowledge of MARC records in order to identify/recognize the
different fields, subfield codes, tags, indicators, delimiters, and subfields within a
MARC21 record without any other context. Implementing a pre/posttest can be a useful
evaluation tool, but it may be more beneficial to assess student learning if there was a
pre/posttest for the entire module, rather than for a single short lesson in this context.
The quizzes in “Topic 5” and “Topic 6” worked well, but inconsistencies in presentation
need to be fixed. The “Topic 5” quiz has all the questions listed on a single page while
“Topic 6” has one question per page. With only four questions, it makes more sense for
the questions to appear at once. The overall average of the “Topic 5” quiz was 3.63 out of
4.00 and for the “Topic 6” quiz it was 3.48 out of 4.00.
With the second iteration of the self-paced module, to open on June 18th, the
grading mechanics are the first priority to fix. Secondly, expanding on the MARC topic
with a redesigned quiz is necessary. Looking at the feedback from Ms. Badger’s course
and how the lesson activities worked on this self-paced module, I am shifting the selfpaced content back to “Pages” rather than trying to use the “Lessons” feature. Nine
students have registered for this second class. Their feedback will be evaluated and
compared to the first iteration when the class closes on July 13th. The smaller number of
students in this class won’t provide much feedback to work with, but hopefully will
capture if the lesson flow and automatic grading has improved, as well as the removal of
the MARC pre/posttest before I move forward with the next cycle of redesign which will

111

include setting up the learning frameworks within Moodle and course competencies, in
addition to changes within the class itself focusing on evaluation and learning activities.
Understanding which activities and content worked and what didn’t work well
will ensure a more effective redesign. As this self-paced module acted as a prototype for
this kind of self-paced professional development, undergoing several redesign cycles will
then allow me, as the Continuing Education Coordinator, to develop a working general
template that can be used in the development of the future self-paced modules.
Changes to the Existing Nebraska Public Librarian Certification Program
The existing Nebraska Public Librarian Certification program outside of just one
Basic Skills class needs to be considered if this self-paced professional development is to
be a successful option. What, if any, changes need to be made to the system for these
kind of self-paced modules to be implemented? Currently, all continuing education hours
and the completion of Basic Skills classes is tracked through Bibliostat, the in-house
database used by the Nebraska Library Commission staff. After each class ends, the
instructor reports the grades to myself and to the Library Development Staff Assistant,
who then updates the individual librarians’ continuing education record to reflect
completion. Each class is worth two continuing education hours. Talking with Linda and
the previous Library Development Director, they both reflected on 2011 when the classes
first moved to Moodle. The previous Continuing Education Coordinator had to figure out
how to transfer the “old” in-person workshop credits, since there were only four of them.
So, if a librarian took two of the in-person workshops, would they have to take all of the
“new” classes online? Or which classes would they get credit for? In 2010, in

112

collaboration with a committee of System Directors and librarians, the previous
Continuing Education Coordinator outlined which of the in-person workshops transferred
into the current Basic Skills classes (Table 5.1).
Table 5.1
Transition Table from In-Person Workshops to Online Basic Skills Classes

Vern Buis, Director of Computing Services, adapted the Bibliostat database with the new
classes. Image 5.3 shows how the courses appear in the database (on the staff side) and

113

the checkmarks that appear when a librarian completes each of the Basic Skills classes
currently.

Image 5.3: Omnibase Course List Screenshot
As students successfully complete each class, the continuing education hours are added to
their record and these boxes are automatically checked off. If they’ve taken the “old”
Basic Skills in-person workshop, they didn’t have to retake any of the online classes.
Again, if a librarian enrolls in the certification program and has a professional certificate
or degree in Library Science, they also are exempted from taking the Basic Skills classes,
so the boxes on this database screen will show as completed. This screen is useful for
Nebraska Library Commission staff members when talking with librarians about their
continuing education requirements, so we can easily see what classes they’ve taken
without having to scroll through their entire continuing education activity record which
includes all webinars, conferences, and other events that they may have attended. Image
5.4 shows how this information appears to librarians when they look up their continuing
education records online. This list pulls information directly from the Omnibase database
and details which classes they’ve taken and which they still have left. The online CE
Record Review is the primary method for librarians to keep track of their certification

114

period, their continuing education activities, and their completion progress with the Basic
Skills classes.

Image 5.4: Student CE Record Example
While editing the database again to include new self-paced modules is possible, there is
some reluctance to do so as it could add more confusion to both staff and librarian
screens and the repeated problem of understanding which self-paced modules count for
which classes. In this current redesign process, communication about the self-paced
modules and the future development of advanced instructor-led classes will need to be
clear and easily understood as the classes are marketed across the state.
The simplest solution that would allow this research to continue immediately
seems to be to create a self-paced module for each of the six currently required courses:

115

Intellectual Freedom and Core Values of Librarianship, Communication, Organization of
Information, Community and the Library, Collection Management, and Customer
Service. By doing so, this would eliminate any confusion and any need for additional
database alterations. Credits for the classes would transfer straight across to the selfpaced modules which would be beneficial especially as it will take time to create future
self-paced modules and this would help ensure a smooth transition. After these six
modules are made available, I would then start working on building a self-paced version
of the elective classes: Leadership, Library Finance, Library Governance, Library
Policy, Library Services to Children and Youth, Library Technology, Management and
Supervision, Programming and Outreach, Readers’ Advisory, and Reference while
beginning collaborations with instructors to develop advanced classes. The requirements
for the certification program would then not need to change and the advanced instructorled classes would then be supplemental, available to Nebraska librarians throughout the
year without requiring a change to the database or to the certification program itself. In
this way, we could add new classes in different topic areas without a permanent change to
the database and librarians would still earn their continuing education credits. Class
offerings and schedules could be updated every year depending on identified needs from
the instructors or myself in my role as the Continuing Education Coordinator.
Next Steps and Considerations
I remain optimistic about the development of self-paced modules along with more
advanced instructor-led courses for the professional development of public librarians in
Nebraska, though I acknowledge that there are a number of concerns that must be

116

addressed moving forward. Overall, I believe that the self-paced module was successful
and that many of the frustrations stem from system settings and inconsistencies within
lessons. Moving forward with this research, I have opened student registration for a
second testing phase of the self-paced module to begin on June 18th. The course has been
renamed as Introduction to Cataloging and I have already started updating the self-paced
module to address the concerns discussed in this chapter.
The Fortieth Anniversary Commemorative Booklet from the American
Educational Research Association Division I (2011) includes documents and reports from
the division and the association that illustrate the division’s mission to “developing a
discipline of education in the professions” and mandate to “become a division that
addressed issues of practice and scholarship across the professions” (p. 5). Within this
document, library science is mentioned once on page thirty-four in a citation from a
document published in 1980, “Division I programs at recent annual meetings have
included presentations by researchers in most of the health professions as well as
engineering, library science, law, and other professional areas.” Not only does the
research discussed in this dissertation benefit the professional development for Nebraska
Public Librarians, but this problem of practice addresses a larger, national conversation
for Continuing Education Coordinators and the librarian profession.
Following the annual Continuing Education Coordinators Forum in 2016, a
committee of state Continuing Education Coordinators began working on an idea for an
online National Library Training Center with weekly online meetings over the last year.
This National Library Training Center would be a central repository of online learning

117

content from all participating states available to librarians nationwide. Each state will
have their own organizational access for state-specific training and access to other
content. Working with these other Continuing Education Coordinators, we have chosen
Moodle for the learning management system with a projected date of January 2020.
Currently, our committee is working on the policies, procedures, and standards for this
project. A letter to the Chief Officers of State Agencies was recently sent out asking these
Chief Officers for insight and feedback to help shape policies as we move forward.
Having this National Library Training Center available would mean that any self-paced
modules or other content developed in Nebraska could be uploaded to this national
training center to be shared with librarians to improve their practice and knowledge even
outside of the state, as well as the opportunity for Nebraska librarians to engage in their
practice on a national level.