Management and Preservation of Animation Cels
in Archives, Libraries, and Museums in the United States

by

Angela René Schwarz

A review of management and preservation practices for animation cels in archives,
libraries, and museums shows a lack of information dissemination of this media
among the information memory field. A survey was conducted of 15 repositories
along with interviews and site visits to determine what practices were being utilized
by professionals. The results show that studio archives have not maintained care
of their animation cels, while museums and special libraries have provided better
stewardship. The results and recommendations are available to be used as an aid
for repository personnel to preserve and manage their animation cel collection.

Introduction
As a kid, growing up through the 1980’s I would get up on weekend
mornings to watch cartoons of The Bugs Bunny Show, He-man, She-ra,
Rainbow Bright and a variety of other cartoons produced or distributed by
Warner Bros. and Disney. In the 1990’s, I would watch cartoons after
school of Disney’s Tail Spin, Nickelodeon’s Doug and The Rugrats, and
Warner Bros. Animaniacs, Pinky and the Brain, and Looney Toons cartoons.
My fascination in animation was more than the cartoons that I watched but
also the elements of production and the process to make them. During the
1980’s the Disney Company re-aired vintage episodes of a tv series
originally hosted by Walt Disney in the 1950’s and early 1960’s. In one of
these episodes, Walt Disney ventures into the ink and paint department of
the studio to reveal and describe an aspect of the process of creating an
animation cel, an element of traditional animation production, to the
audience. The camera focuses on a lady painting one of over a million cels
used in an animation feature. However, by 1989 the detailed handwork of
traditional animation ceased to be used by studios with the advancement of
computer animation. But by that time one traditional animation element,
animation cels, had been bestowed with new value by the public through
the art world.
Since 1939 when the Walt Disney Studios first acted to sell
animation cels to collectors and art museums like the Museum of Modern
Art (MoMA), authentic animation cels have been in demand, at times
reaching a record high auction price of $286,000 (Saracino, 2006).
However, today prices range between $100 to $100,000 depending on the
production and the piece (Heritage Auctions, 2018). Most cels that are sold
by themselves sell for less than $10,000, but production cels sold with the
background from popular, famous, or old productions can sell for thousands
(Amidi, 2011). For example, Heritage Auctions sold a 1935 Mickey Mouse
and Goofy cel with the background for over $95,000; and Van Eaton
Galleries sold a cel and background from the Disney film Sleeping Beauty
for over $94,000 (Heritage Auctions, 2018; Amidi, 2011). Animation cels
are not only a nostalgic piece of art that inspires and allows the public to
have a tangible connection to their childhood but is also a rare American art
form, one in need of preservation research, and management guidelines for
professionals in libraries, archives, and museums. While there has been
some research published on the composition and preservation of animation
cels in recent years, it has not been disseminated to a broad audience. In
addition, a majority of the research published was more for an audience of
conservators than information professionals, as the language is scientific in
manner and chemically sophisticated in vocabulary. During my research
for this thesis, I noticed that a majority of the research conducted and
published on the preservation of animation cels started after a 2006 thesis
written by Karen Hong Saracino on animation cel preservation. Although
historians and animation professionals have been investigating this medium
for years, there is little accessible published information for professionals
in archives, libraries, and museums to guide them when assessing their
organizations animation cel collection. The lack of information made
available to the professionals that care for and manage animation cels is the
largest issue for animation cel preservation. Conservators in the field that
work with animation cels tend to be private conservators that are proprietary
about their particular process and techniques for animation cel conservation,
which can involve restoration.

While conservators that work for organizations may do amazing research to aid the collection they preserve,
that information has a tendency to remain with that conservator rather than
being shared with others. My focus for this thesis is the preservation and management
practices of animation cels in archives, museums and special collections of
libraries in the United States, which will provide another resource on
animation cel preservation practices and contribute to the dialogue on the
topic. Through the course of this thesis I will introduce readers to what is
and makes an animation cel, brief highlights of animation history, current
animation cel preservation research being conducted by major headliners in
preservation, conservation, and film, as well as some of the practices being
used to safeguard animation cels as an American art form. Next, I will
discuss my research methods, including a survey I generated and conducted,
and the results designed to determine what current practices are being used
to preserve and manage animation cels from a sample of repositories in the
country. The outcomes of the survey results along with information from the interviews and site visits will allow for the development of
recommendations to aid repositories of all sizes, in particular, smaller
institutions that lack resources or have small collections of animation cels,
with a goal of facilitating changes to current preservation and management
practices. Furthermore, this thesis will add to the growing research of
animation cels that can lead to guidelines for non-conservation
professionals, if not standards, for this particular art medium in all types of
repositories.

Thesis Statement
In my master’s thesis I argue that due to a lack of disseminated
knowledge in the composition and care of animation cels, memory
information professionals, such as archivists and museum staff, tend to treat
cels with methods developed for paper materials rather than graphic
materials or art.

Even though animation cels were originally created by animators as pre-production elements to be used for a short period of time
and then disposed of or washed off to re-use the celluloid sheet, their value
has transitioned over the decades to now be considered graphic materials or
art. It is my contention that the lack of disseminated knowledge, and the
need for additional research focused on animation cel optimum storage
conditions, and environmental conditions required for the preservation of
the ink and paint, leaves a majority of animation cels neglected and subject
to further deterioration. My thesis project seeks to find the current practices from a range of repositories to determine what practices have worked best
to slow deterioration and should be continued when treating animation cels.
My research method is based on surveying and assessing animation
cel preservation and management practices by a selection of archivists,
collection managers, and animation production professionals in archives,
museums, and special libraries that have large holdings of animation cels
within the United States. I acquired and analyzed data about how personnel
at repositories classify, store, and manage animation cels for preservation
and how these stewards use methods for repairs which are borrowed from
the conservation of paper materials. This data has been assembled through
responses to a survey distributed to 15 repositories comprised of studio
archives, such as Nickelodeon Archive, museums, general archives and
libraries, such as Library of Congress Photographs and Prints Division, that
have animation cel holdings in their collection. Additional data from
interviews with professionals that work in preserving or conserving
animation cels has also been included.

The data produced was then analyzed to discover how a sample of archive, library, and museum
stewards care for this medium of American art to provide recommendations
and aid to disseminate information to repositories. In addition, this thesis
will add to the growing research in regards to animation cel preservation
and support a call for developing published guidelines or standards for the
medium by professional organizations for information and cultural heritage
non-conservation professionals.


Introduction to Animation Cels
Animation as a process defined in layman terms is the technique
where each frame or sheet of clear celluloid is hand drawn and painted, then
sent to be photographed over a background onto film stock using a special
camera. While Disney is most noted for using the multi-plane camera,
designed by Ub Iwerks, the technology and techniques of the animation
process were pioneered before Walt Disney.

For a more specialized definition, Saracino (2006, 19) quotes from Martin Krause and Linda
Witkowski’s book Walt Disney’s Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: An Art
in the Making Featuring the Collection of Stephen H. Ison that the
animation process is defined as The process of creating motion from frame-by-frame
techniques in filmmaking. In cel animation, the characters
are first drawn on paper and then traced and painted onto
cels. The painted cels are then placed over a background and
photographed one frame at a time. When the completed
film is projected at a rate of twenty-four frames per second,
the illusion of motion is created.

An animation cel is a composite object made up of a thin 10 inch x
12 inch or 12 inch x 16 inch sheet of Celluloid (cellulose-based plastic) with
a drawing in black ink, created using a quill pen or a photocopy
(xerography) transfer from an animators’ drawing on paper on one side of
the plastic cel, and water-based colored paint, such as gouache, on the other
(Saracino, 2006; Ness, 2015; Disney, 2016). However, in later years,acrylic paint was used for polyester cels, which replaced cellulose acetate
sheets for safety and longevity. The approach of inking and painting was
twofold: first, when viewed from the inked side, the black ink outlined the
paint producing a clean, straight edge image; and, secondly, from this same
view the camera is seeing the paint layer through the celluloid support with
a smooth surface rather than the view that exhibited evidence of rough brush
strokes (Levitan, 1979; Stark, 2007).

However, this approach also contributes to the difficulty in preserving animation cels. Their first and
foremost issue is the difference in the preservation temperature and relative
humidity requirements considered optimum for the paint and the plastic
support. This is further discussed in the signs of degradation in animation
cels section.
Ness (2015) explains further the history and process of xerography,
or photocopying animators paper drawings to cels, and how it may have
saved the Disney studio by lowering costs in the production of feature films.
However, animators loved to see their actual drawings finally make it to the
screen;–Walt Disney and audiences noticed the change in quality of the
lines and art of the animation features released starting with 101 Dalmatians
(1961). The change in character outlines was because there were some
artistic differences between the animator’s pencil drawings and when an
inker or opaquer inked lines by hand, such as when the lines may become
softer, thicker and refined with one line. The black lines from xerography
where scratchy, unrefined, and thinner than the inked lines. While the drawings where exact transfers of the animators’ stylistic art, the transferred
images lost some quality that audiences were used to seeing in hand inked
Disney animated features, such as Sleeping Beauty and Bambi. In addition,
cels had peg holes along the bottom of the cel. While each studio used their
specific system, most used two pegs in early animation and variations
developed after the 1940’s.

These peg holes are to keep the cels in alignment during inking with an animators’ sketch and while being
photographed with other cels in a scene.
Celluloid is a transparent or opaque plastic sheet of cellulose nitrate,
but the name celluloid or ‘cel’ remained after a transition to other
formulations of plastic sheets became available, such as cellulose acetate
and polyester. Plastics produced with cellulose are made with some type of
organic material, such as cotton or wood pulp.

Cellulose nitrate is formulated by a process of mixing a form of cellulose with nitric acid,
sulfuric acid, water, alcohol, camphor, colorants, and fillers. However, the
process is not as easy as dumping everything in a vat, apply heat and mix.
Manufacturers each had a different routine, but all were similar in formula.
The organic cellulose material, acids, water, and alcohol, were slowly added
together, heated, kneaded, and washed before the addition of camphor,
colorants, and fillers to make celluloid. The plastic was then fabricated to
its shape by extrusion or rolled (Reilly, 1991).
However, cellulose nitrate is not the only plastic sheet to have been
used for animation cels. Research from Giachet (2014), and McCormick
(2014) have identified the composition of cels in the Walt Disney
Animation Research Library, to include cellulose nitrate, variations of
cellulose acetate (cellulose acetate, cellulose diacetate and cellulose
triacetate) and polyester (Mylar) plastic, all of which are about .005mm
thick, the same thickness as a piece of notebook paper.

The Disney

Animation Research Library holds over 60 million objects of Disney
production and commercial art, including over 300,000 animation cels.
That makes up 10% of the collection (Rogge, 2014).
The variations of plastics are due to safety and product
advancements over the decades. Cellulose nitrate was first used as a support
in photography and film before becoming a support for animation cels. But
it’s first use was in 1862 as a cheap substitute to produce reproductions of
tortoiseshell combs for ladies (Saracino, 2006). Issues with cellulose nitrate
soon became apparent as it deteriorated becoming an unstable compound
allowing the plastic to be highly flammable, as well as prone to deteriorate
producing an odor that smells like camphor as the plasticizer evaporates
from the plastic. Its flammability initiated the acceptance of cellulose
acetate in the 1940’s as a film support. Cellulose acetate comes in three
variations: cellulose acetate, cellulose diacetate, and cellulose triacetate. In
contrast to cellulose nitrate, cellulose acetate is more stable resulting in
added longevity of use before deterioration. However, when any variation
of cellulose acetate deteriorates it produces an odor of vinegar, known as
hydrolysis or vinegar syndrome, but it too deteriorated becoming a safety hazard for people and other nearby heritage materials.

This initiated between 1960 to 1990 another change in the chemical make-up of the plastic
support for film and animation cels during the last thirty years when
animation cels were made in studios. The next form of plastic was polyester
(polyethylene terephthalate (PET)). It is superior to all previous supports.
It is stable, flexible and stronger holding up to more use, but over time
polyester will deteriorate too. However, by 1989 computer animation
changed the process of animation.
The other components of animation cels are the ink and paint used
to outline and color the characters. Ink used by studios was in general a
diluted form of black paint, but some other production studios have used
carbon ink, aka India ink (Pichard, 2015; Worth interview, Tori interview).
While other studios may have used a casein-based paint which did not hold
up as well. Application of ink was administered with a quill pen. The paint
is a water-based paint, typically gouache, but in later years when animation
cels started being produced on polyester plastic, acrylic paint was used as it
was able to adhere to the smoother and polished texture of the polyester.
Each studio has their specific formula for animation cel paint, which in
general consisted of a water-soluble binder, like gum-arabic, opaque talc for
brightness and texture, pigment (color), and preservatives to prevent mold
and other bacteria from growing (Campbell, 2000). All forms of paint and
ink were water-soluble to easily wash off after production finished. The
celluloid sheet was then re-used for another production or thrown into garbage if stained by the colored paint or showing signs of use. However,
because the paint and the plastic are made of organic material and
chemicals, they both are susceptible to degradation over time as they are
exposed to environmental conditions. A conservator is usually called in
when deterioration has reached a certain point of changing the artistic
image.

Signs of Degradation in Animation Cel Components
Animation cels are composite objects made up of the plastic support,
the ink, and the paint. This combination of materials makes for challenges
in trying to preserve the whole object since the paint and ink do not have
the same preservation requirements as the plastic support. While the paint
/ ink prefer room temperature and relative humidity (RH) closer to 60%, the
celluloid plastic support prefers the same temperature and relative humidity
of film and photographs that are stored in 55°F and 50% RH. In the past,
animation cels have been stored according to the needs of one of the
components, generally the plastic support, leaving the other component to
degrade and requiring a conservator to later assess issues with the object.
When a conservator exams plastic artwork they look at four general
properties: chemical, optical, physical, and thermal (Shashoua, 2008). For
each property, there are specific attributes known or tested to identify. For
chemical properties, that would be solubility, reactivity with other materials
in surroundings, chemical structure, arrangements, and types of bonding
present in polymers.

Physical properties include density, electrical, mechanical, and thermal responses. Optical properties are detected by a
visual exam, and include abrasions, shrinkage, yellowing, etc. and thermal
properties are determined with physical attributes. However, museums look
at a “loss of function, form or significance of the object” as well.
(Bachmann, 1992) Physical signs of degradation are shrinkage due to loss of plasticizer,
abrasions, delamination of paints as a result of binding agents losing
adhesion, brittleness, yellow discoloration, hydrolysis, warping, sweating,
etc. A majority of these signs are the result of a chemical change at the
molecular level of the plastics polymers, plasticizers, and additives.
Chemical causes are reactions of the plastic to their surroundings. A
number of environmental elements can start a chemical reaction in plastics,
particularly, oxygen, ozone, water, radiation, light, and heat. As plastics
must exist in some of these conditions, they are always exposed to
conditions that will degrade them. If enough energy accumulates, then it
can “break selected chemical bonds present in polymers and additives.
Resulting in the reduction of molecular weight and the formation of new
chemical structures”. These changes can “increase plastics’ sensitivities to
moisture and temperature” (Shashoua, 2008; Hunt, 1992).

Images of

animation cels that exhibit various signs of degradation can be found in the
press releases by the Getty Conservation Institute concerning the animation
cel project, and by Yale’s Institute for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage,
both of which can be found in the bibliography of this thesis.Degradation of the paint and ink is a whole other story. Primarily,
some paint colors will fade with time and exposure to natural light, but more
of an issue is when paint starts flaking off as it loses adhesion to the plastic
base. Another problem is due to animation cels being a composite material,
as previously mentioned, the main elements being the plastic support and
the painted image. These elements have different requirements for storage.
Cold storage recommended for photographic and film elements will slow
the degradation of the plastic, but the temperature can be a problem for
maintaining the moisture needed in the paint to preserve the paint
suppleness. The elements will both shrink but at different rates causing the
paint to crack and pull apart, distorting the image. The cold temperature also
affects the paints’ binding agents, accelerating loss of adhesion, resulting in
the paint cracking and flaking off. (Giachet, 2014)
Original paint layers are extremely hard to fix, requiring a very
delicate and steady hand for detail. Reproducing the original paint formulas
is almost just as difficult since formulas from original studios were trade
secrets in the past and are still so today. Animation art restorers who restore
animation cels as a business may have conducted tests to identify
compounds in order to recreate the same paint formulas. These tests require
specialized equipment that not all archives and museums can access. Or,
restorers may have befriended someone who had access to the paint
formulas who then allowed the restorer access to the paint formulas (Worth
interview, 2017). Most paint has been identified as a gouache, an opaque type of watercolor, for cellulose plastic cels. Due to polyester’s “polished
surface being difficult to wet by traditional gum-based paints, synthetic
paint media, like vinyl or acrylic are preferable” (McCormick, 2014;
Lerner, 2005).

Most recently, Beltran (2017) concluded research on environmental conditions of relative humidity that cause gouache paint to
delaminate, to crack or soften, along with causing celluloid to warp or
flatten. This research shows some promise in the future toward the development of a method to re-adhere the original paint back on the cel.

Brief History of Animation
While my master’s thesis centers on American animation, it is
important to point out pioneering forerunners of animation around the
world, because without the innovation and collaboration of others an idea
or art form cannot move forward and grow. And animation did grow.
Professional caretakers of animation elements need to know the history of
animation to develop an understanding of the processes used over the course
of history as they may encounter them in their career. I chose to use Stephen
Cavalier’s book The World History of Animation as a major source
referenced in this section of my thesis to discuss the history of animation
and in relation to moving images. While his book is not the only source of
history in my thesis, it is the primary source I rely on because it contains a
wealth of knowledge about a broad range of animation, both domestic and
international. Cavalier starts the history of animation with elements of animation having been seen in cave drawings, Egyptian funeral markings,
and other early civilization societies, but this beginning is as much for
moving images as it is for animation. Over time, inventors developed
creations as precursors for moving images. In 1696, one of these precursors
to moving images was invented by producing an optical projection of still
images using a transparent slide and light onto surfaces (Merriam-Webster,
n. d.). This creation was called a ‘magic lantern.’ These magic lanterns
became widespread entertainment in traveling shows. It was from one of
these shows in London, over a hundred years later, that Swiss-born Peter
Mark Roget, a doctor, became interested in the ideas of moving images. In
1824 he wrote an essay, which years later was re-titled “Persistence of
Vision with Regard to Moving Objects” (Cavalier, 2011, Cole, 2001). In
this essay, he explains how the human retina briefly retains the last seen
image after the object disappears, which allows for the fast, consistent
repetition of images to flash before the eye and be seen as a continuous
image. While today there is skepticism about this theory (Cole, 2001), it
did, however, create and produce a profound effect on the history of moving
image industry and those that today create films. After the publication of
Roget’s essay, numerous optical inventions were patented such as
Englishman John Ayrton Paris’s thaumatrope in 1825, Belgian Joseph
Plateau’s phenakistiscope in 1831, and Englishman William Horner’s
daedalm in 1834. The daedalm was later renamed by American William F.
Lincoln in 1860’s as the zoetrope, which resulted in the invention becoming much more popular at the time.

In 1877, Frenchman Charles-Emile

Reynaud invented the praxinoscope (Cavalier, 2011). It consists of a
cylinder and a strip of paper with twelve frames for animation. When the
cylinder rotates the images create an illusion of a moving image. All of
these optical inventions were precursors to present-day film cameras,
including the multi-plane camera used for animation production that will be
discussed further in the section about animation cel components.
It is not until the turn of the 20th century that a seperation between
animation history from other genres of film can be seen. In 1900, Arthur
Melbourne-Cooper of St. Albans, England produced an ad to raise funds for
the English troops fighting in the Boer War in South Africa that could be
considered the first production of animation. He filmed small matches from
a matchbox writing on a blackboard approximately six years ahead of
American and French animation pioneers. The method of production was
similar to the form of clay animation, a method of stop-motion animation.
The same genre of animation as traditional cel animation. But it wasn’t
until 1906 when James Stuart Blackton, an Englishman, produced what is
today considered the first cartoon, Humorous Phases of Funny Faces. Over
the next few years, other animators in Europe produced work, but their
efforts were lost during WWII, like the Italian brothers Arnaldo Ginna and
Bruno Corra’s four abstract films. It was during these early years in
animation that a difference in style also emerged: the two primary categories
being “realistic” and “cartoony.” One style attempts a “stylized realism” while the other conceives to “imitate reality.” It was Emilie Cohl, and a
small group of Parisian artists called the Incoherents, who in 1908 believed
“anything goes and the impossible is certain,” and with their “universe of
antirealism” formed a precursor for the surrealist animation to come later,
such as Steamboat Willie, Betty Boop, Daffy Duck, Wallace & Grommit,
and all other works in this style “in which reality is twisted, stretched,
chased, exploded, and run off a cliff” (Cavalier, 2011).
The inception of cel animation and the celluloid developed in 1913
when John Randolph Bray, a newspaper comic-strip artist transitioned to
animation and came up with the process of creating background images on
translucent paper and using gray tones on animated films. However, Bray
was not one for being honest. Historians believe he would visit other
animators’ studios by invitation in the “spirit of cooperation,” and then steal
their ideas as his own in patents. These deeds produced controversy with
both Winsor McCay, who produced Gertie the Dinosaur in 1911, and Frank
Nankivell (Cavalier, 2011). However, Bray did build the largest animation
studio before WWI in America, attracted the talents of the Fleischer
brothers, Earl Hurd, Paul Terry, and Walter Lantz, to name a few. The
animation process that was most popular for decades was patented by Earl
Hurd in 1914 while he worked for Bray.

This process used paper

backgrounds and overlapping painted celluloid sheets for characters.
However, it didn’t become a standard until 1924. It was during those ten
years that Bray and Hurd worked together requesting commissions for the use of their methods in animation.

These early years also mark the beginning of American animation, which dominates the field for much of
the last century considered as the most successful. (Cavalier, 2011)
Over the next fourteen years, notable animators produced
commercially successful works like Otto Messner’s Felix the Cat in 1919
which was the most famous animated character until the introduction in
1928 of Mickey Mouse in Steamboat Willie. In 1925, Lotte Reiniger
created the earliest surviving animation feature Die Abenteuer des Prinzen
Achmed (The Adventures of Prince Achmed). Unfortunately, all the Berlin
copies were destroyed during WWII. It was not until 1954 that the British
Film Institute (BFI) happened to find a single remaining lost copy in their
inventory, yet it was not restored and shown to the public until 1970.
(Cavalier, 2011)
The Golden Age of cartoons or, otherwise categorized as the
domination of American animation, dates between 1928 to 1957 in feature
films. The years preceding this era produced ample work as a “blueprint”
for future animators to be commercially and artistically successful. A
culmination of art styles, production techniques, and inventions navigated
animation toward a sustainable art form, it only “needed someone to pull it
all together —Walt Disney” (Cavalier, 2011).

So, the golden age of American animation really starts with Disney’s release of Steamboat Willie
(1928).
The cartoon received special accolades due to its sound synchronization with animation. Other cartoons with sound did not have the same sound synchronization that Disney produced for audiences to be
able to connect with the characters emotionally. There is no better proof of
this than the acclaim received by Disney’s full-length animated feature
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1938).

Over the next 30 years,animators produced several popular characters in animated films that are
still known today, including Disney’s Silly Symphonies series, Betty Boop
and Popeye the Sailor by Max Fleischer, Merian C. Cooper’s stop-frame
animation King Kong, Warner Bros. and Tex Avery’s variety of Looney
Tunes characters, William Hanna & Joseph Barbera’s Tom & Jerry, and a
group of ex-Disney artists called United Productions of America or better
known as UPA, Gerald McBoing-Boing and Mr. Magoo (Cavalier, 2011).
However, all good things come to an end, and this happened to
animation features and shorts in 1948 when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled
in United States vs. Paramount Pictures, Inc. to outlaw “block booking” to
theaters. Block booking allowed major studios to contract out a large
selection of new film productions to independent theater owners. However,
there may only be one or two A-list films included in twenty or more lower
grade films and shorts. While this system allowed the production studios to
profit, it put a financial strain on independent theater owners who had to
agree to films sight unseen and with the barest of information, rather than
selecting which films to exhibit in their theater like the studio-run theater
chains. There were times when films contracted in these blocks were left
in their canisters never to be seen by audiences. At the time animation
shorts were shown at the beginning of features and contracted out with these
same blocks of film selections. But with the ruling to outlaw block booking,
studios could no longer rely on budgets from pre-sold features and shorts.
This ruling resulted in studios to lose money from lower grade film
productions, Disney, Warner Bros., and other studios that produced
animation shorts and features were not exempt from this outcome. By 1958
it had become unviable to produce animated shorts for feature films. In
comes television. As the industry changed towards this new technology, the
animation processes developed as well. Although American animators and
studios dominate most of the golden age, animators in Europe and other
countries were producing animation too. It was with television and a change
in the industry that animators from other countries were able to expand their
audience across oceans with English versions of animation features and
shorts. Some examples include Serge Danot’s 1970 Pollux et le char bleu
(Dougal and the blue cat), Belgium Peyo’s 1976 Les Schtroumpfs (The
Smurfs), and Australian Yoram Gross’s 1977 Dot and the Kangaroo
(Cavalier, 2011).
During the 1980’s is when a decline happened in animation features
and cartoons being produced by animation cels, and animation productions
transitioned over to computers. Disney’s The Little Mermaid (1989) is the
studio's last feature film produced with animation cels. Animation moving
beyond 1989, took a complete turn to the computer with a program
developed by Pixar called Computer Animation Production System better known as CAPS (Ness, 2015), which once again changed the way future
animation films and cartoons were made.

Although today animation

features use computers to produce the final product, animators still start
with paper and pencil drawings to develop characters and storyboards
(Campbell, 2000; Nickelodeon & Disney ARL site visit).
By knowing the history of animation, a caretaker learns the
processes used to create animation elements at the time they were created.
This information also allows for the caretaker to know about different types
of knowledge that will aid in the management, preservation, conservation
and, if necessary, restoration of an animation cel. Their historical value is
just one of the values animation cels exhibit as evidence for why they should
be preserved. While an animation cel’s historical value is evidence of a
production process that is no longer used and is therefore obsolete, the other
three values animation cels present are nostalgic, social, and economic. As
discussed in the next section, animation cels’ social value derives from
collectors’ nostalgia for the pieces. This encouraged an economic value as
collectors drove up the price in auctions, further drawing the attention of
studios to market their cels as merchandise. Another economic and social
value derives from the fact that during the production of animation cels
between 1920 to 1990, women were widely hired to ink and paint the cels
providing a job for women in an industry dominated by men (Johnson,
2017). These three values exhibit reasons for why animation cels should be
preserved. Current Animation Preservation Research and Practices
Animation cels produced in the early years of animation features
were only meant to last a few weeks in the final stages of a film’s
production.

Afterward, black and white painted animation cels were

washed off in an acid wash, while color images were disposed of since the
color pigment would stain the celluloid sheets (Biederman, 2001). By the
late 1980’s to early 1990’s all animation studios had transferred from hand
drawings by artists, who had developed many of the animation techniques,
over to CAPS or similar computer-aided design software. The last Disney
full-length feature completely done by hand-drawn cels was 1989’s release
of The Little Mermaid (Cavalier, 2011).
Since most animation cels were destroyed, finding original cels from
early films is a rare find, one looked for by most collectors. Disney is the
only studio, from my research, to have known evidence of early animation
production material that dates prior to the 1950’s. This result may be due
to Disney starting out as an animation studio, rather than with live
productions like the majority of studios. Hence Walt Disney valued key
elements of productions differently from other studios. This value can be
exhibited due to Walt designating a storage place in the basement of the Ink
& Paint building on the studio lot known fondly as the “morgue” from his
days working for newspapers. He would keep material for artists to use for
reference and inspiration, which continues today in Disney’s Animation
Research Library. It is because of this limited availability of material from a by-gone era in moving image and animation history, along with the
popularity with collectors and high sale prices, that repositories are feeling
the pressure to preserve remaining animation cels (McCormick, 2014;
Sacracino, 2006).
Audiences who watched cartoons and animated features as children
grew attached to animation characters and would collect available
animation cels in response to emotional ties to those specific characters.
The cultural demand to preserve these art forms is what is turning a once
production element into artworks and respected animators into respected
artists outside of the animation genre. Auction houses and art galleries that
specialize in animation cels will price pieces for Snoopy and Charlie in the
hundreds to thousands of dollars, the same goes for Scooby Doo and Friends
and Hanna-Barbera characters, Warner Bros. Looney Toons can be found
in America at a value in the high hundreds and up depending on the
character and scene. It is the early Disney animation cels before 1960 and
xerography that demand the tens of thousands of dollars (Solomon, 1988).
The actual production elements used in the films are more valuable, not only
monetarily but historically than commercial reproductions.

Collectors

consider the detail and artistry of these cels as artwork and studios, archives
and museums have taken notice. The context as an artwork alone seems to
indicate cels are meant to be preserved by repositories. Museum exhibitions
of animation suggest that repositories that currently have cels initially
procured their pieces for artistic and preservation reasons since the 1981 Whitney Museum of American Art exhibition of Disney Animation and
Animators, the first museum exhibition of animation (Canemaker, 2017).
Future collections by museums and archives would be subject to a change
in view of the material as artwork and not solely part of film elements.
The Society of Animation Studies (SAS) was founded in 1987
during the transition period from hand-drawn to computer designed
animation, by Harvey Deneroff, who was a Ph.D. student in Los Angeles at
the time. SAS has developed into a worldwide organization aimed towards
the preservation of animation styles and techniques.

Today, this

organization has members from academia and the animation industry from
all over the world. The SAS publicize research articles in their online peerreviewed journal Animation Studies that concern the preservation of
animation, both traditional and computer rendered. They also have an
online blog to discuss various topics of animation spanning its history and
holds annual conferences around the world. In a 2017 SAS article, it was
pointed out that while expertise and skills from other fields, such as media
archives and museums, have been helpful, animation studies still need a
“specific approach” (SAS, 2017) and standards for general practices of
description and preservation.
In 2009, the Disney Animation Research Library (Disney ARL) and
the Getty Conservation Institute (GCI) initialized what has become a tenyear project to identify the chemical composition of animation cel plastic,
ideal storage environment parameters and the possibility of re-adheringflaking or damaged paint to the cels. Information on this project and current
findings can be found in numerous sources, from published research
findings from the project team, news releases from the Getty and popular
online sites (McCormick, Preserving, 2014; Morris, 2015; D23, n.d.;
Beltran, 2017). In 2015, the Yale Institute for the Preservation of Cultural
Heritage (IPCH) and professionals from the Yale University Gallery of Art
(YUAG) began working on a similar project for Disney animation cels in
the YUAG collection.

Yale’s project results in a collaborative effort

between IPCH and GCI to determine animation cel deterioration processes
and ideal environmental conditions (Yale, 2015). On an international level,
the Cinémathèque Française since 2013 has been in the process of
conducting research on graphic arts on plastic materials in collaboration
with Centre de Conservation et de Recherche des Musées de France
(C2RMF).

A donation by the British Film Institute (BFI) to the

Cinémathèque Française of 35 cels from the French animation masterpiece,
directed by Paul Grimault and screenplay by Jacques Prévert, Roi et
L’oiseau (literal translation: The King and the Bird, English title: The King
and the Mockingbird) has become a priority for preserving. The animation
feature was the first from France with production starting in 1947 and not
completed until 1980. The original title was La Bergère et Le Ramoneur
(The Shepherdess and the Chimneysweep) based on a Hans Christian
Andersen fairy tale of the same name (Pichard, 2014; UCA Archives, 2014). It is evident that a community of academia, animation researchers,
animation industry professionals and collectors care about the preservation,
conservation and overall management of animation cels.

While the animation genre has lost millions of examples over the years due to the
previous value, economy, and material composition, the current animation
community is working to save the remaining artwork.

Conservators Methods: Private v. Institutional
Research for this paper led to the discovery that there is a difference
in how private conservators preserve animation cels compared to how
conservators from an institution may approach the material. Many private
conservators are contracted to work on a collector’s artworks, or museums
reach out to them for help preserving their materials.

In some circumstances, collectors have directly instructed private conservators to
completely re-paint the image (aka recreation) as a form of restoration.
From research, it is understood that other conservators may analyze the
paint and retouch the image to fill in any flaking paint (Stark, 2007; Bain,
2002; Biederman, 2001).

The practice of recreating the image can monetarily and historically devalue the animation cel by removal of the
original paint material from the object. Restoration of material becomes an
ethical issue for conservators. Ward states that “it is the activity that most
depends upon the skill, judgment, and sensitivity of the individual, and it
also presents the most exacting ethical challenge.” He goes on to state that
the interaction of conservator with objects varies in degrees and by discipline. “There can only be one standard in conservation (the best that
circumstances allow), but the degree of treatment may depend on” a variety
of variables, such as resources, and future plans for the object (Ward, 1986).
He notes that “the importance of a work of art usually lies in the image that
the artist created, rather than in its material. Therefore, while the original
material must be preserved…the restoration of the image takes precedence,
and the introduction of new materials to that end is perfectly acceptable.”
(Ward, 1986). While conservators can preserve aspects of the cel, such as
the celluloid, the flaking of water-based paint is harder to correct. Some
restoration methods can be re-creation rather than restoration depending on
the collector’s or organization’s preference.

Knowledge gained about animation restoration comes from interviews with animation archivists who
have spoken with private conservators and interviewees who have been in
the animation production and animation cel restoration business. I was
unable to interview a private conservator due to the fact that their
knowledge and techniques are used in their business to make a living and
are proprietary in nature.

Conservators that work within archives or museums may meet the ethical challenges of treatments of animation cels
differently than private conservators. Details from the Disney Family
Museum in San Francisco tell of practices that use more conservative
treatments when dealing with flaking paint, such as filling in gaps with acidfree colored paper behind the animation cel. This practice fits in more with
the ethical issue of maintaining the original art. Conservators are also able to complete their preventative work more effectively when they have
continuous access to collections (Ward, 1986), whereas private
conservators are working with an item for that one time and only have to
ensure its enduring preservation through steps taken at the moment. These
ethical challenges could explain some of the differences in practices.
Museums and archives retain animation cels for multiple purposes
such as a record of the history of a studio, or artist, for research in the
medium, or because of its popularity with audiences. And with very few
conservators currently available who are skilled in treating animation cels,
organizations have only two choices: perform conservative preservation
methods to stabilize the image and support and wait for future conservation
techniques, or hire a conservator to “fix” the image.

Preservation Management & Standards
To date, preservation management and standards followed by
archives and museums for animation cels are borrowed from a range of
other materials, such as paper, photography, film, paintings, and graphic
arts. Other resources consulted for this thesis include The Preservation
Management Handbook edited by Ross Harvey and Martha R. Mahard,
Society of American Archivists publication Preserving Archives &
Manuscripts by Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler, and the chapter “Preventative
Preservation” by Steven Weintraub in the Manual of Museum Planning
edited by Barry Lord. Sacracino (2006) iterates that there are no standards
of preservation, management, cataloging, etc. for animation cels. Archives, museums, and special collection libraries may catalog animation cels today
as either photographs and prints or graphic arts. However, repositories have
no specific standards of preservation for animation cels.

With little knowledge of what to do for deteriorating cels, professionals can only
preserve cels as best as possible and wait.

II.

Research Methods & Outcomes

Methods
Various primary and secondary sources were utilized to gather
information to inform the outcomes and recommendations of my thesis.
Primary sources employed include in-person interviews, site visits and a
survey I generated and conducted solely for this thesis. The survey was
completed by archivists, collection managers, curators and other
information professionals of organizations known to have animation cel
holdings in their collections. Secondary sources comprised of online news
release articles of research being conducted on animation cels by wellknown research centers and collaborations between some of these research
centers, published findings from these same research centers which were
geared towards conservation professionals, and published books and
articles on a variety of other topics that relate to the preservation and
management of animation cels.
While the secondary sources do provide some information on
animation cels and the individual components, the interviews, site visits and
survey offer more direct knowledge about the management of animation
cels. The interviews allowed me to converse with professionals that work
with animation cels on a daily or regular basis. This allowed me to learn
what professionals look to for guidance and what information they still wish
to see. It was also in interviews that some archivists expressed a need for
guidelines of animation cel preservation and management as they progress through their own collections.

The site visits present me with an opportunity to see how collections are being managed and provide insight
into what usual practices are being used by various organizations. Although
the survey is administered to a small sample of repositories, the survey
results informed me of additional and more detailed information about
repositories that have animation cels in their collection and how they
manage them.

Interviews
In the course of my research, I interviewed nine professionals from
various backgrounds in animation. The interviews included five studio
archivists, one film editor, one conservator, one collections manager, one
director of an online animation archive and a retired business owner of an
animation cel restoration business. While two separate private conservators
were contacted for interviews, neither answered any interview questions.
This leaves an area that lacks some context in animation cel preservation
and conservation, since repositories will contract private conservators to
work on animation cels if there is no internal conservator. Comments from
other interview participants who contracted work with private conservators
and articles from private conservator business websites allow some
perspective of what responsibilities and tasks a private conservator may take
on for animation cels at a client’s request.
My first interview was with Anna Martino, Sr. Manager, Kevin
Iwaki,

Collections

Coordinator

and

Micheal

Pazmino, Archives

Coordinator of the Nickelodeon Animation Archive and Resource Library
on November 10, 2016, in Burbank, California. They discussed their
process in receiving boxes of animation cels from overseas and selecting
key cels of scenes from animated shows to preserve and include in the
archive. Nickelodeon’s archive is relatively new, as it expanded five years
ago from a tape vault and now houses painted cels, pencil drawings,
storyboards and various formats of media. The team of three archivists has
been working on cataloging and rehousing the collection of animation cels
for the last few years. Mr. Iwaki explained how he constructed the framed
housing for individual cels from archival standard acid-free board and
archival tape as seen below in Figure 1.

One example of the housing Nickelodeon’s Archive Collection Coordinator Kevin
Iwaki constructed to protect the archives animation cels. The animation cel is of Chucky from
Nickelodeon's show Rugrats (1990-2006). Photo by Angela Schwarz

When asked about animation cels that need more than preservation,
he commented that a private conservator is contracted to address issues with
particular cels for Nickelodeon. Additionally, the archivists’ commented
on the lack of knowledge of how to best preserve animation cels and pointed
out that the sole resource on the subject they had been able to locate is the
thesis written in 2006 by Karen Saracino. During the interview, a box of
animation cels was present to exhibit the state the animation cels are in when
they arrive at the archive. The large box is worn and crumpled from
handling and weight of other boxes from the long trip overseas. When the
boxes are received by the archive, they are initially stored in a climate
controlled off-site location until the archivists are able to process select cels
into the archive out of the millions of cels being shipped to them. Inside the
box, hundreds of cels are separated by paper and stored in the box vertically,
as if in a file cabinet seen below in figure 2, illustrating some of the
conditions cels
go through in
their life time.

Figure 2:
State of
animation cels
when shipped
from other
animation studios
overseas to
Nickelodeon
archivists’. Cels
are separated by
non-archival
paper. Photo by
Angela Schwarz

Another interview was with Eric Chin, Senior Archivist and Rachel
Parham, Archivist from NBCUniversal Archives and Special Collections
on December 12, 2017, in North Hollywood, California. This interview
encompassed many elements of animation, not solely animation cels. While
the archive does have animation cels, the majority of their collection are
animation drawings on paper and maquette models of the characters. The
studio’s limited animation cel collection was due to the difficulty in storing
animation cels in the past along with being of lesser value to the studio than
the pencil drawings and other animation elements. Further, NBCUniversal
closed and re-opened an animation studio multiple times over the last forty
to fifty years. NBCUniversal Archives too had boxes shipped to them with
hundreds of animation elements from overseas and are needing time to
carefully go through them and select the key elements they will catalog and
keep for preservation. However, day-to-day tasks and new accession
materials takes up a majority of their time preventing them from getting to
the animation anytime soon.
Additional interviews mentioned provided further background
information on animation cels. Discussions included how the different
repositories catalog and manage animation cels in their individual
collections, a brief history of Warner Bros. animation studios, and the
conservative conservation practices in an organization to preserve
animation cels as they wait for fully studied methods they expect to receive from the Disney ARL and Getty Conservation Institute research project to
guide conservation professionals.

Site Visits
Five site visits were conducted for this project. While two were
arranged as site visits for student chapters, I took the opportunity to use it
as additional research for my thesis. The other three site visits focused more
on animation cels and practices by conservators and archive professionals.
Site visits attended include the Disney Animation Research Library,
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Margaret Herrick Library,
Warner Bros. Photograph Stills Library, NBCUniversal Archives and
Special Collections, and Nickelodeon Animation Archive and Resource
Library. Each brought their own issues and solutions for animation cel
management and preservation. However, I did notice that locations that had
animation cels on-site, rather than stored off-site using an outsourced
storage facility located in a mountain, like Iron Mountain, or with a different
outsourced company, constructed similar housing using some sort of
archival board and plastic sleeving to protect the animation cel when
shelved horizontally in storage.
The site visit to the Disney Animation Research Library (ARL) in
Glendale, California on February 1, 2018, with the Society of American
Archivists student chapter was an essential visit for accessing information
about the care and management of animation cels. As the largest collection
in North America, if not the world, of animation cels, the Disney ARL
houses over 65,000,000 pieces of art in their collection, including an
unknown exact number of animation cels. However, published articles
approximate the number to be over 150,000 sheets of celluloid.
Tori Cranner, Art Collections Manager at the Disney ARL, was our
guide through the library and provided valuable knowledge of their
approach to storage and preservation. The group was shown different
departments of the ARL with introductions and presentations by various
people to provide an overall view of how Disney preserves its collection at
present and what digital strategies they look to instill for future preservation.
While the actual products used to store and preserve were not discussed at
this site visit like they are during Saracino’s visit in 2006, the group's visual
examination of how animation cels are stored still agrees with Saracino’s
description of cels separated by archival treated paper and in archival mat
board folders. The one exception I did notice is that groups of folders are
now housed in small boxes together with labels that include the title and
scene of the film. This change is due to the ARL being in the middle of a
conservation project with the Getty Conservation Institute. The ARL is
working to re-house all their animation cels from folders to flat boxes, while
also putting the scenes back in sequence order. The ARL stores most of
their art, including animation cels, at 60°F and 55% Relative Humidity,
which from research I have found is the best conditions for storing
animation cels. Another preservation project the ARL is organizing is
digitizing all the collection items in the library, including the animation cels, to allow animators and other Disney departments to look up objects for
reference at their desk while they are working rather than stop their work
and go to the ARL to view items for reference. From a preservation
perspective, this will reduce the amount of handling of the objects and
changes in environment objects are exposed to every time items are pulled
from storage.
Another site visit conducted was to the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) Margaret Herrick Library in Los Angeles,
California on November 8, 2017, with Dawn Jaros, Conservator. Ms. Jaros,
who specializes in paper conservation, provided a perspective from a
conservator who works within an organization, which may differ from a
private conservator. Her responsibilities include aiding in the maintenance
of the collection and collections of other organizations who may store their
collection with the AMPAS, such as the ASIFA-Hollywood collection of
animation elements, including animation cels.

The Association

Internationale du Film d’Animation (ASIFA) or International Animated
Film Association is an international organization for animation production
and preservation. The chapter in Los Angeles in known as the ASIFAHollywood. It was estimated that the Library manages over one thousand
animation cels, including the ASIFA-Hollywood collection. Ms. Jaros
follows the on-going project between the Disney ARL and the GCI, among
other resources, to guide her when dealing with animation cels. During my
visit, examples were shown of degradation issues on animation cels within the collections at the Margaret Herrick Library.

While the example problems were minor in comparison to examples Disney provides in their
conservation project, some delamination and cracking could be seen on cels.
The level of degradation of cels at the Margaret Herrick seems to be
minimal with most of the issues being damage to paint and some odors of
vinegar. Not much shrinkage has been noticed by staff. Furthermore,
animation cels that were xerographed show issues of their own as the
photocopied lines crack and fall off the celluloid leaving a small blank space
or no detail over the paint. However, the Library’s main goal is to stabilize
the elements rather than to do anything that may harm or cause the object
to deteriorate faster. It was also mentioned that animation cels are cared for
by the graphic arts archivists alluding to the classification of animation cels
at this location to be a form of graphic art.
The other three site visits provided further information on how each
repository catalogs, stores, and preserves their collections. The parent
organization chose to either manage and preserve the animation cel
collection on site with a permanent archivist, manage and preserve off-site
by an outsourced company like ProTek, that provides archivist to evaluate,
organize, label, and digitize the materials before storing the original
material off-site elsewhere, or managing the collection from an outsourced,
offsite location stored deep in a mountain. This last scenario exhibits less
knowledge of what items are in the collection and their current condition
but does preserve the collection in a suitable environment for preservation.

Survey
In late January 2018, surveys were sent via email using Google
forms to fifteen repositories in the United States. Institutions were selected
based on knowledge of them having animation cels through Saracino’s
thesis or other research, the repositories’ digital catalog, or affiliation to film
and UCLA, and the small sample size was designed to keep the project
manageable for the time available. While the sample size is small, the
selected repositories do provide a representative selection of institutions
that care for animation cels across the United States.

The selected repositories are also the location of the largest collections of animation cels
in the United States. This selection, and the detailed responses provided to
the survey questions, are why I believe the data from this sample of
repositories supports my conclusions. A major component of my thesis
project was generating and conducting this survey of 15 repositories that
were categorized as one out of four types of information institutions. The
repository types included studio archives, museums, special libraries, and
archives. Each type of institution is administered by a different type of
governance. While studio archives are operated under a for-profit business
model, museums, special libraries, and archives, in general, operate under a
non-profit or foundation status. Other special libraries and archives fall
under an academic governance model if affiliated with a university. This
difference in governance values and mission may contribute to the
difference between repositories’ levels of management and preservation of
animation cels. The number of repositories selected for each category type was between three to five institutions. A final number for each category
was five studio archives, three archives, four museums, and three special
libraries. While the Disney Animation Research Library was included in
the special libraries category, there can be some debate that the Disney
Animation Research Library is a studio archive. The reason I categorized
the Disney ARL as a special library was due to the institution’s name, the
fact that there is a separate Disney Archive on the Disney Studio lot,
because their function is to be more of a usable resource for animators and
researchers, and in part to round out the number of special libraries with
animation cels. A full list of repositories can be found in Appendix B.
My survey was modeled after the Heritage Health Index survey from
2004 with questions focused towards animation cel collections (Heritage
Preservation, 2005).

The survey is thirty-eight questions about a repository’s whole collection, animation cel collection, environmental
conditions, staffing, and exhibition. Although the survey can be considered
long, it does ask for valuable information on the overall management and
preservation that animation cels are exposed to in different repositories.
This will allow for a better analysis between the practices used by the
different types of repositories and the health of the repositories in the survey
sample. Furthermore, having a long and thorough set of questions will also
allow for a better analysis of which methods have been practiced most often
by professionals and how these methods may be affecting the animation cels
in their collection.

Data Analysis and Outcomes
Data analysis of results from the surveys includes answers received
from eight out of the 15 repositories that were sent a survey. These eight
repositories are: Disney Animation Research Library (Disney ARL),
NBCUniversal Archives & Collections, Nickelodeon Animation Archive &
Resource Library, Prints & Photograph Division of the Library of Congress,
Cartoon Museum, Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), Charles M. Schulz
Museum & Research Center, and a partial survey from the UCLA Film &
Television Archive. This equals about 53% of the selected repositories that
completed the survey. However, one archive (UCLA F&TV) to respond
completed the first six questions and left the rest blank as they did not have
any animation cels in their collection. Of the remaining seven repositories,
three said they could not complete the survey due to a confidentiality policy,
to the collection being housed off-site and not cataloged, or because an
outsourced company manages the collection and internal archivists of the
organization could not respond to the survey questions. However, an
interview and site visit was conducted with two of these organizations prior
to the survey being sent out. The other four institutions did not respond at
all. So, in fact, 11 repositories responded in some fashion whether negative
or positive to the survey. This equals about 73% of total responses with an
approximate 20% of repositories that had animation cels but were not able
to complete the survey for various mentioned reasons.
Of the eight institutions that completed the survey, one is a special
library, one is an archive, three are museums, and three answered as studio archives. The one archive that completed a part of the survey is the one
repository that did not have any animation cels. As no other archives
completed the survey, this leaves the category somewhat unrepresented in
the survey results. From the three surveys that indicated the institution to be
a studio archive, the Disney ARL was included in this category. This differs
from where I considered the institution to be categorized as a special library
when selecting repositories. Since the Disney ARL falls under the Disney
Company corporate governance and the primary users are the Disney
animators, ARL staff consider the Disney Animation Research Library to
be another studio archive. Although 50% of the repositories completed the
survey, the variation in the number of surveys received per category does
not provide a balanced outlook over the types of institutions. However,
responses collected from the surveys will provide a basis of methods used
on an individual repository level.

The percentage of an institution’s governance is distributed in a more equal division between three corporate
for-profit governances and four non-profit foundation governances with the
one archive under an academic governance. Overall, survey answers seem
rather similar with some variations and some questions left blank. The
survey questions can be found in Appendix D and responses can be found
in Appendix E.
In the first section of the survey, questions one through 10 aims to
create a basis of information on each repository’s animation cel collection
in comparison to their whole collection. These questions indicate the type of information institution and governance that influence the collection
management decisions. Additional questions determine that the repository
does have an animation cel collection and the number of animation cel
holdings in comparison to the number of their whole collection, as well as
how animation cels are cataloged. From the eight surveys, one denotes that
0% of the institution’s collection includes animation cels, four indicate the
repository’s collections are made up of around 1 – 19% of animation cels,
one survey indicates that 20 – 39% of the repository’s collection includes
animation cels, and the other two do not know the percentage of animation
cels in their collection. However, from amounts listed in question five and
six from one of these two surveys, I can calculate that animation cels make
up less than 1% of the whole collection. Responses for repositories total
collection holdings range between 7,000 to 160,000 with three not
answering the question. Amounts for animation cel holdings range between
100 to 500 with four survey respondents unsure about the number of
animation cels in the repository. Yet, literature research indicates that the
Disney ARL repository, listed as unsure, cares for around 150,000
animation cels in their collection.
While most institutions started collecting animation cels in the latter
half of the 20th century, two started collecting animation cels earlier, one
studio archive in 1923 and one museum in 1939. A number of survey
respondents answered that collected animation cels range into the late
1990’s to 2000 and skipped question nine. Question nine asks for a
43

breakdown of what percentage of the animation cel collection was produced
during specific decades. All the repositories agree that animation cels are
not cataloged as a medium of paper as previous research has indicated, but
rather as art or as their own material, animation cels. One institution
indicates that they are cataloged as special collections. This majority
consensus from repositories that animation cels are cataloged as artwork
indicates that classification for animation cels has changed over the last
twelve years from earlier research in Saracino’s thesis where some
repositories classified animation cels as paper.
The second section of the survey questions the environmental
conditions of the repositories’ collection space. However, an important
oversight was made when no questions were included asking what the actual
temperature and relative humidity are for each repository for their animation
cel collection. Even so, seven surveys indicate that conditions are regulated
for temperature, relative humidity, light, and ultraviolet light. But one
studio repository has limited areas that have conditions fully regulated, and
another studio archive has no relative humidity control for its collections.
Furthermore, all institutions use gloves and flat archival housing to handle
and store animation cels. However, environmental measurements and
control products vary among the institutions. Some indicate measuring the
collections environment using thermohygrometers, and some mention use
of light filters, and one special library indicates that animation cels are
stored at the same temperature as photographs. Storing animation cels in
44

temperatures recommended for photography and film has been typical for
the material since the plastic support is known to be better preserved in
colder temperatures. But the colder temperature can cause damage to the
paint. None of the repositories specify using any other products to control
conditions of storage. This may be due to archival folders and boxes now
being permeated with molecular traps to capture any off-gassing from the
plastic support or other gases harmful to the stability of materials. As for
adequate storage space, five locations agreed that 100% of their collection
is stored well. One location’s respondent thought 60-79% of the collection
was stored safely, and another location’s respondent did not know if the
whole collection was stored in adequate space. Similar answers prevailed
when asked what percentage of animation cels are stored in adequate space,
one museum institution indicates 0%, a studio archive indicates only 1-19%,
a third repository replied don’t know, while the remaining four repositories
say 100% of their animation cels are in adequate and safe storage space.
Space is valuable to any repository. Although most surveyed locations have
adequate space for their collections, there are those that have not yet updated
their space or performed an assessment of their animation collection.
Yet, responses about whether an assessment of the general
conditions of the animation cel collection has been done are much more
varied. Three have completed a visual evaluation of their animation cels,
two have not, one is not up to date, and another is in the process of
completing a new evaluation. The time between assessments also varies.
45

The three studio archives have not done one in numerous years until
recently. One studio had not assessed their animation cel collection in 25
years until recently when a new building was constructed. Another rarely
assesses their collection. The last indicated only one assessment had been
done in recent years due to a conservation study. This is out of the
animation cels lifetime starting in 1923, which is the most surprising
because the studio had been collecting animation cels for decades and has
been a leader in animation production and preservation. Mindy Johnson’s
book titled Ink & Paint: The Women of Walt Disney’s Animation (2017,
361) and a site visit indicate that the collection was moved once before
moving to a state of the art building in 1999. An evaluation of materials
before, during or after this move would have been done by the caretakers at
the time. The groups visual observance of every item having been housed
in a box with a label and cataloged to a shelf indicates that the collection
was assessed prior to the conservation study. Yet, evaluations are not done
regularly as seen with the museums and new staff of the organization may
not know the history of the collection without thorough research. The three
museums and the special library have set policies on when the collection
needs to be assessed which also includes the animation cel collection. But
one indicates the items’ main assessments are done when they arrive at the
repository. However, two others indicate an assessment is done every two
to five years with one of them also evaluating the cels that are pulled for
exhibitions. This additional evaluation for exhibitions is typical for museum
46

preservation of collection items to maintain provenance and to provide a
condition report for exhibition contracts.
The way in which animation cels are stored at an item level is quite
important since the celluloid can stick together over time, paint can stick to
plastic, causing complications in preserving the materials. While four out
of seven (57%) repositories store animation cels separated by archival tissue
paper or in a folder and then grouped in a box, one did not answer, one
stores cels individually in a folder and a box, and one other stores cels with
tissue paper dividers and in a flat box. But the consensus is preserving the
cels and the amount of storage space by storing individual animation cels
laid flat separated by some archival material divider and then small amounts
of grouped cels are stored horizontally on the shelf in a small (thin) flat box.
However, from site visit discussions, regular evaluations are encouraged
every few years to ensure the animation cel is not sticking to the divider and
to evaluate the condition of the cel.
Section three of the survey includes questions about which staff
handles and cares for the animation cel collection, including if outsourced
professionals are contracted to work with the cels. In addition, questions
include topics of funding and exhibition. The three studio archives have
slight differences in which staff performs preservation and conservation
tasks. The one animation studio with an older collection has a paid
conservation/preservation staff member, whereas the archive staff of the
other animation studio and the one film/tv studio conduct the conservation
47

and preservation duties as needed for their collection. All three studios have
less than 10 staff members who work with the animation cels. One has
seven staff, one has two staff that work with animation cels out of the four
archive staff, and the last studio has three staff to manage its archive
collection and all three handle the cels.
The one special library has paid conservation and preservation staff,
volunteers, and archive staff that handles and performs duties as needed to
preserve animation cels. While they have 150 staff members in the whole
unit, about 1-19% of this staff works with the animation cels. This is
roughly 29 staff members, the highest number of staff in this survey
research to conduct preservation of animation cels. The three museums
have a similar number of staff compared to the studio archives. Two of the
museums have six and four staff members equaling about 1-19% of total
staff, while the other museum has only one staff member equaling about 2039% of total staff to preserve the collection.

Yet, the staffing for

conservation and preservation shifts. The museum with the most staff
members that work with animation cels is the only museum surveyed to not
have a paid conservation/preservation staff member, but rather has regular
staff conduct tasks as needed and contracts an outsourced conservator to
perform any necessary work on animation cels. The two museums with
smaller staff have a paid conservation/preservation staff member.

In

addition, the museum with only one conservation/preservation staff
member also uses volunteers to care for its animation cel collection.
48

Overall, there is an equal division of repositories that have a paid
conservation/preservation staff member versus regular archive staff
performing conservation/preservation tasks as needed.

One of those

repositories has paid conservation/preservation staff and regular staff that
performs conservation/preservation tasks as needed. Only one museum
with a small staff and the special library allow volunteers to work with
collections, and just one repository uses an outsourced conservator.
Reasons for these staffing results among repositories can vary, but
organizations may want to keep material and decisions internal to control
the provenance and methods performed to conserve or preserve the
animation material. Since half of the repositories have a paid conservation
staff, conclusions can be made that repositories, most museums and special
libraries, are valuing their whole collection to ensure that a properly trained
conservation staff is on site to manage and care for the variety of collection
materials. However, the fact that the other 50% of the repositories have
regular collection staff conducting conservation/preservation tasks shows
that additional research and knowledge of how best to preserve animation
cels is needed in the archival and library field. Interviews suggest that many
of these regular staff members perform conservative methods of
preservation and conservation until further and better research and
knowledge are disseminated among the archival and library field.
Signs and causes of deterioration for the animation cels among the
repositories collections appear to be typical for the art material. The studio
49

archives with more recent animation cel collections comment on needing
proper assessment strategies, along with the removal of bad storage
materials and practice, and proper accessioning of the animation cel
collection. As assessments have not been done for all the collections,
deterioration signs were limited to paint flaking, cel distortion and cracking,
and off-gassing from the celluloid plastic. On the other hand, museums
listed causes and signs of deterioration to be tape and staples, dirt/grime, as
well as the classic deterioration signs of the material, flaking paint and
curling celluloid. Again, there is an institutional difference between studio
archives and more typical information institutions of museums and special
libraries.

A majority of the studio archives have yet to assess their

animation cel collection, while the museums and special library have
included the materials into their whole collection. This difference can be
for a variety of reasons. The studio archives have thousands, if not millions,
of items in their whole collection with animation cels only a small part of
that collection. Museums can specialize in one or more particular materials
providing more focus on animation cels in their collections. The special
libraries can exhibit cross issues of having millions of items with animation
cels only a small collection out of the whole but are able to focus on the
animation material due to the size of staff and resources.
A majority of repositories have funding for conservation and
preservation activities in their budget. Yet, only two of them have 1-19%
for

their

overall

budget

allocated
50

specifically

for

the

preservation/conservation of animation cels, even though one is a museum
and the other is a studio archive. These two repositories happen to be wellknown repositories of famous cartoons and animation characters.

In

addition, these two repositories have different staffing, as one has a paid
internal conservation/preservation staff member and the other contracts
external conservators when needed. The remaining repositories may not
divide up their budget per collection materials, but rather may use the funds
for conservation and preservation activities determined by the materials
severity of deterioration. This lack of budgeting for preservation and
conservation activities seems to hinder preservation activities for a
repository’s animation cel collection as only two repositories claim that
90% or more of their collection is in no need of preservation, both of which
are cartoon and animation museums with an ability to focus on animation
cels in the collection, which may account for why their collection is in such
good order. While two others were unable to answer due to not answering
the questions or in the middle of an assessment project, the last three
repositories which consist of two studio archives and one special library
assess that 100% of their animation cel collection is in need of basic to
urgent need of preservation. The reason for why 100% of their animation
cel collection is in need of preservation is not clear. It could be due to
respondents being unclear on how to answer the survey questions, a lack of
priority by the studio archive, previous bad storage and assessment
strategies, or select staff knowledgeable in animation cel collection. Each
51

repository’s reasons vary due to mission or function within the parent
organization, staffing, funding, and priority for their animation cel
collection.
The final survey questions asked about exhibition practices. When
it comes to exhibiting animation cels most repositories exhibit cels
vertically mounted in a frame on the wall, while one uses an easel with
backing. There was only one museum repository that mentioned exhibiting
animation cels laid flat in a display case, but this depends on the exhibit.
The special library exhibits cels in a mat that is then contained in a plexipack with silica gel. The Disney ARL described a previous exhibition
enclosure in 2014 at the American Institute for Conservation of Historic and
Artistic Works (AIC) annual conference. They used a window mat,
matboard backing with the cel attached by Japanese paper hinges, a sheet
of Artsorb (a silica gel RH buffer), and RH measurement strip. These
examples seem to be the current best way to house animation cels until
further research is known.
The duration an animation cel is on exhibit is more varied as two
repositories exhibit pieces three to six months, one exhibits six to twelve
months, while the other exhibits up to six months in one year, but no more
than twelve months in five years.

Other repositories responded that

exhibition duration varies. As exposure to environmental conditions during
exhibition can contribute to animation cel deterioration, repositories in
general limit the duration of exhibition and handling while traveling to
52

preserve the elements but allow the public to enjoy viewing the materials
for a limited time.
Overall, the survey, interviews, and site visits bring together an
understanding that each repository is different.

Each is administered

according to their function, whether that is the preservation of company
history for company business or the preservation and access of an American
art form for research and the public. Studio archives exhibit placing a lower
value on their animation cels when compared to other types of repositories,
by the lack of priority placed on assessing and caring for the collection.
This is changing as a few of the studio archives contacted during research
for this thesis were in the middle of an assessment of animation elements
including animation cels, or plans for an assessment was in the near future.
The cartoon and animation specific museums along with one of the studio
archives appear to have a handle on managing and caring for their animation
cel collection. The repositories with collections of multiple materials other
than animation cels tend to have a slower momentum in assessing and
preserving their animation cel collection.

53

Recommendations
The culmination of research methods in the form of an extensive
survey, site visits and interviews along with a literature review, are the basis
for the following recommendations that focus on the management and
preservation needs of animation cels. These recommendations are directed
towards information memory professionals, such as archivists, collection
managers, registrars, and special collection librarians, with little or no
knowledge of animation or animation cels that may exist in their repository.
The recommendations are to aid them in managing and preserving this
limited art form.

However, a warning needs to be mentioned that

caretakers must proceed with caution when working with animation cels
and keep the original artwork unaffected as possible when applying
preservation practices. If conservation treatment is determined to be
needed, please consult a professionally trained conservator.

First, acquire an understanding of the animation process and
development of animation cels. Professionals that work with animation cels
need to have an understanding of the production process of animation and
the components that make an animation cel. This will help professionals to
determine where a particular cel was located in the camera layer levels
during the production of a film scene which can determine how valuable
that cel is to preserve over similar one. As multi-plane cameras had up to
seven layers, each layer will have different components for characters and
scene action in one picture of a scene that includes twenty-four pictures to
54

complete a scene. In general, the second layer was considered the key
element as it had the most action of the scene and would be used more than
other cel layers. This makes the key animation cels more valuable than a
first or third layer which may have an arm or leg for movement. There are
numerous published works that further explain the animation process.
Second, administer conservative general care practices for
animation cels. All repositories suggest wearing gloves when handling
animation cels to prevent fingerprints on the plastic support. Should cels
need to have fingerprints or dust cleaned from the image, a soft cotton cloth
can be used to lightly rub fingerprints and to remove dirt from the plastic
support.

Never use the cloth on the paint as the cloth can rub the

delaminated or fragile paint off. As the paint is water-soluble, using water
on or near animation cels should be prohibited to prevent any chance of
water spilling onto the cels and re-wetting the paint causing it to dilute or
smear. Cels need to remain flat to prevent paint from cracking or otherwise
degrading.

As cellulose nitrate and cellulose acetate off-gas various

constituents in the plastic, which can cause cellulose nitrate to be highly
flammable, airing out these animation cels on regular occasions is
recommended for safety.
Third, provide appropriate preservation storage for animation cels.
There is no way to prevent the natural deterioration process of organic
material like cellulose or ingredients in the paint, but methods can be used
to slow the progress of degradation. Repositories can use archival materials
55

that have silica gel in the material, such as Artsorb, to minimize exposure
to humidity; archival matboard with molecular traps using zeolites can also
be used to reduce the buildup of off-gassing (Rempel, 1996). Animation
cels are not like other graphic and art materials and would be best preserved
if individual cels were placed in window mats to allow off-gassing to escape
and support the animation cel on a flat surface. Then a handful of cels in
mats can be placed in flat boxes to be stored on the shelf. This will reduce
the pressure and friction on the image of each animation cel. Special care
needs to be taken with the paint, in particular when dealing with unstable
paint or humid conditions. The paint will absorb the moisture in the air
becoming tacky and stick to plastic supports, other painted images and other
materials. Interleaving cels with archival paper or folders, a method not
typical of other collections, is highly recommended. Disney ARL uses
glassine to sleeve individual animation cels and prevent them from sticking
to other materials. All materials used should be of archival standard and
acid-free.
Fourth, regulate proper environmental conditions of storage
facilities for storing animation cels. Temperature, relative humidity, light,
and ultraviolet energy all have degrading effects on animation cels. And
being a composite object made of materials that do not have the same
preservation condition requirements can make it difficult to protect
animation cels from these effects. In previous years the temperature used
for animation cels were the low 60°’s Fahrenheit or below that are used for
56

film and photography to preserve the plastic support. Current research
suggests that a higher temperature closer to that for paintings is ideal for
animation cels’ multiple components. This temperature range is 68°F to
72°F. While the temperature for paintings is too warm for the plastic, a
comparable temperature for animation cels would be a range of 60°F to
65°F, preferably closer to 65°F. Relative humidity (RH) is much the same
story. Animation cels have been stored at an RH of 50% or lower all to
preserve the plastic support. However, research conducted in the Disney
ARL and GCI project indicate that the ideal RH for animation cels to
preserve the plastic and the paint is closer to 55% to 60% relative humidity
(Beltran, 2017). This allows the air to retain enough moisture to keep the
paint from drying out and cracking, but not so moist as to cause the plastic
support to start warping. Essential preservation when using temperature
and relative humidity is the stability of these conditions as temperature
affects relative humidity. However, if a choice has to be made between
maintaining the relative humidity or temperature, maintaining the relative
humidity is best.
The level and type of light can have additional effects on animation
cels. In preservation practices, there is visible light and ultraviolet light
(UV) that require professionals to take care of the amount of light an object
is exposed to over time. Visible light is required to work in storage space
and view objects, but anything else may cause undue damage to cels. While
visible light is measured in lux or lumens per square meter, ultraviolet light
57

is measured in microwatts of ultraviolet radiation per lumen of visible light
(µW/l). UV produces high energy of radiation which is rather damaging to
several objects in repositories, daylight being the source of considerable
UV. However, artificial UV light sources include some fluorescent, metal
halide, and mercury vapor lights all which should be avoided in repository
lighting fixtures. Light sources that emit more than 10 µW/l need to be
reduced. While most visible light is acceptable, to best preserve animation
cels visible light should range between no more than 50 and 100 lux. Some
methods that can be utilized is to use shades, films, or filters attached to the
top of shelves and pulled down to cover the shelves to further filter light,
decrease the number of light fixtures in an area, decrease the wattage of the
light bulbs, and utilize light dimmers that turn lights off with no active
movement.
Additional

environmental

condition

control

that

can

be

implemented if the repository has the funds, is to install an air filtration
system to prevent and remove dust and out gassed vapors from inside the
building. While this may be out of some institutions’ budgets for some
time, it should be considered for future plans.
Fifth, monitor the collection. The repositories that best knew their
collection from the surveys were the ones that had a regular collection
assessment policy implemented in their institution.

Examining the

condition of the collection enables staff members that perform conservation
and preservation tasks to be aware of any changes that occur over time due
58

to age, storage, environment or exhibition. Maintaining accurate records of
when evaluations are done, what changes are noted, exhibition notes of
traveling exhibits, and provenance history would all be good to have when
managing animation cels. Any changes need to be clearly documented and
be maintained for new and existing staff members. Performing regular
evaluations of collections can also permit discovery of any pest infestations
or other issues with or in the storage space before the problem becomes too
big.
Sixth, a continuation of animation cel research is needed along with
dissemination of information to information professionals. My research has
shown that there is information available on the individual components of
animation cels and there is a growing emergence of research being
conducted and published on animation cels themselves aimed toward the
conservation field. However, there is a noticeable lack of information about
and standards for the preservation of animation cels for information and
library professionals, such as archivists. In smaller staffed repositories,
where a conservator is not on staff, as exhibited in some of the surveys
received in this project, it is important for archivists and librarians to be
aware of management and preservation methods for animation cels in their
collection. Although Disney’s ink and paint department do produce limited
reproductions of chosen cels, in general, animation cels are no longer
produced as they once were and sharing current and future research will
help to preserve animation cels for future audiences to enjoy.
59

Implementing these guidelines will not be an easy task, but can start
with articles on the research and data from this thesis submitted to
professional organizations that have the infrastructure and authority to set
standards. Some organizations in mind are the Society of Animation
Studies (SAS); the Visual Materials section and other sections that relate to
animation cels in the Society of American Archivists (SAA); and the
American Library Association (ALA). By disseminating the data, and
recommended guidelines, additional support can be garnered for the
guidelines from information and cultural heritage professionals who can aid
in influencing decision makers in the mentioned organizations. Another
course of action is presenting a poster at the national conference for these
organizations. The ALA and the SAA are the best organizations with
authority that can bring credibility to the guidelines with their peer review
and committees to set standards.

60

Conclusion
My thesis project has shown that there is limited literature published
on management and preservation of animation cels for information memory
professionals. Most published materials on the subject, however, are aimed
toward a conservator readership. While there are numerous publications on
the various forms of cellulose nitrate, cellulose acetate and polyester
celluloid used in film and photography along with the numerous
publications on art and art forms, there are still no written publications
specifically about the management and care of animation cels. Many of the
archivists and librarians that manage and care for animation cels rely on
information relayed from paid internal conservators. However, information
professionals who do not have the ability to converse with an internal
conservator or have a budget to consult with a private conservator are left
with vague information to guide them in the management and preservation
of their repositories’ collection.
To date, there are no standards set for preservation practices of
animation cels in any information memory field, and common terminology
for animation cels comes from film and animation production. In addition,
classification of animation cels is still uncertain as the various personnel
that I interviewed or surveyed consider animation cels to be a range of
mediums, such as graphic art, art, special collections, or their own separate
classification, animation cels. However, classification has changed over the
last ten years when some repositories classified animation cels as paper or
61

photographs and now most classify animation cels as some form of art.
Despite these issues, most information professionals are managing their
collection in a rather suitable and conservative manner while waiting for
better practices and standards.
Data gathered from my survey along with interviews of additional
repository personnel exhibit that there is a divide among the types of
repositories that manage animation cels and the priority these institutions
place on assessing and preserving their animation cel collection. Studio
archives show less momentum in evaluating and accessing their animation
cel collection over the multiple other materials in their collection. Museums
and special libraries take various priority levels on managing animation cels
depending on the material focus of the museum or special collection, but
still place a higher priority on assessing and accessioning animation cels
that come into their collection when compared with the studio archives.
However, the animation studios are currently in progress of assessments of
their animation cel collections, exhibiting a change to their priorities for
managing their animation cel collections for the future.
Collectors of animation cel art have been pursuing items since the
1930’s after the Disney studio sold its first animation cel to the Museum of
Modern Art. But it was the high demand for animation cels in the 1980’s
that made animation cels a unique American art form that collectors paid
thousands of dollars to obtain. Animation art has remained a highly

62

collectible item at auction and with added research in the preservation of
animation cels becomes an even more recognized important artform.
Current storage and preservation methods for animation cels are
easy for any repository to incorporate into their collection as they would
already be doing them for their other collection materials. Controlling the
environment conditions, proper storage and handling, and knowledgeable
staff are easy ways to further preserve animation cels as new research is
conducted to better understand the needs of animation cels.

Yet, a recognized set of standards for information professionals regarding
animation cels will better result in uniform management and future
preservation practices for this complex American artform.