A Journey to Improve Collaboration Efforts Between Stakeholders and
Teacher Librarians: A Mixed Method Study

Collaboration between teachers and teacher librarians (TLs) faces fundamental
challenges in the high school setting. Studies of professional library organizations have
suggested that collaborations between teachers and TLs are effective in improving student
learning, encouraging personal reading, and raising digital citizenship awareness. The
conceptual framework and structure of the teacher and librarian collaboration model (TLC-III) is
based on the notion that robust collaboration efforts involving groups of teachers have positive
effects on students. Researchers have validated the TLC-III model in studies with various
groups of teachers and TLs as instructional partners, but have not done so at the high school
level. The aim of this study was accordingly to validate the TLC-III model at this level with
various high school teachers across disciplines and to determine why some choose to collaborate
with TLs while others do not and the factors that influence the formation of a collaborative
environment at a large, comprehensive high school. This mixed-method study relied on 62
x

anonymous surveys and 22 face-to-face interviews to assess what is needed to improve
collaboration as part of the learning environment at this school.
Keywords: teacher librarian, high school collaboration, school library programs,
librarian-teacher collaboration, student achievement, principal-librarian collaboration, school
culture, relationships.

xi

CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND
Collaboration is an effective and indeed powerful instructional method; thus failure to
collaborate can have negative impacts on teachers and administrators alike. Collaboration is
particularly crucial because individual, isolated teaching efforts no longer suffice when it comes
to equipping students with the skills necessary for their future success, including working well
with others. Numerous studies have noted that collaboration between teachers and teacher
librarians (TLs) remains a relatively novel concept for teachers in general, though it is valuable
for TLs and highly recommended in their preservice training (Loertscher, 2014). Thus research
into the effectiveness of teachers working closely with TLs on curriculum planning and
implementation for improving student academic achievement (Lance, Rodney, & HamiltonPennell, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2005) is often cited in the library literature but only rarely in the
education literature (Montiel-Overall & Jones, 2011). In the education world, working on an
intellectual endeavor means collaboration, as two or more individuals integrate and share
information that promotes student learning and engagement (Montiel-Overall, 2005a).
Collaboration has emerged as a trend within in the twenty-first century classroom owing
to the advent of new technologies (American Association of School Librarians [AASL], 2007),
as educators are moving from teaching in isolation to learning from their peers, for instance
forming professional learning communities (PLCs) to improve their teaching skill sets. There
has also been a shift in society toward preparing students for college and careers by providing
them with skills useful for thinking and working together, especially in the context of an
increasingly global job market. This shift has affected both educators and administrators, who
can support students’ move from thinking about their own individual efforts to group work, from
independence to awareness and awareness of their community and surroundings (Leonard &

1

Leonard, 2001b). Educators represent a model for students to learn how to be effective
collaborators. Collaboration thus involves stakeholders who share a collective idea working
together to achieve it to foster student achievement.
TLs have a direct influence on student achievement (Lance et al., 2000, 2001, 2002,
2005), in part through implementing collaboration efforts within the broader school community
(Farmer, 2007). Successful collaboration occurs when TLs and fellow teachers incorporate
information literacy into their teaching, promote reading for both acquisition of knowledge and
personal enjoyment, and integrate technology within the classroom in ways that increase
students’ depth of knowledge through their learning experiences (Farmer, 2007; Loertscher,
2014; Montiel-Overall, 2005a). The most successful school library programs in terms of direct
impacts on student achievement are those in which TLs collaborate with teachers as equals in the
instructional process (Cooper & Bray, 2011).
Roles of the Teacher Librarian
In today’s school setting, the roles of TLs are changing rapidly as they work to prepare
students for the rigors of education and of changing and emerging technologies. TLs and school
library programs encourage collaboration with teachers to promote students’ academic success.
Thus, the AASL (2007) described information literacy and technology skills as crucial for
effective functioning in today’s knowledge-based society. Indeed, all educators must integrate
the teaching of information literacy and technology skills into the regular curriculum (Kuhlthau,
2004; Scott & O’Sullivan, 2005). The emergence of new pedagogical methods with respect to
information literacy has affected the ways in which teachers and TLs impart these skills to
students to keep pace with the emergence of new tools (Chu, Tse, & Chow, 2011).

2

TLs’ professional objectives include acting as proponents of literacy programs,
promoting effective digital research skills, and managing information that students can utilize for
school assignments and for the act of learning more generally (Zmuda & Harada, 2008). TLs are
increasingly working as, among other things, collaborative teachers, program administrators for
professional development, information specialists, and technology integrators (Cooper & Bray,
2011; Mardis & Everhart, 2014; Montiel-Overall, 2009; Purcell, 2010). Further, TLs take on
leadership positions both in the school setting and at the district level in their efforts to improve
the learning landscape (Chu et al., 2011).
In order to be prepared to bridge the needs of school libraries and classrooms, TLs
undergo special training. In California, for example, TLs earn both a state teaching credential
and a state TL services credential (California Department of Education, 2017). Credentialing
requires a minimum of three years of classroom teaching, completion of graduate coursework,
and submission of a portfolio to the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. TLs may
hold various titles, including school librarian, school library media specialist, and TL. These
terms all describe the same responsibility for leading a school library program. Thus, what the
AASL terms a TL position may be described by a district or state as “school library media
specialist,” a designation that reflects the reality that modern school libraries contain more than
books. Other districts use the term TL to emphasize the school librarian’s primary role as an
educator rather than a custodian of books (American Library Association, 2015). In this study, I
use the term TL because the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing uses it when
issuing the librarian teaching credential and it is preferred by the California Department of
Education.

3

Given all of the responsibilities and challenges that TLs face daily, it is necessary to
clarify their roles so that stakeholders may accurately identify and understand how schools can
best utilize them in efforts to improve student achievement (Purcell, 2010). Misperceptions on
the part of administrators, teachers, and other stakeholders can create an unnecessary burden for
TLs as they attempt to conduct meaningful work, build relationships, collaborate, and promote
literacy (Shannon, 2012). When effectively deployed, TLs can act as co-teachers and fellow
curriculum planners; they can influence students’ lifelong learning habits, helping them to
conduct continual inquires and to extend research habits that they first encounter in a school
setting (Bush, 2013). TLs as collaborators can help in the process of creating relevant learning
experiences for all students and thereby also influence how students view their relationships with
the school community and how they view themselves as self-learners and readers.
Statement of the Problem
There has been research on collaboration among teachers who teach similar content or at
the same grade level, but little work on collaboration among teachers and other school
professionals in other content fields, such as TLs (Kimmel, 2012a). Collaboration forms part of
the teaching model and standards that guide TLs as the seek to realize instructional goals.
Planning and collaborating among teachers are not neat and tidy linear processes (Wolcott,
1994). Teachers plan for various reasons using various strategies, and TLs need to understand
and accommodate various ways of collaborating with teachers and of leveraging their roles as
providers of resources (Kimmel, 2012b).
While many studies have explored the ways in which TLs impact student achievement
and help to close the achievement gap as well as theories and models that schools have used to
promote and enhance collaboration efforts, little research has focused on collaboration involving

4

high school TLs and single-subject teachers. Rather, attention has been given to planning by
academic college librarians’ and the impact of research skills on graduation rates. There are thus
important areas awaiting future research regarding TLs’ changing leadership roles and gaps in
knowledge regarding the implementation of collaborative efforts are implemented in the high
school classroom.
Research Questions
The overarching research question for this study concerned the elements that foster
effective collaborative exchanges between high school teachers and TLs. The following subquestions grew out of this main idea:
(a) How do high school teachers, administrators, and high school TLs who work in the
same school setting define collaboration?
(b) Does an individual’s definition of collaboration affect how he or she interacts and
collaborates with other teachers or teaching support staff?
(c) What factors contribute to or detract from collaboration between teachers and TLs?
Conceptual Framework
Collaboration is a prominent theme within the AASL’s standards for the twenty-first
century learner, in that the standards advance students’ learning and achievement and thereby
help them to become productive members of a global society. Relationships among fellow
educators, teachers and students, and other stakeholders are critical in the education field, for
they can define how teachers approach the classroom or the types of access to information that
are available for themselves, students, and colleagues. According to Daly (2010), the
relationships that teachers cultivate within the school community increase their chances of
staying in the education profession, the extent to which they work with others, and their

5

willingness to learn from each other. These relationships can positively influence how teachers
present the curriculum in the classroom through shared experiences, conversations, and
observations. The role of TLs is to create a positive social network within the school system and
to facilitate positive organizational change as they promote information literacy standards and
collaborate continually with teachers and other stakeholders.
Montiel-Overall (2005a) defined the five core elements of teacher-TL collaboration as
interest, innovation, intensity, integration, and implementation. This overall “TLC model”
involves specific core elements that promote to shared thinking, planning, and creation of
something new (Hamilton, 2011; Montiel-Overall, 2005a). Montiel-Overall (2005a) also
outlined four models of collaboration between teachers and TLs. Model A, coordination, which
requires the least involvement, occurs when a teacher works autonomously with little or no
interaction with a TL. Model B, cooperation, involves combining the efforts of teachers and TLs
in instruction while formal lesson planning continues to be done by individuals. Montiel-Overall
(2012) later revised the TLC model, renaming it “TLC-III,” but the core elements remained the
same. Researchers have emphasized that both teachers and TLs need to avoid the codependency
model (Cooper & Bray, 2011), according to which the classroom teacher leaves all of the
instruction to the TL without learning how to present the material better in future instruction.
Model C, integrated instruction, involves high-level involvement that demonstrates, again,
shared thinking, planning, and creation of something new. Model D, integrated curriculum,
represents the implementation of Model C school-wide in collaboration with the district and
other administrators at the district level rather than in a specific school setting.
Integration, as a core element of collaboration, is a major factor in student achievement.
Collaboration to integrate research and literacy skills across the school curriculum in its entirety

6

facilitates student comprehension of a broad range of subjects (math, history, language arts,
science, etc.) while simultaneously developing information literacy and research abilities.
Interdisciplinary connections foster a deep understanding of information that may in fact be the
most important factor when it comes to improving academic achievement (Montiel-Overall,
2006), though it seems to be the case that teachers only collaborate with specific other teachers
(Kimmel, 2012a). As discussed earlier, the call has increasingly been for teachers to leave their
isolation as content experts in order to make their knowledge explicit and to engage in
collaborative inquiry about practice. It is up to TLs to learn how to engage in collaborative
inquiry with other teachers. Additional research is necessary to identify and develop best
practices for promoting collaboration between TLs and high school teachers. In any case, it is
imperative to advocate for the roles of TLs and the school library curriculum in ways that
improve such collaborative relationships.
Teachers’ Perspectives on Collaboration
Collaboration, then, is one of the most important aspects of a TL’s role, but, for a variety
of reasons, it has proved challenging to implement (Wilson, 2012). Some classroom teachers
may not know how students stand to benefit from teacher-TL collaboration owing to a lack of
exposure to the relevant concepts during their preservice teacher training or to working with a
TL. However difficult it may prove, though, student teachers are likely to continue collaborating
when they learn to do it during their training (Latham, Gross, & Witte, 2013; Moreillon, 2008).
Education and librarian professionals are increasingly interested in finding solutions to
collaborative challenges, and one branch of research on the topic focuses on improving
collaborative efforts between classroom teachers and TLs (Cooper & Bray, 2011; Kimmel,
2012a; Loertscher, 2014; Montiel-Overall, 2009). This work has pointed to the need for TLs to

7

identify teachers who are willing to work together on various projects. When a collaborative
project proves successful, word-of-mouth discussion can encourage other teachers to collaborate
as well. High school teachers are, as noted, typically isolationists in this respect (Loertscher,
2014), so they may be unwilling to relinquish control of their students, classrooms, or schedules
(Wilson, 2012). For successful TLs, on the other hand, collaboration is more than just a catch
phrase or buzzword in the field: it is the very core of what they do (Moreillon, 2008).
In the shared creation that is collaboration, each educator needs to establish a trusting and
working relationship with other stakeholders and to have faith in the process itself (MontielOverall, 2005b). Once educators have established such a relationship, they are prepared to
develop learning opportunities jointly while executing varying but complementary approaches to
instruction. All members of a collaborative teaching team must therefore understand the others’
roles, perceptions, and objectives in order to overcome the barriers to effective collaborative
teaching. Collaboration is worth the effort because it can, when done correctly, promote
relationships within the school community so that everyone is treated equally in the classroom
setting and no one is marginalized (B. Johnson, 2003).
This model, while valuable, does not fall within the research scope of this study.
Teachers who view collaboration positively are likely to continue to seek out others with whom
to work towards a common goal while creating additional opportunities to enhance classroom
practices (Vangrieken, Dochy, Raes, & Kyndt, 2015). The idea that educators perform better
when they work together and grow professionally is based on organizational theory, which
resembles approaches followed in the business sector and in the implementation of PLCs, which
are prominent in school settings (Leonard & Leonard, 2003). PLCs assist teachers in deepening
their pedagogical knowledge collectively, exchanging ideas, learning from one another, and

8

expanding their understanding through social interactions and conversations supported by data
(Popp & Goldman, 2016). The substantial research on PLCs indicates that TLs are not always
involved, an omission that impedes collaborative efforts.
A PLC can likewise be described as a group of educators across a school who work in
common toward similar goals in order to benefit the school community. Such educators share a
set of values and norms regarding the teaching profession and labor collectively so that everyone
may grow and reflect upon practices in the education field (Achinstein, 2002). Teachers can
learn from one another by avoiding mistakes and improving reflection practices and confidence
with a commitment to the idea of continuous improvement for the school community
(Hargreaves, 2000). Shared decision-making is an important aspect of educators coming
together to help to improve the school setting.
Collaboration can take many forms, not being specific to a practice, time frame, or setting
(Cooper & Bray, 2011; Loertscher, 2014; Montiel-Overall, 2005b). Team teaching, planning,
coaching, mentor-mentee relationships, and formal or informal professional dialogue are just a
few examples. When educators work together to build relationships and foster ideas, individuals
may benefit in various ways, including the empowerment of teachers (Hargreaves, 2000).
Collaboration does not look any different when a TL is involved, since TLs are educators who
develop relationships with other staff members and with students.
Roadblocks to Collaboration
Collaboration, then, can take a variety of forms in the educational setting depending on
the previous experiences of the participants. Education philosophy and theories that guide
teachers’ decision making may also vary among collaborative partners. Useful here is Buzzeo’s
(2002) definition of collaboration as “two or more equal partners who set out to create a unit of

9

study based on content standards in one or more content areas plus information literacy
standards, a unit that will be team-designed, team taught and team-evaluated” (p. 7). This
conception of collaboration emphasizes positive student learning, but it raises the question of
whether the differences among the ideas and perspectives of the various partners represent
impediments to educators’ daily tasks.
Common barriers to collaboration include lack of administrative support, lack of time or
other scheduling conflicts, and limitations of the school culture (Buzzeo, 2003; Farmer, 2007;
Leonard & Leonard, 2003; Montiel-Overall, 2006) when it comes to engaging in PLCs or turning
to some other model. School administrators, classroom teachers, researchers, and TLs recognize
the impact that collaboration can have in terms of improving instruction. The time required may
be one reason for a school’s neglect of the collaborative model. In any case, as Kimmel (2012a)
and DuFour and Marzano (2012) have suggested, additional research is necessary to determine
the nature of effective collaboration among teachers and the steps that school administrators can
take to provide time for and otherwise encourage it.
Administrators should not need to act alone or to feel that they are in a vacuum when it
comes to shared decision making; rather, leaders should encourage shared governance that
involves active participation in decision making (Farmer, 2007). TLs need to advocate for and
share with administrators the integral role that the school library plays in student learning. The
principal, as an instructional leader, is key to the development of a school library program that
supports and enhances teaching and learning (Church, 2008). When administrators understand
the importance of the TL and school library in a wide variety of educational contexts,
instructional leaders will be empowered to enhance and support collaboration efforts that further
the mission and vision of the school and district.

10

A roadblock to collaboration mentioned earlier is teachers’ preference for working and
planning on their own and tendency to seek guidance from others only when they are
comfortable doing so (Hargreaves, 2000). TLs work in various capacities within a school
depending on teachers’ personalities and teaching styles, and conflicts can arise. Teachers and
TLs can, however, embrace their differences, which define their teaching ideals and indicate how
to make changes to the curriculum within the classroom. TLs must therefore know how to work
with various personalities on campus while effectively demonstrating ways in which a school
library can help teachers to enhance their lessons. TLs cannot force themselves and their
educational ideas on others, and there are differing points of view regarding how best to utilize
library resources within the classroom. TLs need to act as a support system and to appreciate
that time may be required before teachers are willing to collaborate. When a TL works well with
one teacher, others may hear of their success and seek to recreate it, thereby improving teaching
practices across a school.
Educators have shared values and goals for their students, and the disagreements can
occur can help professionals to grow and learn and to improve the collaboration process going
forward. The importance of collaboration lies in its positive effect on student engagement and
willingness to work with and learn from others (Montiel-Overall, 2006).
Research Methodology
This mixed-methods study was informed by the above research question and subquestions. It involved an online survey of 128 teachers and 5 administrators, who in this way
shared their thoughts and experiences on the topic of collaboration. The survey was designed so
that participants would consent to individual interviews that would further reveal the in-depth
reality of high school teaching and thus better answer the research questions. The high school

11

level was selected for this study because this is the context in which most of California’s 859
TLs were employed at the time it was conducted (California Department of Education, 2017).
Thus, in San Diego County only a few school districts have TLs at the middle-school level. As
mentioned, few studies have investigated how teachers and TLs collaborate at the high school
level.
This study, then, collected and analyzed survey data, interview data, and my notes
utilizing the TLC-III model that was first developed by Montiel-Overall in 2005 and improved
over the following seven years thanks to various research studies. The TLC-III model
emphasizes ways in which teachers and TLs typically collaborate and the various stages that they
observe. This study also explored the barriers to collaboration that teachers and administrators
identified through the data-collection process, survey results, my notes, and suggestions were
considered in terms of the implications for future research and how the data collected can help
TLs to improve collaborative efforts at the high school where the research study took place.
Significance of the Study
As discussed, collaboration faces many challenges and, though it has been practiced for a
long time, relatively few TLs use it to its full potential (Cooper & Bray, 2011). This situation
needs to change in light of research indicating that collaboration between TLs and teachers has a
positive impact on student achievement (Cooper & Bray, 2011; Kimmel, 2012b; Loertscher,
2014; Montiel-Overall, 2009). Fortunately, with the adoption and implementation of the
Common Core State Standards (CCSS), teachers are becoming more likely to appreciate the skill
set that TLs possess, while administrators have an opportunity to see the value in the ways in
which TLs can influence and improve teaching practices and the understanding of informational
literacy. The CCSS gives teachers the responsibility of developing skills and learning in ways

12

that advance students’ understanding of their education and the expectations of them (Loertscher
& Marcoux, 2010). The CCSS works to help educators to set forward-thinking goals about
student performance that are based on evidence rather than speculation (Loertscher & Marcoux,
2010). Under the CCSS, the library program and the TLs can become increasingly integrated
into students’ education while promoting collaboration efforts between TLs and other teachers
(Morris, 2012).
Collaboration can improve school community efforts, so this study explored how high
school teachers work with TLs, the desirable characteristics of collaboration in the high school
setting, and the barriers to collaborative efforts. This study was designed to inform school
administrators about how to support teachers and TLs alike in the collaborative process and how
to prevent typical impediments to the collaborative process. This study also enabled the
researcher to gain a better understanding of the process of collaborating with other teachers and
the various forms of formal and informal collaboration at the high school in which the study took
place, and it provided insight into the characteristics that teachers view as beneficial when
working with a collaborative partner. Moreover, this study is intended to contribute to the
literature on how relationships affect TLs’ collaboration efforts and the characteristics,
challenges, and opportunities that the collaborative process represents for teachers,
administrators, and students. In sum, it is hoped that this research will benefit teachers, TLs,
administrators, and, ultimately, their students.
TLs represent the gateways to the promotion of reading and social justice, for they can
identify and promote resources that feature multicultural and diverse characters within the library
and the classroom. They can likewise promote various types reading materials to help students
engage in critical thinking and to cultivate a lifelong love of reading. Collaborating with TLs in

13

these ways is similarly important for teachers and principals, whose perspectives influence how
students use a school library, how stakeholders can promote collaborative efforts, and the
capacity of TLs to promote social justice through literature.
The twenty-first century student needs to possess literacy in reading, information, and
technology, skills for personal knowledge building, and oral literacy (Barrett, 2010). Teachers
create various digital literacy lesson plans but, owing to a lack of knowledge regarding
information literacy instruction, may fail to promote knowledge creation and research skills.
Fostering some of today’s essential skills, including critical evaluation, synthesis, empathy, and
communication, should take place in a natural, self-motivated manner, which means through
reading and information seeking, which in turn means investing in school libraries (Kyle, 2014).
Learning is a process of internal dialogue, of making sense of new information.
Information obtained through library resources, such as books, articles, and websites, provides a
stimulus to an internal dialogue of learning. Thus “Understanding knowledge, how it works,
how it is dynamic and relational, not static or hierarchical, changes how librarians facilitate
learning and knowledge creation” (Lankes, 2012, p. 10). Inquiry-driven models of learning
facilitated by TLs and classroom teachers promote this knowledge-driven conversation, which is
a prerequisite for students to develop critical thinking.
Since TLs are typically skilled in technology use, they should take the lead in teaching
technology skills during professional development for teachers (Cooper & Bray, 2011). TLs are
proactive leaders in technology integration owing to the changes in research standards over the
years, including the profusion of online resources that are continually updated and the promotion
of digital literacy in the face of evolving technologies. When defining the responsibilities of
TLs, the professional standards of the AASL and other guidelines for TLs emphasize leadership

14

in the context of collaboration. Owing to their broad and general nature, however, these
standards offer little practical guidance for practicing TLs, who need more clarification regarding
their roles and explicit techniques and strategies for leadership and for implementing and
supporting a collaborative culture within a school community (Johnston, 2012). Very few
studies have considered how TLs and high school teachers collaborate, the characteristics that
teachers would like TLs to possess in order to promote collaboration, or the environment
necessary to foster collaboration in the high school setting. TLs and library programs help
students learn how to conduct research, and they improve student learning and have an impact on
college retention rates, but very little is known regarding the factors that contribute to these key
outcomes.
Organization of the Study
Chapter 1 has provided an overview of this study, including the research questions,
conceptual framework, background regarding the various roles played by TLs in today’s school
setting, the rationale for collaboration in high school teaching, and insights into ways in which
teachers’ ideas can impact their collaboration with other teaching and support staff. Amid the
many definitions of collaboration in the education world, Montiel-Overall’s TLC-III model of
collaboration was chosen as particularly useful for the present inquiry. Chapter 2 includes a
review of the literature on collaboration in the classroom from the perspectives of TLs and
administrators as well as the benefits of and barriers to collaboration efforts. There follows in
Chapter 3 the detailed plan for this mixed-methods study, the specific questions asked, methods
of data collection and analysis, participant recruitment, and selection, and the interview
questions. In Chapter 4, the data collected for this study, which were gathered from 62
completed online anonymous surveys and 22 face-to-face interviews conducted in the spring of

15

2017, are presented, along with the coding process and the themes that emerged from the survey
and interview questions. In Chapter 5, the implications of the findings for the TL/researcher,
teachers, and administrators are discussed.
Definition of Terms

Collaboration
For this study, collaboration is defined as a “trusting, working relationship between two
or more equal participants involved in shared thinking, shared planning and shared created of
integrated instruction” (Montiel-Overall, 2005b, p. 5). From this perspective, the instructional
process is improved when teachers talk and share with each other in efforts to improve student
learning in all areas of the curriculum and particularly in promoting concrete and integrative
teaching.

Teacher Librarian
The American Library Association and the AASL have officially adopted the term school
librarian, but that term overlooks the very important instructional aspect of the job; for the
school librarian is a certified teacher too, as is recognized by the Department of Education. The
term teacher librarian (TL) thus best describes the multifaceted responsibilities of the position,
for which reason I have used it throughout this study to refer to library media specialists (at the
elementary, middle, or high school levels), school librarians, and media coordinators (Wolf,
Jones, & Gilbert, 2014).

Twenty-First Century Skills
The meaning of this term is consistently changing owing to the constant evolution of
technologies and understanding, but a useful definition takes into account that technology and

16

culture are changing the kinds of skills that are demanded in the global workplace (Kyllonen,
2012).

School Culture
A school’s culture is the sum of its unofficial norms, its “unwritten rules and traditions,
customs, and expectations” (Deal & Peterson, 2016, p. 7) and is therefore specific to a given
school. These norms influence how members of the staff interact, how they view students, and
their preference either to work together or rather apart from the school-wide culture.
Chapter Summary
Building collaborative relationships, then, is a complex and evolving process that
requires considerable effort and involves many external factors that can be beyond the control of
either teachers or TLs. A collaborative culture in the school is equally vital, along with the
attendant internal factors that influence the relationships among teachers and have the potential
to foster a professional community that is constantly learning and advancing student achievement
(Muronaga & Harada, 2007). The interpersonal dynamics of teachers’ collaborations may vary
in consistency, impact, and sustainability. It takes time to develop trust and respect, but effective
partnerships are possible with support from administrators, understanding of the process, and the
conviction that positive change can occur even if the process may be both messy and noisy
(Muronaga & Harada, 2007). Everyone needs to contribute resources and ideas, for a team effort
can potentially change in meaningful ways how teachers deliver the curriculum to students and
in general promote learning improvement.

17

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
California is in the bottom tier of U.S. states in terms of its TL-to-student ratio, with one
TL for every 7,187 students, roughly one ninth of the national average and forty-second in the
nation. Just 9% of California schools employ a credentialed TL, with most staffing at the high
school level, and in 86% of these schools only a qualified staff member manages the library
(California Department of Education, 2017). Students are at a considerable disadvantage when
their schools lose or have never had a school library or employed a TL (Lance & Hofschire,
2011). For the fact is that a school library alone is not enough (Todd & Kuhlthau, 2005b); TLs
need to collaborate actively and to take a leadership role with their teacher colleagues and school
administrators in order to ensure that school libraries are effective in contributing to student
achievement.
Schools that employ a full-time TL as part of the teaching staff have shown increases in
student achievement on standardized reading tests according to data collected over a period of
years in Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, New York, and other states (Dow, McMahon-Lakin, & Court,
2012; Francis & Lance, 2011). Regardless of the relative affluence of the communities in which
they lived, students performed significantly better on reading tests when they had access to
library programs run by TLs (Lance & Hofschire, 2011). Research continues to demonstrate that
an increase in school library usage tends to correlate with higher achievement on state-mandated
assessments, again regardless of a school’s educational or financial needs (R. V. Small,
Shanahan, & Stasak, 2010).
School libraries are environments in which TLs act as agents of active learning. Thus a
study of 39 school libraries in Ohio that were effective according to a set of criteria validated by
a panel of experts (including representatives from the Institute of Museum and Library Services,

18

representatives from the Ohio Educational Library Media Association, and researchers from the
Rutgers School of Communication and Information) found that TLs function as inputs by
supporting students in the learning process and as outputs by promoting positive learning
outcomes and improving students’ individual and academic achievements (Todd & Kuhlthau,
2005a, 2005b). TLs and school libraries are “not just informational, but transformational and
formational, leading to knowledge creation, knowledge production, knowledge dissemination
and knowledge use, as well as the development of informational values” (Todd & Kuhlthau,
2005a, p. 85).
This chapter reviews the current literature regarding the leadership role of the TL as a
collaborative partner, especially in the public high school setting, as it evolves in response to the
changing nature of school settings, such as increasing implementation of technology and the
Common Core Standards. The literature also discusses how collaboration among groups of
teachers affects student learning, including factors that prevent teachers and TLs from working
together on planning. TLs help stakeholders to understand school library programs and to utilize
the library effectively for curriculum development and self-learning. This chapter also looks at
the relationships among principals, teachers, and students and how interactions among subgroups
impact the leadership roles that TLs play in public schools.
TLs are essential for the overall success of students, schools, and districts. Collaboration
between teachers and librarians has, however, been a relatively low priority in schools and in
educational policy and research (Eri & Pihl, 2016). Recent studies have, as just observed, found
that TLs contribute to student achievement. The following discussion covers TLs’ differing roles
as program administrators, collaborators, and information specialists, the necessity of
collaborations between TLs school administrators, principals, and teachers, and the importance

19

of identifying TLs as leaders within their educational communities. Most importantly, the
literature demonstrates the positive impact of collaborations involving TLs on the school
community through literacy programs and technology integration and in the process provides the
theoretical framework for this study.
Roles of Teacher Librarians
Ideally, TLs collaborate with teachers to plan, conduct, and evaluate learning activities
that incorporate information literacy while at the same time cultivating a collaborative culture
throughout the school community according to the AASL and the Association for Educational
Communications and Technology (AECT) (1998). Collaborative endeavors include finding
resources for teachers (Loertscher, 1988), developing information literacy instruction (Breivik &
Senn, 1998), assisting classroom teachers in planning, developing, teaching, and evaluating
information literacy in the context of student learning (AASL & AECT, 1998; Callison, 1997).
Collaboration is more likely to be discussed in TL and special education preparation
classes than in single-subject teacher preparation credential programs (Asselin & Doiron, 2003;
Hartzell, 2002; Hunt & Luetkehans, 2013; Roux, 2008). Previous studies have found that
classroom teachers’ failure to understand the role of TLs and information literacy often impedes
collaboration between the two groups (Asselin, 2000; Roux, 2008). A case study examining
school librarians and their consulting role in a team approach to curriculum development (van
Deusen, 1996) was the first to demonstrate the need to include school librarians in education
programs for teachers, many of whom saw librarians as outsiders because they were neither
classroom teachers nor administrators. New teachers who understand the role and impact of TLs
in regards to student achievement, by contrast, are more likely to collaborate with TLs and other
teachers (Asselin, 2000).

20

In order to raise awareness of the many ways in which TLs can benefit the educational
community, VanTuyle and Watkins (2012) suggested that TLs advocate actively for library
programs and for their roles as collaborators and connectors to information and knowledge while
sharing this information with administrators. Thus TLs are encouraged to promote research that
empirically demonstrates the effectiveness of their library programs in contributing to student
achievement and thus success for schools and districts and to push for job descriptions and
evaluations that properly define and assess their roles and qualifications. Finally, there should be
an expectation on the district level for teachers to integrate library services into their curricula.
With administrative support, TLs can organize and coordinate workshops, model instructional
strategies, and coach other teachers, sharing the outcomes of and data from their inquiries with
other interested parties (Asselin, 2000). Involving administrators can impact future decisions
and relationships in regard to the role that TLs play in the public-school setting.
Benefits of Collaboration
As the AASL and AECT (1998) put it, “Collaboration—working with others—is a key
theme in building partnerships for learning” (p. 50). Collaboration between teachers and TLs
creates a resource-rich teaching and learning environment for students. Working together,
teachers and TLs establish positive relationships so that people can learn from one another
(Hughes-Hassell & Wheelock, 2001). These collaborative environments connect classroom
goals, curriculum mapping, and collection development to a school’s resources. In addition,
effective collaboration helps teachers and TLs to engage in ongoing professional development
and professional reflection and contributes to overall morale (Hughes-Hassell & Wheelock,
2001; Lindsay, 2005; Loertscher, 2014). Teachers learn when others share their experiences,
reflections, and mistakes. Collaboration helps to develop new and improved routines,

21

procedures, and ways of thinking about student learning and the development of knowledge
(Hughes-Hassell & Wheelock, 2001).
Through collaboration, both teaching parties help to improve student engagement in
inquiry-based projects that incorporate information literacy skills. Schools want to produce
lifelong learners and readers, and one way to do so is to teach students how to use school library
resources not only during but also outside school hours and for multiple purposes. Students
benefit from the formulation of objective learning goals (AASL & AECT, 1998; Hughes-Hassell
& Wheelock, 2001).
Collaboration requires active participation, genuine effort, and commitment on the part of
both the teacher and the TL, for it can take considerable time. The benefits can be significant,
however, particularly in terms of information literacy that encompasses the content and all areas
of the curriculum and content-related objectives (AASL & AECT, 1998). Educational
researchers are aware of the benefits of collaboration involving TLs, but teachers and
administrators tend not to be; indeed, many teachers do not even view TLs as co-teachers
(Montiel-Overall, 2010). For teachers and TLs to collaborate successfully in the school setting,
all involved need a solid understanding of what they are doing and why if they are to learn from
one another and plan effectively (Montiel-Overall, 2009, 2010). Collaboration is difficult but
valuable, especially since society prizes the development and implementation of partnerships
(Rosenfeld & Loertscher, 2007).
Fostering Collaboration
A variety of factors, including events, experiences, and the influence of other people can
affect teachers’ attitudes toward collaboration (Clark, 1992; Smith, 2001). It is in this respect
that a TL can assist teachers and students alike so as to promote reading and overall learning

22

success. In the past, high school teachers have tended to be autonomous and isolated from their
teaching colleagues, but the promotion of professional learning has been embraced by educators
in pursuit of a more “organic, context-sensitive process of learning” (Levine & Marcus, 2007, p.
118). In this context, personal investment in reform efforts will occur when teachers realize a
shared vision for improving information literacy in the classroom (Dufour & Marzano, 2012;
Smith, 2001). However, even those with high hopes for promoting teacher and TL collaboration
are often uncertain regarding how teachers and TLs learn in these created communities (Levine
& Marcus, 2007).
A number of U.S. studies have used large correlational and quantitative data assessments
to demonstrate a link between quality libraries staffed by full-time professionals and student
achievement. TLs have circulated such studies widely as part of an effort not simply to halt the
decline of libraries but even to expand them by informing administrators of the benefits of
libraries so that they can make better-informed decisions (Lance et al., 2000, 2001, 2002, 2005).
These studies have provided TLs with authoritative evidence of their contributions and have
promoted awareness of the potential of school libraries, but, amid the emphasis on test-driven
assessments, the contributions of the TL remain underappreciated (Loertscher, 2014).
Administrators’ Knowledge
School administrators (e.g., superintendents and principals) tend to be poorly informed
about their districts’ school library programs and the role of TLs (Shannon, 2012; Todd &
Kuhlthau, 2005b; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). They often stereotype TLs as the keepers of
books without understanding their specific teaching roles in relation to information and
technology (Hartzell, 2002). Thus superintendents in Illinois and Iowa reported being unfamiliar
with the role of TLs and their capacity to assist the administration with instruction, lacking as

23

they did both knowledge of the relationship between library media services and assessment
scores and trust in the research on the roles and responsibilities of TLs and the relationships that
they can form (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). Researchers have attributed this unfamiliarity with
the roles of TLs to their “occupational invisibility” (Hartzell, 2002, p. 92). The professional
preparation and socialization of administrators do not acquaint them with the roles that school
library programs and TLs play in student achievement (Lance & Hofschire, 2011).
One factor contributing to administrators’ shortcomings in this regard is the content of
their courses of study and credentialing programs. Simply put, these programs place such
emphasis on executive decision making and administrative accountability that they fail to
acknowledge the ways in which TLs can serve administrators’ needs as connectors and
information specialists (Hartzell, 2002; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). Administrators do need to
remain up-to-date professionally after completing their preparation programs in order to cultivate
new ideas, part of which effort involves reading research publications, and it is in this context,
through publications in administrative journals that share research findings, that TLs and their
advocates can raise the profile of school libraries for administrators. Thus the latter can attend
the AASL’s conferences free of charge because the organization recognizes the need for
administrators to appreciate the impact of TLs and school library programs generally.
School districts hold superintendents accountable for their decisions and expect them to
provide information necessary for effective decision making. TLs accordingly need to share
reliable data with administrators (VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012) and to participate in short- and
long-term strategic planning at the district level. In this way, superintendents come to perceive
the value of the TL and the role of the school library in information literacy and knowledge

24

attainment. TLs for their part must be vigilant about advocating for school library programs and
demonstrating their value to the school district.
Research also shows that school principals, like superintendents, tend to be uninformed
about the contributions that TLs and school library programs can make to the success of students
and schools. School library programs are chronically underfunded in California; thus, as
discussed, many lack a TL (Zmuda & Harada, 2008). It is in part because principals have not
prioritized school library programs that they have remained underfunded. Not surprisingly,
principals who work closely with their school librarians seem to have a better understanding of
their school library programs (AASL, 2007; Shannon, 2012). Nevertheless, most principals have
only a limited understanding of ways in which a school library can embed effective instructional
programs in the curriculum or of the effectiveness of librarian-teacher collaborations for student
achievement.
Principals’ lack of understanding of the roles that TLs play, then, can impact utilization
of the school library and can result in the elimination of TL positions from school budgets
(Church, 2008; Gavigan & Lance, 2015; Hartzell, 2007; Shannon, 2012). Gaps in preparation
programs for principals and the professional literature are a significant factor in this lack of
understanding (Shannon, 2012). Thus, in one study, less than 2% of elementary school
principals surveyed in Virginia named coursework completed during their principal preparation
programs as their primary source of information regarding the instructional role of TLs (Church,
2008). It is increasingly apparent that administrative credential preparation programs need to
draw attention to the effectiveness of school library programs in promoting student achievement,
as do administrators’ professional organizations. The relevant information is available; the
American Library Association, for instance, publishes numerous research articles on these topics.

25

Because effective school library programs are built on strong partnerships between
principals and TLs (Oberg, Hay, & Henri, 2000), the latter need to increase their visibility to
former. Thus, one study reminded TLs not to assume that principals have had exposure to
successful school library programs (Shannon, 2012). TLs need to end their “occupational
invisibility” in order to educate principals about the importance of libraries and library
professionals for students, teachers, and the educational community in general (Hartzell, 2002;
Shannon, 2012). Principals who understand and appreciate libraries, and TLs, are naturally more
likely to advocate on their behalf (Lance & Russell, 2004; Oberg et al., 2000; Shannon, 2012),
for they understand the correlation between student achievement and productive relationships
between teachers and TLs. Thus, one study showed that higher-performing schools were led by
principals who valued regular meetings with TLs and encouraged collaboration between them
and classroom teachers (Lance & Russell, 2004). Principals can help by observing and offering
constructive criticism of lessons that emerge from collaborative partnerships.
In promoting collaborative programs, it is accordingly crucial that principals witness
firsthand how their participation facilitates learning. Student assessments should therefore
reflect preferred modes of instruction and demonstrate ways in which collaboration promotes
student ownership of learning (Loertscher, 2014). Such assessments identify strengths and
weaknesses in the curriculum, while partnerships involving TLs, principals, and classroom
teachers provide students with opportunities to witness education communities working together
to promote learning. Students benefit when principals value library programs and share their
positive outputs within their learning communities (Lance & Russell, 2004). In sum, when
principals participate in the process, they experience firsthand how beneficial collaboration is for
the school community.

26

Expert Models of Collaboration
One model of collaboration involving TLs is for universities to integrate it into teacher
preparation programs. Instructive in this context is a study by Roux (2008), who partnered with
a faculty member in the secondary education preparation program at her university to create a
collaborative project meant to raise awareness of the role of school librarians in promoting
student learning. For the project, the students created a research presentation that involved
interviewing and collaborating with a school librarian, finding in the process that several of the
19 preservice teachers who participated were unaware of the various types of librarians. Some
students interviewed public librarians, and one attempted to interview a university librarian.
Many of the presentations contained stereotypical images of libraries and librarians. Overall,
Roux found the exercise helpful for educating preservice teachers about the roles of school
librarians. Preservice teachers who received adequate training regarding collaboration with TLs
tended to continue the practice, being better able to plan for it (Latham et al., 2013; Moreillon,
2008).
Education and librarian professionals are increasingly interested in finding solutions for
challenges to collaboration. Thus, one branch of research has focused on improving
collaborative efforts between classroom teachers and TLs (Cooper & Bray, 2011; Kimmel,
2012a; Loertscher, 2014; Montiel-Overall, 2009). These studies have shown that TLs need to
identify teachers who are willing to collaborate on various projects and that, when projects are
successful, other teachers engage in collaboration as well.
Particularly useful here is Loertscher’s (1988) taxonomy of library media specialists,
which has eleven levels corresponding to the various stages of a library media program in which
TLs can participate throughout the school day (Figure 1). At Level 1, the library does not enter

27

into a teacher’s thought processes when planning. At Level 2, the library serves a warehouse of
materials that are available for checkout, and the TL often remains at this level, performing daily
tasks that help others or maintain the order and the attractiveness of the collection and the
library. Level 3 involves the retrieval process of materials based on requests from teachers and
students, while at Level 4 the retrieval process responds to spur-of-the-moment planning to
accommodate educators’ need for flexibility. At Level 5, teachers and TLs interact in passing or
during lunchtime to further planning goals, to entertain suggestions, and discuss the arrival of
new materials. At Level 6, TLs fulfill teachers’ requests for access to materials pertaining to a
given research topic, often at the same time every year. At Level 7, the TL promotes the
capacity of the library program to promote student achievement, and at Level 8 the TL serves as
a support planner, providing materials for a previously-devised lesson including additional
resources based on learning best practices. At Levels 9 and 10, TLs participate in the
instructional design, development, execution, and the evaluation of the unit at the school site. At
Level 11, the TL participates in the planning process with other educators to develop a
curriculum that can improve teachers’ instructional practices in ways that can be of use to others
throughout the district. The many levels of collaboration, shared thinking, and planning
described in this model assist districts in implementing effective strategies as professionals learn
from each other to improve student learning in all curricular areas. The goal is to build
metacognitive skills that help in the analysis, synthesis, and transfer of informational literacy in
the context of true collaboration.

28

Figure 1: Loertscher’s taxonomy
According to Montiel-Overall (2006), there are at the heart of a teacher-TL collaboration
five core elements, namely interest, innovation, intensity, integration, and implementation, that
together promote shared thinking, planning, and creation of something new (cf. Hamilton, 2011).
As discussed earlier, Montiel-Overall (2006) also described four models of collaboration
29

between teachers and TLs (Figure 2). Model A, coordination, which requires the least
involvement, describes situations in which the teacher works autonomously, interacting little if at
all with a TL. Model B, cooperation, describes situations in which teachers and TLs combine
their efforts for instruction but carry out formal lesson planning individually. Other researchers
have urged teachers and TLs to avoid relationships of codependency in which the classroom
teacher leaves everything to the TL without learning how better to implement the material in the
future (Cooper & Bray, 2011). Model C, integrated instruction, is an example of high-level
involvement that demonstrates shared thinking, planning, and creation of something new. Model
D, integrated curriculum, involves integration of Model C locally or across a school district as
the TL works on the curriculum and implementation of instruction, drawing attention to the vast
literacy resources that are available and offering guidance regarding how best to use these
resources in teaching all subjects.

Figure 2: Models of librarian and teacher working relationships
Hamilton (2011) reported on an embedded collaboration between herself and an English
teacher that provides a good example of Montiel-Overall’s Model C, integrated instruction.
30

Through their collaboration, these educators developed the library and classroom into a shared
environment that was learning-centered and focused on scaffolding students’ ability to read,
write, and create content independently and confidently through social interaction in physical
and virtual learning spaces. The collaborators were able to facilitate conversations with students
regarding research strategies and how best to utilize various research tools. This participatory
environment encouraged student collaboration and discussion within the context of the learning
process.
Integration is in fact a core element of collaboration and a major factor in student
achievement. Collaborative integration of library instruction across the school curriculum
facilitates students’ comprehension of a broad range of subjects (math, history, language arts,
science, etc.) while simultaneously developing information literacy and research abilities.
Through interdisciplinary connections, a deep understanding of information emerges, which, as
noted earlier, may be the most important factor in improved academic achievement (MontielOverall, 2006).
A more recent study has furthered this line of inquiry by arguing that teachers mainly
collaborate with others who uphold the same standards or teach the same subject (Kimmel,
2012a). Increasingly, the call is for teachers to move out of their isolation, to make their
knowledge explicit, and to engage in collaborative inquiry about practice, in which context TLs
must learn to engage in collaborative inquiry with other teachers. Additional research is
necessary to identify and develop best practices for facilitation collaboration between TLs and
classroom teachers. In any case, advocacy for TLs and the school library curriculum is
imperative for improving collaborative relationships between teachers and TLs.

31

The TL is an instructional leader within the school community. When participating in
school committees, TLs provide a unique perspective because they work with the entire school
community in individual (students, teachers, and administrators) and group contexts (Church,
2011). When TLs collaborates with classroom teachers, they are master teachers, ensuring that
students develop critical thinking skills by becoming effective users of ideas and information
(Church, 2011).
Montiel-Overall’s (2005a, 2005b) TLC model describes a continuum of interactions
between teachers and TLs ranging from high- to low-level activities depending on the objectives
for student learning. The revised TLC-III model is a simplified version Loertscher’s (1988)
taxonomy of collaboration, in which, as discussed above, there are 11 possible levels of
interaction between the two types of teachers across the grade levels involving the school library.
Teachers develop their own teaching styles as their expertise grows in terms of both content
knowledge and mastery of teaching practices. Teachers have ideas that students can explore and
expand through the use of information resources, and it may be necessary to tweak or adapt
methods to meet the changing needs of students (Loertscher, 1988). Whatever a teacher’s
strengths in the classroom, the relationships that he or she builds with students and the school
community can help the school to improve. Improvement can come through reaching out to
others to for ideas, for clarification, or to tinker with a lesson. It is in these contexts that the TL
can be of assistance as a sounding board, source of ideas, resource gatherer, expert on applying
technology, collaborator, or co-teacher.
Barriers to Collaboration
Several studies have indicated that the manner in which TLs operate has a significant
impact on student achievement and learning (Lance et al., 2000, 2001, 2002, 2005). I have

32

explored the benefits of collaboration throughout this literature review, but in many cases there
are barriers that prevent both teaching groups from coming together to plan, implement curricula,
co-teach, or reach a meaningful understanding of how best to utilize TLs in planning at the
school and district levels. These barriers, again as discussed above, include availability of time,
attitudes on the part of teachers and principals, and scheduling conflicts (Haycock, 2007).
Collaboration between TLs and teachers has a positive effect on student interest in and
ownership of learning (Haycock, 2007). Studies have emphasized the importance of trust in
building foundations for connecting, working together, and sharing information and skills
(Montiel-Overall, 2008). Trust takes time to build among teacher groups, but information
sharing and collegiality help teachers to feel that they are part of a team or a school community,
thereby reducing the likelihood that they will continue working in isolation (Montiel-Overall,
2008). Communication takes various forms in a school setting, including face-to-face as well as
through e-mail, online chatting, messaging services and other technologies, phone calls, and the
sharing of documents, things that students can do almost anywhere. Through these various
communication channels, teachers can interact continually, on and off school grounds.
Management of time, such as finding a time to meet, is a recurrent issue in research into
collaboration between classroom teachers and TLs, and the role of the principal appears key in
this respect (Giorgis & Peterson, 1996; Kimmel, 2011; Leonard, 2002; Leonard & Leonard,
2001a, 2001b, 2003; Loertscher, 2014; Montiel-Overall, 2005a, 2005b, 2006, 2008; Rawson,
2014). Multiple meetings on overlapping topics can exacerbate scheduling problems, lower
expectations, and impede the free exchange of ideas.
Loertscher (2014) has reported that, during the past decade of financial strain across the
United States, many school districts have eliminated professional TLs, which has occurred in

33

both middle- and high schools, especially in California. Large cuts to school library budgets
reflect a growing sentiment on the part of administrators that the Internet and Google have made
the role of the TL redundant owing to the immediate availability of information through a simple
online search.
Numerous studies have suggested that teachers support collaboration in theory but tend to
be unwilling to invest the time required to make it work (Leonard, 2002; Leonard & Leonard,
2001a, 2001b). As just discussed, teachers typically do not have time to work with colleagues or
to observe what other professionals are experiencing in the classroom (Hartzell, 2002; Lindsay,
2005; Loertscher, 2014). Other challenges include finding a common preparation period,
aligning visions and standards, and understanding differing teaching styles.
Chapter Summary
TLs fulfill various roles at the school level and within the district. Rather than being
mere gatekeepers of the library and its books, they are program administrators, instructional
collaborators, information specialists, and community leaders. All stakeholders can benefit from
a deeper understanding of the role of the TL and the school library within the school curriculum.
Preparation programs for teachers and administrators could alleviate some of this lack of
understanding by addressing collaboration with TLs. In California, TLs follow the guidelines set
by the state’s School Library Model Standards, which also help school officials to make coherent
decisions regarding TLs, since the roles that they play can vary depending on the needs of a
given school. A dialogue involving TLs and district administrators, principals, and classroom
teachers needs to take place so that their collective efforts can lead to improvements in student
achievement. True collaboration demonstrates to students that an education system is a
functioning unit. TLs need to advocate for themselves and school library programs, and they

34

cannot assume that all stakeholders understand their roles within the school community. An
effective TL works in collaboration with the entire school community to serve it, the students,
and the teachers.
As noted throughout this literature review, the TL maintains a unique role in facilitating
the transfer of knowledge (Lankes, 2012) by providing access, baseline information, a safe
atmosphere, and motivation. Thus, the TL provides access to materials and prepares a physical
place that can inspire and stimulate conversations among students by providing the tools that
facilitate knowledge transfer. Information literacy is an integral part of this knowledge provision
(Church, 2011; Hamilton, 2011; Lankes, 2012). TLs further create safe environments in which
students feel comfortable conversing with their peers and a participatory culture through
collaboration with classroom teachers to engage students and motivate participatory learning
(Hamilton, 2011; Lankes, 2012). When teachers and TLs create collaboratively in a
participatory culture focused on twenty-first century instructional practices, students are
motivated to analyze critically and to synthesize the materials that teachers present during
instruction (Gross & Latham, 2007).

35

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
TLs are trained educational specialists who play many roles, not the least of which is
delivering information literacy curricula. Information literacy is the ability to find and utilize
information from a variety of digital, visual, and textual sources (Cooper & Bray, 2011). Other
responsibilities of TLs include evaluating resources, promoting literacy, helping students to
understand digital citizenship, program administration, technology integration, and in general
responding to the needs of teachers and students. Any of these responsibilities may involve
collaboration with other teachers.
As the review of the literature made clear, there have been some studies of this
collaboration process, the various stakeholders’ perspectives on TLs, the leadership roles of TLs,
and the importance of collaboration for the teaching profession. None, however, has explored
how organizational change can affect this process at the high school level, the practices involved
in planning, or the first steps in teacher-TL collaboration (Montiel-Overall, 2007).
In order to shed light on these issues, the present study utilized a mixed-method approach
incorporating the diverse perspectives and experiences of high school teachers and
administrators at one high school on collaboration. To be more specific, the aim was to promote
understanding of the issues involved in collaborative efforts of high school teachers and TLs at a
large high school in southern California. Data were collected through survey instruments, faceto-face interviews with staff members on campus, and I took personalized notes during the
interviews, the aim again being to explore how one high school defined collaboration involving
the TL, the types of teachers participating in collaborative efforts, and the impact of
collaboration on the teachers’ other relationships and on their information literacy skills. My
calendar was also utilized to help with past practices in relation to the various levels of

36

collaboration too. All aspects of the data collection were designed to support the call for
improved understanding of the perspectives of stakeholders (in particular teachers and
administrators) on the knowledge and skillset that a TL can bring to a high school campus. The
hope is to provide more and more nuanced information to teachers and administrators regarding
how a TL can foster learning and improve informational and teaching practices and information
literacy. Further, through this study I as a TL have arrived at a greater appreciation for my role
as a collaborator and for teachers’ preferences in collaborative efforts. Within this specific
school district, therefore, this study stands to improve communication efforts concerning all that
the TL has to offer.
Conceptual Framework
The main conceptual framework for this study is Montiel-Overall’s (2006) TLC model.
According to this model, as described in detail above, the four facets of collaboration within the
school setting are “coordination, cooperation, integrated instruction, and integrated curriculum”
(p. 30) that take the form of a range of limited to intensive efforts. As such, the four levels of
cooperation offer a perspective on the teacher-TL relationship that can be applied to a single
school setting or across a district. The overarching notion, then, is that collaboration is
fundamental to a successful school library program, meaning one that has a positive impact on
student achievement.
Research Questions
As discussed in Chapter 1, but repeated here for the sake of completeness, the
overarching research question for this study concerned the elements that foster effective
collaborative exchanges between high school teachers and TLs. The following sub-questions
grew out of this main idea:

37

a) How do high school teachers, administrators, and high school TLs who work in the
same school setting define collaboration?
b) Does an individual’s definition of collaboration affect how he or she interacts and
collaborates with other teachers or teaching support staff?
c) What factors contribute to or detract from collaboration between teachers and TLs?
Research Design
This study used a mixed-method research design, which can be defined as an
intellectual and practical synthesis based on qualitative and quantitative research;
it is the third methodological or a research paradigm (along with qualitative and
quantitative research). It recognizes the importance of traditional quantitative and
qualitative research, but also offers a powerful third paradigm choice that often
will provide the most informative, complete, balanced, and useful research results.
(R. B. Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, & Turner, 2007, p. 129)
The mixed methodology in this case consisted of an online anonymous survey, interviews with
teachers and administrators conducted at the end of the 2016-2017 school year, and my
personalized notes taken during the interviews.
The survey was administered as follows. First, the Institutional Review Board (IRB)
gave its consent to the study, and the IRB consent form for participation was duly placed at the
very beginning of the survey, before the questions (Appendix A). Next, the principal and
superintendent agreed on a timeframe for the survey, and a Qualtrics survey link was emailed to
all teachers and administrators at the school informing them about the study. Once participants
accessed the link, they also saw the following statement also appeared before the questions: “By
continuing with the survey, you are verifying that you, as a participant, have read this consent
information and voluntarily agree to participate in this survey portion of the study.” Thus, by
answering the first question, participants gave their consent to the study and acknowledged the risks
associated with it—which, as mentioned in the consent form, included boredom and the potential

38

difficulties involved with preserving participants’ anonymity. The survey was emailed to every
teacher and administrator employed at the specific high school during May 2017. The window for
the survey window was six weeks. During this period, an IRB-approved reminder was sent every
week and a half to potential participants who had not submitted a completed survey using the
automatic setting in the Qualtrics survey program; those who completed the survey ceased to receive
these reminders. Participants took part of the study and interviews after IRB approval. One part of
the initial process before the study took place, was to obtain IRB approval while following school
district guidelines. The school district needed to give permission for the study to take place at the
high school. Both the principal and superintendent perused the survey, interview questions, and
consent forms that the participants would be asked during the approved agreed upon time-period.
Both administrators agreed to this request in writing letters to the IRB board granting their approval
for conducting the study at the high school. After IRB approval, the survey was first sent out to the
potential participants at the high school.
As discussed, the purpose of the survey was to capture individual perspectives on

collaboration and information literacy in relation to the TL. Also gleaned from the survey were
insights into the impressions of high school teachers and administrators regarding the school
library program, the potential represented by the TL, and the resources available within the
school setting. The survey thus provided a broad picture of participants’ views of collaboration
at this particular high school.
The results of the survey also yielded insight into whom to interview in the pursuit of a
more in-depth understanding of collaboration at the school. The interviews revealed various
perspectives on collaboration from teachers who had taught in the school setting for many years
and others who had been there three years or less. The three data-collection methods thus
triangulated the thinking of teachers and administrators about collaboration and revealed whether
39

there were themes in common with Montiel-Overall’s TLC model. Notes were taken during the
interviews also provided insight into the various ways in which teachers collaborated with the TL
and other specific questions requiring follow-up after the interviews were complete. Each mode
of data collection, then, supported and balanced the others, and, overall, the mixed-method
approach generated appropriate research questions and confidence in the quality of the research
findings and outcomes (R. B. Johnson et al., 2007; M. Small, 2011).
To be more specific, the interview data that I collected illustrated various recurrent
themes in the collaborative efforts of the participants. When teachers defined collaboration in a
given way, the effort was made to determine whether they were following through with and
operationalizing their ideas or whether instead their biases had created barriers to collaborating
with a TL. Multiple data points were necessary to elucidate the nature of these teacher-TL
collaborations, since each supplemented the others in the production of a detailed account of
collaboration between high school teachers and TLs.
The interviews were arranged, as stated, after the online survey had been completed.
Participants who finished the survey received a thank you message to which a second survey
attached. Respondents could then indicate whether they were willing to be interviewed (no,
maybe, yes) and, if so, they were asked to provide a name. Those who declined to participate in
an interview received another thank you, while I contacted those who had provided names to
make future arrangements for the interviews. In the end, 22 individuals agreed to participate, 19
teachers and 3 administrators. Interviews took place on campus.
Participants
Of the 42 public school districts in San Diego County at the time of the survey, 20 were
serving high school students at one or more facility. According to the California Longitudinal

40

Pupil Achievement Data System (2017), six districts at the time employed TLs at the high school
level, of which three were served by a single district librarian working with or visiting multiple
school facilities within a given week. The San Diego County Office of Education employed one
TL who provided for the informational needs of the smaller districts, for which either the town or
county library served as the school library owing to limited funds, personnel, and services.
Again, private or charter schools were not taken into consideration.
As noted, this study focused on a single high school, a facility located in one of the six
districts that employed a TL and at which I was employed. I used convenience sampling because
my employment gave me access to 128 credentialed teachers and administrators as potential
participants, making every effort to reach out to teachers, administrators, and support teaching
staff. I also tried to have a representative from each department on campus.
Setting
This comprehensive high school in San Diego County served a community that was
diverse in both cultural and economic terms. Thus, in terms of ethnic composition, the school’s
student population of 3,053 was 54% Hispanic, 25% White, 7% African American, 6% Filipino,
2% Pacific Islander, 3% Asian, and 0.3% American Indian/Alaskan. Many students came from
military families, and 51% were eligible for free or reduced lunch. The staff consisted of more
than 200 certificated and classified staff members, including 110 teachers in the classroom, 13
support teachers (i.e., guidance counselors, a TL, and a speech and language pathologist), and 6
administrators.
The survey collected statistics on the teachers, staff, and administrators employed at the
school, including ethnicity, years of teaching experience at the present high school and

41

elsewhere, and level of education. These data allowed for a demographic comparison of the
populations of students and staff.
Data Collection
This mixed-methods study involved three phases of data collection. The purpose of the
first was to collect data from a broad cross-section of teachers and administrators within the
same high school, who self-reported whether they had collaborated in any way with the TL,
irrespective of their information literacy skills. The data collected included the current year of
certification and any collaboration with TLs at previous schools. I invited all teachers and
administrators at the high school site to complete the survey.
The survey itself (Appendix A) was adapted from Schultz-Jones and Ledbetter’s (2009)
Teacher-Librarian Collaboration Survey. Survey questions included inquiries relating to
confidence in the research process, assisting students with their information needs, barriers to
collaboration, including less obvious ones, and to any need for additional clarification of the
validated survey. As noted, the survey also asked respondents about their willingness to
participate in a follow-up interview. The survey phase thus helped me to gain a picture of how
each group viewed collaboration and prepared for the next phase. The responses also provided
me with insights into how my role as a TL was viewed by the school’s teachers and
administrators, into positive and negative aspects of collaboration, and into possible best
practices for selecting high school teachers to interview in the follow-up phases. Further, by
accessing a cross-section of experienced and new teachers, I became more aware of the effect of
school culture on collaboration efforts among the staff of each subject department.
Following distribution of the online survey and assessment of the initial responses using
SPSS software, 30 participants were identified who agreed provisionally to the interviews to

42

represent the various departments in the high school campus to confirm interest in participating
in interviews. For a variety of reasons, including scheduling conflicts, changes of mind, and lastminute cancellations, 22 interviews were actually conducted. Again, one goal was to have a
representative cross-section of teachers in terms of disciplines, years of teaching, gender, level of
and disposition to collaborate, and backgrounds in fields other than education. The survey also
provided information about teachers who had worked with a TL thanks to carefully-worded
survey questions and, again, identified teachers and administrators to interview.
The second phase of data collection, then, involved establishing, through the interview
process, interviewees’ perspectives on collaboration and any themes associated with any of the
specific demographic characteristics discussed above. I interviewed both administrators and
certified teachers. My notes from the interviews captured previous collaborative efforts or
examples, clarified the nature of the collaborative culture within the school community, and
indicated any need for clarification. The intent was to document whether teachers were using
each other’s expertise to help to achieve an educational goal on which the group had collectively
agreed as part of their efforts to increase student knowledge with respect to information literacy.
I recorded the interviews individually on audio tape in order preserve as clear a record as
possible of the various opinions regarding collaboration, factors that influenced teachers’
decisions to collaborate, prevalent ideas when teachers collaborated, and possible elements to
retain and changes to be made for future collaborative efforts. Interviewees were also asked
whether their views had changed about collaboration with the TL, whether they had collaborated
before, their assessments of the value of the TL in the collaboration process for their colleagues,
and the overall impact of the collaborative process on their personal experiences (Appendix B).

43

These interviews offered added value for the data from the survey sessions while
providing an opportunity for reflection to the participants too. Positionality can affect the
outcome of the data collected for research studies like this one; thus the participants knew me in
the school setting even if they had not collaborated with me on projects. Before the interviews, I
gave the participants the option of an interview with me or with a neutral person. The thinking
was that, if any one teacher preferred a neutral interviewer, then a third party would conduct all
of the interviews for the sake of consistency as well as to obtain any information that might have
been withheld had I conducted the interviews myself. However, no participant chose to be
interviewed by a third party.
The interviews were conducted and notes were taken in person, since it was important to
gain an understanding of the school dynamic, the personality of each participant, the specific
language that they used within the group, and other nuances of collaboration. I recorded and
transcribed the face-to-face interviews, as discussed, in order to identify themes and occurrences
relevant to the research questions, as is explored in detail in Chapter 4. Every interviewee
provided his or her unique perspective, so there was variability in regard to the insights and
experiences shared. My own personal and calendar notes described the collaborative process
from my perspective.
Again, this study employed a mixed-methods approach that emphasized the integration of
qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis in order to arrive at an in-depth
understanding of the research questions (Plano Clark & Ivankova, 2015). The distinctive
characteristic of mixed-methods research is the
level of prioritization of one form of data over the other, by the combination of
data forms in the research process (such as during the collection or analysis
phases), and by the timing of data collection, such as whether the quantitative and

44

qualitative phases take place concurrently or sequentially, and if so, in what order.
(Driscoll, Appiah-Yeboah, Salib, & Rupert, 2007, p. 19)
Timing was important within this study in that each form of data collection relied upon the
others.
The study, then, included surveys, individual interviews with participants across
disciplines, and notes were taken during the interview process. The aim was to assess the
collaborative process in terms of the various levels developed by both Montiel-Overall (2006)
and Loertscher (1988), which describe the value and experiences of the participants in the
context of the ways in which they have collaborated as well as the ways in which their biases
affect collaboration efforts, in particular with the TL. The survey thus collected the quantitative
information, while the interviews and notes supported the qualitative data.
Timeline
The timeline for the study was as illustrated in Figure 3.

Contacted
Administrator at
high school site to
set up dates to
distribute survey
following IRB
approval (April
2017)

Interviewed
participants while
recording notes
(May-June)

Administered
online survey
(April-May)

Transcribed and
analyzed survey,
interview, and notes
data (June-January )

Figure 3: Timeline of research study
Data Analysis
A mixed-methods analysis was identified as the most effective research design for this
study. At the collection stage, quantitative data can play a role in providing baseline information
45

and helping to avoid bias (R. B. Johnson et al., 2007). In this case, each data collection
component supported the others so as to illuminate the significance of the data in regard to
collaboration efforts with TLs. I analyzed the survey data through SPSS software to gain a
quantifiable result as a basis for the specific tests that I ran, such as, Chi square tests of
associations, t tests for independent samples since I was comparing teachers and the factors that
contributed to collaboration. It proved easy to compile the survey data for analysis, and the
results, as discussed, informed the selection of interview candidates. The results of the survey
also provided big-picture information in terms of the frequency with which teachers collaborated
and the nature of their collaborations. The interviews, on the other hand, provided a closer, more
in-depth view of collaboration.
At first, I hand-coded the data that were collected through the interviews and notes in
order to identify themes based on the frequency of key words and themes utilizing MontielOverall and Hernández’s (2012) TLC-III framework, which is a revised version of MontielOverall’s (2005a) TLC model. I then decided to use a specific qualitative analysis tool,
HyperRESEARCH, to accelerate the coding process and to connect the data. The interviews and
my own personalized notes told a story about the actual practices involving teachers and TLs and
provided a few examples of successful projects that had helped other teachers and administrators
learn how to deploy the TL better within the school setting. The analysis also identified barriers
to collaboration at the school. The goal of the analysis was, again, to identify various factors that
facilitate and impede successful collaboration between teachers and TLs so as to assist
administrators at both the high school and district levels in providing for the time and other
resources necessary for teachers to plan and work with TLs and other support staff effectively.

46

Validity
According to Creswell and Plano Clark (2011),
research needs to utilize procedures to ensure that the validity of the data, results,
and the interpretations. Validity differs in quantitative and qualitative research,
but in both approaches, it serves the purpose of checking on the quality of the
data, the results, and the interpretation. (p. 210)
For this study, outside researchers validated the survey questions to ensure clarity before
I administered it, and the interviews and notes served to triangulate and verify the survey data.
Through analysis, another researcher was able to help validate the codes and themes, for I was
concerned that I might overlook themes. The participants were able to check the results, such as
the themes that emerged from the interviews, for correctness, which also helped to triangulate the
data.
The notes I took during the interviews were meant to be “thick with rich descriptors”
(Creswell, 2013; Geertz, 1993, p. 3) that would help to validate the information I that collected
and to provide a glimpse of how collaboration actually took place in the specific school setting.
These thick and rich descriptors were thus intended to be consistent with the results of the survey
and interviews. Both my calendar and notes that I took during the interviews and can be
considered part of a collaborative process involving the colleagues who were interviewed in
terms of the conceptual frameworks of Montiel-Overall and Loertscher. My notes and saved
calendar meetings also helped to establish the types of collaboration taking place, the
departments that were utilizing library services, and unfulfilled needs relating to collaboration.
By asking when a wink is just a wink, Geertz (1993) illustrated the researcher’s need to
rely on thick and rich descriptors; in his words,
quoted raw, a note in a bottle, this passage conveys, as any similar one similarly
presented would do, a fair sense of how much goes into an ethnographic
description of even the most elemental sort—how extraordinarily “thick” it is. (p.
9)
47

I made an effort to consider the participants’ various levels of understanding of the research
questions without being one-sided or overly precise and to demonstrate these levels in terms of
the cultural exchange of information between the groups. Thick descriptions from my notes that
were sufficiently multi-faceted to contribute to answering the research questions revealed a new
level of understanding of what I observed free of the limitations of the educational setting of
culture transformation in their capacity as a “comprehensible meaning frame” (p. 30).
The following three validation strategies designed by Creswell (2013) assisted in the
collection and analysis of the data. Prolonged engagement and persistent notes helped me to
remain in contact with the participants and to keep in mind what was in the best interests of the
study. In surveying, interviewing participants, and taking personalized notes, I continually
validated my hypothesis through negative case analysis, refining my ideas so as to provide a
realistic perspective on and assessment of the data on collaboration and the ideas of TLs. So also
clarifying my bias (Creswell, 2013) was a necessary part of my research study, for readers of this
study need to be aware of any biases or assumptions on my part regarding high school teachers
or TLs—again, I was a TL at the high school under study at the time that the research was
conducted.
Limitations
This research study has certain limitations. One just mentioned is positionality,
specifically my employment as a TL at the school at which I was conducting the study, a fact
that might have made my colleagues hesitant to share their opinions regarding the collaborative
process, my role as the TL at the school, or about the school library program in general. My
position may have enabled one group of teachers to talk freely while hindering others during the
data-collection process. Additionally, my role as TL could color my analysis of the dataset, as I

48

naturally viewed the data through what might be called my TL lens. It is important that a
researcher be as unbiased as possible so as to consider various interpretations, both negative and
positive, of the data.
The selection of interviewees must similarly be objective in order to identify groups of
teachers able provide the most useful data and reflections on collaboration. However, because
the end of the school year fast approaching when I conducted the interviews, rather than being
selective, I interviewed every willing participant.
Self-reporting by teachers and administrators through interviews also represents a
potential limitation, though I sought to compensate for it by collecting data from multiple
sources, specifically the combination of surveys, interviews, and notes. I also, as alluded to
above, engaged a colleague to analyze the interview data in order to validate my themes by
demonstrating that two researchers arrived at the same conclusions. Also as mentioned, I gave
participants the option of a third party to conduct the interviews, but no one chose this option.
Chapter Summary
A mixed-methods research approach was selected for this study as the best means to
reveal to the educational field how teachers’ viewpoints and ideas affect their relationships with
each other. This approach provided a solid understanding of how schools utilize TLs and the
level of uncertainty among teachers and administrators regarding the role of the TL on campus,
particularly as it evolves in response to the demands of technology and information literacy. The
goal was to examine the perspectives of as many educators as possible on a single campus in
which a common cultural understanding had been established. Following Creswell and Plano
Clark (2011), then, I identified a mixed-methods approach as the appropriate one to explore the
research questions, since the data were validated by multiple methods.

49

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
The purpose of this study was to gain an understanding of why some high school teachers
collaborate with TLs while others do not and of the factors that influence utilization of library
services. Put slightly differently, I was interested in gaining a deeper understanding of how the
school culture at a particular high school influenced the TL’s role in facilitating learning. The
overarching research question for this study—which has already been presented repeatedly but
will be reproduced here again for the sake of completeness—concerned the elements that foster
effective collaborative exchanges between high school teachers and TLs. The following subquestions grew out of this main idea:
a) How do high school teachers, administrators, and high school TLs who work in the
same school setting define collaboration?
b) Does an individual’s definition of collaboration affect how he or she interacts and
collaborates with other teachers or teaching support staff?
c) What factors contribute to or detract from collaboration between teachers and TLs?
This chapter addresses these research questions by offering analysis of 62 (n=62)
anonymously completed surveys and 22 follow-up, face-to-face interviews with high school
teachers. The study design and methods involved recruiting interviewees at one high school and
relied on purposeful sampling methods. Survey data were analyzed using the research analysis
software tool SPSS, and interview data were coded for themes. The following discussion
summarizes the raw data and discusses the findings in three sections. The first describes the
statistical analysis of the online survey. The second section presents the raw data of the
interviews using counts of the various themes that were coded; pseudonyms are used to protect
the identities of the interviewees. The third section reviews the emerging themes and sub-themes

50

that developed from the participants’ interviews and my notes that were taken throughout the
course of the study. Data were collected between April and June 2017. Surveys were emailed to
123 certificated staff members and 6 administrators at one high school, for a total sample size of
128 participants (n=128). Since the survey was anonymous, it is unclear how many
administrators and teachers completed the survey, but in any case, 62 surveys were completed of
the possible 128, which represents a return rate of 48%.
Survey Data Results
The high school at which this survey was administered employed 123 teachers and 6
administrators. The breakdown by department was 16 English teachers, 15 social science
teachers, 16 mathematics teachers, 12 science teachers, 9 world languages teachers, 8 physical
education (PE) teachers, 15 special education teachers (including credentialed support
providers), 10 visual and performing arts teachers, 1 junior Reserve Officer’s Training Corps
(JROTC) teacher, 3 industrial arts teachers, 3 Advancement Via Individual Determination
(AVID) teachers, 7 academic counselors, 1 teacher librarian, 5 Academic Acceleration and
Recovery Center (AARC) teachers/counselors, and the 6 administrators. Of the 128 staff, 62
completed the survey (see Appendix A for survey questions). There were in fact 129 certificated
staff members, but since the researcher of this was one, the potential sample size of the survey
was 128 (n=128). All surveys were completed by the participants anonymously through a
Qualtrics Software Survey link. The survey, as detailed in the previous chapter, included
demographic questions on age, gender, teaching experience, education, other careers, and
previous teaching positions. Other survey questions, which collected information using a Likerttype scale survey instrument, concerned the respondents’ various types of relationships with the
TL, including any collaboration, the various roles played by the TL, the credentialing process for

51

TLs, and barriers that prevented certificated staff from collaborating with the TL. The option of
filling out paper copies of the survey was offered to the participants, but none requested this
format. The quantitative survey questions were analyzed using SPSS software. Descriptive
statistics, chi square tests of association, and t tests for independent samples were used to analyze
the data.
Ten surveys were removed from the analysis pool because participants failed to complete
them; in fact, they all stopped with the fifteenth question. This outcome could have been due to
the length of the specific subsection or to some other form of survey fatigue. One feature of the
Qualtrics online platform is that the participants had the option of completing their surveys at
intervals rather than all at once, though it is necessary to use the same device and browser to do
so.
The participants’ demographic characteristics are presented in Table 1. Most of the
respondents were female (53.2%), White (80.6%), and had a Master's degree and a teaching
credential (64.5%). A plurality had 21 years or more years of teaching experience (29%). Over
half (51.6%) had been previously employed in a field other than teaching, and 71% had worked
at another school. By way of comparison, the ethnic composition of the school’s staff as a whole
was as follows: 75.6% White, 10.2% Hispanic, 3.1% African-American, 1.6% Filipino, 0.8%
Pacific Islander, 2.4% Asian, and 1.6% American Indian/Alaskan; 2.4% identified with more
than one ethnicity and another 2.4% did not report an ethnicity. The average number of years of
teaching experience (during the 2016-2017 school year) among the staff as a whole was 12, with
5 teachers having completed only their first year of teaching. The gender makeup of the staff is
nearly evenly split (50.4% female, 49.6% male). In terms of education, among the staff 55 (42.6

52

%) certificated staff held a bachelor’s degree, 70 (54.2%) a master’s degree, 3 (2.3%) a
doctorate, and 1 (0.7%) a special degree (specifically, a Juris Doctor).
Table 1: Participants’ Demographic Characteristics
n

%

Gender
Male
Female
Total

Factor

29
33
62

46.8
53.2
100.0

Race/Ethnicity
White
Black or African American
Hispanic or Latino/a
American Indian or Alaskan Native
Asian
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
Other
Total

50
1
6
1
1
1
2
62

80.6
1.6
9.7
1.6
1.6
1.6
3.2
100.0

Highest Level of Education
Bachelor's degree plus teaching credential
Master's degree
Master's degree plus teaching credential
Doctorate degree
Other
Total

15
2
40
3
2
62

24.2
3.2
64.5
4.8
3.2
100.0

Years of Teaching Experience
Less than 1
1-2
5 or less
6-10
11-15
16-20
21 or more
Total

2
1
5
10
10
16
18
62

3.2
1.6
8.1
16.1
16.1
25.8
29.0
100.0

Previously Employed in Another Field Besides Teaching
No
Yes

30
32

48.4
51.6

Worked at Another School
Yes
No
Total

44
18
62

71.0
29.0
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian in any manner
Yes
No
Not applicable
Total

21
27
14
62

33.9
43.5
22.6
100.0

53

Descriptive Statistics for the Quantitative Survey Questions
The participants provided various personal statistics, while the questions were designed
to explore their perceptions of and interactions with TLs. Around a third (33.9%) of respondents
indicated that they had collaborated with a TL in some manner in previous school setting, while
nearly three fourths (73.3%) reported having collaborated with the TL at this high school or
planning to do so.
Confidence in Research Skills
Participants rated their confidence levels regarding their own skill in using a variety of
educational tools, their knowledge of how to create an effective search, and their use of the
library as a tool or resource to share ethical research skills with students (Question 13). Higher
confidence levels were assigned higher code values in the survey and the “not sure what this
means” response was assigned a code value of zero. Sixty-two respondents gave an answer
regarding research skills. The survey did not ask respondents to assess their overall confidence
in their own research skills, but one of the sub-questions asked them to rate their confidence in
appropriately using the library resources and services for research, and for the responses
“describes me extremely well” was selected by 11 (17.7%), “describes me very well” by 14
(22.6%), and “moderately well” by 22 (35.5%), while another 11 (17.7%) had only slight
confidence, 3 (4.8%) did not feel that the question described them, and 1 (1.6%) was unsure what
the question was asking. These responses are presented in Table 2.

54

Table 2: Participants’ Confidence in Their Research Skills
Survey Question 13
I feel confident in my understanding of the structure of information within the field of education research.
Not sure what this means
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

n

%

3
4
15
21
11
8
62

4.8
6.5
24.2
33.9
17.7
12.9
100.0

I feel confident in my ability to identify and use key educational research tools to locate relevant information.
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

3
9
24
15
11
62

4.8
14.5
38.7
24.2
17.7
100.0

I feel confident that I can plan effective search strategies as needed.
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

2
7
24
17
12
62

3.2
11.3
38.7
27.4
19.4
100.0

I feel confident that I will recognize and make appropriate use of library services in the research process that I
use.
Not sure what this means
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

1
3
11
22
14
11
62

1.6
4.8
17.7
35.5
22.6
17.7
100.0

I feel confident that I understand the technical and ethical issues involved in research in the field of
education.
Not sure what this means
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

1
2
12
11
17
19
62

1.6
3.2
19.4
17.7
27.4
30.6
100.0

I feel confident that I can locate information about the field of education.
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

4
14
25
19
62

6.5
22.6
40.3
30.6
100.0

I feel confident that I understand that some new information sources are more authoritative than others.
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

1
4
11
22
24
62

1.6
6.5
17.7
35.5
38.7
100.0

I feel confident that I demonstrate critical thinking in the research process that I use.
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

1
10
26
25
62

1.6
16.1
41.9
40.3
100.0

55

School Library Resources
Participants were asked to rate the significance of a variety of factors associated with the
school library. Various sub-questions were linked to concepts, such as library resources that can
be utilized by both teachers and students, the need for information to be kept in one central
space, collaboration with the library staff to improve teaching practices, and the assistance that
students receive in the library (Question 14). Twenty-four (38.7%) participants answered that it
was extremely important to know to collaborate with the library staff to support their teaching,
17 (27.4%) answered that this statement described them well, 13 (21%) felt it was moderately
descriptive of themselves, while 8 (12.9%) felt that it described them only slightly. No
participant answered that the statement did not describe them or was unsure what the question
was asking. These responses are presented in Table 3.

56

Table 3: Importance of Factors Related to the School Library
Survey Question 14
It is important for me to understanding why information should
be stored in a central place.
Not sure what this means
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

n

%

5
4
8
21
12
12
62

8.1
6.5
12.9
33.9
19.4
19.4
100.0

It is important for me to know how materials are loaned and
shared.
Does not describe me
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

5
11
17
17
12
62

8.1
17.7
27.4
27.4
19.4
100.0

It is important for me to know how the library staff assists my
students with their information needs.
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

5
15
21
21
62

8.1
24.2
33.9
33.9
100.0

It is important for me to knowing how the library staff can
collaborate with me to support my teaching.
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

8
13
17
24
62

12.9
21.0
27.4
38.7
100.0

It is important for me that my students be aware of the various
library resources and tools that are available.
Describes me slightly well
Describes me moderately well
Describes me very well
Describes me extremely well
Total

2
9
17
34
62

3.2
14.5
27.4
54.8
100.0

57

Collaboration with the Teacher Librarian
Participants responded to a series of sub-questions regarding how helpful collaboration
with the teacher librarian would be in the performance of a variety of tasks (Question 15).
Participants rated one collaborative in particular as extremely important, that of helping teachers
follow citation policies for crediting resources that are utilized: 29 (47.5%) rated that this kind of
collaboration as extremely important, 16 (26.2%) as important, 7 (11.5%) as moderately
important, 6 (9.8%) as slightly important, and 3 (4.9%) as not at all important. These findings
are presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in defining
and articulating the need for research in my field within education.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

1
6
12
13
28
60

1.7
10.0
20.0
21.7
46.7
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
identifying various types and formats of potential sources of
information.
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
9
16
32
61

6.6
14.8
26.2
52.5
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in weighing
the costs and benefits of acquiring the needed information.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

2
4
15
18
20
59

3.4
6.8
25.4
30.5
33.9
100.0

58

Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks Continued
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
reevaluating the nature and extent of the information needed.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

2
5
12
25
17
61

3.3
8.2
19.7
41.0
27.9
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in selecting
the most appropriate methods of information retrieval for accessing
information.
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
8
22
26
60

6.7
13.3
36.7
43.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
constructing and implementing effective search strategies.
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

3
6
26
25
60

5.0
10.0
43.3
41.7
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in retrieving
information online or in person.
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

5
7
22
27
61

8.2
11.5
36.1
44.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in extracting,
recording, and managing information and its sources.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

1
3
12
16
29
61

1.6
4.9
19.7
26.2
47.5
100.0

59

Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks Continued
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
summarizing the main ideas for extraction of information gathered.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

1
12
11
19
17
60

1.7
20.0
18.3
31.7
28.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
articulating and applying initial criteria for evaluating the
information and its sources.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

1
9
20
19
12
61

1.6
14.8
32.8
31.1
19.7
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
synthesizing main ideas in order to construct new concepts.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
12
20
12
12
60

6.7
20.0
33.3
20.0
20.0
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
comparing new and prior knowledge to determine the value added,
contradictions, or other characteristics of information.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

5
11
16
17
10
59

8.5
18.6
27.1
28.8
16.9
100.0

60

Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks Continued
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
determining whether new knowledge has an impact on my values
system and on steps to reconcile differences among various
resources.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

5
9
21
15
9
59

8.5
15.3
35.6
25.4
15.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
understanding and interpreting information through discourse with
individuals, subject-area experts, and/or practitioners.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

7
10
16
15
13
61

11.5
16.4
26.2
24.6
21.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
understanding ethical, legal, and socioeconomic issues related to
research in education.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
10
13
17
18
62

6.5
16.1
21.0
27.4
29.0
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in following
laws, regulations, polices, and etiquette related to the access and use
of information resources.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

3
4
13
14
27
61

4.9
6.6
21.3
23.0
44.3
100.0

61

Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks Continued
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
acknowledging the use of information sources to communicate
research in education.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
6
13
17
21
61

6.6
9.8
21.3
27.9
34.4
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in applying
new and prior information in the planning and creation of a
particular product or performance.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

3
9
17
18
14
61

4.9
14.8
27.9
29.5
23.0
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in revising
the development process for the product or performance for a
specific assignment.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

2
8
22
14
13
59

3.4
13.6
37.3
23.7
22.0
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
communicating a product or performance to others for a specific
assignment.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

5
7
21
14
14
61

8.2
11.5
34.4
23.0
23.0
100.0

62

Table 4: Importance of Collaborating with a Teacher Librarian of Various Tasks Continued
Survey Question 15

n

%

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
assisting students to assess their own learning process.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

2
3
13
19
24
61

3.3
4.9
21.3
31.1
39.3
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
evaluating the effect of the collaborative process on student
achievement.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

4
5
17
17
18
61

6.6
8.2
27.9
27.9
29.5
100.0

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in
following citation policies for crediting resources that I utilize.
Not at all Important
Slightly Important
Moderately Important
Very Important
Extremely Important
Total

3
6
7
16
29
61

4.9
9.8
11.5
26.2
47.5
100.0

Knowledge of Teacher Librarians’ Roles
To make full use of the services that the library and teacher librarian provides to teachers
and students, participants need to be able to identify what is available to help them both in and
outside the classroom and how the TL can play a larger role in curriculum development and
assisting students to be mindful of their role as digital citizens. Participants indicated using the
Linkert-style scale whether they agreed or disagreed that the TL was qualified to perform various
job roles at the school or district levels (Question 17). Most of the sub-questions for survey

63

Question 17 were answered by participants, who indicated that they were either neutral about the
specific role mentioned (neither agreeing nor disagreeing) or that they somewhat or strongly
agreed about the job role. One sub-question in particular elicited a range of participant opinions,
specifically regarding the TL’s participation in developing the school curriculum. According the
TLC-III model, the highest level of collaboration involving a TL happens when he or she
participates in the development of the school curriculum both at the site and district levels. Of
the 62 participants, 2 (3.2%) strongly disagreed that TLs should take part in curriculum
development, 7 (11.3%) somewhat disagreed, 21 (33.9%) neither agreed or disagreed, 18 (29%)
somewhat agreed, 13 (21%) strongly agreed, while 1 (1.6%) was unsure about the meaning of
the question. These results are presented in Table 5.
Table 5: Participants’ Assessments of Survey Items
Survey Question 17

n

%

Teacher librarians provide information resources appropriate to students'
information needs and learning tasks.
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
8
53
62

1.6
12.9
85.5
100.0

Teacher librarians match the information needs and interests of individual
users with appropriate library resources.
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
11
50
62

1.6
17.7
80.6
100.0

Teacher librarians develop a collection of information resources that
supports instruction and individual interests.
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

2
11
49
62

3.2
17.7
79.0
100.0

64

Table 5: Participants’ Assessments of Survey Items Continued
Survey Question 17

n

%

Teacher librarians provide leadership in using technology for teaching and
learning.
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
2
13
46
62

1.6
3.2
21.0
74.2
100.0

Teacher librarians facilitate teaching of the school's curriculum.
Not sure what this means
Strongly Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
1
14
18
28
62

1.6
1.6
22.6
29.0
45.2
100.0

Teacher librarians participate in developing the school curriculum.
Not sure what this means
Strongly Disagree
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
2
7
21
18
13
62

1.6
3.2
11.3
33.9
29.0
21.0
100.0

Teacher librarians identify needs of the school community.
Strongly Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
15
18
28
62

1.6
24.2
29.0
45.2
100.0

Teacher librarians teach students how to be independent learners.
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree

1
9
22
30

1.6
14.5
35.5
48.4

65

Table 5: Participants’ Assessments of Survey Items Continued
Survey Question 17

n

%

Teacher librarians plan instructional activities in collaboration with
classroom teachers.
Not sure what this means
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
2
6
21
32
62

1.6
3.2
9.7
33.9
51.6
100.0

Teacher librarians create instructional materials for teaching and learning.
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

3
16
11
32
62

4.8
25.8
17.7
51.6
100.0

Teacher librarians guide teachers in the effective design of instruction.
Strongly Disagree
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

3
6
21
13
19
62

4.8
9.7
33.9
21.0
30.6
100.0

Teacher librarians support the concept of the intellectual freedom of
information.
Not sure what this means
Somewhat Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

2
1
11
12
36
62

3.2
1.6
17.7
19.4
58.1
100.0

Teacher librarians foster collaborative as well as individual inquiry.
Not sure what this means
Strongly Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

1
2
9
19
31
62

1.6
3.2
14.5
30.6
50.0
100.0

66

Table 5: Participants’ Assessments of Survey Items Continued
Survey Question 17

n

%

Teacher librarians help students to develop lifelong learning skills.
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

8
16
38
62

12.9
25.8
61.3
100.0

Teacher librarians help students to develop critical thinking skills.
Neither Agree nor Disagree
Somewhat Agree
Strongly Agree
Total

12
18
32
62

19.4
29.0
51.6
100.0

Analysis of Survey Data
The aim of the survey was for the participants to share their plans to collaborate with the
TL at the high school site. As can be seen in Table 6, 44 participants indicated that they would
collaborate (n = 60, 73.3%) as opposed to 26.7% shared that they would not collaborate with the
TL. Reasons for not planning to collaborate with the TL were explained by the participants in
survey Question 19. The “plan to collaborate” variable was accordingly used in subsequent
analyses. The t test for independent samples was used to compare the mean ratings for the
survey items in terms of plans to collaborate with a TL (yes/no) (see Table 7).
Table 6: Collaboration with TL and the Collaboration Variable
Survey Question

n

%

16
44
60

26.7
73.3
100.0

Planning to collaborate with the teacher librarian on campus
No
Yes
Total

67

Table 7: T Test for Independent Samples Comparing the Mean Ratings for Survey Question 13
with Plans to Collaborate with the TL
Survey Item

Plan to
N
Collaborate

M

SD

t

df

P

I feel confident in my understanding of the
structure of information within the field of
education research.

No
Yes

16 2.63 1.40 -0.98 58 .32
44 3.00 1.25

I feel confident in my ability to identify and use
key educational research tools to locate relevant
information.

No
Yes

16 3.19 1.22 -0.75 58 .45
44 3.43 1.06

I feel confident that I can plan effective search
strategies as needed.

No
Yes

16 3.56 1.03 0.27 58 .78
44 3.48 1.06

I feel confident that I can recognize and make
appropriate use of library services in the research
process that I use.

No
Yes

16 2.63 1.50 -2.53 58 .01*
44 3.48 1.00

I feel confident that I understand the technical and
ethical issues involved in writing research for the
education field.

No
Yes

16 3.19 1.42 -1.36 58 .17
44 3.70 1.25

I feel confident that I can locate information about No
the field of education itself.
Yes

16 3.69 1.01 -1.46 58 .15
44 4.07 0.84

I feel confident in my understanding that some new No
information sources are more authoritative than
Yes
others.

16 3.88 1.08 -0.58 58 .56
44 4.05 0.96

I feel confident that I demonstrate critical thinking No
in the research process that I use.
Yes

16 4.13 1.02 -0.44 58 .65
44 4.23 0.67

One of the mean scores for the confidence in research skills (Question 13) differed in
terms of plans to collaborate at the level of statistical significance. Those who planned to
collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 3.48, SD = 1.00) for the item “I feel
confident that I will recognize and make appropriate use of library services in the research
process that I use” than those who did not plan to collaborate (M = 2.63, SD = 1.50). Those who
planned to collaborate were more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean
68

difference between the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.53, p <
.05).
The next t test for independent samples compared the mean ratings for the survey items
in terms of “plan to collaborate with a TL” (yes/no) (Table 8), and two of the mean scores for
Question 14 were found to differ at the level of statistical significance. Those who planned to
collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.07, SD = 0.87) for the item “It is important
for me to know how library staff assist my students with their information needs” than those who
did not plan to collaborate (M = 3.50, SD = 1.09). Those who planned to collaborate were more
likely to indicate that this statement described them; mean difference between the two groups for
this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.08, p < .05). Those who planned to collaborate
with a TL had higher mean scores (M = 4.16, SD = 0.93) for the item “It is important for me to
know how the library staff collaborates with me to support my teaching” than those who did not
plan to collaborate (M = 3.19, SD = 1.10). Those who planned to collaborate were significantly
more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference between the two
groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -3.37, p < .05).

69

Table 8: T Test for Independent Samples Comparing the Mean Ratings for the Question 14 Items
by Plans to Collaborate with the TL
Survey Item

Plan to
Collaborate

N

M

SD

t

df

P

It is important for me to
understand why information
storage in a central place is
important.

No
Yes

16
44

2.88
3.11

1.36
1.49

-0.55

58

.57

It is important for me to know
how loaning and sharing of
materials takes place.

No
Yes

16
44

2.94
3.43

1.06
1.24

-1.40

58

.16

It is important for me to
No
understand the kinds of personnel Yes
who staff the library and their
roles.

16
44

3.19
3.70

1.10
1.02

-1.69

58

.09

It is important for me to know
how the library staff assists my
students with their information
needs.

No
Yes

16
44

3.50
4.07

1.09
0.87

-2.08

58

.04*

It is important for me to know
No
how the library staff can
Yes
collaborate with me to support my
teaching.

16
44

3.19
4.16

1.10
0.93

-3.37

58 .001*

It is important to me that my
students be aware of the various
library resources and tools
available.

16
44

4.00
4.45

1.15
0.69

-1.85

58

No
Yes

.18

Given the statistical significance of the difference between the participants who indicated
that they would collaborate or were collaborating with the TL and those who had no plans to
collaborate or do not need to, it would make sense to inquire why the latter felt no need to
collaborate. To answer this question, I cross-referenced each participant’s answer to the relevant
question (Question 18) who answered either “no” or “too much going on in my classroom,” in
connection with Question 20, to which the participants provided free responses regarding
70

impediments to collaborating with the TL or utilizing the library’s services. Sixteen (26.7%)
indicated that they either did not need to collaborate with the TL or did not want to for various
reasons.
Seven themes emerged in this regard. Time was the number one reason, being cited by 5
of the 16 respondents as largely responsible for failure to collaborate with the TL. Another
reason cited, in this case by an administrator and a mathematics teacher, was the nature of an
individual’s job role. Three respondents cited lack of knowledge regarding what the library and
TL have to offer in regard to services or collaboration and how to fit ideas into their curricula.
The other themes, cited by only one respondent each, were lack of planning sufficiently far in
advance, low “energy levels” in the case of a teacher near retirement who did “not want to try
something new,” a desire to collaborate only with teachers with specific subject matter expertise
(in this case, mathematics), and the assumption that the library was always booked.
Background Factors that Could Influence Collaboration
A possible contributing factor to collaboration was whether work experience in a field
outside education increased or decreased the likelihood of collaborating. On Question 7 of the
survey, over half of respondents (51.6%) answered that they had been previously employed in
another field. The chi-square test of association results indicated that there was no statistical
association between a positive answer and plans to collaborate with a TL. I also wanted to
determine whether the school at which this research study was conducted was anomalous with
respect to teacher-TL collaboration. Over two thirds (71%) of respondents indicated that they
had also worked at a school other than the one at which they were currently employed. The chisquare test of association results indicated that there was no statistically significant difference in

71

terms of plans to collaborate between those who had and those who had not worked at another
school. These results are presented in Table 9.
The literature suggests that teachers and administrators need to be exposed, either
through a credentialing program or professional development, regarding how best to utilize
library services or collaborate with a TL. Fifty-three of the 62 respondents (85.5%) indicated
that they had had no exposure in their coursework to the concept of collaboration with the TL.
Six (9.7%) mentioned participating in professional development in the past year led by the
researcher in her capacity as TL during which she shared various teaching tools and applications
that can be utilized in the classroom. Three (4.8%) indicated that they had been exposed to these
issues in some way in the course of their credentialing graduate degree programs. According to
one, “As part of my schooling, it was stressed to use other school staff as resources and to let
students know that they were available as a resource to them.” Another respondent mentioned
that his experience using the library as a college student had prepared him by instructing him as
to what was required and helping him to incorporate library resources into his curriculum more
effectively.
Table 9: Chi-square Test and Descriptive Statistics for Survey Question 7 by Plans to
Collaborate
Previously employed in another field besides teaching
Plan to Collaborate
No
Yes
No
11 (37.9%)
18 (62.1%)
Yes
5 (16.1%)
26 (83.9%)
2
Note. x = 3.64, df = 1, p = .06. Numbers in parentheses indicate row percentages.

Another factor that was considered as a possible influence on collaboration between TLs
and teachers was the level of education required to be a TL and the additional certification that
TLs must undergo in California to obtain the TL credential. The chi-square test of association
indicated that there was no statistically significant difference in terms of plans to collaborate
72

between those who were informed about the steps required to become a credentialed TL and
those who were not (see Table 10). Participants were asked in Question 10 to identify items on a
list in relation to obtaining the California Teacher Librarian credential. Nineteen (86.4%)
checked all the items listed and planned to collaborate with the TL, while 3 (13.6%) checked all
the items but did not plan to do so. Twenty-five (65.8%) did not check all of the items listed
above and planned to collaborate with the TL, while 13 (34.2%) did not check all of the items
listed above and did not plan to collaborate with the TL.
Table 10: Chi-square Test and Descriptive Statistics for Survey Question 10 by Plans to
Collaborate
What do you think are the
California requirements for
teacher librarian certification?

Plan to Collaborate

No
Yes
Did not choose all items listed
13 (34.2%)
25 (65.8%)
Chose all items listed
3 (13.6%)
19 (86.4%)
2
Note. x = 3.01, df = 1, p = .08. Numbers in parentheses indicate row percentages.

Roles of the Teacher Librarian
The t tests for independent samples were used to compare the mean ratings for the survey
items for Question 17, which concerned plans to collaborate with a TL (yes/no) (Table 11). Six
of the mean scores for Question 17 differed by plans to collaborate at the level of statistical
significance.
Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.34, SD =
0.74) for the item “TLs facilitate teaching of the school's curriculum” than those who did not
plan to collaborate (M = 3.69, SD = 1.13). Those who planned to collaborate were significantly
more likely to indicate that this statement described them. Thus, the mean difference between
the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.59, p < .05).

73

Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 3.73, SD =
0.97) for the item “TLs participate in developing the school curriculum” than those who did not
plan to collaborate (M = 2.94, SD = 1.28). Thus, those who planned to collaborate were
significantly more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference
between the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.54, p < .05).
Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.30, SD =
0.79) for the item “TLs identify needs of the school community” than those who did not plan to
collaborate (M = 3.75, SD = 1.12). Thus, those who planned to collaborate were significantly
more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference between the two
groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.09, p < .05).
Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.48, SD =
0.66) for the item “TLs teach students how to be independent learners” than those who did not
plan to collaborate (M = 3.75, SD = 0.85). Thus, those who planned to collaborate were
significantly more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference
between the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -3.46, p < .05).
Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.34, SD =
0.96) for the item “TLs create instructional materials for teaching and learning” than those who
did not plan to collaborate (M = 3.69, SD = 0.87). Thus, those who planned to collaborate were
significantly more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference
between the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.37, p < .05).
Those who planned to collaborate with a TL had a higher mean score (M = 4.61, SD =
0.68) for the item “TLs help students to develop lifelong learning skills” than those who did not
plan to collaborate (M = 4.13, SD = 0.71). Thus, those who planned to collaborate were

74

significantly more likely to indicate that this statement described them. The mean difference
between the two groups for this item was statistically significant (t(58) = -2.40, p < .05). There
were no other statistically significant differences between the two groups in terms of these
survey items.

75

Table 11: T Test for Independent Samples Comparing the Mean Ratings for the Question 17
Items by Plans to Collaborate with the TL
Survey Item
TLs provide information resources appropriate to
students' information needs and learning tasks.

Plan to
N M
SD
Collaborate
No
16 4.69 0.60
Yes
44 4.89 0.32

TLs match the information needs and interests of
individual users with appropriate library resources.

No
Yes

T

df

P

-1.65 58

.10

16 4.63 0.61
44 4.86 0.34

-1.88 58

.06

TLs develop a collection of information resources that No
supports instruction and individual interests.
Yes

16 4.63 0.61
44 4.82 0.44

-1.33 58

.18

TLs provide leadership in using technology for
teaching and learning.

No
Yes

16 4.69 0.60
44 4.66 0.64

0.15

.87

TLs facilitate teaching of the school's curriculum.

No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

16
44
16
44
16
44

3.69
4.34
2.94
3.73
3.75
4.30

1.13
0.74
1.28
0.97
1.12
0.79

-2.59 58 .01*

No
Yes
No
Yes

16
44
16
44

3.75
4.48
3.88
4.41

0.85
0.66
1.25
0.81

-3.46 58 .001*

No
Yes
No
Yes

16
44
16
44

3.69
4.34
3.31
3.77

0.87
0.96
1.13
1.09

-2.37 58 .02*

TLs participate in developing the school curriculum.
TLs identify the needs of the school community.

TLs teach students how to be independent learners.
TLs plan instructional activities in collaboration with
teachers.
TLs create instructional materials for teaching and
learning.
TLs guide teachers in the effective design of
instruction.

No
TLs support the concept of the intellectual freedom of Yes
information.
No
TLs foster collaborative as well as individual inquiry. Yes
No
TLs help students to develop lifelong learning skills.
Yes
No
TLs help students to develop critical thinking skills.
Yes

58

-2.54 58 .01*
-2.09 58 .04*

-1.92 58

.06

-1.42 58

.16

16 3.81 1.37
44 4.36 1.03

-1.66 58

.10

16
44
16
44
16
44

-1.53 58

.13

3.81
4.30
4.13
4.61
4.13
4.36

1.27
1.00
0.71
0.68
0.71
0.81

-2.40 58 .02*
-1.03 58

.30

Correlation Across the Domains
The survey items with the highest ratings of importance related to collaboration with the
TL were as follows (in order of the highest to lowest mean rating) (Table 12):
76



Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in identifying a variety of
types and formats of potential sources for information (mean rating: 4.25).



Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in constructing and
implementing effective search strategies (mean rating: 4.22).



Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in selecting the most
appropriate investigative methods of information retrieval for accessing information
(mean rating: 4.17).



Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in extracting, recording, and
managing information and its sources (mean rating: 4.16).



Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in retrieving information
online or in person using a variety of methods (mean rating: 4.13).

Table 12: Descriptive Statistics for Questions 15 and 16
Survey Items

N

Min Max

M

SD

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in defining and
articulating the need for research in my field of education. (1)

60

1

5

4.02

1.11

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in identifying a variety
of types and formats of potential sources for information. (2)

61

2

5

4.25

.94

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful weighing the costs and
benefits of acquiring the needed information. (3)

59

1

5

3.85

1.08

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in reevaluating the
nature and extent of the information needed. (4)

61

1

5

3.82

1.04

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in selecting the most
appropriate investigative methods of information retrieval systems for
accessing information. (5)

60

2

5

4.17

.90

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in constructing and
implementing effective search strategies. (6)

60

2

5

4.22

.82

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in retrieving
information online or in person using a variety of methods. (7)

61

2

5

4.16

.93

77

Table 12: Descriptive Statistics for Questions 15 and 16 Continued
Survey Items

N

Min Max

M

SD

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in extracting,
recording, and managing information and its sources. (8)

61

1

5

4.13

1.00

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in summarizing the
main ideas for extraction of the information that I gather. (9)

60

1

5

3.65

1.14

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in articulating and
applying initial criteria for evaluating both the information and its sources. (1)

61

1

5

3.52

1.02

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in synthesizing main
ideas to construct new concepts. (2)

60

1

5

3.27

1.19

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in comparing new with
prior knowledge to determine the value added, contradictions, or other unique
characteristics of gathering information. (3)

59

1

5

3.27

1.20

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in determining whether
new knowledge has an impact on my values system and taking steps to
reconcile differences with various resources. (4)

59

1

5

3.24

1.15

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in understanding and
interpreting information through discourse with individuals, subject-area
experts, and/or practitioners. (5)

61

1

5

3.28

1.29

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in understanding many
of the ethical, legal, and socioeconomic issues surrounding research in
education. (6)

62

1

5

3.56

1.25

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in following laws,
regulations, polices, and etiquette related to the access and use of information
resources. (7)

61

1

5

3.95

1.17

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in acknowledging the
use of information sources in communicating research in education. (8)

61

1

5

3.74

1.22

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in applying new and
prior information to the planning and creation of a particular product or
performance. (9)

61

1

5

3.51

1.14

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in revising the
development process for the product or performance for the specific purpose
of an assignment. (10)

59

1

5

3.47

1.08

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in communicating the
product or performance effectively to others for the specific purpose of an
assignment. (11)

61

1

5

3.41

1.20

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in assisting students to
assess their own learning processes. (12)

61

1

5

3.98

1.05

78

Table 12: Descriptive Statistics for Questions 15 and 16 Continued
Survey Items

N

Min Max

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in evaluating efforts to
improve student achievement. (13)

61

1

Collaboration with a teacher librarian would be helpful in following citation
policies for crediting resources I utilize. (14)

61

1

M

SD

5

3.66

1.18

5

4.02

1.20

Questions 15 and 16 asked participants to assess the importance for collaborating with a
teacher librarian in the successful performance of a specified task. The individual Pearson
correlations for these questions indicate that a relationship exists among all of the domains. The
researcher averaged across these 23 items to create a total score for perceived helpfulness of
collaboration with a TL across a variety of domains. There was a strong positive correlation
among the survey items with the highest mean ratings of importance in regards to collaboration
with the TL and across these domains. The greatest positive correlations between two variables,
r = .855, n = 60, p < .001, related collaborating with the TL in extracting, recording, and
managing information and its sources to collaborating with the TL in retrieving information
online or in person using a variety of methods. These two roles that are perceived by the
participants as the basis for proper collaborative relationships utilizing the TL’s skill set in
research, retrieval, and management of information resources. There is no Pearson correlation
table in this paper due to the nature of the study, a researcher would expect a correlation between
the findings and across the variety of the domains that were analyzed for this study.
A t test for independent samples was used to compare the mean ratings for the survey
items for Question 17, which concerned plans to collaborate with a TL (see Table 13). On
average, those who planned to collaborate perceived collaboration with a TL across a variety of
domains as more helpful (M = 3.88, SD = 0.75) than did those who had no plans to collaborate

79

with a TL (M = 3.22, SD = 1.02). The difference of 0.65 was statistically significant (t(58) = 2.70, p < .01).
Table 13: T Test for Independent Samples Comparing the Mean Ratings for the Average of
Questions 15 and 16 by Plans to Collaborate with the TL

Perceived
Helpfulness of
Collaborating
with a Teacher
Librarian

Plan to
Collaborate
No
Yes

N

M

SD

t

Df

p

16
44

3.22
3.88

1.02
0.75

-2.70

58

.009

For Question 19, respondents shared their opinions regarding when collaboration with a
TL would be beneficial to meet their own information needs and those of their students. This
written response was analyzed thematically, and 10 themes emerged from the 62 responses. The
theme with the highest response rate corresponded to the fourth-highest-rated domain, which was
mentioned earlier. Twenty-two participants (35%) indicated that, in the absence of barriers, it
would be beneficial to collaborate with the TL in extracting, recording, and managing
information and its sources. This domain captured research projects that teachers like to include
in their curricula and the role of the TL in helping to manage sources, such as identifying best
practices for creating and managing citations. Eleven participants (17%) were unable to adduce
other examples than those mentioned in the survey of measures that could help fulfill their
students’ information needs. Seven (11%) indicated that it would be helpful to be able to
identify the most appropriate method for information retrieval in terms of accessing databases
and other reliable online resources, conducting interviews, and analyzing primary and secondary
resources (depending of course on the curricular standards and desired outcomes).
Six participants (10%) indicated that they simply want the library to be open for students
to access services and technology in the course to complete their school assignments. Five (8%)
80

expressed a desire to collaborate more with the TL in identifying a variety of types of formats of
potential sources for information that students could utilize and access, and this result also
corresponds to the highest mean rated domain from Question 15. Three participants (5%)
indicated their desire for a school site professional development program lead by the TL aimed at
improving teaching practices, while three others (5%) wanted the TL to help students pick out
books or to lead reading programs. Another three participants (5%) indicated that it would be
beneficial to collaborate with the TL in learning how to construct and implement effective search
strategies which means when to use effective Boolean search terms (e.g., AND, OR, and NOT)
or how to operate the advance features settings for the various types of search engines. This
theme corresponds to the third-highest-ranked domain, which was explored in Question 15. One
further response (2%) expressed a desire for the TL to stage a freshman orientation session that
would provide an overview of various research strategies, citation systems, issues involving
plagiarism, and other background information to help students build their skill sets as digital
citizens (2%). Another unique suggestion (2%) was that teachers and students become better
informed about retrieving information online or in person using a variety of methods, which
relates to the issue of using online as opposed to print resources, this being the fifth-highest-rated
domain in Question 15. These results were consistent with those achieved using the Linkertstyle questions to rate the importance of collaborating with a TL in the successful performance of
a specified task, since the five top-rated domains were evident in the written responses regarding
participants’ values and needs.
The statistically significant findings indicated that those who better understood the role of
the TL and the TL’s capacity to provide assistance in a variety of ways related to the 23 domains
presented in the survey were more likely to collaborate with the TL. Understanding the TL’s

81

role in teaching and learning thus facilitates collaboration at the high school level. The TL and
administrators bear the responsibility of helping teachers better understand how the TL and the
library can help enhance teaching practices and student achievement.
Qualitative Data Analysis
As has been seen, 22 of the 62 teachers and administrators who completed the
anonymous online survey participated in the face-to-face interviews, though nearly all expressed
a desire to take part in this second phase of data collection. In any case, both groups (those who
were interviewed and those who were not) were represented in the first, survey, phase. Also, as
discussed earlier, the initial collaboration survey was sent to all individuals at the school site, and
the last question provided a link to a second survey that could be completed if the participant was
willing to do so. The second survey asked respondents’ names, so that an incentive could be
directed to them thanking them for completing the survey, and whether they would be willing to
be interviewed about the proposed topic of teacher to TL collaboration. Thirty-four (56.67%) of
the 62 participants indicated that they were available to be interviewed, 16 (26.67%) answered
“maybe,” 10 (16.67%) declined to be interviewed, and 2 (3.22%) did not answer the second
survey.
The twenty-two of the 34 respondents who indicated a willingness to take part in the
second phase of data collection were then scheduled for interviews. This process was especially
challenging because the interviews were conducted during the final weeks of the 2016-2017
school year, a time of year that during which many activities that take place at any school. As
alluded to earlier, several individuals who indicated a willingness to be interviewed failed to
provide contact information and so could not be scheduled. All interviews were conducted faceto-face and at the high school site either during the TL’s prep period or after school. All

82

interviews were conducted after the closure of the online survey; all took from 20 to 50 minutes
to complete. All but one interview was audiotaped and then professionally transcribed verbatim
in order to code, collect, and analyze data; personal notes were taken throughout each interview.
One participant withheld permission to be recorded for personal reasons.
As already reported above, the respondents included approximately equal numbers of
men and women, and all but one had at least two years’ experience at the school; the exception
was approaching the end of her first year of teaching. The participants averaged 17 years in
education. In terms of racial/ethnic background, 19 were Caucasian (86.4%), 2 Latino/a (9%),
and one identified with two or more races (4.6%). Three were administrators (14%) and 19 were
teachers (86%). Most the departments at the high school site were represented, the exceptions
being Counseling, AARC, Industrial Arts, and JROTC, in each case owing to scheduling
conflicts. The breakdown of the department representation for the interviews was: 4 English, 2
Math, 2 Science, 4 Social Science, 1 World Language, 1 PE, 2 Visual and Performing Arts, 1
AVID, 2 Special Education teachers and 3 Administrators. These results are presented in Table
14.

83

Table 14: Interview Participants’ Backgrounds
Participant
Name

Gender

Number of Years of
Teaching/Administration
Experience

Department

Self-Reported
Race

Teacher 1

Male

11

Caucasian

Teacher 2
Teacher 3
Teacher 4

Male
Male
Male

28
6
27

Visual &
Performing Arts
Science
Science
English

Administrator 1
Teacher 5
Teacher 6
Teacher 7

Male
Male
Female
Male

21
30
8
11

Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Latino

Teacher 8
Administrator 2
Teacher 9
Teacher 10
Teacher 11
Teacher 12
Administrator 3

Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female

1
14
19
11
20
28
28

Administration
Social Science
English
Visual &
Performing Arts
Math
Administration
World Languages
English
Math
AVID
Administration

Teacher 13
Teacher 14
Teacher 15
Teacher 16
Teacher 17

Female
Male
Male
Male
Female

35
10
20
25
8

Teacher 18

Female

24

Teacher 19

Female

20

Social Science
Social Science
PE
Social Science
Special
Education
Special
Education
English

Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian

Latina
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Latina &
Native
American
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian
Caucasian

Analysis of the Interview Data
All interview transcriptions and personal notes were read and coded a minimum of four
times using HyperRESEARCH Qualitative research software. The first review and holistic
coding was conducted to provide an overview of the interviews, to determine whether follow-up
interviews were needed for clarification, to assess provisionally the overall perspective of
84

teachers and administrators regarding TLs and collaboration, and to determine the type of coding
best suited to sharing and exploring the themes that would emerge from subsequent rounds of
analysis. In light of this preliminary assessment, clarification interviews were arranged with two
teachers.
In the second round of coding, descriptive coding served to “categorize the inventory,
tabular account, summary, or index of the data’s contents” (Saldaña, 2016, p. 104). Through this
type of coding, the researcher acquired an organizational grasp of the study, in particular
participants’ attitudes toward TLs. Table 15 lists the initial descriptive codes. The researcher
also used memoing as a tool to gain insight into the codes and to differentiate between the word
choice for each excerpt, an approach that, according to Miles, Huberman, and Saldaña (2014),
“contributes strongly to the development/revision of the coding system” (p. 99). Thus, memoing
helped with the sorting and understanding of each code through several readings and revisits and
with the elapse of between coding cycles. Memoing also represented one way in which the
researcher was able to maintain consistency throughout the coding process, which went on over
several weeks (this approach was used with the initial list in Table 15 below). One way in which
HyperRESEARCH was used in conjunction with memoing involved a feature that could add
notes to individual codes as reminders for the researcher regarding the nature of each code and
the choice of certain verbiage. This flexible coding strategy allowed the researcher to determine
the methods and preferences for each specific coding descriptor. In sum, by using memos in the
first phase of coding, I enhanced my understanding of the data and ability to maintain continuity
(Birks, Chapman, & Francis, 2008).

85

Table 15: Initial List of Descriptive Codes and Their Frequencies
Start List of Descriptive Codes

n

Administration Actions that Hinder
Administration as Facilitators
Assumptions of Others
Being Prepared
Cannot Collaborate with Everyone
Common Prep Time
Curriculum Issues
Department Dynamics
Different Perspective/Learn from Each Other
Do Not Understand the Benefits
Fail Together (Make Improvements After)
Feeling of Guilt – Do Not Want to Bother Others
Food
Goal Setting
Growth Mindset
Initiating Collaboration – Based on Need
Isolation
Lack of Communication
Lack of Resources
Library Research
Mentoring
Model A Coordination—Library as Warehouse
Model B Cooperation—You Teach and then I Teach
Model C Integrated Instruction—Share Planning and Teaching
Model D Integrated Curriculum—District Planning
Opportunities Provided by Administration
Overall Benefits of Collaboration—End Result
Pathways
Personality Traits
Ego
Flexibility
Personality Dynamics—Finding Your Niche in a Group
Silo—Content Master
Preservice Training
Professional Development
Professional Learning Communities (PLCs)
Freedom of Choice
Misuse of PLC time
Overextended—Too Many Responsibilities and Preps
PLCs Used Effectively
Proximity
School Culture
Teacher Leadership
Technology—Ease of Use
Time
Inhibitor—Lack of or Not Enough Time in the Day
Making Time—Valuing Collaboration
PLCs—Permitted Time in the Schedule
TL as a Leader
TL Provides Opportunities
Too Much Change—Change Saturation
Trust and Value of Other’s Ideas
Use of Research to Influence Decisions
Value of Library—Positive Past Experiences
Value of the TL Skills Set
Total: 53 Descriptive Codes

86

7
36
3
3
10
11
14
7
40
8
19
8
1
17
6
5
6
5
10
8
27
24
5
6
1
25
11
1
11
5
10
13
11
5
12
5
3
24
13
19
1
28
13
15
33
2
10
8
21
6
2
20
Count: 614

Structural coding was used as part of the third and fourth reading installments involving
the interview transcripts because “structural coding applies a content-based or conceptual phrase
representing a topic of inquiry to a segment of data that relates to a specific research question.
The similarly coded segments are then coded together for more detailed coding and analysis”
(Saldaña, 2016, p. 98). This coding technique was used to answer the research questions and to
group them according to the major themes and sub-themes that emerged after rereading the
interviews. This coding process was also done in conjunction with the four-level conceptual
framework created by Montiel-Overall and discussed in detail in previous chapters. This level of
coding served to explore the applicability of the TLC-III model to the high school level,
especially in this specific school setting and to enhance my understanding of my own work
setting. The second, third, and fourth readings and reviews of the transcripts and notes were
done to identify any themes in the data and then to highlight quotes that supported the themes.
Development of Themes
The starting point for the theme development came after the initial list descriptor had
been broken down. Most of the initial list descriptors had both a positive and negative aspect.
Proximity, for example, was a common theme in the interviews; it concerns the fact that
collaboration can occur on the spur of the moment when teachers and administrators are outside
their classrooms and offices observing students. A positive aspect of proximity is that
classrooms within the departments and grade levels are sufficiently close for this collaboration to
occur; a negative aspect is that proximity can also limit those in outlier classrooms or
departments that are spread far apart on campus. In the case of the school at which this research
was conducted, the English department and classrooms in which the subject was being taught

87

were dispersed throughout the campus, impeding spur-of-the-moment collaboration across
departments and grade levels.
The initial breakdown into categories revealed the broad scope of the themes, ideas, and
quotes from the interviewees for each specific research question. With the HyperRESEARCH
program, short word descriptors served to consolidate the major themes that emerged.
Identifying the excerpts associated with each descriptor was quite easy using the qualitative tool,
for which each word descriptor was linked to a number of excerpts coded to fit that field. It was
possible to link one excerpt to several descriptors, as occurred repeatedly throughout the coding
process. Using the software, clicking on one of the descriptors brought up all of the associated
quotes from an interview. These linkages facilitated greatly the process of determining themes
compared with hand coding. This specific analysis tool, then, helped to determine the
overarching themes and especially the prerequisites for collaboration between high school
teachers and TLs based on each participants’ personal experiences, words, and narratives.
One major theme emerged, in addition to five sub-themes, during the various stages of
coding. All the themes and sub-themes were interconnected, but the central theme was
prominent throughout. In the absence of such a theme, there would of course by definition be no
sub-themes. The process of arriving at the one major theme and five sub-themes included
reading all of the interviews repeatedly, analyzing all of the excerpts, and having a second
researcher read through the analysis, coding structures, memos, and literature review. This
second party—who had a background in educational research, held a leadership position in
higher education, and had qualitative and quantitative coursework experience—validated the
themes, including the central theme and five interdependent sub-themes, in a manner that was
consistent with Montiel-Overall’s TLC-III model, which, again, served as the theoretical

88

framework for this research study. This major theme was relationships; the five sub-themes
were, again, previous experience, logistics, definition of collaboration, leadership, and barriers to
collaboration.
Overarching theme: relationships. Relationships, then, was the core theme that
emerged from the coding process. Relationships among colleagues and administrators have both
positive and negative aspects, as participants made clear at length throughout the interview
process. The consistent message as they shared their beliefs, background information, and past
experiences was that relationships can solidify the process of collaboration, depending on the
school culture, and that trust levels between certificated staff and administrators are important.
The first interview question asked participants to define what collaboration meant to them, and
many discussed how it was influenced by the relationships that they formed in various ways on
campus, such as the mentoring new employees, through professional learning networks within
the school—which can also lead to personal relationships—or simply as a consequence of having
something in common, such as belonging to the same department or physical proximity. All of
these factors played roles in establishing and nurturing relationships among staff members
because everyone has the desire to feel part of a group, whether to work on a common goal or
just to vent frustrations. Interpersonal relationships matter; they create a framework for mutual
learning and for enhancing the capacity of teachers and administrators to impact student learning
in positive ways.
When there are trusting symbiotic relationships among staff members, then, collaboration
can happen organically. Individuals learn from one another based on need and experience, and
this deserves the support of both teachers and administrators as part of a school’s culture. Thus,
one administrator indicated in an interview that, at least on this school campus, some teachers

89

assimilated and that collaboration did occur and affected other aspects of the school culture, even
if not all of the teachers were involved:
There are pockets where there’s some really good groups and again, it’s because I
can see that they have worked together, they trust each other, they have a really
good—not just a professional but some of them I’ve seen that they have also
personal relationships. It’s almost like their personal relationship has developed
or excuse me, the other way around, that their professional relationship has been
so good that now they have formed a personal relationship. There are some
pockets out there, but it's not system in place. It’s not a system here at the school
that I can say this is how this site functions. I would say it’s fifty-fifty.
This administrator thus acknowledged that the interrelated phenomena of school culture and
relationships helped to determine whether collaboration would take place, observing that it was
occurring, but only among some staff. Another administrator acknowledged expressed similar
sentiments:
I would say that the culture of this school is one of the huge ones. You develop
that culture where we're all working towards a common theme. Sometimes, that
work looks different for certain people because we all have different assignments
that we need to tackle. If that culture piece is there where it's kind of more of a
standard to collaborate, rather than just kind of dump it on somebody, I find that
that works the best.
School culture, like other factors, can have positive or negative impacts on relationships
among staff members. One art teacher drew attention to the latter:
I think the culture of the school sometimes can be an inhibitor. That culture can
come in various ways, but from what I've seen in my 10 plus years of experience,
it trickles down from administration, down to the students. So, when the
leadership does not instill collaboration, even within their own setting, instructors
will see that.
Administrators need to be role models for collaboration, since their relationships with teachers
affect how teachers interact and their satisfaction, cohesion, and commitment to the profession
(Price, 2012). An administrative team that establishes a school culture in which its members
serve as role models for collaboration will have a positive impact on how teachers work together.

90

Administrators can also be role models in terms of establishing positive collaborative
relationships with TLs and knowing how a TL can help each department. When teachers notice
administrators working with a TL and sharing their knowledge of the TL’s role in the
collaborative process, teachers may be more likely to collaborate with the TL in the future, and
they in turn can serve as models students.
Another integral aspect of relationships in respect to the collaborative process is trust.
Trust levels were discussed in the interviews because one of the interview questions asked
participants to share their ideas about trust in the context of collaboration. A majority expressed
the opinion that a “high level of trust is needed,” especially when a group is working together in
a similar content area and on particularly demanding tasks. Trust is necessary for all voices to be
heard in a non-judgmental arena. Simply put, collaboration correlates positively with trust
within a group. The administrators interviewed were aware of this fact, with one observing:
Knowing that, when we're brainstorming, that's exactly that there are no bad
ideas, everybody has that respect for each other and trust each other that we're
there for a common goal, and a common goal ultimately is what is it that's
benefiting our students. To me, the number one inhibitor would be a lack of
relationships and lack of trust within the group.
Trust, then, goes hand in hand with relationships. When groups meet to tackle a problem, they
need to feel safe and comfortable sharing ideas. Thus, a social science teacher asserted that
“You have to trust that people will listen to you, and you have to trust that if there's something
that's just meant for the group, that it stays in the group.” An English teacher perhaps put it best,
observing that the perception of a lack of trust or judgment within a group forestalls
collaboration:
I mean, yeah, a high level of trust, just because you want to make sure that you
feel your voice is heard in a respectable way and not judged. I feel like I don't
want to collaborate with certain teachers here because I feel like I will be judged.
I don't want to put myself in that position so I'd rather not.
91

Trust takes time; it involves sharing rather than merely receiving ideas and lesson plans.
Establishing norms can help to create a safe framework for sharing and improving on
ideas. In the words of a female special education teacher,
I think it takes a lot of trust to get a group of people together, to share ideas and
not know if those ideas will be accepted in a positive or negative way. So, I think
it's always very important, when you're having a meeting with people, especially
if it is a PLC meeting, that there are some norms that are set up, that there is
mutual respect. People have the right to say what they want to say. We are not
going to be mean, we are not going to be vindictive, we're not going to be
malicious. We share, and we share in a way that is constructive and not hurtful.
Because when you start opening yourself up to criticism, that's painful, because
nobody wants to admit that they have a fault somewhere. We all \think of
ourselves as being these perfect teachers. And the fact of the matter is, none of
us are. And so, I think that you must have a rapport with the people that you're
collaborating with. You must have that rapport. Otherwise it just isn't going to
work. If someone is constantly judging, if someone is constantly negative in the
group, it just does not work.
An administrator agreed in another interview that norms bolster relationships and help groups to
focus on the goals of a collaborative effort rather than extraneous thoughts, resentments, and
tasks that have the potential to ruin relationships or prevent work from being accomplished,
sharing the following story,
One of the things that I have found very, very critical is whenever a new group of
people come together, regardless if they’re a steward we have at work, but even if
there's one or two new members, even one new member to a group makes a
difference. I always insist that you should set your norms.
While the group is setting norms, they identify what their core values are and they
identify if their core values are matched. Once you set your norms and I always
say don't go crazy, five is already too many as far as I'm concerned. Three or four
norms and we're good. You should set your norms and have them posted or as
you're doing your meetings you have a folder, you have something, or you have
your piece of paper and you put it in the middle of the table just to remind
yourself about what the norms are.
I knew it sounds silly, but in my experience of facilitating PLCs for the last 13
years I had a group in my previous school that said, like around six weeks into the
school year, came to me, the department chair came to me and said, we're having
92

a really hard time, they're not coming in on time, I don't know what else to do,
you're the principal so you need to send it ASAP. Okay, well, is one of your
norms to rely on time. Oh, we didn't do norms, we didn't have time for that. We
needed to go into, so I offered to facilitate and went back to set up norms. The
number one norm was right to the meeting on time, as silly as it sounds, but that's
the beginning.
Part of the norms is to set that as silly as . . . and I can say silly as it sounds right
on time but that is right on time, then indicates that this is a protected time and
this is important time that every member values therefore, they're on time, they're
with positive intent. I'm there because my voice is going to . . . I have a way that
I'm going to share my voice and I knew that my voice is going to be heard. That's
a very basic story, but to me, it's a critical point to begin. I did have that
experience with one group that said they don't have time for that and then they
struggled and it got better after we revisited and started at that point.
Positive relationships, then, are built within a group when it establishes norms that meet
its needs. This one step can reduce the likelihood of easily-managed problems involving the
ability of every member to make his or her voice heard.
Teachers need to be given the time to collaborate and solve problems together so that they
can reflect on their own personal teaching, which can improve in the right environment. Various
participants shared their thoughts and feelings about the concept and power of reflective practices,
group problem-solving, and preparedness for meeting with fellow staff members. In the words of a
male science teacher,

Planning ahead of time of what’s going to happen, what’s going to work, what do
students need—if we find out that what we are doing is not working, we need to
rethink everything to see what we can do to make it work better.
A math teacher observed that reflection can happen collectively within a group regarding
decisions made together and individually, but that it needs to be a part of the planning process:
I think as much as there’s things you have to do before or to plan for it to make
sure to come back and be like, “Oh, how did it go?” or to reflect on it. So maybe
if it doesn’t happen collaboratively, it will happen individually about how the
collaboration went, just having the space.

93

Both administrators and teachers are needed to create realize common goals and to act as
role models. The TL can be a part of the process by sharing and improving ideas and making
sure that he or she is non-judgmental when sharing resources that can enhance learning. Thus
another English teacher asserted that it is important for the TL to be a neutral party in
collaborating and to help expand ideas while not judging what is shared by teachers:
It's been great to have the librarian to collaborate with because it gives me some
fresh ideas. You give me so many resources that I didn't know about. You give
me technology tools that I didn't know about. It expands my students and my
classroom outside of this classroom. I mean we're able to research wise, and you
know what I mean? Resources, and tools, and I wish more teachers here would
collaborate. Yeah, I think the biggest thing is trust and not feeling judged. I don't
want to ever feel like if I share something that they're going to pick it apart and
tell me all the things that are wrong with it instead of just working with me on it.
Trust, then, is integral when building relationships, including collaborative ones.
Teachers and administrators collaborate with a TL when doing so is part of the school culture
and trust is evident.
Sub-theme: previous experiences. Another theme that emerged through the coding
process was the influence, both positive and negative, that a participant’s previous experience
and interactions with other staff members had on the likelihood of future interactions with others.
Such statements as “that is what they always do,” “I want to explore other methods, but my
department has always done the same thing,” “I have tried,” and “it is easier to just do what I
want to do” shared during the interviews are indicative of the negative ways in which past
experiences can impact group dynamics.
Positive interactions among staff members, by contrast, promote the initiation or
continuation of collaborative efforts in the future. A male Visual and Performing Arts teacher
described one benefit of collaboration:

94

I think that's one of the big things. And especially just to see how much faster it
makes things go. It's much faster and more efficient when you have multiple
people working on the same thing because of that I will continue to collaborate.
A male social science teacher echoed these sentiments:
It's not necessarily a new attitude, but it's life for everybody. With that might
come more of a desire to work together because you have new teachers who have
the need to work together, because, hey, somebody helped me out. Then, who
knows, then that person is talking to somebody else and word of mouth is not that
same teacher is teaching their department the lesson.
A positive experience has a positive influence on others so as not to not “leave a bitter taste”
regarding the idea of working with others.
Previous experiences captured in this data collection effort included mentoring,
opportunities provided by administrators to staff to move out of their comfort zone and work at
not just grade and content level but with other staff members, library use as a student, and
preservice training. If any of these experiences were negative for a teacher or TL, he or she may
be more likely to work in isolation.
Mentoring. Mentoring was one concept that participants referred to throughout the
interviews. It can take many forms, formal and informal, within a department or across
departments. New teachers can be assigned a mentor, or an experienced teacher can show them
the ropes of the school culture. Mentoring practices influence how teachers interact and
therefore, possibly, the likelihood of collaboration with the TL. For example, the art teacher
stated,
When I came here brand new to this school, I had the pleasure of a fellow
colleague showing me around. Having an experienced teacher who knows the
campus, who knows other staff members, having a person like that guiding a new
teacher helps. That's where you see the trust. That's where you see trust being
gained. With that in hand, it also sets the pace; it sets the culture of what the
school is.

95

This statement indicates that the mentoring process can give new teachers insight into
interactions with the TL. When experienced teachers share with newer staff members that they
collaborate with the TL and that doing so is part of the school culture, their likelihood of working
with and seeking guidance and help from the TL is impacted.
Experienced teachers can help new teachers find their voice. An experienced teacher can
invite a new teacher to a group within the school. A male science teacher described his positive
experience being a new teacher and finding guidance from an older teacher.
He did treat me like someone who had an opinion of value, of note. Having a
voice is nice. That is valued. It makes you want to collaborate more, and just
being open and not judgmental about what you bring to the table I think
encourages a collaboration on those ideas.
These mentoring interactions have implications for improving the collaborative process on
campus. A female AVID teacher also shared a positive past mentoring experience that made a
difference in how she interacted with fellow colleagues and novice teachers: “I think as a new
teacher I learned to collaborate by being invited in by my colleagues to groups where maybe I
didn't have a lot to contribute initially because I was new, but I saw the process.” New teachers
need to seek out these collaborative groups, while experienced teachers need to be aware of the
need to include new teachers in them. Having a TL as part of such collaborative groups can help
to continue a cycle of collaboration within a school.
Preservice training, including clinical practice experience, impacts how a teacher lays the
foundation for collaboration in a first position. The graphic arts teacher shared how
collaboration occurred during his preservice training that impacted interactions with his
colleagues:
I actually learned while I was going through the credential program. I hate to say
we were forced to, but instead of just doing group work, you're encouraged to
like, “What do you think about this?” You know, “Can you help me with this?
96

What do you think about that?” “I see how you're doing that differently than the
way I'm doing it, why is it that you're doing it that way?” So, we are encouraged
to collaborate from back in school. But once they get to their sites, I would think
that the sites should make it just part of the culture. I think, coming to a site, you
should just be expected to collaborate. It should just be part of the routine.
This teacher, then, considered collaboration to be a natural process thanks to his preservice
training. Preservice training is of course part of a teacher’s past experiences, so it can be a part
of a positive process in which collaboration with the TL and other staff members is a priority.
Previous experiences can also have a negative impact on a teacher’s willingness to
collaborate. If a teacher who is part of group is not heard, that teacher will feel devalued. If a
teacher feels that the atmosphere is judgmental, he or she can become isolated or simply leave
the school, as several interviewees observed. One experienced female social science teacher
explained that
The new people, I think, sometimes they're fortunate enough to have another
teacher on site that really takes them under their wing, but I've also seen where
new teachers come in with new ideas and they've been ostracized for the new
ideas and wanting to bring something else, and that's terribly unhealthy and they
become their own island.
Administrators thus need to provide opportunities for all teachers to take part in a collaborative,
healthy support system so that no islands or silos form. Negative relationships and group
dynamics in the past can impact how teachers interact with a TL. When the campus school
culture is full of islands, collaboration of any kind is unlikely to occur.
Logistics. The logistics of the school refer to the ability of administrators to plan and
implement efficient systems for promoting student achievement. Logistical considerations that
can impact the collaborative process include common prep times for content or grade-level
teams, utilization the PLC time given to teachers, proximity of classrooms, provision of

97

opportunities for collaboration professional development by administrators, and observation and
reflection with other teachers.
As already alluded to, scheduling is a perennial issue, for teachers need time to
collaborate with one another, and it is up to administrators to work this time into the schedule.
Again, effective logistics can involve common prep time for content, grade level, or for general
and special education teachers. If the school schedule does not permit collaboration during the
common prep periods, then the administration needs to provide other alternative times during the
day. The TL needs a flexible schedule too, since he or she has the potential to collaborate with
everyone on campus. The high school campus at which the research was conducted provided
teachers 30 minutes of PLC time after school on Wednesdays because the daily schedule could
not accommodate common prep time.
All participants mentioned in their interviews that the school provided the time to
collaborate through these weekly meetings, for which the teachers set the agenda. The
administration recognized the effectiveness of the PLC model works and its potential for a
positive collaborative process. According to a female administrator,
There’re some really good PLCs out there and you can see it because the students
are growing. You could see it in their grades. You can see it in the activities that
they’re doing. Then there are other pockets of grade levels in certain courses
where the students are struggling, and those would-be adults that are not really
using the collaboration. It’s professional learning community where you make
time for collaboration. It’s not happening. They’re treating it as a time to go
through an agenda, and that’s not collaboration.
Providing professional development for teachers is another aspect of a school’s logistics
as it seeks to enhance student achievement. Teachers benefit from being able to choose the type
of professional development that they believe will best contribute to improvements in their
practice. For the academic year during which this study took place, the administration decided to

98

“have teachers teach teachers.” Thus, a variety of professional development opportunities were
made available to teachers that involved learning from one another, with the choice of sessions to
attend left up to the individuals. Many of the interviewees expressed the opinion that they had
learned new information from this round-robin style of professional development, especially
regarding technology. Thus, male Social Science teacher observed that
I think this year they did a fantastic job, as far as having those workshops that all
you Google ninjas put on, all in different classrooms all over campus. Making it
open for people to come in. Plus, the workshops that we talked about, where I got
pulled out of classroom, that was driven through administration, and allowing us
to have release time and paying for substitutes. That helped a lot.
Administrators provided the opportunities for teachers to learn from one another, thereby
contributing to a positive attitude toward collaboration. Setting up professional learning through
which teachers learned from each other benefited everyone involved.
Definition of collaboration. Another theme that emerged was the relationship between
participants’ definitions of collaboration and the extent to which they engaged in it. The most
common definition was “working with others.” Other definitions that teachers offered included
“failing together and then learning from each other’s mistakes, then improving the process,”
having “a growth mindset,” “learning from one another,” and “having a different perspective to
approach a problem.” Across the 22 interviews, participants stressed their willingness to make
time for collaboration, whether or not it is scheduled. A male social science teacher summed it
up by saying, “I just have to make time. It has to be a priority, otherwise you'll never have
time.” A female English teacher similarly shared, “I make time to collaborate.” A male World
Languages teacher spoke on the topic at great length:
You just have to make it. When it’s important, you’ll find it. Where there’s a
will, there’s a way, and when something’s important, and I guess when true
reflection and true assessment is at the top, and it’s really about kids, finding time
to collaborate is not difficult. When it’s not about real assessment or real kids or
99

real learning, finding time to collaborate is like a chore. I don’t—it’s very easy
for me to go. I don’t do e-mails, and I don’t do phone calls. I get up and I go.
There was one outlier, a female math teacher who, though she defined collaboration along the
same general lines as the other participants, but also questioned its necessity:
Well, what I think it should be is people in whatever work environment working
together, respecting each other, having an open mind, and sharing ideas, bouncing
it off of each other, trying new things, and then coming back and seeing whether
or not it worked and talking about that; but I have never in my teaching career
experienced anything close to that . . . but what pops into my head is I feel like in
education, we feel like it’s a must. We've got to collaborate because it's supposed
to be better. But what if it’s not? What if letting a teacher do what works best for
them for their style, for their, I guess just style. What if that was the best? But
then I think about it and go, “Well, no,” but I don't always think it’s absolutely
necessary. We do it because it’s a good word. It’s like a buzzword, so we have
to, but you know. Two minds are better than one. It makes sense, but if we could
just get past our issues, then it could be a big benefit.
The interviewees thus defined collaboration in similar terms and for the most part indicated the
need to make time for it, and this would include collaboration with a TL.
Leadership. Various practices and conditions can be put in place that contribute to a
collaborative school environment. Administrators set the tone of the school and need to know
the value and skill set of the TL. Other conditions that contributed to collaboration, according to
the themes that emerged from the interviews, were administrators acting as facilitators and
providing opportunities to staff to collaborate and freedom of choice, especially when it came to
setting up their own PLCs, the TL providing opportunities to teachers, the use of research in
making decisions, valuing and knowing the skillset of the TL, valuing research as a skillset for
students to acquire, and simply having access to technology.
Leadership that facilitates collaboration takes place on several levels, including the
administration and the department. In the words of a male administrator,
I think it depends on, again, I keep kind of going back to leadership, but I think
that’s a huge part. The departmental leadership has a big effect, and then the staff
100

buy in. That, I think, goes hand in hand with the leadership, because if,
obviously, if it’s poor leadership, you're not gonna get buy in, and vice versa.
A male art teacher shared these sentiments:
Each administration has a style in terms of what collaboration is. Some of it can
be just, you know, lip service. Whereas sometimes it's factual, it materializes.
I’ve had principals where it’s, “Okay, here’s how much we got. What do you
guys want to do with this?
Leadership can contribute when it is truthful and sincere, when leaders are seen more as
facilitators than as the dominant voices in the conversation.
Understanding the skills/role of the TL. Collaboration is also facilitated when TLs
provide the staff with opportunities to engage in it. All interviewees asserted that the TL did
provide the opportunities for learning. Their statements included, “she provides opportunities,”
“emails were sent to us to share about using a variety of resources,” “she was a part of the after
school professional development trainings,” and “she has reached out to staff numerous times.”
The TL is a skilled researcher who helps both students and teachers to refine their
abilities to utilize, analyze, and decipher information. Understanding these skills can lead to
collaboration; but one interviewee admitted that “I do know that the librarian is highly skilled in
research.” An administrator had the more informed view that the TL and the library were
kind of giving kids all those different mediums to experience how to access
source material and how to do it safely, effectively, and that responsibly is huge.
I particularly would hope for more teachers, particularly the ones that have to
have the papers written, that they would use some aspect of the library.
Another teacher wanted
to point out the flexibility that the librarian, you in this case, have had with us as a
department. I think that, I can'’ speak for other teachers, but I’m sure you have
the same flexibility, if not more, with other departments, or even teachers
individually because some of the skills that the students are taught in the
classroom, I’m willing to bet, are refined in the library. Students who do not
know how to research will come for help in the library. Research skills, you
know, what is MLA? Why is MLA important? Why is documenting your work
101

important? Why is it important to know how to find a book as opposed to finding
an article online?
Other ideas about the use of technology for research were mentioned in connection with the TL’s
role in the classroom: “There is a newness to it that I think, with this technology has come, it's
revolutionary in education, it’s definitely revolutionary in information and how we find it and
how we use it. That’s what a librarian is, right?” Combining research skills with technology, the
TL can help teachers to acquire and improve skills related to these standards in the manner in
which they feel most comfortable.
As discussed earlier, at the school where this study was conducted, PLCs met every
Wednesday after school for 30 minutes. The one change that administrators made for the 20162017 school year was to give teachers the choice of which PLC they would attend, a move that
was supported by teachers and by department and grade-level dynamics involving a failure to
share or show improvement in delivery of the curriculum. Also, teachers wanted to work
together to tackle classroom and school-wide issues, such as improving the implementation of
technology in the classroom and implementing a Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports
(PBIS) program. Many of the participants felt that the ability to choose their collaborators was
beneficial. In the words of a female English teacher,
I think they try here with the PLC time, they try to encourage us to collaborate
with one another, I think this year went more towards that. I think in the past it
was you only met with your grade level, and if you didn’t . . . for me, it’s hard
because my grade level, we don't have the same teaching styles, so I kind of just
strayed away and didn’t meet up with them at all. I think being able to choose
this year has made it a lot better, and I’ve been able to actually collaborate a lot
more this year. The different types of people too, not just my department.
A male teacher shared this sentiment by reporting that “I wasn't asked to be in a PLC, so I found
one that I wanted to do.”

102

Technology. Technology was mentioned repeatedly during the interviews and associated
with the TL’s role as a helpful implementer and a source of knowledge about how resources can
be best implemented in the classroom. A male social science teacher acknowledged that, in
order to excel and better utilize technology in the classroom, he had had to seek additional
guidance,
Most of the time, it was me. I mean, I would ask you a question and you’d say,
“But did you know this?” You'd show me different things, resources that I didn't
know about. Then sometimes you’ll email and show different ideas, so it goes
both ways. I think a lot of the time I was chasing you down because I needed a
lot of help this year.
The first-year math teacher appreciated the technology and wanted it in her classroom:
The pros, I would say, just that so many people are doing so many different things
with . . . I don’t know how it was before I came in, but with the Chromebooks
coming in, I feel like technology is just . . . I don't know how it was before, but it's
huge now and I see snippets of things going on. I was like, “That’s awesome.”
Using technology within a group has become easier for teachers, since they can share
information, resources, lessons created, student samples and other information using tools such
as Google Drive and Drop Box. A male PE teacher discussed how his department shared
information with each other,
For technology, it was one stop shopping is probably the best answer, and what I
mean by that is, if there’s a resource that you can go to, or you can get everything
you need. It may not be in the same file or folder, but you know it’s—here it is,
PE, here's the folders, and each one has files. Now I know it's in here, is it
logically arranged? We’re starting some of that in PE, in the—I think it was
Google Drive, not Google Classroom, where we have a shared a folder within the
group, and anybody can just dump in there. I haven’t dumped anything in yet, but
I probably will this summer. I want to start dumping stuff in, and see. . . I think
that, if that helps, I think one of the challenges will be organization.
Detractors/Barriers to Collaboration. Numerous factors are at play in collaboration,
including barriers and detractors that prevent teachers from collaborating with a TL. Dominant
themes in this respect were
103

• time,
• administrative actions,
• staff members’ failure to understand the benefits of collaboration,
• department dynamics,
• lack of communication among staff,
• lack of resources, especially access to reliable information and technology devices,
• egos,
• misuse of PLC time,
• a negative school culture,
• a feeling of overextended among the teaching staff, and
• change saturation.
Time was cited by many participants as a reason for not collaborating. Time is a valuable
commodity for school personnel, and the feeling that their time is being wasted impacts how they
feel working with others. Comments expressing these sentiments included, “Time is always a
huge inhibitor”; “Time, which you probably have heard quite a bit—it's having the time to talk in
a relaxed situation”; “Time and—yeah, time”; and “There's never enough time in the day.” As
one respondent explained at greater length,
I think time. I’m sure that's the common thread. I suppose, I think it would just
get, I’ll speak for myself, I sometimes get too busy, just locked into my own
world. Particularly, later in my career, I don’t have the energy to put into things
that are only going to be in place for a year or two. I think that would be a big
factor for me.
A special education teacher said much the same thing:
Time. Schedules. Time is probably the biggest. For me, it’s time. It could be
periods not matching up. When I do have the time, it could be the teacher’s
absent, or that particular teacher doesn't have the time. Especially when I’m
looking at IEP stuff, trying to pull meetings together or pull time so we can just
104

get together and discuss a particular student. When you've got more than two
people that you need to speak to, it gets crazy trying to facilitate when is a good
time, when can we, we end up having not everybody there, or we end up
scheduling far in advance because we can’t get everybody there. So, it’s really
just time, and I think people’s schedules. That’s the biggest for me.”
Time can inhibit schedules, but time can also impact effort, too, as a social science teacher made
clear:
Sometimes people—there’s not enough time. People are looking for the easiest
route and if you’ve done something for a while and you think it works, it’s easy to
keep doing it. So, I guess maybe the easy way out? Or people aren’t, they're stuck
in their ways and they don’t see the need to change. They don’t see the value of
changing.
A female English teacher spoke of “Time. Sometimes there’s teachers that aren’t on board.
There’s usually ways to work around that, but that can inhibit the process a bit.” Time will
always be a factor, but individuals determine how to deal with it, using it either as an inhibitor
and excuse or as a way to make the most of a day.
Administrators can provide time for teachers to collaborate, but their actions can also
hinder collaboration efforts. As one of the teachers put it, administrative efforts sometimes
meant “having contrived assignments that go along with it. And I mean, by contrived, I mean
administratively getting a contrived assignment instead of just where they want a result. And
collaboration isn’t always a result.” For the 2016-2017 school year at this high school, PLC
groups were required to share their notes from their weekly meetings with the administrators
through Google Docs. Administrators were then to make comments or suggestions for the next
PLC meeting. According to the interviewee who found the notes to be contrived, administrators
get in the way with trying to direct things, they feel they have to direct things.
Their position should just be walking around. And when they’ve walked around,
it’s just stopping in, watching, observing, listening, maybe commenting if they
feel it’s absolutely needed. Or maybe commenting later.
From the perspective of a social science teacher,
105

Sometimes it seems like some of the inhibitors is administrators having to check
off boxes of things that they have to cover, whether it be in staff meetings, in your
beginning of the year meetings. I would rather spend time collaborating than
listening to one person speak.
A special education teacher was similarly critical:
I don't think they were successfully looking at teacher pairings of, “I think this
person’s willing and this person's willing.” Just because they’re willing doesn't
mean they can work well together. I wish they looked more at that, and then
keeping successful pairings together, and honoring that they need that co-prep,
that they need time to collaborate with each other. Even more training.
Administrators can and do make powerful decisions that influence how teachers work together.
Making decisions based on data that have been collected and having difficult conversations can
start the process.
Another idea that came up frequently during the interviews concerned the ways in which
interactions with peers influence future collaboration and department dynamics, how strong
personalities can forestall collaborations, and the misuse of shared time, for instance during
PLCs. There were fourteen different departments at the school, each one with its own group
dynamics. Some of the interviewees’ observations about collaboration did not necessarily carry
over to all departments. Thus, a male English complained that
You know, the collaborative efforts on this campus because you’ve got people
who are so into their department and their own thing, they're afraid to give up
their . . . maybe the term, very loosely, power, their hold on their control. And
that’s what makes it different. That’s what makes it difficult.
A male social science teacher similarly asserted,
Well, when one person dominates and that is a big inhibitor. They don’t want to
take advice from anyone else or they don’t want to hear anyone else sharing. It
could, if you have someone that instead of collaborating, they’re there to share
their information only. Those aren't fun. Those aren’t good.
A male science teacher was even more detailed in his assessment of departmental politics:

106

Like I just said, checking that ego at the door, and not being too proud about
whatever materials you have. Let me actually pull from a different department.
I’ve heard a lot of rumblings from a particular department that there's a lot of
issues with possession of worksheets and assessments. Yes. This is very
interesting. I’m not going to name any names at all, or even the departments, but
I’ve heard that this department has, I guess PLC has a rep of one person does all
the work, one person makes all the worksheets, and makes all the assessments,
and the other people take it. That, obviously, has fostered some resentment. Of
course, being a science guy, I listen to both perspectives, and I heard out from
both of them, and after I did the piecing together, I realized personalities that are
like that, there’s typically a reason that other people don’t collaborate, and they
just take.
A female mathematics teacher voiced her frustration:
It’s so, so, so awful, and so many of our teacher leaders are just gung-ho and just
keep preaching it, and just keep trying. I don't know why they can’t look at the
data and say, “You know what? You’re right.” It’s egos.
A male world languages teacher cited as counterproductive for collaboration the misuse of time
and personal agendas that took precedence over group goals and norms:
Yeah, so the time constraints; I don’t like the time constraint, and I guess that’s a
union imposed thing. It seems counterproductive to me. Also, attendance, timely
attendance, people showing up late, and people tending to their own personal
agendas rather than on task with the PLC, so people thinking about their
babysitter or scheduling, texting and calling and all that stuff.
Administrators would do well to heed the advice of another male social science teacher regarding
inter-departmental cooperation:
I think definitely the biggest thing would be to hire the right people. You
sometimes can’t teach people to be nice, and if you’re working with kids and
you’re working with people, what are you doing if you’re not nice? Be nice to
people. You’ll get more back in return, that’s the way I understand it. So
definitely that would be huge. And then as far as I like what they’ve done as far
as provided a little choice, so an avenue of escape. You’re not forced to work
with someone that you cannot collaborate with.
We should be more understanding and we should be able to work with people and
hopefully we have people that will, but let’s be honest, some people are going to
clash. Give them a reason to escape where they don’t have to be enemies because
they chose a different path. Forcing people doesn’t always work. Leaving a
meeting with steam in your ears is not bad all the time; sometimes you have to
107

have more conversation. It is challenging. But if you don’t have a mutual respect
for someone, it’s kind of tough.
The interactions that these teachers experienced and dealt with had the potential to impact their
viewpoint, future collaboration efforts, and school culture in general. Administrators, however,
can encourage collaboration in a variety ways and promote relationships among staff, especially
when building the relationship between teachers and the TL.
Summary of the Findings
Interviews with 22 study participants revealed one major theme and five interconnected
sub-themes regarding how best to foster effective collaborative exchanges between high school
teachers and TLs. The major theme emerged in conjunction with Relationships, and the subthemes that emerged were Previous Experiences, Logistics, Definition of Collaboration,
Leadership, and Detractors/Barriers That Prevent Collaboration.
Sixty-two individuals completed anonymous surveys, which revealed that those who are
aware of the ways in which a library and TL can assist in implementing the curriculum and
improving student learning are more likely to begin or to continue collaborating with a TL.
Teachers and administrators can be exposed to the benefits that the TL and library have to offer
in a variety of ways. The TL and administrators bear the responsibility of helping teachers to
appreciate how the TL and library can enhance teaching practices, student achievement, and the
correlation between both practices. It is up to the TL and administrators to decide how to
approach and share ideas with the teachers so that each stakeholder can access the library.
Collaboration between the TL and administrators is therefore crucial, for it can build trust as a
norm within the context of a positive school culture.

108

Quantitative and qualitative data from this study proved to be consistent with the TLC-III
model and framework. Relationships matter, affecting how teachers interact with each other and
with the TL. Teachers’ understanding of the TL’s skill set can foster further collaboration.
When teachers and administrators have a history of positive relationships with the library and TL
beginning when they were students and extending through preservice training, they are more
likely to promote collaboration at their schools. These themes are consistent with MontielOverall’s TLC-III model and framework, which describes collaboration between teachers and
TLs in terms of four levels, namely coordination, cooperation, integrated instruction, and
integrated curriculum. Table 16 illustrates how the qualitative and quantitative findings from
this mixed-method study answered each research question over the course of this chapter.

109

Table 16: Summary of Research Questions and Related Qualitative Themes
Research Question
What elements that foster effective
collaborative exchanges between high school
teachers and TLs?

How do teachers, administrators, and TLs
who work in the same high school define
collaboration?
Does an individual’s definition of
collaboration affect how he or she interacts
and collaborates with other teachers or
teaching support staff?
What factors contribute to or detract from
teachers’ propensity to collaborate with a
TL?

Themes/Ideas
Relationships
Previous Experiences/Mentorships
Logistics
Definition of Collaboration
Leadership
Knowledge of the TL’s Role and Skillset
Value Collaboration
Making Collaboration a Priority
Leadership
Previous Experiences
Values Collaboration
Working with Others
Fail Together/Learn from Mistakes
Yes

Contributing Factors: Relationships, Value of
Collaboration, Leadership, Previous
Experiences, Logistics, Knowledge of the
TL’s Role and Skillset, Positive School
Culture, Making Collaboration a Priority
Detractors/Barriers: Time, Leadership
Actions, Staff Members Who Do not
Understand the Benefits of Collaboration,
Department Dynamics That Do Not Support
Collaboration, Lack of Communication
Among Staff, Lack of Resources Especially
Access to Reliable Information and
Technology Devices, Egos, Misuse of PLC
Time, Negative School Culture, Teachers
Who Feel Overextended, and Change
Saturation.

School-wide relationships can have adverse effects as well, for example when school
culture is counter-productive, relationships among teachers are few, teachers feel undervalued in
their departments, trust is difficult to build, and barriers are evident and used as excuses not to
collaborate. Teachers who do not make the time to collaborate can become silos in their
110

classrooms and forego collaborating with a TL, as a result of which the library fails to grow and
comes to be seen as a mere warehouse for books and computers. The TL and administrators
need to appreciate the importance of positive relationships involving themselves, teachers,
support staff, and other stakeholders for the proper utilization of the library and the TL.

111

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSION AND IMPLLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Overview of the Problem
There is more to the teacher librarian than meets the eye. TLs are not just gatekeepers of
the library and its books; they serve as, among other things, program administrators, instructional
collaborators, information specialists, and community leaders. The role of the TL and library
within the school curriculum needs to be better understood by all stakeholders. In California,
TLs follow the state’s School Library Model Standards, which help officials make coherent
decisions regarding the flexible role of TLs in meeting a school’s needs. A dialogue between the
TL and administrators, principals, and teachers can lead to collective efforts that enhance student
achievement and success. True collaboration demonstrates to students that an education system
is a working unit. TLs need to promote their abilities and the services of the school library
program without assuming that all stakeholders understand their roles within the school
community. Likewise, preparation programs for principals and teachers should cover
collaboration with TLs.
There is a great deal of literature that documents the impact of TLs in terms of closing the
achievement gap and assisting schools in promoting and enhancing collaborative efforts and
improving relationships with general education teachers. However, very little research has
focused on collaboration involving high school TLs, teachers, and administrations in terms of
best practices for promoting collaborative relationships. Instead, most work has looked at
academic college librarians in relation to the impact of students’ research skills on graduation
rates. There is accordingly a pressing need for studies of TLs’ leadership and collaborative roles
in high school and middle school settings.

112

As a researcher and TL, I was interested in factors that influence collaboration among
teachers and administrators. The overriding question that I wanted to answer was why some
high school teachers and administrators chose to collaborate with me and others did not.
Copious resources in the form of time and money were expended at my high school in efforts to
promote collaboration during PLCs and to identify the resources necessary to improve teaching
practices. It was my conviction that having a TL play a role in decision making by sharing
knowledge about information resources can improve relationships within a school in a costeffective manner. Investment in and promotion of the skillset of TLs can help teachers and
students to make better use of the variety of library services available and thereby increase usage
of a school’s library resources. The purpose of this study, then, was to learn more about how I as
a TL might improve my practices and interactions with teachers and administrators and to
identify enablers factors that facilitate and factors that impede collaboration on campus. By
nurturing purposeful interactions, sharing expertise, improving research practices, and making
available resources that support the curriculum, TLs promote productive interactions involving
themselves, teachers, and administrators.
The overarching research question for this study—which will be reproduced here one
more time for the sake of completeness—concerned the elements that foster effective
collaborative exchanges between high school teachers and TLs. The following sub-questions
grew out of this main idea:
a) How do high school teachers, administrators, and high school TLs who work in the
same school setting define collaboration?
b) Does an individual’s definition of collaboration affect how he or she interacts and
collaborates with other teachers or teaching support staff?

113

c) What factors contribute to or detract from collaboration between teachers and TLs?
For this mixed-method study, teachers and administrators at one high school completed
an anonymous survey and participated in semi-structured follow-up interviews during which
notes were taken. The study took place in one of San Diego Count’s 42 public school districts.
The surveys and interviews provided insight into how relationships involving TLs, teachers, and
administrators facilitate efforts to improve standards of practice and to increase the knowledge
and awareness of all stakeholders regarding the effective use of library services.
This chapter summarizes the results, discusses the findings, conclusions, significance,
and limitations of the study, and offers suggestions for improving the practices of TLs and for
future research. The TLC-III model served as a framework for the analysis, which addressed
each research question. The conclusions are based on my informed interpretation of the data and
the relevant literature, and my reflections on the implications of the results combine the
perspectives of a researcher and a TL. In what follows, then, the quantitative and qualitative
findings are summarized, their implications are discussed, and suggestions are made for future
research regarding the role of the TL in the high school setting.
Summary of the Findings
The findings from this study were based on data collected through 62 online surveys and
22 in-person interviews with teachers and administrators at a single high school. All interviews
were transcribed and coded using a variety of techniques to identify the various themes that
emerged. Notes were also taken during the interview process to triangulate the data, and an
additional researcher coded the data to verify the consistency of the primary researcher’s results.
The discussion that follows describes the main theme and sub-themes briefly and then explores
in depth the various connections among them.

114

Implications of the Study
Understanding the role of the TL. The statistically significant findings discussed in
Chapter 4 indicate that educators who understand the role of TLs in assisting them in various
ways relating to the 23 domains represented in the survey are more likely to collaborate with a
TL or other staff member. It is up to TLs and administrators to ensure that teachers understand
these benefits.
At the school where the study was conducted, however, this understanding was not as
widespread as it could be. Thus, the survey indicated that teachers and administrators alike were
not well informed regarding the certification process for TLs; for while many were aware that
the TL had classroom experience, few were aware that TLs must complete an additional
certificate program. (Specifically, in California, certification for a TL involves at least three
years of classroom experience in addition to either a multiple- or single-subject credential.) If
teachers were better informed about the rigorous training that is required to become a TL, they
might be more willing to take advantage of the relevant, current, and reliable resources that TLs
make available.
For the fact is that, as discussed in the literature review, many teachers and administrators
are not exposed to what the TL can provide in terms of information literacy, curriculum
planning, and utilization of resources. Preservice training is one avenue for incoming teachers to
learn how to leverage these resources by incorporating the library into efforts to build literacy
skills. In my own experience and that of the participants, however, neither professional
development nor additional coursework addressed interacting with a TL. Those relatively new to
the profession expressed the opinion that teachers should work with all support staff, and many
participants indicated that working with a skilled TL had caused them to assess the position more

115

positively and increased the likelihood that they would work with the TL again. The teachers
called for more professional development so as to understand better how to utilize the TL’s skill
set when planning and designing new curricula collaboratively. The data indicate that TLs need
to advocate for themselves by promoting the library and its role in curriculum development and
at the same time working with leadership to ensure that the library furthers the missions of the
school and district. A key aspect of this advocacy is for TLs to take part in various groups
throughout the school and district.
In this study, teachers and administrators individually typed into text boxes their opinions
regarding the role of the TL in the high school setting, and the results of the open-ended survey
questions were consistent with the skill sets that were ranked in the Likert-style questions.
Participants were clear about the skills that they would like a TL to possess. There does appear
to have been a disconnect with respect to teachers’ failure to take full advantage of the resources
and skills that the TL had to offer. Thus, themes that emerged from the interviews offered
insight into why some teachers chose to collaborate with the TL and others did not. The skills
that the participants identified as significant in this regard corresponded with the theoretical
frameworks of Montiel-Overall and Loertscher. From this perspective, if extensive collaboration
is to occur between teachers and administrators, they need to know the positive ways in which
the role of the TL can impact their practice and student learning. Once stakeholders become
aware of the enormous benefits of collaborating with a TL, they are likely to make collaboration
a priority.
Relationships. The establishment of relationships requires trust. In the current
educational climate, effective schools have teachers and leaders who solicit and contribute ideas
in order to put plans into action. Educators need to pose positive, inquiry-based questions

116

regarding student performance while building trust and listening to staff, students, and parents.
A growth mindset toward learning can promote student achievement by building positive
relationships among teachers. It is accordingly crucial to foster a school culture in which all staff
members feel that they are part of a team working to promote learning in a safe and nurturing
environment. Such a culture does not, of course, emerge overnight, but rather forms when staff
members take the time to come together and create clear and concise goals that further their
school’s overall mission. In this effort, the TL and library can help to cultivate positive
relationships in a variety of ways. Teachers and administrators who understand what TLs have
to offer are naturally more likely to value and solicit their contributions.
According to Robinson (2011),
goal setting works because it forces decisions about the relative importance about
what is important. Goal setting includes deciding what goals to set, gaining the
commitment of those responsible for achieving them, and communicating them to
all those with an interest in their achievements. (p. 45)
Setting goals helps a team to determine where each member stands and to put all members on the
same page. Steps toward a specific goal may vary, but simply having clear and concise goals
can boost morale and guide decision-making. Goals need to be discussed, updated, and reviewed
to ensure consistency across a team. Putting goals on the shelf will only result in a backlash,
especially when a new action plan, set of goals, or review needs to be completed, as staff
members, especially those who helped to set the original goals, conclude that their work is
undervalued and therefore become less likely to create or to follow a new action plan. Moreover,
all staff members are likely to interpret the constant changing of goals as an indication that there
is no real need to follow them since the focus is bound to shift again in the relatively near future.
Once goals have been established, for instance by a PLC team, the next step is to assess
the resources that are needed and those that are available. The aim here is to ensure that, should
117

any stakeholders raise concerns about an expenditure or allocation of funds, they can be
reassured that the school’s goals are being furthered. TLs should be a part of this process, since
they are some of the few staff members on a campus who are aware of all of the various
information resources currently available. Clearly-defined goals can also help individuals and
teams to challenge previous decisions, for instance by questioning whether constantly “throwing
money” at the same groups or programs represents an effective use of resources and whether any
data are available to support assertions about the effectiveness of such groups and programs in
promoting student achievement. Such discussions can also improve the relationship that TLs
form with administrators and teachers. Awareness of the capabilities of TLs can help others to
appreciate their significance for schools and districts. These types of discussions need not be
consigned to PLCs, but must in any case be conducted at a consistent time and place that is
known to all staff members.
PLCs were, however, the context in which these issues were dealt with at the high school
where this study was conducted. I as the TL enjoyed the flexible nature of my role at this school
and worked with several PLCs to provide a variety of resources and tools and shared additional
items and knowledge with the group, working collaboratively with a variety of teachers to
nurture positive relationships by providing access to relevant and useful information. Thus I
collaborated with the technology PLC when that group requested information about tools and
resources and with other content-specific PLCs in this regard. Meeting with these individual
PLC groups appears to have been beneficial, but the participation of a TL was not requested by
all groups or at all meetings, despite the fact that I had ideas to share regarding curriculum
planning. Again, time is a key resource for building these types of relationships, but the effort is

118

worth it, since these relationships, whether positive or negative, determine how the TL and the
TL’s skill set are perceived on campus.
Administrators, therefore, can nurture collaboration by ensuring that the TL has a flexible
schedule that meets the needs of students and teachers alike. Flexible scheduling and a
supportive administration promote collaboration by allowing the TL to utilize time more
effectively so as to accommodate the various schedules of teachers and administrators
throughout the school year.
Definition of collaboration. The participants in this study defined collaboration in
similar terms. They also indicated that, when they chose to collaborate, they did so with a select
few who shared their teaching styles, goals, content, and grade level. The ability to choose one’s
collaborators was valued highly by the participants. In any case, 73% of the respondents to the
survey indicated either having collaborated with a TL or intending to do so. Various levels of
engagement were noted during the collaborative process in a manner consistent with MontielOverall’s TLC-III model and Loertscher’s taxonomies. I in my capacities as TL and researcher
daily encountered situations readily identifiable with these theoretical contexts. It has taken
time, but more teachers have been seeking my help, asking for resources to improve the delivery
of information to their students on a wide range of topics. Again, this effort has taken time and
persistence. I learned over the course of this study that the school community as a whole valued
collaboration and that individuals who truly wanted to do so found the time; as for those who did
not, I also learned that I must not take their disinterest personally since other factors contributed
to their choice. At the same time, the findings indicated that TLs should continuously share
information, resources, and ways to facilitate and improve implementation of teachers’ curricula.
They must be persistent in advocating for the library at both the high school and district levels.

119

Understanding collaboration from the perspectives of the participants in this study helped me to
perceive a common thread and viewpoint regarding collaboration and to realize that
administrators can help by providing opportunities for teachers to work collaboratively.
Previous experiences. The past of course has implications for the present and future,
and this means that past experiences impact our current interactions and our choice of
collaborators (if any). Thus, the participants in the survey and interviews acknowledged the
significance for their teaching practices of having had and serving as a mentor. Past experiences
with other schools and a variety of colleagues had shaped their interactions with their current
colleagues, including the TL.
At the high school where this research study took place, the district office had
implemented a formal mentorship program, Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment
Program (BTSA), which paired teachers new to the field with experienced veterans teaching the
same or similar content. Many of the participants in the study, however, discussed their
experiences with informal mentorship, that is, with other teachers who had helped them to finetune their practice, offered advice for behavior management and for developing and improving
lessons, and served as shoulders to cry on. This type of mentorship can be facilitated by the
proximity of classrooms or by shared content or grade level. TLs have a role to play in the
formal and informal mentoring process. The TL is the one teacher who knows how to obtain
information resources suited to the content and grade levels of curricula across departments. TLs
can serve as BTSA providers, but they can also mentor informally.
In terms of specific steps, TLs can simply introduce themselves to new teachers in a oneon-one setting and share how the library can help. Establishment of a positive relationship
between a TL and a new teacher can promote ongoing use of the library and the skills that the TL

120

has to offer. Then, in a beginning teacher’s second year, he or she will be familiar with the
library and will have established a professional relationship with the TL and therefore will be
likely to utilize the library in a variety of ways. In subsequent years, this teacher can mentor
incoming teachers, including informing the about the ways in which the library and TL can help
them. Further, when a teacher who established a positive relationship with a TL in his or her
first years becomes an administrator, she or he will be prepared to promote at the department,
school, and district levels awareness of the role of the library and TL in the delivery of curricula
and in the promotion of student achievement. These relationships, past experiences, and
mentorship experiences make a difference. The TL thus needs to advocate for the initiation of
and be a part of this process.
Leadership. Leadership is part of the collaborative process. Administrators and teacher
leaders need to know the role of the TL in setting goals and in the processes of instruction and
curriculum development. As shown in the literature review, the problem of the TL not being
consulted or considered as a collaborative partner is not new. Thus in a study by Hartzell (2002)
principals judged TLs solely in reference to their own past classroom experiences. TLs can
expand the awareness of principals and other stakeholders about their roles through the measures
just suggested—mentorship, advocacy, and continually asking questions and presenting shared
ideas about how the library can, in addition to serving as a hub for information resources,
advance a school’s mission, goals, and plans to improve student achievement.
In this context, positive relationships form between the administration and TLs when
each group understands how collaboration stands to improve student achievement.
Administrators can work to build a library program that enables teachers to utilize all aspects of

121

the library effectively, thereby making the library part of the conversation when it comes to
planning and utilizing resources.
By encouraging classroom teachers to learn more about the role of TLs, administrators
can also increase the likelihood that they will make full use of the school library’s resources. It
is for this reason that TLs need to take part in planning professional development programs—so
that they can ensure that teachers how best to work into the curriculum technology, literacy,
research, and digital citizenship standards. This process can begin by working out the logistics
of offering professional development that meets the needs of the teaching staff while improving
relationships involving teachers and TLs. TLs serve as teacher leaders and can thus function as
valuable liaisons for teachers and administrators.
Detractors/Barriers. Time—or rather the lack of it—was the detractor most commonly
identified in both the survey and the interviews, though many participants also asserted that,
when something is important, the time for it will be found. Time can be an excuse not to
collaborate, so administrators need to think about collaboration when arranging schedules. The
TL can share resources and tools that help staff use time efficiently. Changing attitudes takes
time as well, but by continually providing opportunities and resources, the TL can help remove
these roadblocks with the help of leadership.
This study provided me as a researcher an opportunity to appreciate the extent to and
ways in which relationships and school culture impact collaboration, especially when a TL is
involved in the implementation of best practices in research. In the process of conducting this
mixed-method study, I shifted my focus from teacher-related factors to librarian-related factors
and viewed the problem of practice through a different lens. Approaching collaboration from
multiple perspectives gave me insight into what a TL needs to change, keep, or improve upon in

122

order to keep providing resources and information and making the library part of the
conversation when curriculum, technology, literacy, and other school-related skills are discussed.
Implications for Policy
A well-funded and -staffed school library can provide access to informational resources
for students regardless of their economic circumstances. Equal access means that no students
face barriers to the information that they need to complete assignments, to learn more about their
world and other cultures, to make informed decisions, and to improve their literacy skills.
Students can obtain and decipher reliable information through a variety of formats that the school
library provides and the skills taught by the TL and thereby expand their networks of learning.
School libraries are the one classroom in which students can feel safe while exploring their own
interests and accessing the information necessary to come up with their own interpretations and
findings. Schools can utilize the school library to help bridge the digital divide that separates
students. By investing in school library programs, including retaining the services of qualified,
full-time TLs, districts can tackle the digital inequality issue, help improve the word gap among
younger students, and promote reading interest by making available books in which students feel
represented. All in all, students who have access to current and reliable information are prepared
to learn digital citizenship, the democratic process of making informed decisions, and to read for
information and for enjoyment.
Through the survey and interviews, participants revealed that they were unsure of the role
of the TL in the high school setting owing to lack of exposure during previous work experience
or preservice training. Research is a significant aspect of the college setting. Preservice teachers
learn many aspects of literacy, including lesson planning, behavior management, assessments,
and what it takes to create a safe learning space for all students. Teachers cannot do all of this on

123

their own, so collaboration is a large part of the job when it comes to improving lessons,
teaching, and professional interactions. Teacher preparation and administrative programs need
to include effective instruction regarding how new teachers and administrators can fully utilize
TLs.
There are, however, significant gaps in the research regarding TLs’ changing leadership
roles in high and middle school settings and in particular how administrators can support
collaborative efforts between teachers and the TL. Most California school districts employ TLs
only at the high school level, though other states of comparable size and student demographics
employ them at the elementary level. As a result, many California students are not exposed to
critical research skills until they begin high school. When students have limited support for
acquiring and utilizing research and critical literacy skills, their learning is bound to suffer, so
employing TLs at both the elementary and middle school levels needs to be seriously considered
in California. Other states employ TLs at all three levels because research has shown the
benefits of exposing students research skills and various genres of literature and media at an
early age.

Suggestions for Future Research
Numerous studies have documented the impact of TLs on student achievement, for
instance by helping to close the achievement gap, promoting and enhancing collaboration in
schools, and cultivating relationships with general education teachers. There has, however, been
relatively little research into the factors that need to be in place in a high school or district setting
for TLs to collaborate with other teachers. Logistics are important, as are knowledge of the roles
of TLs in the school setting, flexible scheduling, previous experience and coursework, and

124

professional development opportunities, when it comes to building relationships and increasing
awareness of what TLs do and how they can promote collaboration in the high school setting.
In education, leadership is often associated with principals, and there is a gap in the
research regarding how TLs, if they were in positions of leadership, would use and implement
school library programs. Questions that remain to be answered include whether the presence of
TLs in school administration would impact usage and knowledge of school library programs and
whether the integration of technology and digital research skills can be enhanced through
professional development or the guidance of a leader with a school library background.
Furthermore, awareness on the part of stakeholders of TLs’ leadership roles, specifically at the
high school level, could have positive impacts in terms of preparing students for careers and
college. Administrators need classroom experience, and involvement in a mentorship program
with a TL as a teacher could help a future administrator to ensure that full advantage is taken of
the resources that school libraries have to offer.
Studies are also needed to assess whether the mentoring of new teachers by TLs can
increase utilization of the library and TLs’ skill sets. As discussed, previous work has
demonstrated that school administrators (e.g., superintendents and principals) tend to be poorly
informed about school library programs and the roles of TLs, viewing them as mere keepers of
books rather than coordinators of information and technology (Hartzell, 2002; Shannon, 2012;
Todd & Kuhlthau, 2005b; VanTuyle & Watkins, 2012). Early mentorship has the potential to
break the cycle of administrators’ ignorance in this regard. In the present study, the participants
acknowledged the importance of mentorship for new teachers’ improvement in the classroom
and in their reflective practices. Those who experienced supportive mentorship felt better
prepared to adapt to the changing circumstances of the classroom, and this ability to adapt can

125

contribute to teacher retention. Since mentorship can have such positive impacts on teaching
practices, it makes sense that TLs, who are uniquely positioned to work with all teachers on a
campus, play a part in the mentorship process.
Future research is needed in this area owing to the small sample population for this study,
especially in respect to the specific needs of various departments. The variation in perceptions of
collaborating with a TL across departments and administrators merits further consideration in the
context of other high schools, since it suggests possible misconceptions about roles of TLs.
Future studies could, for instance, observe in greater detail the practices of teachers and
administrators that facilitate collaboration with a TL as well as factors that contribute to the
underutilization of school library programs.
For the focus here has been not on the voice, advocacy, or self-image of TLs,
investigation of which would require a larger data set of schools that employ TLs. With access
to such a data set, future studies could seek to answer such questions as whether TLs’ advocacy
or self-image can change the attitudes of teachers and administrators regarding use of the library.
Similarly valuable would be an exploration of TLs’ opinions of themselves and of the potential
for a personal growth mindset to increase use of library resources and to promote collaborative
practices within a staff or among groups of teachers. Studies of this type could inform TL
certification programs.
Limitations
There were several limitations to this study in terms of the data collection methods,
namely the survey, interviews, and notes. One limitation was the inclusion of too many Likertstyle questions that were overly technical and difficult for the participants. Some of these
questions were unclear to the participants owing to the use of librarian jargon rather than

126

language readily intelligible to teachers and administrators. As mentioned, 10 of the participants
stopped taking the survey at Question 15, which asked participants to share their feelings about
collaborating with a TL in the performance of a specified task in regard to 9 domains and may
have seemed overwhelming. In any case, the statistical analysis and the spot at which these
participants stopped suggests that the Likert-style questions should have been simple, in
layman’s language, and not too numerous. One participant acknowledged in the last follow-up
survey question, which asked about the survey itself, that “some questions were a little
confusing”. This statement indicates that the questions should have been simpler and more
direct. Thus the survey could have begun by asking participants to share their current knowledge
about the role and skill set of the TL and concluded by asking them to share what they had
learned from the survey itself. In a few of their responses, participants indicted that they had
been unaware of TLs’ roles and capabilities. These responses suggest that the misconceptions of
teachers and administrators regarding TLs should be addressed when planning professional
development or working to improve communication with school staff.
Question 16, which asked participants to rank their perceptions of the importance of
collaborating with a TL in the performance of a specific task, included 14 sub-questions. The 10
participants who were daunted by the 9 sub-questions associated with Question 15 were not able
to move forward to the next Likert-style question since they never returned to finish the survey.
These incomplete surveys had to be removed from the data analysis. Thus, had the survey been
designed differently, the completion rate could have been significantly higher and thus provided
additional information for the researcher, especially in the written responses that had the
potential to provide thick descriptions of teachers’ and administrators’ perceptions of the school
library program and collaboration with the TL. A clear lesson is that a long series of Likert-style

127

questions can discourage participants from completing a survey; thus surveys need to be broken
up by the style of question and written in easy-to-comprehend language.
Another limitation of the study was that it asked about experiences with an TL at the high
school where the study was conducted or at other schools in an effort to determine whether
teachers would be likely to collaborate with a TL in the future. Neither the survey nor the
interviews, however, collected any personal accounts or stories regarding the participants’
backgrounds. Thus, they were only asked, using simple yes or no questions, whether they had or
would in the future work with a TL. Those questions provided essential data, but the
participants’ stories that were missed could have added a narrative dimension to this mixedmethod study and provided further insight into the improvement of collaborative practices
involving teachers and administrators and more generally into the influence of past experiences
on individuals’ choices.
The specific interview questions also represented a limitation for this study. They were
written to gain additional insight into how teachers and administrators view collaboration and the
barriers and enablers relating to it at this at the school where the study was conducted. A great
deal of data were collected through the interviews, but the many of the responses concerned
collaboration on campus in general. For a similar study at another site, the interview questions
should accordingly be focused on collaboration between staff members and TLs and include
additional verbiage. The interview questions could thus be simplified to concentrate on
collaboration with a TL (why and why not), any barriers to such collaboration, and the role of the
administration in promoting collaborative efforts. Such questions are more directly geared to
eliciting participants’ opinions on these issues.

128

Though the questions used in this study were validated based on previous research,
different and sets of them should have been used for the administrators and the teachers. To be
more specific, the data collected from the administrators provided valuable perspectives on one
high school, but richer data could have been collected had questions asked about such issues as
how administrators viewed the library and TLs’ skill set in relation to the curriculum, the place
of the library and the TL in their leadership visions, and their past experiences as teachers and
leaders with the library and the TL. It would likewise have been informative to determine
whether participants learned anything during the survey and whether additional information
about the roles and skill set of TLs and the library in student achievement could influence
administrators’ decisions about whom to consult in formulating curricula. Such interview or
survey questions could be geared to various groups of participants in an effort to understand
further the role of leadership in guaranteeing libraries and TLs a voice in classroom instruction.
Positionality represents another potential limitation of this study, for the researcher was
serving as the TL at the high school at which the study took place. It is therefore possible that
the researcher was too close to the subject to interpret and present the results fairly with an
unbiased frame of reference. Alternatively, it is possible that the participants felt at ease
conversing with me as a TL and researcher, since I could better explain scenarios and past
experiences or personalities than a researcher without a personal connection to the school. All
participants were given the option to be interviewed by a third party, but none made this choice.
They were selected based simply on their willingness to be interviewed and ability to follow
directions and provide their names, regardless of whether the TL had collaborated with them in
the past. Because the participants were not preselected, I could not anticipate their answers,

129

whether or not I had previously collaborated with them. A more purposeful sampling technique
might provide other insights than those gained here.
In Montiel-Overall’s TLC-III framework, the highest level of collaboration relates to
integrated curricula at the highest level (Model D), as a TL works with administrators, not
necessarily in a specific school setting but at the district level. Further insight might have been
gleaned through the inclusion of district administrators in the study, in particular regarding
whether the district had plans to incorporate the TL into curriculum planning so as to make better
use of library resources by, for instance, helping teachers plan during the proposed PLC time.
However, very few data were gathered for this study relating to Model D. The inclusion of
district administrators could have provided additional data for determining whether the TLC-III
model should include district curriculum planning to which the TL contributes as part of the
effort to enhance students’ achievement by sharing the resources to which stakeholders have
access when it comes to incorporating Common Core Standards and nurturing literacy and
digital citizenship skills.
The data that was collected through the surveys and interviews shares with the TL
researcher and administrators where the current reality is with staff members in regards to the
collaborative culture on campus. The goal is for the TL to work with all teachers and
administrators and the TLC-III model helps differentiate between the various levels. The simple
yes/no question in the survey that asked participants to share if they plan on collaborating with
the TL shares and the reflective written responses from Question 19 that asked what prevents
participants from collaborating with the TL shares where the school is in the collaborative nature
with the TL. The high school where the study took place shows that there is much to be
improved upon, but most the stakeholders are either in Model A or Model B in which the library

130

is not a thought or is just a room that holds books and desktop computers, or that the TL is the
keeper of the books. Through the use of the researcher’s personal notes and calendar, there are
small pockets of collaboration taking place on campus that are a good representation of Model B
and Model C in which there is an aspect of sharing or teaching roles or that the TL is a
collaborative partner and teaching colleague. Improvement is needed throughout the campus on
building more positive relationships, understanding, and utilizing the TL effectively on campus.
This study was able to share with stakeholders their thoughts of the position, if they should or
want to collaborate with the TL, and what systems in place at the high school are either
enhancing or detracting from this goal.
Significance of the Study
The purpose of this study was to inform the TL researcher, the leadership, and teachers at
a California high school about how collaboration was occurring and ways in which it could be
improved in terms of including the TL in curriculum planning. The TL as a researcher learned
through the data collection and coding processes about stakeholders’ misconceptions regarding
the position, teachers’ perceived needs, and ways to promote the library and its services.
Information about how leadership and teachers valued the TL and the library drew attention to
the valuable learning opportunities that at least some teachers and students were making use of at
the high school. As the review of the literature made clear, the library is one place where
students can explore their interests while simultaneously building their proficiency in respect to
state curriculum standards. Positive experiences in a school library can impact how students
encounter and view public and academic libraries as well. These experiences can thus promote
lifelong learning while widening and deepening students’ knowledge of a broad range of topics
and their exposure to and understanding of other cultures and beliefs.

131

Relationships was the main theme that emerged over the course of this research study.
Simply put, relationships among teachers, leadership, support staff, and students matter. Those
among school staff determine the role of the TL in the collaborative process. In Figure 4, the
data collected in this study are used to illustrate how negativity on campus and various barriers
erected by both teachers and administrators vastly decrease the likelihood of collaboration
involving the TL. Barriers take the form of scheduling, lack of opportunities, unfavorable past
experiences, unsympathetic procedures, and the view of the school library as a mere warehouse
of books for students to check out.

Figure 4: Relationships affecting the TLC-III Model

132

By contrast, when there is a positive culture on campus that embraces and supports the
library and the TL, the resources of the library and the TL’s skill set will be better utilized.
Flexible transitions among the models of Montiel-Overall’s TLC-III framework can be expected
to occur throughout the school year as intensity levels fluctuate. Other factors are also crucial;
thus scheduling must be arranged so as to support collaboration, and time is required to build
trust and improve relationships. When a TL shares and improves knowledge skills for both
teachers and students, word gets around as the school culture embraces and enhances
collaboration. This study has demonstrated that positive relationships are necessary if
collaboration is to occur among teachers, administrators, and the TL.
Suggestions for Leadership
There are many areas of future research in how the TLs' leadership roles are changing
This research study was able to fill a gap and provide researchers a further grasp on the practices
of collaboration, especially between teachers and TLs at the high school level. The research
study had access to a data set that was able to utilize and determine where the school culture and
beliefs towards both the position and how to best utilize the skill set of the TL. There is much
room for improvement, but building relationships and having leadership be more aware of the
role of the TL on this campus, but now there an analysis of data and back stories, leadership can
now act on the suggestions.
University educational leadership programs should include information regarding the
instructional role of the TL as an enhancement to the curriculum in order to best prepare their
graduates for their roles as instructional leaders in their schools. TLs need to take a proactive role
by initiating collaboration with classroom teachers, teaching information literacy skills, and
raising principals’ awareness of the library’s contribution to student learning (Mardis &

133

Everhart, 2014; Shannon, 2012). Currently education administration preparation programs offer
little to no training or information about how school libraries impact student achievement
(Shannon, 2012). This study might help teacher preparation programs implement some aspect of
a collaboration project with pre-service TLs. If teachers are inspired to collaborate and learn
during their pre-service trainings then they are more likely to carry those ideas over when they
are in the classroom (Latham, Gross, & Witte, 2013; Moreillon, Kimmel, & Gavigan, 2014).
Recommendations for Administrators
One way for collaboration to improve between stakeholders is that all parties need to be
aware of the role and skill set of the TL. Better understanding this position will help leadership
better utilize the TL while working together on curriculum writing and development, using
resources effectively while continually improving technology, digital citizenship, and literacy
skills.
Other ways that administrators can better improve collaborative relationships on campus
is to recruit and invite the TL to meetings in which curriculum writing or implementing new
programs are taking place. The TL can share what resources are available or needed to better
enhance the ideas. Additionally, TLs can help plan staff development or help create useful
information that can help improve and enhance teachers' research needs which are then
transferred in the classroom to students. Staff will see the usefulness and skill set of the TL
while the administration is promoting the TLs role in a resourceful way of sharing of information
and expertise. This will increase the chances that teachers will most likely collaborate in the
future with the TL since administrators have started the process.
Other ways that administrators can help promote or utilize the TL skill set is to learn,
research, and read about the profession of school librarianship. As mentioned previously,

134

administration programs do not typically have coursework related to the school library nor about
the role of the TL. Administrators need to learn about the position, read the research on the
importance of literacy and research skills and how it is all connected with a positive school
library program and how the TL supports and enhances the curriculum. Other ways that
administrators can help advocate for the TL and school library program is to have the TL be a
part of the school site plan and to have in the plan how the library is to support both students and
teachers. School site plans are connected to district goals, and district administrators need to be
aware of the position too. Not only is site level advocacy important, but there needs to be a
district administrative advocacy for school library programs that are consistent and be a part of
LCAP funding.
Mentorships were mentioned by participants as being important and helped shape how
they collaborate with others. Administrators need to beware of how important mentorships
impact teachers and need to support this learning process for teachers. Recruiting TLs as part of
this relationship building booster not only helps improve positive relationships on campus, but
builds the foundation of teachers better understand the role and position of the TL and the school
library program. TLs are resources of information and a certified teacher, not the keeper of the
books and the more knowledge that is available for stakeholders have about the position and the
impacts of student achievement, the more likelihood that collaboration efforts and relationships
will improve on campus.
Leadership is integral to developing a successful 21st century school library media
program. As information literacy and technology skills become central to learning, the TL must
lead the way in building 21st century skills throughout the school environment, by becoming an
active member of the local and global learning community. The TL can build relationships with

135

organizations and stakeholders to develop an effective school library media program and
advocate for student learning (American Association of School Librarians, 2009). Current
research has shown that when a TL participates completely within the school’s instructional
program, takes on an active leadership role, student achievement is higher (DiScala &
Subramaniam, 2011; Lance, Hamilton-Pennell, Rodney, Petersen, & Sitter, 1999; Lance et al.,
2000, 2005; Lance et al., 2004; Smith, 2001, 2006; Todd, Kuhlthau, & OELMA, 2004).
Conclusions
A positive school culture that supports collaboration is one in which the teachers feel
valued and are provided with time to collaborate with the TL. When teachers, administrators,
and TLs are able to learn from one another, collaboration flourishes. This notion is well
established in the field of education, being a subject of ongoing study as districts look for ways
to improve relationships among all stakeholders. School funding can impact the formation and
nurturing of these relationships, including whether time is scheduled for collaboration. Funding
for library resources and for TLs, however, is often scarce, and library programs are often cut
owing to a lack of knowledge on the part of administrators and teachers regarding how best to
utilize the skills of TLs.
Adoption of the CCSS has resulted in increased rigor when it comes to the adoption and
usage of digital media literacy while raising expectations for students’ research skills. An
obvious question, then, is why, since research shows that students’ ability to meet state standards
depends increasingly on the skill set and training of TLs, the TL still tends to be the most
underutilized position on school campuses. The findings presented here suggest that school
districts that employ a TL already have the resources necessary to implement the standards.
Nevertheless, although these resources were available at the high school at which this study was

136

conducted, they were underutilized by most stakeholders. The leadership, teachers, and TLs
accordingly need to promote the sharing of ideas, to be given the time to collaborate, and to
leverage one another’s professional expertise. Doing so can create new knowledge and
understanding regarding how to make the most of library resources and improve development
and implementation of curricula. Such formal and informal structures take shape when
opportunities are provided for collaboration and when all stakeholders have an understanding of
and experience with the knowledge that TLs provide in terms of advancing student learning.
The anonymous surveys provided much-needed insight into how the library and TL can
be better utilized, the lack of awareness and misconceptions concerning the TL’s role, and
practices in place that the school staff considered effective. The completed interviews provided
a variety of perspectives as the participants willingly shared their views, both negative and
positive, of collaboration. Lessons were learned during the interviews, with teachers and
administrators becoming more likely to take advantage of library services and to seek the help of
the TL. A TL needs to keep a finger on the pulse of the school so as to ensure that all teachers
are well informed about library resources and to maintain the support of administrators in
aligning the library with school and district goals. The data collected from the surveys,
interviews, and notes for this study thus have implications for practice, policy, and future
research opportunities.