Older Voluntarism and Rural Community Sustainability:
A Case Study of a Volunteer-based Rural Library

Abstract
Older Voluntarism and Rural Community Sustainability:
A Case Study of a Volunteer-based Rural Library
Amber Colibaba
With regards to building knowledge about rural aging, there is a gap in understanding of
the diversity of older rural people’s experiences and the interaction between older rural
people and the development trajectories of aging rural communities. One way to examine
these experiences and interactions is through voluntarism; the activities of volunteers and
voluntary organizations, which are pivotal for supporting aging in place in oftenunderserviced rural communities. To address this gap, this thesis features a communitybased case study with a volunteer-based rural library in Ontario, Canada and was aimed
at understanding the experiences of older library volunteers, examining the challenges of
a rural library volunteer program and exploring how they contribute to rural community
sustainability. Through surveys (n=87), interviews (n=48) and focus groups (n=6) with
library volunteers, staff, board members and community leaders the findings demonstrate
how older voluntarism is felt through the lived experiences of individual volunteers,
poses interpersonal, operational and structural challenges, and can potentially contribute
to the sustainability of rural communities. The thesis contributes to our understanding of
the rural, older voluntarism and provides recommendations for ways to sustain library
volunteer programs.
Keywords: Voluntarism, rural aging, sustainability, rural library, community-based
research, case study, Canada

Chapter 1
Introduction
“It’s not just about books. It’s everything else that we give to the community.”
Selwyn Public Library volunteer

Population aging has become a key process of change in the 21st century, predominately
in small towns and rural regions around the world (Scharf et al., 2016). With regards to
building knowledge about aging in rural areas, there is a call for a greater understanding
of the diversity of older rural people’s experiences and the interaction between older
people and the development trajectories of aging rural communities (Keating et al.,
2011). One way to understand these experiences and interactions is through voluntarism;
that is, the role and activities of volunteers and voluntary organizations (Skinner, 2014).
As aging rural communities continue to develop, there becomes an increasing demand for
services catered towards older adults and it often falls on the voluntary sector to deliver
these services within rural communities (Hanlon et al., 2014). With the voluntary sector
playing a pivotal role in coping with the needs of aging rural communities, voluntarism
can be seen as a means to achieve positive community sustainability, as the interactions
with the individuals and communities alike help to facilitate age-friendly communities
and services (Joseph & Skinner, 2012).

2
1.1 Research problem
While rural areas are typically under-researched, they can serve as critical
foundations for understanding the diverse and complex experiences of aging (Keating et
al., 2011). Within the rural context, voluntarism plays a pivotal role in understanding
these complex experiences of aging and in recognizing how rural communities cope with
change (Joseph & Skinner, 2012). ‘Voluntarism’ refers to the activities of volunteers and
voluntary organizations who are involved in providing services, but are not part of the
state, are not for profit and have a significant degree of volunteering (Milligan &
Conradson, 2006). The ‘voluntary sector’ includes non-profit and voluntary
organizations, community groups and individual volunteers who are involved in a variety
of activities, such as library services, the basis of the thesis. In Canada and
internationally, of particular concern is the aging of the volunteer base in rural
communities and the challenges older voluntarism poses for the sustainability of aging
rural communities (see contributions to Skinner & Hanlon, 2016). ‘Older voluntarism’ is
conceived here as the activities of individual volunteers who are in later life, normally 65
years and older, and voluntary organizations who feature an older volunteer base and/or
provide services and supports in aging communities. Examining the role of older
voluntarism allows for an insight into its transformative potential as it acts as a pathway
for integration between older people and aging places, which in turn, creates the potential
for positive community sustainability (Skinner et al., 2016).

3
1.2 Research goal and objectives
The goal of the thesis is to explore how older voluntarism contributes to the
sustainability of aging rural communities. Through a case study of a volunteer-based
library in an aging rural community, the specific research objectives are to:
1. Understand the experiences of older library volunteers;
2. Examine the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program;
3. Explore how older library volunteers and library volunteer programs
contribute to rural community sustainability.
These research objectives are pursued across three different scales of inquiry—
individual, program and community—within the study site of the Selwyn Public Library
in rural Ontario, Canada. Focusing on the under-researched context of public libraries, the
case provides a foundation for building a more thorough understanding of the role of
voluntarism as it relates to older rural people and their aging rural communities. Coupled
with the intellectual goal of the thesis is the applied goal of contributing to a communityuniversity partnership between the Selwyn Public Library and Trent University.
1.3 Conceptual foundations
In order to explore how older voluntarism contributes to the sustainability of
aging rural communities, the thesis draws together key debates and concepts related to
aging, voluntarism and rural community sustainability as foundations for the research.
Understanding these concepts provides context for the findings and allows for a deeper
understanding of how these ideas intersect in the framework of rural communities.

4
Rural communities are dynamic and complex. They feature rapidly aging
populations due to the out-migration of younger cohorts of residents and the in-migration
of urban retirees, coupled with rural residents aging in place (Joseph & Martin-Matthews,
1993). In order to keep rural communities “good places to grow old” (Keating, 2008 p.1),
they rely upon voluntarism (the role and activities of volunteers and voluntary
organizations) to ensure services run in order to cater to their aging population and to
support them aging in place (Hanlon et al., 2016).
Voluntarism also offers a window through which to view the dynamics and
complexities of rural areas, and the experiences of aging in rural communities. The thesis
uses older voluntarism in this capacity, as it uses it as a way in which to understand the
experiences of older library volunteers, but also to examine how older library volunteers
and volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability. Drawing upon the
work by Skinner and Winterton (2018) regarding contested spaces of rural aging, the
thesis’ concluding discussion presents contested spaces of older voluntarism as a means
to more thoroughly understand the complex relationship between aging, voluntarism and
rural community sustainability. It does so by examining the conflicts that arise at the
individual, program and community level that shape the individual experiences of
voluntarism, the challenges of sustaining rural voluntarism and how volunteers contribute
to rural community sustainability.
1.4 Broad approach to research
The thesis took a community-based research approach to explore how older
voluntarism contributes to the sustainability of aging rural communities. It was
undertaken as part of a collaborative partnership between the Corporation of the

5
Township of Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors and the Trent Centre for Aging
and Society, led by Dr. Mark Skinner, Trent University Professor and Canada Research
Chair in Rural Aging, Health and Social Care, in order to create a research project that
was informed by the organization in order to have the ability to implement change. The
partnership originated due to the uncertainty expressed by a past board member about the
sustainability of the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program. The board member grew
concerned due to the age and abilities of the current volunteers and wanted to study ways
in which to sustain the program and ensure the continued success of the library.
1.4.1 Introduction to case study
The research featured a case study of the Selwyn Public Library. Unique within
the provincial library system, which is mostly staff based, (Ministry of Tourism, Culture
and Sport, 2016), the library is a rural, volunteer-based library (174 volunteers), catering
to the residents of the three communities of Selwyn Township, Bridgenorth, Ennismore
and Lakefield. Incorporated in 2001, and comprising of small towns, villages and
disposed rural settlements, established by colonial settlers in the early 1800s, Selwyn
Township is typical of a rural community in Canada, as it features a rapidly aging
population. Peterborough County, in which Selwyn Township resides (see Figure 1.1)
features one of Canada’s most rapidly aging rural population, with one-fifth of residents
over the age of 65 (Statistics Canada, 2016). Using Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library as the case study allowed the thesis to explore the nature of older
voluntarism in aging rural communities by understanding the experiences of older library
volunteers, the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program and how library

6
volunteers and library volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability.

(adapted from Wikipedia)
Figure 1.1 Map of Ontario, indicating Peterborough County
1.5 Thesis organization
The remainder of the thesis is organized into five chapters. Chapter 2 introduces
and discusses the theoretical and conceptual approaches that inform the research. It
discusses aging in place, voluntarism and rural community sustainability in order to
provide a foundation for understanding the transformative process voluntarism has on
aging individuals and rural communities. Chapter 3 outlines the methodological approach
to the research and the methods used to carry out the case study. It details the community-

7
based research approach while describing the community-university partnership that
helped to inform the research design. Chapter 4 provides context of the case study site
and the library volunteer program. It situates rural, Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library in the context of rural community change and provides descriptive
findings from the survey results that present a demographic profile of the research
participants. Chapter 5 outlines the experiences of older library volunteers, the challenges
of sustaining rural library volunteer programs and how library volunteers and library
volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability. It also sheds light on the
narratives of aging in place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community
sustainability interwoven throughout the findings. The concluding chapter reflects upon
the research to provide a discussion on the narratives within the thesis and the emergent
threads of inquiry regarding older voluntarism. It also reflects upon the limitations and
future research directions to be taken to expand the understanding of the role of older
voluntarism in aging rural communities.

8

Chapter 2
Aging in Place, Voluntarism and
Rural Community Sustainability
In scholarship on aging and community sustainability, the rural context is generally
under-researched; however, it serves as a critical window for understanding diverse and
complex experiences of aging. The rural context boasts a very dynamic landscape, as it
has seen cycles of change that have led to both opportunities and challenges alike. This
chapter seeks to examine these cycles of change, to demonstrate how they have attributed
to an aging population within rural communities, and to use voluntarism as a window in
which to view the experiences of aging in rural communities and how voluntarism and
aging communities become fundamental processes of positive and sustainable community
development.
Drawing upon rural studies, geographical gerontology and voluntary sector
research, the chapter is structured in a way to showcase the narrative and interconnectedness between changing rural communities, rural aging, the evolving role of
voluntarism and rural community sustainability. It begins by providing an examination of
rural communities and the local and global changes that attribute to its rapidly aging
population. The chapter then discusses the process of rural aging and the context of aging
in place by reviewing the challenges facing rural communities and providing an
understanding of what it means to grow old in them. The chapter then forms a connection
between aging rural communities and voluntarism, and how voluntarism and voluntary

9
sector activities are critical in delivering support and services to older residents aging in
place.
To understand the transformative role of voluntarism, the chapter then discusses
rural community sustainability. It presents the four pillars of sustainability used to
explore the concept and demonstrates the way in which voluntarism is a pathway for
integration for older people and aging places. The chapter then discusses the importance
of place-based approaches and community-based research and concludes with an avenue
for looking forward at the relationship between changing rural communities, rural aging,
voluntarism and rural community sustainability by offering insight into further research
opportunities that help round out the key themes and fill in the gaps.
2.1 Changing rural communities
‘Rural’ is a complex term. An idyllic view of the rural context may spark
traditional, countryside environment imagery. However ideal the imagery, there are many
conflicting narratives of rurality that challenge that idyll. Shucksmith and Brown (2016),
offer two conflicting narratives that shape the perception of rurality. The first being the
pastoralist narrative, where rural areas are repositories of cultural values, with the second
being the modernist narrative, where rural is seen as a backwards environment in need of
transformation and development to allow for the residents to have modern services.
Whatever the narrative, rural communities are areas that have undergone and are still
undergoing considerable amounts of change.
Historically, rural communities were focused primarily on agricultural production
and resource extraction. However, two trends at the regional level began to emerge that

10
effected rural spaces, the expansion of the countryside under the urban influence and the
decoupling of rural communities from their service centre roles in regions of primary
production (Bryant & Joseph, 2001). These trends led to functional shifts in the way rural
livelihood was carried out, as there became increased access to metropolitan areas and an
increased access to information and technology (Bryant & Joseph, 2001). These shifts in
rural livelihood brought on considerable change for rural communities in the 20th and
early 21st centuries. Similar to the narratives of the characteristics of rural settings,
Shucksmith and Brown (2016) introduce six narratives of rural change; agri-centric
change, urban-rural access, competitive economy, rural as place left behind, amenitybased economy and society-nature interrelationships. Each narrative of rural change
offers a unique understanding of the various transformations underway in rural areas and
demonstrates the diversity amongst rural communities. However, complex the narrative,
at the core, rural societies can be seen as being shaped by the people that live within them
(Argent, 2016). These changes are attributed to social, cultural and economic
relationships within rural settings, such as the change in demographics and living
conditions. Changes also occur on various scales, from the local level such as mobility, to
the global level such as modernization, industrialization and urbanization (Argent, 2016).
To provide additional understanding of the changes within rural communities,
academics point to both short and long-term cycles of change that shaped rural areas
(Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005; Joseph & Skinner, 2012). Long-term cycles of change
are categorized as decline in population due to both migration trends and settlement
patterns (Joseph & Skinner, 2012). One factor attributing to these changes is technology.
In one way, rural depopulation was driven by successive innovation in production and

11
transportation technologies (Skinner & Joseph, 2007). Due to the innovation of such
transportation technologies, rural areas began to witness the consolidation of services
away from villages and smaller towns into larger urban centres (Joseph & CloutierFisher, 2005). The increase of mobility in this sense, where there was a new need to
travel outside of rural areas to access services and resources, also led to smaller rural
services risking closure, which resulted in loss of local jobs as well as local identity
(Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005).
Mobility in a different sense, has also led to changes within rural areas. Mobility,
in the form of migration, affected population size and makeup in many rural communities
(Joseph & Martin-Matthews, 1993; Bryant & Joseph, 2001; Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher,
2005; Skinner & Hanlon, 2016; Scharf et al., 2016). Common within rural communities
is the out-migration of the younger cohort of residents to seek employment and education
opportunities in larger urban centres (Bryant & Joseph, 2001). In contrast, in-migration of
ex-urban migrants to the countryside is common as well. This form of migration is
typically done post-retirement, and is amenity-driven, as retirees from urban areas seek
the natural features offered by rural settings. Lastly, is the cohort of residents remaining
in rural areas and choosing to age in place (Bryant & Joseph, 2001).
Accompanying the long-term cycles of change discussed above, are short-term
cycles of change within rural communities. In addition to technology and mobility, shortterm cycles of change are characterized as the economic and social restructuring of the
welfare state (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005). According to Joseph and Cloutier-Fisher
(2005), restructuring “provided a platform for government downsizing and centralisation,
rationalisation and privatisation of services as a means of spurring flagging economies

12
and reducing deficits” (p.134). This level of restructuring changed the rules under which
people experienced rural society (Skinner & Joseph, 2011). These short-term cycles of
change were felt across all communities but felt predominately in rural settings, where
there was a heavy reliance on public sector investment to support primary industry and
rural services (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005). Under the health service umbrella,
restructuring created gaps in service delivery, such as deficiencies in transportation,
mental health services, palliative care and respite care (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005).
In response to the long-term cycles of change, namely the migration patterns of
residents into rural areas, the short-term cycles of change presented a series of challenges,
as the shift in rural social policy began to promote healthy aging and aging in place as the
older population of rural communities rapidly began to increase (Joseph & CloutierFisher, 2005; Joseph & Skinner, 2012).
2.2 Rural aging and aging in place
As mentioned in the previous section, rural communities are rapidly aging
(Keating & Phillips, 2008). ‘Elderly migration’ into rural communities is adding to the
number of older residents already choosing to age in place and the out-migration of the
younger cohort of residents are creating a more concentrated demographic of older
people in rural areas (Joseph & Martin-Matthews, 1993). These various migration
patterns make up three scenarios of aging compositions for rural areas. The accumulation
scenario is characterized by net out-migration of young and net in-migration of old, the
congregation scenario shows net in-migration of old and low levels of net in-migration of
young, and lastly, the re-composition scenario is characterized by net out-migration of
young and aging in place of old (Hanlon et al., 2016).

13
Along with migration patterns, Scharf et al. (2016) identified three factors
associated with the growing interest in rural aging research; the environmental context of
aging has become a central theme in social gerontology, environmental experiences are
being shaped by globalisation (migration and mobility, new information and
communication technologies, welfare state retrenchment), and that demographic aging
intersects with other long-standing challenges facing declining and under-serviced rural
communities such as how older residents contribute to resolving those challenges.
As mentioned in the previous section, due to the restructuring of the welfare state,
an increasing challenge of rural communities is to provide health and social services to
support their older residents choosing to age in place. This challenge speaks to what
Joseph and Cloutier-Fisher (2005) call a double jeopardy, where “vulnerable older people
are living in vulnerable rural areas” (p.137). In this context, the vulnerability of rural
communities is due to the lack of community services, lack of transportation and lack of
access to specialized care. The vulnerability of the older rural residents is due to the
likelihood of ill-health, low income levels, impaired mobility, lack of social supports and
social and geographical isolation (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005). In rural communities,
the lack of service and support delivery is across the continuum of health care. In formal
care settings, as discussed above, the welfare state restructuring in rural areas has led to
the closure of many local community services aimed at helping people age in place. In
informal care and support settings, the reliance is now on family, friends and neighbours
to provide those forms of care (Joseph & Martin-Matthews, 1993; Joseph & Skinner,
2012). This reliance away from formal care settings proves to be difficult for in-migrants
to rural communities who left their families behind in urban centres and may not be

14
familiar with their neighbours (Joseph & Skinner, 2012). However, it also proves to be
difficult for long-term residents aging in place as well, as the out-migration of younger
cohorts sees younger families no longer living in proximity to their older family
members; thus, not being as frequently accessible and available to provide in home care
and support (Joseph & Martin-Matthews, 1993; Joseph & Skinner, 2012). Whatever the
challenge may be, it is central to note the importance of ‘place’ in healthy aging and what
aging in place can provide to the older person (Wiles et al., 2012). Allowing older
residents to remain in their communities and in their homes as they age promotes
personal well-being, offers consistency, meaning, control and security to their lives, helps
maintains independence, helps facilitate adjustments to life/care and helps to maintain
positive self-image and identity (Winterton & Warburton, 2012).
Another important factor attributing to rural aging is the diversity of aging in
these contexts and the importance surrounding understanding and valuing these
experiences, as there is no singular way to look at rural aging. Keating and Phillips
(2008) discuss the role of human ecology as a lens through which to view rural aging, by
explaining, at the surface, to understand the diversity, it requires an expanded
consideration of aging in various contexts. In the context of rural, older people live in
interaction with both the physical and social environments in which they live. Therefore,
older people help to shape their own experience of aging by interacting with their own
physical and social environment.
One example of a way in which older people can shape their own experience of
aging in rural communities is through their relationship with access to power and
resources. Skinner and Winterton (2018) highlight the intersection of rural citizenship

15
and population aging that create ‘contested spaces of rural aging.’ These areas of
contestation are “geographical locations where conflicts in the form of opposition,
confrontation, subversion and/or resistance engage actors whose social positions are
defined by differential control of resources/access to power” (p.16). In the rural context,
these conflicts emerge over the negotiation over rural citizenship, which encompasses the
rights and entitlements to the symbolic, geographic and social spaces that make up rural
space (Skinner & Winterton, 2018).
To understand this in the context of rural aging, Skinner and Winterton (2018)
offer five processes and outcomes that give rise to these contested spaces.
1. Contested spaces of rural aging are created because of competing policies and
practices relating to healthy aging and rural governmentality, and changing rural
demographics;
2. Contested spaces of rural aging emerge over competing discourses over the rights
to rural symbolic, political and cultural space in older age;
3. Contested spaces of rural aging emerge over competing discourses relating to the
right to age in place within rural communities;
4. Contested spaces of rural aging are created through active and passive interactions
between diverse older adults, wider community members and rural organizations
and policy;
5. Contested rural spaces can both create and reproduce inequality within rural
communities for older adults
In identifying these complex process and outcomes of contested spaces of rural aging,
Skinner and Winterton (2018) advocate for an approach to develop contextualized studies

16
of rural aging spaces that account for the diversity and complexity of rural areas and the
people aging within them. They present a framework that offers guiding questions for
rural aging research, policy and practice that allows for a further understanding of the
diversity. Questions such as ‘how is the perceived right to age in place within rural
contexts contextualized among different groups of rural older adults and within different
communities?’, ‘What forms of contestation within rural aging spaces produce positive
outcomes for rural older adults and communities and which generate negative outcomes
for specific groups?’, and ‘Which characteristics of contested spaces of rural aging
contribute to enhanced agency along older rural populations?’ allow for a deeper
understanding of the diversity of experiences of aging in rural communities.
The concept of ‘contested spaces of rural aging’ provides the thesis with a
foundational framework in which it situates an expanded view of contestation, ‘contested
spaces of older voluntarism’. The thesis builds upon the work of Skinner and Winterton
(2018) by demonstrating how contested spaces are also formed at the intersection of
aging and spaces of voluntarism, which dispute the right and responsibility to volunteer,
at the individual, volunteer program and community level.
The discussion in the above section has outlined challenges of aging rural
communities in relation to providing services and support to their older residents, as well
as noted the importance of understanding the diversity in which older people experience
aging in rural communities. A window through which to view these experiences of aging
is through voluntarism and voluntary sector activities. These activities also act as a
foundation for positive rural community development and sustainability by providing

17
important community services, to fill in gaps created by the restructuring of the welfare
state- a concept this chapter will discuss in length in the proceeding section.
2.3 The changing role of voluntarism
As mentioned in the previous section, voluntarism, or the activities of voluntary
sector organizations and volunteers done willingly, without expectation of monetary gain
(Hanlon et al., 2016), is one way in which rural communities respond to the changing
roles and responsibilities surrounding the provision of health and social support services.
As stated by Joseph and Skinner (2012), voluntarism is a “local, community response to
the changing roles and responsibilities of the state and civil society whereby NPOs,
community groups, family members and individual volunteers take on a more central role
in meeting the needs of people aging in place” (p. 381). By strengthening local capacity
to respond to the social as well as the economic changes, voluntarism can help to retain
local services that support residents to age in place (Skinner et al., 2014). Voluntarism is
a critical process at the intersection of the large and short-term cycles of change
mentioned above, where these specific cycles of change effect the provision of health and
social care in rural communities (Skinner & Joseph, 2011). It can be understood as a
mechanism and mediator of the local dynamics of change in care provisioning system and
communities.
The changing dynamics of voluntarism began to emerge when change (migration,
mobility, restructuring) started to be felt in rural communities (Skinner & Joseph, 2011).
The provision of health services was being carried out by community groups and
informal caregiving was placed on the shoulders of family members and individual
volunteers. With this increase in responsibility came the expectation that voluntary sector

18
providers could help overcome the challenges of sustaining rural health and social
community services, thus, aiding in sustaining rural communities (Skinner & Joseph,
2011). To further understand the role of the voluntary sector organization within rural
communities, Skinner and Joseph (2011) outline the local dynamics, or the interactions
among various voluntary service providers. They first discuss voluntarism as a barometer
of change, where the increased demand for voluntarism is a direct manifestation of
change in health and social care systems. The high demand for new forms of care
delivery increased the downloading of care responsibilities to voluntary sector
organizations and individual volunteers. The increase in responsibilities, at times, exceeds
the capacity and abilities of rural communities and their volunteers, which increases the
risk of burnout and feelings of burden and guilt. Secondly, voluntarism is viewed as a
mechanism of adjustment. In this view, voluntarism is a mediator of restructuring at the
local level, as there is an expectation of voluntary organizations, community groups,
family members and individual volunteers at facilitating adjustments to change within
their local communities. In rural communities, voluntary sector organizations begin to
recruit older residents to accommodate for the high dependence on rural voluntary sector
organizations and the small pool of younger residents willing to volunteer. With
voluntarism as a service delivery agent, it helps to maintain the integrity of communities
and the independence of its aging residents, alike (Skinner & Joseph, 2011). Lastly,
Skinner and Joseph (2011) discuss voluntarism as a space of resistance, as it is seen as
working in active opposition to policies.
To illustrate an example of the role of voluntarism, Skinner (2014) conducted a
case study of Community Care Peterborough, a non-profit community support

19
organization, to understand how this voluntary sector organization and its volunteers are
coping with the increased reliance on voluntarism to meet the needs of Peterborough’s
aging population. Community Care is an organization in Peterborough with 800
volunteers who participate in various community support service activities such as
friendly visiting, health and wellness clinics, meal programmes and transportation
services. One finding from the case study suggests that there is an importance of place
within voluntary sector organizations. In the case of Community Care Peterborough,
there was a general lack of professional staff and volunteers, which poses a constraint on
service delivery. This lack of personnel is linked to the general lack of local human
resources available to Community Care as they are dependent upon individual’s personal
decisions to work, live and grow old in Peterborough, all while wanting to participate in
voluntary sector activities. A second finding from Skinner (2014) was there was a placeembeddedness to volunteering for Community Care Peterborough, as volunteers enjoyed
the community aspect to volunteering and felt they were contributing to their local
communities.
With voluntarism as a mediator of change, it is important to understand what
makes voluntarism in a rural context so dynamic and integral. Rozanova et al. (2008)
discuss why rural communities are good places to participate in voluntary activities by
outlining that it is easy to develop connections due to smaller community dynamics and
more stable populations, as rural residents seem to grow up and grow old together within
the same community. However, a critical look at rural landscapes can also reveal their
exclusionary characteristics. Exclusion in rural areas can come in the form of social,
material resources and service exclusion and can occur through older residents not being

20
familiar with their neighbours, especially if new migrants, older residents may not be
financially stable enough to participate in voluntary activities and lack of public
transportation may make it difficult for some older residents to access voluntary sector
activities (Rozanova et al., 2008). Rozanova et al. (2008) also notes the influence of rural
community characteristics on social participation of older adults. The first characteristic
is the remoteness from an urban centre. It is here where it becomes the responsibility of
voluntary sector organizations to fill in for missing services if the rural area is located at a
distance from an urban centre. The second characteristic is the population density of the
rural area. Less dense populations may not be able to provide critical public services to
their community such as firefighting, postal services, health care and public
transportation. A less dense area also tends to have fewer formal voluntary sector
organizations due to low levels of membership and/or high overhead costs associations.
In rural areas with a low population density, volunteers tend to be concentrated in
religious affiliated groups, service clubs, sports organizations, school groups, and
neighbourhood and civic organizations. Due to the out-migration of younger residents,
the changing population size of rural areas can influence social participation within rural
communities. Due to this migration, rural areas lose membership in their voluntary
organizations. As well, as previously mentioned, voluntary sector organizations take on
the role of filling in gaps in services and infrastructure due to local municipalities not
being able to keep pace with the population influx of older migrants into these areas.
However challenging keeping up with the aging population may be, the population of
older adults creates opportunities for social participation in rural areas as they create a
volunteer pool of retired residents with a variety of skills and experiences. As well,

21
Rozanova et al. (2008) note that people in mid to late life are more likely to make
substantial contributions to their community and use voluntarism as a means to make
these contributions. The proportion of highly educated rural residents also have an impact
on social participation as they tend to be more aware of the needs to people in their
communities and social networks, and like the pool of retired volunteers, educated
residents also provide a broad skill set to use in voluntary organizations.
Along with the preceding rural characteristics influencing social participation
within voluntary organizations, Joseph and Martin-Matthews (1993) note that migration
patterns also have an effect on the level of participation in rural voluntarism, as the
migration of people in and out of rural areas can limit the involvement with voluntary
organizations. Migrants moving into rural areas, who often have higher socio-economic
status, may affect voluntarism as those needing the services delivered by voluntary
organizations are dominated by the residents choosing to age in place. This divide
between new migrants and long-term residents can create and/or increase already
developed polarization between the two resident groups, as one is seen to age
successfully in rural areas, and the other heavily relying on the service delivery of
voluntary sector organizations. Along with the migration patterns into rural areas,
migration out of rural areas in winter months can affect voluntarism. Seasonal migration,
or ‘snowbirds’ leaving cooler climates in the winter to find warmer climates in the south
is an activity taken on by young, healthy and affluent older people. Therefore, in winter
months, that leaves older, frail and less affluent people to take on more of the
responsibility of voluntary sector activities, in a season where winter puts added pressure
on service delivery in rural areas (Joseph & Martin-Matthews, 1993).

22
Up until this point, this chapter has discussed how voluntarism aids in the
sustainability of rural community by providing services to the community necessary to
meet the needs of its older population who wish to age in place. Along with this,
however, it is important to note the implications of volunteering on the older individual
who is participating in voluntary activities. As noted by Warburton (2015) older people
choose to volunteer in ways that are meaningful to them. Other motivations also include
the opportunity to help others, to build or maintain social networks, to do something
worthwhile and to provide personal satisfaction. Along with personal motivations,
volunteering in later life is linked to productive aging, as there is a new attention to the
positive contributions of older people, rather than seeing them as burdens to society. This
assumes that the skills, expertise and experience of older people are currently underutilized, and thus, volunteering is a way in which to use and capitalize on these skill sets
(Warburton, 2015). Volunteering can also be linked to healthy aging, as it is seen as an
avenue to maintain better health in later life. Benefits include reduced mortality, higher
life satisfaction, improved psychological health, less depression and improved
functioning levels. Paired with these benefits, volunteering is also used as a role
replacement in later life by providing a sense of purpose and gives life meaning after
retirement. This purpose is increasingly important in marginalized population, such as
people with different cultural backgrounds and women who had limited involvement in
paid work previously in their life (Warburton, 2015).
Volunteering in later life can also counter the arguments made earlier in the
chapter around social exclusion by fostering inclusion of older people in rural
communities. As noted by Warburton (2015), voluntarism is seen as “a process to ensure

23
that everyone, regardless of their life experiences or circumstances, can achieve their
potential in life” (p. 349). In rural areas, older people are at high risk of social
isolation/exclusion due to various life course factors such as retirement, widowhood and
ageism. However, by participating in voluntary activities, older adults can build their
social networks, connect with their community, thus, limiting their risk of becoming
isolated.
With the rural voluntary sector playing a pivotal role in sustaining rural
communities by mediating change, it is important to note that there is also in increasing
uncertainty surrounding the voluntary sector itself. Ryser and Halseth (2014) demonstrate
some barriers that can impede the renewal of the rural voluntary sector. One barrier is
attitude. This constitutes the readiness to change within voluntary sector organizations.
Both the need and the capacity to change is integral for the renewal and sustainability of
voluntary sector organizations. Operational barriers to renewal include the lack of
attention to renewing roles, mandates, policies, procedures and tools. Communication
barriers refer to disrupted and infrequent communication strategies due to the large
workload and limited human resources commonly found in rural voluntary sector
organizations. Financial barriers to renewal and sustainability include the lack of funding
provided to rural voluntary sector organizations. Ryser and Halseth (2014) note that
larger funding agencies do not understand the rural context and what organizations
require to meet the needs of their rural populations. This funding barrier makes it difficult
to provide essential services as well as to secure paid staff. Limited human resources
provide a barrier to the renewal and sustainability of rural voluntary sector organizations
as smaller population sizes offer small pools of volunteers to access skills wanted in grant

24
applications. Those volunteers who are participating are busy running the day-to-day
functions to promote innovation and collaboration within the community. Ryser and
Halseth (2014) also discuss infrastructure barriers, primarily outdated technologies,
which can impede the renewal of rural voluntary sector organizations. A successful
organization requires the most up to date operating systems and connections, and with
limited funding, this can be a challenge. Lastly, policy provides a barrier to renewal as
policy is used to reduce the level of risk to central governments rather than to provide a
more supportive policy environment. It is within the concept of place where these
discussions around renewal and sustainability can begin to be debated and change can
begin to be implemented.
2.4 Rural community sustainability
Underlying the discussion of changing rural communities, rural aging and
voluntarism are concerns for the sustainability of rural communities. As rural
communities continue to undergo cycles of change, the sustainability of the social make
up of these regions has become of concern to policy makers and community leaders alike.
As defined in the Brundtland Report, sustainability refers to meeting the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations (World Commission on
Environment and Development, 1987). Decades on from this report, sustainability in the
context of the thesis refers to meeting the needs of older, rural populations in terms of
livelihoods, economies, social service systems and human and natural environments.
With a ‘double jeopardy’ of vulnerable older people living in vulnerable older
places (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher 2005), the apprehension rests in how to keep these older
residents and aging communities sustained. In addition, the high demand on the voluntary

25
sector to provide services to rural communities becomes concerning as the reliance on the
voluntary sector puts in increased stress on the volunteer and thus can have repercussions
on the sustainability of the voluntary sector organization.
In sustainable community development research, there is a gap in the literature
that focuses on the rural context. While examining sustainable community development,
the rural context is seen as simply ‘not urban’, rather than a complex and dynamic setting
with different histories and trajectories of development (Markey, 2012). In the rural
context, looking at sustainable forms of development are important in order to address
fundamental issues of restructuring and community vitality, as it provides the solution of
keeping rural communities viable and livable, as Markey (2012) states, “rural
sustainability is rooted in a commitment to livability that may then become a foundation
for future viability” (p. 24).
One way to understand sustainable forms of development is through the “four
pillars of sustainability”; cultural, social, economic and environmental (Duxbury &
Jeannotte, 2012). Cultural sustainability refers to the cultural vitality of communities,
which Choe et al., (2007) describes as “the need to advance development in ways that
allows human groups to live together better, without losing their identity and sense of
community, without betraying their heritage while improving quality of life” (p. 202).
The social sustainability of communities refers to strengthening the sense of community
and sense of place, with an emphasis on social equity and justice (Dempsey et al., 2011).
This can be done through the promotion of civic participation, localized empowerment
and social interaction (Dempsey et al., 2011). Economic sustainability refers to sustaining
capital, whether it be natural, human or social (Moldan et al., 2012). Lastly,

26
environmental sustainability represents both the natural and human environments and
sustaining those for future generations (Moldan et al., 2012). These four pillars are
compatible and mutually supportive as they can be used in tandem of one another to
understand and analyze the entire breadth of sustainable development within rural
communities (Boström, 2012). The thesis uses these pillars as themes in which to explore
how older voluntarism contributes to the sustainability (cultural, social, economic and
environmental) of aging rural communities.
Within this field, rural community sustainability has begun to be seen as an
outcome of the interactions between older people and aging places. Skinner et al. (2016)
discuss a key component missing from debates on rural aging, “a comprehensive
understanding of how interactions between older people and place influences both the
experiences of individuals and the development trajectories of their communities” (p. 39).
Voluntarism is an identified process through which such interactions occur, as outlined in
Figure 2.1. This figure illustrates the transformative relationship between older people,
aging places and voluntarism; a relationship that this thesis explores in the context of a
volunteer based-rural library, older library volunteers and rural community sustainability.
Following Skinner (2014) older people are seen to be both the sources of and
solutions to the challenges of aging in place, and voluntarism is used a mediator and
process used in which to cope with the challenges. It is the acts of volunteers that help to
facilitate successful and healthy aging in place and promote sustainable community
development. As well, it is the vitality of rural voluntary sector organizations that act as
indicators of community development and their ability to cope with change (Skinner,
2014).

27

Figure 2.1 Place-based approach to explore the role of older voluntarism in aging
rural communities (adapted from Skinner, 2014 p.164).
As defined by Skinner (2014), place is a “mutually constituted site of structure
and agency through which broad-scale sociodemographic, economic and environmental
changes materialise and from which people experience and transform their outcomes” (p.
162). In the context of this thesis, place is an important concept as it can help to explain
how and why voluntarism is manifest quite differently among and within geographical
contexts, particular to this case, rural contexts. In research, the need for place-based
approaches is key to understanding older voluntarism as a process that shapes and is
shaped by the interaction between older people and their communities.
An important aspect within place-based approaches to research is the importance
of community, as a focal point for applied research. Place-based research provides a
sound foundation for community development and allows communities to respond to
changes and crises (Markey et al., 2012). As well, place-based approaches can aid in
building community capacity within rural areas. Community capacity can be developed
through investments in service provision in the voluntary sector, fostering the recognition

28
to provide health and support services in a manner that recognizes the realities of rural
life, and ensuring participation of community members is at the forefront, as community
members need to care enough about their community to give back and keep it viable. In
addition to community capacity, place-based approaches can also be beneficial to
building social cohesion within communities in the form of the interactions that create
partnerships, networks and relationships that are sustained by that interaction (Markey et
al., 2012).
An applied aspect of place-based approaches to research which helps showcase
the transformative process outlined in Figure 2.1, is community-based research (also
called ‘CBR’) (Markey et al., 2010; Halseth et al., 2016). This approach places an
emphasis on participation and empowering social change. In the rural context,
community-based research is used to investigate the critical issues within context. In the
context of aging rural communities, it is used to investigate the ways in which
voluntarism is a mediator of change and allowing older people to age in place (Markey et
al., 2010). Furthermore, community-based research is important in rural communities due
to its flexible and sensitive look on rural dynamics. This approach to rural allows
researchers to work with rural areas undergoing dramatic and rapid restructuring and
provides an explicit link to the prevalence of place-based development and territorial
policy as a response to the restructuring. In addition, conducting community-based
research in rural communities helps to bridge any physical separation between rural
institutions and rural organizations, it helps to ground the research process in the local
community and it provides involvement from the community towards action (Halseth et
al., 2016).

29
2.5 Summary
Using research from rural studies, geographical gerontology and voluntary sector
studies, this chapter has discussed the connection between rural communities, aging,
voluntarism and rural community sustainability and the mutually transformative
relationship between them. By examining the changes underway in rural communities,
including migration and mobility of older people, the changing demographic of rural
communities comes into view, as do the challenges and opportunities posed by an aging
population. In a response to the changes underway in rural communities and to the
challenges posed by a rapidly aging population, rural communities as seen to often turn to
voluntary sector organizations and individual volunteers to meet the needs of the
community and to provide the necessary services to keep rural residents aging in place
and to keep the communities sustainable. Embedded throughout is the importance of
place, thereby making place-based approaches fundamental to building a greater
understanding of the role of volunteers in the sustainability of aging rural communities.
In addition to place, the four pillars of sustainability and the concepts of communitybased research are presented. These notions are embedded throughout the thesis as they
provide foundations for the conceptual and methodological frameworks used.
In addition, aging in place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community
sustainable are reviewed and positioned in the chapter. Introducing these overarching
narratives provides a foundation for the following chapters, as these three concepts are
embedded in the remainder of the thesis to aid in the understanding the role of older
voluntarism in the sustainability of aging rural communities.

30
In reviewing such concepts and arguments surrounding aging in place, the
changing role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability, gaps in the literature
begin to emerge, as do lines of future research that could be taken to add to the breadth of
aging rural voluntary studies. One notable gap that this thesis addresses is the lack of
community-based research on rural community services. Primarily, research on rural
voluntary sector organizations is focused on rural services providing health and social
care services (Skinner, 2014) and how the voluntary sector contributes to community
economic development (Halseth and Ryser, 2007). However, research on volunteer-based
public services, such as rural libraries, provides an insight into the role of volunteers and
volunteer organizations in the sustainability of rural communities in a different capacity.
One way to fill this gap is to continue the methodological approach in research by
conducting qualitative, community-based case studies. Conducting research in this
manner will allow for a continuation of the work promoting community vitality by
allowing the communities to be involved in the research; however, it is important to
expand the case study focus outside of health and social service delivery and community
development to include public services that provide services to the entire rural
community.
Informed by the importance of place-based approaches, the thesis features a
community-based case study of a volunteer-based rural library, a public service that is
integral to the community, to fill in the gap and explore the role of older voluntarism in
sustaining aging rural communities. To do so, informed by the three narratives of aging in
place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability, the thesis

31
examines the experiences of older library volunteers, the challenges of a library program
and the contributions of older library volunteers make to their local community.

32

Chapter 3
Research Design and Methods

This chapter outlines the methodological approach and methods used in the study of the
role of older voluntarism in the sustainability of aging rural communities. Firstly, it
describes the research framework to provide an overview of the concepts, methodology
and methods used in the research. Secondly, the chapter further details the methodology
and methods used in the research. It outlines the nature of the community-based
partnership, describes the case study site and reports on the methods used to conduct the
research. Thirdly, the chapter discusses how the data was collected and analyzed. Lastly,
the chapter outlines the organization of findings presented in the following two chapters.
3.1 Research framework
As discussed in Chapter 2, the narratives of aging in place, the changing role of
voluntarism and community sustainability are prevalent themes within scholarship on the
rural context. As the literature suggests, aging and voluntarism are mutually
transformative concepts, as they are seen as pathways of integration, which contribute to
positive rural community sustainability. As shown in Table 3.1, these three concepts act
as a framework in which to situate the research.

33

Table 3.1 Research Design Framework
Research Question

Conceptual Framework

Methodological
Framework

Understand the
experiences of older
library volunteers

Aging in place

What is the role of
older voluntarism in the
sustainability of aging
rural communities?

The changing role of
voluntarism

Rural Community
Sustainability

Research Objectives

Community-based, case
study of a volunteerbased library and older
library volunteers

Methods, Data &
Scale of Analysis
Survey administered
to library volunteers
and board members as
well as interviews
with participating
volunteers

Examine the challenges
Interviews with
of sustaining a rural
library volunteers,
library volunteer
staff members,
program
members of the Board
of Directors and
township
Explore how older
stakeholders.
Focus
library volunteers and
groups
with
selected
library volunteer
participants
program contribute to
rural community
sustainability

34
As illustrated in Table 3.1, the research design is linked through these conceptual
frameworks. Stemming from the overall research question of, what is the role of older
voluntarism in the sustainability of aging rural communities, the thesis uses aging in
place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability as concepts
that informed the rest of the research.
As discussed in Chapter 2, a rapidly aging population and the importance of
voluntarism for service delivery are characteristics of rural communities. Using these
concepts, the thesis undertook a community-based approach to the research in order to
explore how older voluntarism contributes to the rural communities of Selwyn Township.
Additionally, Chapter 2 outlines the role older voluntarism has in the sustainability of
rural communities, as they fill in service gaps in order to deliver services to the residents
in order to keep residents aging in place. Using this concept of rural community
sustainability, the thesis conducted a case study of the Selwyn Public Library and its
volunteers in order to understand the experiences of older library volunteers, to examine
the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program and to explore how older
library volunteers and library volunteer programs contribute to rural community
sustainability. In addition to the intellectual goals, the thesis has the applied goal of
reporting back to the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors on these concepts and to
be able to provide recommendations on how to sustain the volunteer program. The
following section will outline in detail the methodology undertaken and the methods used
in the research.

35
3.2 Methodology
This section outlines the methodology used within the research. It will begin by
discussing the community-based research approach undertaken, which outlines the
importance of community-based research and how working collaboratively with a
community organization informed the research. It will then describe in detail the
partnership with the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors and Trent University, and
describe Selwyn Township and the Selwyn Public Library in order to showcase the
uniqueness of the volunteer model they utilize. The section will then discuss the case
study of the Selwyn Public Library and their volunteer program and will end with a
discussion of the research ethics protocol undertaken.
3.2.1 Community-based research
The thesis took a community-based research approach, as it worked with the
Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors in order to produce a research project that suits
their needs and will help implement change for them as a community organization. As
defined by Halseth et al. (2016), community-based research is research that is conducted
by, for or with community members. In addition, they describe the goal of communitybased research as producing new knowledge that can support change in communities.
As Halseth et al. (2016) describe, community-based research involves
partnerships with communities at various levels of engagement. These partnerships are
mutually beneficial for researcher and community as firstly, they can help to improve the
credibility, validity and usability of the data and, secondly, the results from community-

36
based research can produce direct community benefits as it involves the community in the
production of knowledge.
The thesis was developed as part of a collaborative partnership between the
Corporation of the Township of Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors and the Trent
Centre for Aging and Society, led by Dr. Mark Skinner, Trent University Professor and
Canada Research Chair in Rural Aging, Health and Social Care. The idea for the project
originated in 2015 when a member of the library board at the time, approached Dr.
Skinner after hearing him give a public lecture in Selwyn Township on rural aging and
voluntarism, to inquire about conducting a community-based research project with the
Selwyn Public Library. The board member was concerned regarding the sustainability of
the volunteer program at the library, as many of the long-term volunteers were aging into
their 80s and they feared what would happen operationally, structurally and economically
when they were no longer able to commit to volunteering. After writing a communityuniversity collaborative proposal titled, Sustaining Volunteer Involvement: Aging
Volunteers and the Selwyn Public Library, which included topics of interest such as the
sustainability of the volunteer program and the desire to keep local seniors engaged in
their community, the proposal was adapted into a thesis project by the researcher in 2016
as part of the Masters of Arts in Sustainability Studies program.
Through open communication via e-mails, as well as invited meetings, the Selwyn
Public Library Board of Directors were consulted throughout the conception of the
research, as shown in Table 3.2. Consultations were held regarding the research design
and the adaptation of the objectives of the original proposal into M.A. thesis objectives.

37
In addition, the board was actively involved in the conception, design and review of the
research instruments and the dissemination of the findings.
Table 3.2 Timeline of community-based partnership
Date
September 2016

October 2016

March 2017

June 2017

January 2018

April 2018
June 2018

Meeting
Researcher recruited to take on communityuniversity research proposal “Sustaining
Volunteer Involvement: Aging Volunteers and
the Selwyn Public Library”.
Initial meeting with Selwyn Public Library
board
• Sign partnership
• Discuss research details
Presentation of research proposal to Selwyn
Public Library board
• Review of research design
• Review of research instruments
Attended Selwyn Public Library volunteer
appreciation dinner
• Presented project to volunteers
• Distributed survey packages
Progress presentation for Selwyn Public
Library board
• Research update
• Presentation of preliminary findings
Thesis oral defence
Community report presented to Selwyn Public
Library Board of Directors, staff and
volunteers

3.2.2 Case study
As discussed in the previous section, this thesis took a community-based research
approach, using an on-going collaborative partnership between the Corporation of the
Township of Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors and the Trent Centre for Aging
and Society. Through the community-based approach, the thesis conducted a case study
of the Selwyn Public Library in order to explore how older voluntarism contributes to the

38
sustainability of aging rural communities., Flyberg (2018) defines a case study as an
intensive analysis of an individual unit, which allows for the research to present detail,
richness, completeness and depth of the individual unit of study. To complement this
definition, Baxter (2016) adds the element of studying a particular phenomenon of the
individual unit, that allows for the study of the contextual influences on and explanations
of the phenomenon. In practice, the thesis conducted a case study of the Selwyn Public
Library and looked particularly at the phenomenon of older voluntarism within the library
and in relation to the sustainability of the communities of Selwyn Township.
Selwyn Township is located within the broader geographical region of
Peterborough County which features one of Canada’s most rapidly aging rural
population, with 1 in 5 residents over the age of 65 (Statistics Canada, 2016). Located
one hour northeast of Toronto, Ontario (pop. 5.5million), the largest metropolitan region
in Canada, Peterborough County features a population of 57,000, and is comprised of
eight rural townships as well as two First Nations communities (Nicol et al., 2009), as
shown in Figure 3.1.
The Township of Selwyn, adjacent to the City of Peterborough, is the most
populated municipality in Peterborough County. Brought together by two amalgamations
in 1998 and 2001, the Township of Smith, the Township of Ennismore and the Village of
Lakefield became the Township of Selwyn in 2013 (Township of Selwyn, 2014).
Located within Selwyn Township, the Selwyn Public Library is a community
organization that holds a long-standing position within the three communities of the
Township; Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield as detailed further in Chapter 4. With a
branch in each of the three communities, the library caters to the entire township, as their

39
mission statement suggests, “The Selwyn Public Library supports and enriches the
community by providing resources and opportunities for meaningful connections,
lifelong learning and personal and cultural development” (Township of Selwyn, 2015).

(adapted from www.ptbocounty.ca)
Figure 3.1 Map of Peterborough County, indicating townships
To provide these enriching opportunities, the Selwyn Public Library provides library
services to the communities of Selwyn Township. Services such as interlibrary loans,
genealogical and local history resources, printing and faxing, access to public computers
and Wi-Fi, print collections and e-books for borrowing, as well as online resources are
available in the Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield branches. In addition to the library

40
services, they also offer public programming, which includes kids and teen reading
programs, as well as programming for adults, such as book clubs, movie night,
technology workshops and poetry night (Township of Selwyn, 2015). The personnel
makeup of the Selwyn Public Library is outlined in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3 Breakdown of Selwyn Public Library staff and volunteers by branch

As shown in Table 3.3, the Selwyn Public Library is comprised of seven board members,
six staff members and 174 volunteers. Volunteers work on a shift basis, coming in an
average of once per week to perform various duties for the library which include
circulation desk, cataloguing, memberships and reservations, to name a few (for more
information on the library volunteers, see Chapter 4).
In addition to the Selwyn Public Library, volunteers also participate voluntarily at
one of the three thrift stores in partnership with the library. Causeway Treasure Trove
(Bridgenorth), the Ennismore Community Thrift Shop (Ennismore) and Renewed

41
Classics (Lakefield), are second-hand stores that collect community donations of clothing
and housewares to resell for fundraising purposes. Renewed Classics collects profits
strictly for the Lakefield branch to support their children’s programs whereas Causeway
Treasure Trove and the Ennismore Community Thrift Shop are run in partnership with
Community Care Peterborough, a non-profit community support organization. In these
instances, the profits of the two thrift stores are split 50/50 with the local Community
Care Peterborough office and the Bridgenorth and Ennismore branches of the Selwyn
Public Library. Similarly, for the Causeway Treasure Trove and the Ennismore
Community Thrift Shop, volunteer recruitment is done through the local Community
Care Peterborough Office, where recruitment for Renewed Classics is done through the
Lakefield library branch.
Through the description and discussion of both Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library, it becomes evident why this organization situated in this place was chosen
for a case study on the role of older voluntarism in the sustainability of rural
communities. Firstly, Peterborough County, in which Selwyn Township is situated within
(see Figure 3.2), features one of Canada’s most rapidly aging populations. Coupled with
the rural aging demographic is the uniqueness of the Selwyn Public Library’s volunteer
model. According to the 2016 Ontario Public Library Statistics put out by the Ministry of
Tourism, Culture and Sport, the average number of volunteers for libraries in populations
between 15,001 to 30,000, is 23 (Ministry of Tourism, Culture and Sport, 2016). With the
Selwyn Public Library having 174 presently, they use 8 times the number of volunteers
than an average library in the provincial system. This speaks to the uniqueness of the
volunteer model and the reliance the library has on their volunteers, as they make up 94%

42
of their personnel. The combination of Selwyn Township as representative of rural
settings in Canada (rural recreational, agriculture and small town) and of rural
voluntarism in Canada (older volunteers) makes the Selwyn Public Library a fruitful site
to study the role of older voluntarism in rural community sustainability.
3.2.3 Research ethics
The research was approved by the Trent University Research Ethics Board on
May 30, 2017 (see Appendix A). Due to the nature of small town, rural communities, the
researcher was not able to guarantee absolute privacy of the research participants as their
participation in the project may have been known by other participants and community
members. However, to ensure confidentiality of personal information, throughout the
research process, the research participant’s identities are anonymous. Throughout the
presentation of findings in Chapter 4 and 5, research participants are referred to according
to their participant group of either volunteer, staff, board member or township
stakeholder.
In addition, informed consent was taken prior to any research commencing. In the
surveys, a statement of implied consent was included in the introduction to instruct
respondents of the nature of their participation (Appendix B). For interviews and focus
groups, participants signed an informed consent form (Appendix C and D) prior to the
interview and/or focus group beginning.
3.3 Data collection
Data collection involved three phases. Beginning on June 5, 2017, data collection
in the form of surveys, semi-structured interviews and focus groups began in order to

43
gain information to fulfill the research objectives of understanding the experiences of
older library volunteers, examining the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer
program and exploring how older library volunteers and library volunteer programs
contribute to rural community sustainability. For a timeline of the data collection process,
see Table 3.4 below.
Table 3.4 Timeline of data collection
Tasks

2017
J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

Research
Ethics
Approval

Survey
Recruitment
Survey
Collection
Interviews
Focus Groups

3.3.1 Surveys
The first research method that was implemented was a survey. According to
McGuirk and O’Neil (2016), surveys allow the researcher to pose standardized, formally
structured questions to a group of individuals. Surveys are useful for gathering original
data about people, their behaviours, experiences, social interactions, attitudes and
opinions. In addition, McGuirk and O’Neil (2016) discuss the strengths of using surveys
in qualitative research. Firstly, surveys allow the research to reach large populations. In

44
the case of this research, administering surveys to the Selwyn Public Library volunteers
and board members allowed for the possibility of all 174 volunteers and seven board
members to participate in the research. Secondly, surveys act as complimentary to other
qualitative research methods such as interviews and focus groups. In practice, the surveys
were designed in order to compliment the interviews and focus groups by collecting
preliminary data on experiences and voluntary activities of the respondents. They were
also used to provide a descriptive statistical overview of volunteer characteristics for the
board.
The survey was introduced to the Selwyn Public Library volunteers at the
volunteer appreciation dinner on June 5, 2017. At that time, the researcher distributed
survey packages to all interested library volunteers and board members. Survey packages
included a copy of the survey (see Appendix B), as well as a mail-back envelope that
included postage and the return address of the researcher, so the respondents could mail
the survey back once complete. The survey was modelled on the Statistics Canada
General Social Survey Giving, Volunteering and Participating. Using this national survey
as a design guideline allowed for the survey results to be referenced to the national results
in order to describe potential trends, similarities and differences (see Chapter 4).
The survey (see Appendix B), began with a statement of implied consent which
informed the participant that by completing the survey, they give consent for their
responses to be used in the research. They were also informed that their identity will
remain anonymous and that their participation is entirely voluntary. The question
component to the survey was divided into five sections. It began by asking questions
about the respondent’s background information such as age, gender, household income,

45
cultural identity, area of residency and education and employment. The second section
asked questions regarding the respondent’s interaction with the Selwyn Public Library.
Content in these questions included how long the respondent had been volunteering on
behalf of the library, which branch did they commonly volunteer at, how often they
volunteer on behalf of the library, the types of voluntary activities they performed while
at the library, how they found out about the opportunity to volunteer for the library, the
reasons for volunteering at the library and their interest in volunteering more on behalf of
the library.
The third section of the survey asked questions about volunteering within the
community. This section featured questions about formal volunteering for a group or
organization other than the Selwyn Public Library and informal volunteering for friends,
neighbours and/or relatives. The fourth section of the survey had questions referring to
any barriers the respondents faced when it comes to volunteering at the Selwyn Public
Library or at other groups or organizations. The section also included questions related to
missed or cancelled voluntary activities, length of travel to voluntary activities and
additional support they felt they required as a volunteer at the Selwyn Public Library. The
final section asked the survey respondent if they would be interested in participating in a
follow up interview to further discuss their experience as a Selwyn Public Library
volunteer and a volunteer within their local community.
3.3.2 Interviews
Once surveys began to be collected and survey respondents indicated they were
interested in participating in an interview, the interview process began. The interviews
were semi-structured in nature, which allowed for the researcher to ask pre-determined

46
questions to the interview participants but allowed for the interviews to be flexible in
terms of pace, order and nature of the questions (Dunn, 2016). A reason for doing
interviews in qualitative research is to gain information on events, opinions and
experiences as it gives voice to the interview participant, as well as interviews fill in gaps
that other methods, such as surveys, are not able to bridge (Dunn, 2016).
The purpose of the interviews in the thesis was to collect information on the
experiences of volunteering, information on the sustainability of the Selwyn Public
Library volunteer program and information on the connection between the Selwyn Public
Library, the volunteers and the communities of Selwyn Township. Where the survey was
designed to be answered by volunteers and board members exclusively, interviews
recruited participants from various groups, including volunteers (n=33) and board
members (n=5), Selwyn Public Library staff (n=7) and a select number of township
stakeholders (n=3), for a total of 48 interviews.
Recruitment for the interviews happened through two methods. Firstly, volunteers
and board members were recruited to interview through their survey, where they were
asked to provide their name and contact information if they were interested in
participating in an interview. Recruitment for staff, township stakeholders and board
members who did not complete a survey, was done through e-mail. An initial
introductory e-mail was sent to all potential participants, which contained a letter of
recruitment (Appendix E) and provided an overview of the purpose of the project and the
purpose of the interviews.
Once participants accepted the request to interview (no matter the recruitment
method) a date and time was set. Beginning in June 2017, interviews took place at a

47
location that was most convenient for the participants, which included the library branch
in which they volunteered at, Trent University, or their personal homes. The interviews
began once the participant read, understood and signed the consent form (Appendix C).
The consent form detailed that the research had been approved by the Trent University
Research Ethics Board, that their participation in the research is voluntary, that their
identity will remain confidential and they will remain anonymous, however, there is a
minimal risk that their participation will be known to other participants and community
members. In addition, the participant signed off on the interview being audio-recorded
with the use of a digital voice recorder for transcription purposes.
The interview was designed in order to address the three research objectives: 1) to
understand the experiences of older library volunteers, 2) to examine the challenges of
sustaining a rural library volunteer program and 3) explore how older library volunteers
and library volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability. Using the
three objectives as a basis, the interview guides for all participant groups were developed
using different sections (Appendix F, G, H, I). The first section was used to gain
background information on the interview participant, including information on how long
they have been affiliated with the Selwyn Public Library and what their roles are in terms
of their affiliation. The second section involved questions regarding their experiences of
volunteering at the library. Questions in this section involved the participant’s
experiences with either volunteering at the library or their experiences interacting with
the Selwyn Public Library volunteers and discussing the challenges associated with
volunteering at the library. The next section in the interview guide involved questions
surrounding the sustainability of voluntarism at the Selwyn Public Library. The questions

48
in this section asked about changes in the volunteer program, what challenges the library
is facing in terms of their volunteer base and ways in which the library could overcome
those challenges. The following section asked questions about the connection of the
Selwyn Public Library, the volunteers and Selwyn Township. Questions asked how local
volunteers contribute to the communities of Selwyn Township, how Selwyn Public
Library volunteers specifically contribute to their community and how volunteering could
be further supported in Selwyn Township. The final section acted as a conclusion, asking
participants if they had any suggestions for further interview participants, and recruited
interview participants to take part in a focus group.
3.3.3 Focus groups
Following the interviews with Selwyn Public Library volunteers, board members
and staff, focus groups were held. Focus groups work in tandem with other qualitative
research methods as they allow for participants to interact with one another to learn and
engage in order to explore different points of view (Cameron, 2016). This synergistic
effect between participants allows for a deeper understanding of experiences and
opinions, which adds to the rigour and depth of research (Cameron, 2016).
The purpose of the focus groups in the research was to expand on the findings
from the interviews to allow for participants from similar participant groups to discuss as
a group their experiences of volunteering, the challenges of sustaining the Selwyn Public
Library volunteer program and their connection as volunteers to the sustainability of the
communities of Selwyn Township. In addition, the focus groups allowed the participants
to validate the preliminary interview results.

49
Focus groups began in September 2017, following the completion of the
interviews. A total of six focus groups were held with 27 participants; a focus group for
Lakefield volunteers (n=5) at the Lakefield branch, a focus group for Bridgenorth
volunteers (n=5) at the Bridgenorth branch, a focus group for Ennismore volunteers (n=5)
at the Ennismore branch, a focus group for staff (n=6) at the Bridgenorth branch, a focus
group for board members (n=4) at the Bridgenorth branch and a focus group for thrift
store volunteers (n=2) at Trent University. Focus group participants were recruited
through their response in the interviews when asked if they would be willing to
participate in a focus group.
Each focus group began once all participants read, understood and signed the
consent form (Appendix D). The consent form informed the participants that the project
was approved by the Trent University Research Ethics Board, that their participation in
the project was entirely voluntary, that their identity and personal information will remain
anonymous, however there is a minimal risk that their participation in the project will be
known to other focus group participants and community members. In addition to the
focus group participants and the researcher who facilitated and monitored the discussion,
the focus groups involved a Trent Centre for Aging & Society Research Assistant who
took notes on key themes and discussion points.
Similar to the interview guide, the focus group was designed around the three
objectives of the thesis (Appendix J). With the intent of promoting interaction and
discussion between participants, the focus groups were intended to use various interactive
activities in order for the participants to discuss key themes amongst one another. The
first exercise was created for participants to choose three themes or issues that have

50
implications on the individual volunteers at the library. The chosen themes/issues were
placed on a large flip-chart and a discussion was facilitated about the reasoning behind
their chosen theme/issue.
The second exercise had focus group participants in small groups of two or three
to discuss issues or themes that have implications for the Selwyn Public Library and the
volunteer program. Once each small group had identified their themes or issues, a
discussion was facilitated where participants further explained their chosen theme or
issue and commented on the others presented. The third exercise was a group discussion
surrounding the contributions the Selwyn Public Library volunteers make to the
communities of Selwyn Township. Here, focus group participants discussed the ways in
which they felt volunteers at the library contributed to their local community. The final
exercise was used to validate the preliminary findings from the interviews. Here, a list of
preliminary findings from the surveys and interviews was presented to the participants,
and as a group, they decided which themes were touched upon in the preceding group
discussions. This validation process informed the accuracy of the analysis of emergent
themes.
3.4 Data analysis
Once data collection was completed, the researcher began the data analysis phase.
Data analysis in the form of systematically inputting and coding survey results and
performing a thematic analysis of interview and focus group transcripts was conducted in
order to analyze and interpret the results.

51
3.4.1 Survey data
Using the data collected from the surveys, the researcher conducted a descriptive
statistical analysis. A descriptive statistical analysis allowed the survey results to be
described and summarized to reflect the findings dataset (Burt & Barber, 2009). Using
the collected, paper copies of the returned surveys, the data was manually inputted into a
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet for analysis. Using the completed dataset, the results were
summarized in order to describe the demographic characteristics of the respondents, as
well as their interactions with the library and with their local communities through
volunteering. The descriptive statistical results are presented in Chapter 4.
A descriptive statistical analysis was chosen over a more comprehensive
statistical analysis as per consultations with the Selwyn Public Library Board. Upon
consulting with the board over the rationale for the survey, they indicated that for their
purposes of the community-university partnership, a more descriptive and summative
analysis of the survey results would yield the most use for them.
3.4.2 Interview and focus group data
Data analysis for the interview and focus groups began with transcription. For the
interview data, with the help of a Trent Centre for Aging and Society Research Assistant,
each audio file was transcribed in order to portray the spoken words of the interview. For
the focus group data, the notes taken by the Research Assistant during the focus groups
were transcribed to portray all key themes and points of discussion, as well as verbatim
quotations heard by the Research Assistant at the time of the focus group.

52
Using the 48 interviews and 6 focus group transcripts, the researcher conducted a
thematic analysis of the qualitative data. A coding structure was created to distill key
themes from the dataset, in order to act as a framework for the codes (Cope, 2016). Key
themes were identified, in accordance with the three research objectives (to understand
the experiences of older library volunteers, to examine the challenges of sustaining a rural
library volunteer program and to explore how older library volunteers and library
volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability) and then analytic codes
were created in order to reflect these themes. The coding structure contained both predetermined and emergent codes, reflective of information in the literature as well as areas
of importance discussed by participants. Using analytic codes allowed for the detail
provided by the participants to inform the research as they allow for the analysis to dig
deeper into processes and context of the interviews and focus groups (Cope, 2016).
3.5 Organization of findings
The findings are presented in the following two chapters. Chapter 4 provides the
context of a volunteer-based rural library. It provides background information on the
history and legacy of both Selwyn Township and the Selwyn Public Library and presents
the results from the survey in order to describe the demographics of and issues facing the
individual volunteers. Chapter 5 presents the findings from the interviews and focus
groups as they discuss how the individual experiences of older library volunteers, the
challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program and library volunteers and
library volunteer programs speak to aging in place, the changing role of voluntarism and
rural community sustainability. The final chapter acts as a discussion and conclusion as it

53
reflects back on the research objectives and the research approach and identifies the
limitations and contributions of the research.

54

Chapter 4
Volunteer-based Rural Library Case Study
“It just makes it a richer community when you have participation in it. I think people take
more pride in their community if they’re involved in it.”
Selwyn Public Library staff member
With a large portion of residents aging in place, coupled with the changing role of
voluntarism to aid in the sustainability of rural communities, rural communities in
Canada are undergoing drastic changes. This chapter examines changes within the study
site, Selwyn Township. It first situates the township in the context of rural community
change by discussing how an amalgamation of three long-standing rural townships led to
the present-day makeup of Selwyn Township. It then discusses how the Selwyn Public
Library, an integral community service within the township, underwent similar
restructuring and the challenges and implications associated with those changes.
Understanding the historical-geographical context of Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library will provide context for the following chapter, which presents the findings
from the interviews and focus groups in relation to the objectives of the thesis 1) to
understand the experiences of older library volunteers, 2) to examine the challenges of
sustaining a rural library volunteer program and 3) to explore how older library
volunteers and library volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability.
The chapter also addresses the aim of the community-university partnership by providing
a demographic and statistical description of the current state of the Selwyn Public Library
volunteers.

55
4.1 Selwyn Township
To understand the relationship between the Selwyn Public Library and its
volunteer program, the volunteers and their communities, it is important to situate these
concepts in the broader context of rural community change, as discussed in Chapter 2.
Examining Selwyn Township and understanding the three wards in which it is comprised
(see Figure 3.1), allows for an understanding of the diverse experiences and interactions
of the library volunteers and their connection to their communities.
Selwyn Township, located on the traditional territory of the Mississauga
Anishinaabe in the territory covered by the Williams Treaty (Migizi & Kapyrka, 2015),
was established through two municipal amalgamations and is comprised of the formerly
known Smith Township (est. 1819), Ennismore Township (est.1829) and the Village of
Lakefield (est. 1874). In 1998, Smith and Ennismore Townships amalgamated to created
Smith-Ennismore Township and was joined in 2001 by Lakefield to make SmithEnnismore-Lakefield Township, until it changed names to Selwyn Township in 2013.
Table 4.1 offers a historical representation of the population changes seen in
Selwyn Township since its initial establishment as Smith-Ennismore-Lakefield Township
in 2001. Historical population data predating 2001 is absent for the three individual
Townships of Smith, Ennismore and Lakefield, however, since the establishment of
Smith-Ennismore-Lakefield Township in 2001, contemporary population data can be
found and analyzed. Akin to the trends in rural population aging discussed in Chapter 2,
the population of Selwyn Township is shown as rapidly aging, with its population of
residents over 65 more than doubling (67%) from 2001 to 2016.

56
Table 4.1 Population changes in Selwyn Township from 2001 to 2016, to reflect the
years following amalgamation

*Table shows data from Statistics Canada beginning in 2001 to reflect the year of the
newly amalgamated Smith-Ennismore-Lakefield Township.
Table 4.2 summarizes the three wards that presently make up Selwyn Township
according to characteristics such as primary settlement, population, rural topography and
service sector. As with the changes undergone elsewhere in rural Canada, the wards (then
townships) of Bridgenorth (Smith), Ennismore and Lakefield have experienced changes
in their rural typology and primary service sector that have led to their present-day
makeup and role within the broader township and county (Brunger, 2009; Delledonne,
1999; Galvin, 1978; Selwyn Township, 2015; Willcox, 1998).
Bridgenorth was established in 1818 as a Protestant, Irish hamlet that has
transitioned from an agriculture settlement, to milling town, to bedroom community and
cottage destination (Willcox, 1998).

57
Table 4.2 Characteristics of the Wards of Selwyn Township

Presently, Bridgenorth serves as a bedroom community for the larger urban centre of the
City of Peterborough by offering many services to its permanent residents as well as its
seasonal residents who come to the region for recreation opportunities offered by
Chemong Lake, which is part of the Kawartha Lakes cottage region. Today, Bridgenorth
hosts the Bridgenorth branch of the Selwyn Public Library, which acts as a joint facility
with a Community Hall, located adjacent to the local elementary school.
Ennismore was established in 1822 as an Irish, Roman Catholic hamlet with deep
roots set in agricultural production (Galvin, 1978). Since its establishment, the growth of
many crops was the driving catalyst of change in the township of Ennismore, with the
causeway across Chemong Lake being created to aid in the ease of transportation of crops
into larger urban centres and to connect Ennismore with the broader region, including the
adjacent Curve Lake First Nations Community. Today, Ennismore has the lowest
population of the three wards of Selwyn Township. However, it is still rich in agricultural

58
production, and in community recreation as it hosts the Ennismore branch of the Selwyn
Public Library and community recreational services such as a community arena, and a
large Shamrock Festival.
The village of Lakefield (est. 1874), is the most populated ward within Selwyn
township and the second largest urban centre in Peterborough County (Brunger, 2009).
As a ‘small town’, Lakefield provides many local services to its residents, which is a
testament to its past role as a service town for the surrounding farming areas and
industrial sites specializing in milling (Delledonne, 1999). Presently, the Village of
Lakefield, with a population of 2,753 and 32.8% of that population over the age of 65, is
facing the challenge, like the challenge of rural areas across Canada as discussed in
Chapter 2, of catering its services to the needs of its aging residents to keep them aging in
place.
Due to the proximity of these communities to the City of Peterborough,
population numbers began to decrease due to the migration away from rural areas to seek
employment. The influence of urban centres caused the closure the industries rural
communities relied upon, thus, becoming the service, recreational and agricultural centres
they are today (Nicol et al., 2009).
4.2 Selwyn Public Library
As discussed in the previous section, Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield are
rural communities, providing community services to cater to their residents. One
community service that is an integral part of each community is the Selwyn Public
Library (est. 2001). Comprised of a Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield branch, as

59
well as three associated thrift stores, the Selwyn Public Library, “supports and enriches
the community by providing resources and opportunities for meaningful connections,
lifelong learning and personal and cultural development” (Selwyn Township, 2015).
Unique to the Selwyn Public Library and the provincial context of libraries is the
volunteer model in which it runs. Across the Selwyn Public Library, there is one
CEO/Chief Librarian, a children’s programme coordinator, a training and technology
coordinator, and a librarian for each branch. Apart from the six staff, the library is run by
174 volunteers, who perform the daily functions of the library including, but not limited
to, circulation desk, inter-library loans, cataloguing, shelving items and duties at the thrift
stores. The evolution of the three library branches is outlined in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Description of library branches from independent libraries to
amalgamation into Selwyn Public Library
Branch

Bridgenorth

Date
1974
1998
2009
1970

Ennismore

1971
1982
1998
1895

Lakefield

1993
2001

Event
Grew from small book club, to larger, volunteer run
library
Amalgamation of Smith and Ennismore joined the
Bridgenorth and Ennismore libraries
Moved to its current location and became a joint
library and community hall
Demonstration library sponsored by Lake Ontario
Regional System
Became permanent within community
Moved to its present location
Amalgamation of Smith and Ennismore joined the
Bridgenorth and Ennismore libraries
Received grant from Ontario government to create
Lakefield Library
Moved to its current location
Amalgamation of Lakefield and Smith-Ennismore
library led Lakefield library to adopt volunteer model

60
The Bridgenorth Library (est. 1974) began in the basement of the local church and
at that time, was staffed by Lakefield Library Staff. As the community began to embrace
the library, the staffing makeup changed, and the Bridgenorth Library began to be run by
community volunteers. Soon after, it moved to different locations within the community,
before moving into its present location in 2009, which is now a joint library and
community hall.
The Ennismore Library (est. 1970) began as a ‘demonstration library’ sponsored
by the Lake Ontario Regional System and quickly became incorporated as an official
municipal service. Due to its official designation, a library board was appointed in 1972
to oversee the structure and overall duties of the library. The library was located in the
Parish Hall, until it moved into the renovated fire hall. From there, it moved to its current
location, adjacent to the Ennismore Community Centre and Arena in 1982. Following the
amalgamation at the municipal level, in 1998, the Bridgenorth and Ennismore libraries
merged to create the Smith-Ennismore Library.
In contrast to the Bridgenorth and Ennismore libraries, which were volunteer run,
the Lakefield Public Library (est.1895) was an individual entity, when it received a grant
from the Ontario government to form a library in the community, located in the townhall.
As the Lakefield Public Library, at the time, was run by paid staff, when it amalgamated
with the Smith-Ennismore Library in 2001 to create the Smith-Ennismore-Lakefield
Public Library, and then the Selwyn Public Library in 2013, it was forced to adopt the
volunteer model of the other library. According to present day volunteers, having been
run by paid staff up until that point, the amalgamation became a point to contention as

61
some of the paid Lakefield Library staff lost their jobs because of the continuity of the
volunteer model across all three branches.
As discussed in Chapter 2, rural communities underwent restructuring changes at
the local level, which resulted in the downloading of service delivery onto the voluntary
sector organizations and individual volunteers. As outlined above, through the
amalgamation of the townships and the subsequent amalgamation of the libraries, the
responsibility of providing library services to Selwyn Township fell and still currently
falls on local volunteers, most of whom are older.
4.3 Selwyn Public Library volunteers
As mentioned in the previous section, the Selwyn Public Library is a unique
library as it heavily relies upon local volunteers to provide library services to the three
wards of Selwyn Township. Where many libraries in Ontario operate in unionized staff
environments (Ministry of Tourism, Culture and Sport, 2016), the Selwyn Public
Library’s volunteer model sees that the daily functions of the library such as cataloguing,
membership, circulation desk, shelf reading and managing reservations are done by
volunteers who support the library by attending an average of one or two, three hour
shifts a week. A total of 87 surveys were returned over the course of two months, giving
the survey a 48% response rate. Figure 4.1 provides an overview of survey respondents
by branch and board. Using the results from the survey administered to volunteers at all
three branches, as well as board members and volunteers at the community thrift stores
this section will describe and provide context regarding the respondent’s demographic
information and discuss their connection to the library and their connection to Selwyn
Township, which will be further elaborated on in the following findings chapter.

62
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Bridgenorth

Ennismore

Number of Survey Respondents

Lakefield

Board

Total Number of Volunteers

Figure 4.1. Survey respondents by branch and board compared to the total
number of volunteers per participant group
The chapter provides selected figures in order to illustrate the key survey results. A
complete survey data table is available in Appendix K.
4.3.1 Volunteer and board member demographics
A typical volunteer at the Selwyn Public Library, according to the results from the
surveys is a married or widowed, Canadian female, 65-74 years of age, who holds a nonuniversity certificate or diploma, has worked in the education sector and makes $60,000
to $80,000 annually. Survey results demonstrate there are more female volunteers than
male volunteers, which is seen as a trend across the entire Selwyn Public Library as well
as within each individual branch and across the Board of Directors as well. In addition to
gender, 76% of the survey respondents are between the ages of 65 and 84 (see Figure

63
4.2). Also, survey results indicate that 71% of volunteers are married or in a common law
relationship and 89% identify as Canadian.

95+
85-94

Age

75-84
65-74
45-64
Under 44
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.2 Age of survey respondents
*(n=85)
According to the survey results, Selwyn Public Library volunteers and board
members primarily have an annual income of $60,000 to less than $80,000 (23%),
$40,000 to less than $50,000 (19%), $20,000 to less than $30,000 (13%) and $50,000 to
less than $60,000 (13%).
In terms of ward of residency of the Selwyn Public Library volunteers and board
members, 16 reside in Bridgenorth, 25 reside in Ennismore, 27 reside in Lakefield, three
reside in Douro-Dummer Township and 15 reside in the City of Peterborough, as shown
in Figure 4.3. Regardless of the location, 78% of survey respondents indicated they have
lived there for 10 years or more.

64

Place of Residency

City of Peterborough

Another township in Peterborough County

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.3 Place of residency of survey respondents
*(n=86)
The educational background of volunteers at the Selwyn Public Library and board
members vary, with 28% indicating they have received a non-university certificate or
diploma from a community college, CEGEP, school of nursing, etc. Similar results are
seen in the past and/or present employment of volunteers, with 28% of survey
respondents indicating education as their employment sector, as well as 33% indicating
‘other’ and responding that past and/or present employment was in health care or that
they are presently retired.
4.3.2 Volunteer connection to the Selwyn Public Library
This section illustrates the results from the surveys regarding the connection the
volunteers and board members have to the Selwyn Public Library. The findings from the
survey suggests a longstanding commitment from volunteers and board members alike, in
terms of length of volunteering, with 51% of survey respondents stating that they have

65
been volunteering on behalf of the Selwyn Public Library for 10 years or more, followed
by 26% volunteering for five years to less than 10 years. Volunteering at the Selwyn
Public Library is indicated to happen for volunteers once a week, and once a month for
board members, with an average for the library of 6.5 hours volunteered weekly.
The type of voluntary activities performed by Selwyn Public Library volunteers
varies, with common activities indicated by survey respondents from all three branches
being circulation desk (67%), reservation of library materials (44%), helping with
internet/computers (38%) and memberships (35%). 17 survey respondents indicated they
volunteer at the thrift store, with 11 through the Bridgenorth branch, four through the
Ennismore branch and two through the Lakefield branch, as well as all survey
respondents from the Board of Directors indicating they sat as a member of a committee
or Board, along with two survey respondents indicating they fundraised as well (see
Figure 4.4).
Similar to the trend in voluntary activities, volunteers across all three library
branches as well as board members indicated that word of mouth was the primary method
in which they were recruited to volunteer for the Selwyn Public Library. As well, results
regarding the reasons for volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library were similar across
all participant groups.

66

Other
Skills sharing programming
Interlibrary loans

Volunteer Activity

Repairing materials
Memberships
Thrift Store
Sitting as a member of a committee or board
Fundraising
Helping with internet/computers
Cataloguing
Reservation of library materials
Circulation desk
0

5

10

15

20

25

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.4 Volunteer activities performed by survey respondents
*(n=86)
Survey respondents from the Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield branches as
well as board members indicated their reasons for volunteering on behalf of the Selwyn
Public Library were, to make a contribution to the community (91%), to network with or
meet people (55%) and to use skills and experiences (53%) (See Figure 4.5). Whatever
the length of volunteer commitment, or the reason for volunteering, when asked if they
were interested in volunteering more often at the Selwyn Public Library, 72% responded
no, and 23% responded yes.

67

Other
To use skills and experienes

Reason for Volunteering

To make a contribution to the community
To explore own strengths
To fulfill religious obligations or other beliefs
To improve job opportunities
To network with or meet people
Friends volunteer
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.5 Reasons for volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library
*(n=86)
4.3.3 Volunteer connection to Selwyn Township
This section presents the results from the survey that demonstrate the connection
the Selwyn Public Library volunteers and board members have with their broader
communities. The results show that library volunteers participate in both formal and
informal volunteering opportunities outside of the Selwyn Public Library. Formal
volunteering opportunities taken up by survey respondents across all three branches as
well as board members include fundraising (46%), organizing, supervising or
coordinating activities or events (42%), teaching, educating, or mentoring (40%) and
collecting, serving or delivering food or other goods (33%) (see Figure 4.6) once a week
(47%) and for an average of 22.1 hours per month.

68

Did not answer
Other
Engage in conversation or preservation activities
Volunteer driving
Work associated with maintenance or repair
Collect, serve or deliver food or other goods

Formal Volunteering Activity

Provide health care or support
Counsel or provide advice
Coach, referee or officiate
Office work, bookkeeping or administrative work
Organizing, supervising or coordinating activities
Teaching, educating, mentoring
Sit as a member of a committee or board
Fundraising
Canvassing
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.6 Formal volunteer activities performed by survey respondents in
the past 12 months
*(n=57)
Similar to the results discussed above surrounding the length of volunteer
commitment to the Selwyn Public Library, the results indicate that 53% of survey
respondents have been formal volunteering for 10 years or more.
Informal volunteering activities taken up by survey respondents include working
at someone’s home such as cooking, cleaning, gardening, maintenance, painting,
shovelling snow or car repairs (48%), work at someone’s home with health-related or
personal care (48%), and working at someone’s home with shopping, driving someone to

69
the store or other appointments (43%) (see Figure 4.7) and for an average of 23.6 hours
per month and for an length of 10 years or more (55%).

Informal Volunteering Activity

Did not answer
Other
Work at someone's home with unpaid teaching
Working at someone's home with personal care
Working at someone's home with paperwork tasks
Working at someone's home with shopping, driving
Working at someone's home such as cooking,
cleaning
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.7 Informal volunteering activities performed by survey respondents in the
past 12 months
*(n=61)
4.3.4 Barriers to volunteering
This section illustrates the results from the survey that outline the barriers to
volunteering felt by the survey respondents. Barriers of importance include did not have
time (43%), personal or family responsibilities (39%), gave enough time already (23%),
health problems or were physically unable (21%) and unable to make long-term
commitment (17%), as shown in Figure 4.8. Due to these barriers, volunteers cancelled
voluntary activities once or twice (44%), or never had to cancel (33%). In terms of
distance volunteers were required to travel to volunteer, survey respondents indicated that
travel time was less than 15 minutes (40%) or 15 to 30 minutes (35%).

Barrier

70

Did not answer
Other
Cultural
Age
Language
Bad weather or incelment weather
Distance is too far
Personal or family responsbilities
No opportunities in area
No information
No transportation
No interest
Prefer to give money instead of time
Unable to make long-term commitment
Financial cost of volunteering
Did not have time
Health problems or were physically unable
Did not know how to get involved
Because no one asked
Dissatisfied with a previous experience
Gave enough time already
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Number of Survey Respondents
Board

Lakefield

Ennismore

Bridgenorth

Figure 4.8 Barriers to volunteering
*(n=75)
Along with addressing the barriers to volunteering, the survey respondents also
indicated what further support they would like to see from the library. Of the survey
respondents who answered, 61% indicated that the current amount of support was
adequate. For instance, one survey respondent stated, “The support for volunteers at the
library is fantastic. I can’t think of any way they could better support the volunteers.” In
reference to an annual volunteer appreciation dinner the library holds in honour of the
volunteers, another survey respondent stated, “They support us all the time, with a lovely
dinner once a year and presenting us awards.”

71
Some 34% of survey respondents provided suggestions for further support they
would like to see from the library. Suggestions include ensuring there are meaningful
tasks to perform, as a respondent stated, “ensure there are meaningful tasks to perform
which contribute to the libraries goals in the community.” Additional suggestions include
further computer instruction and training, cleaning support in the thrift stores and more
volunteers to aid in the burnout felt by on-call volunteers, as a respondent stated the
library needs “more volunteers so that the same people are not always asked to cover
shifts.”
4.3.5 Comparing survey results to Canadian national survey
Along with providing a descriptive analysis of the demographic characteristics of
the volunteers, their connection to the Selwyn Public Library and to Selwyn Township
and the barriers to volunteering, the survey results can also be used to make a descriptive
comparison between the Selwyn Public Library volunteers and the results from the
Canadian national survey on volunteering (Hall et al., 2009). With an understanding of
the different population size of the two surveys, as well as without having done
significant tests on the results, the comparison between the Selwyn Public Library
volunteers and the Canadian national survey results are purely descriptive in nature.
Using an adaptation from Skinner (2014) who conducted a case study of
Community Care Peterborough, a volunteer-based community support service as context,
Table 4.4 outlines the comparison of the Selwyn Public Library volunteers to the
Canadian national average using the most recently available census data (Hall et al.,
2009). In contrast to the national average, as outlined in Table 4.4, the survey indicates
that the Selwyn Public Library has a larger proportion of women volunteering (86%), and

72
older people aged 65 and over (89%), and who have been volunteering for a long
duration of time (76% five years or more). This variation, however, is consistent with the
profile of volunteers within the community services sector, especially in rural areas,
where volunteers are predominately older women (Cook et al., 2013). In addition, the
comparison shows the range of formal and informal volunteering activities conducted by
volunteers, along with the library, which will be further discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
Table 4.4 Profile of Selwyn Public Library volunteers, in reference to national
survey of volunteering

Demographics (sex, age)
Female
65 years or older
Duration of volunteering
5 or more years
Formal volunteering (activity)
Fundraising
Preparing and delivering food
Organising activities
Transportation and driving
Committee membership
Informal volunteering (activity)
Driving and shopping
Cooking and cleaning
Personal care and bathing
Motivations for volunteering
Contribution to the community
Canadian national data from Hall et al. (2009)

Selwyn Public
Library

Canada

86%
89%

47%
36%

76%

44%

30%
22%
28%
9%
26%

44%
27%
45%
20%
33%

30%
33%
33%

47%
60%
53%

90%

93%

73
4.4 Summary
This chapter provided context on the case study of a volunteer-based rural library.
Selwyn Township, comprised of a hamlet, small town and village boasts a rural setting
typical of that seen in Canada, with a rapidly aging population. Each community of
Selwyn Township (Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield) provides an individual history
and settlement pattern that speaks to the dynamic and complex nature of this rural setting.
The Selwyn Public Library is an institutional public service with a long-standing history
in each of the communities of Selwyn Township, as each individual branch was once a
community public library before merging in 2001.
In addition to providing the historical-geographical context of Selwyn Township
and the Selwyn Public Library, the chapter also presented the descriptive survey results,
which provided demographic and statistical information on the current Selwyn Public
Library volunteers. What we can describe from these survey results is that the typical
volunteer at the Selwyn Public Library discussed in the above sections differs from
characteristics of the typical volunteer in Canada’s community support sector. The gender
characteristic matches the Canadian data, as older volunteers are generally women,
however, the Canadian data demonstrates that volunteer rates decrease as the individual
volunteer ages (Cook et al., 2013). This is contrasted by the survey results, as they show
that 89% of the volunteer base at the Selwyn Public Library is over the age of 65.
In addition, as reviewed in Chapter 2, volunteering in later life has many positive
benefits to the volunteer, including building and strengthening social networks as well as
creating personal satisfaction. After analysing the survey results, it can be described that
the survey respondents experience those benefits through volunteering at the Selwyn

74
Public Library, as many expressed that developing social connections and utilizing their
skills and experiences were large contributing factors for why they volunteer at the
Selwyn Public Library.
Both the historical-geographical context of Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library and the survey results provide foundation and context for the remainder of
the thesis. As previously discussed, the three narratives of aging in place, the changing
role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability allow for an understanding of the
role of older voluntarism in the sustainability of aging rural communities. The following
chapter presents the findings from the interviews and focus groups to provide an
additional understanding of these narratives as well as to provide the foundation for the
recommendations to be presented to the Selwyn Public Library board.

75

Chapter 5
Perspectives on Older Voluntarism
“What a great opportunity it is to have this sort of symbiotic relationship when you’re
serving the community but you’re also benefiting yourself because it’s so rewarding”
Selwyn Public Library volunteer

Building upon the historical-geographical context of Selwyn Township and the Selwyn
Public Library, and the descriptive findings from the volunteer survey presented in
Chapter 4, this chapter uses results from the qualitative interviews and focus groups with
Selwyn Public Library volunteers, staff and board members as well as township
stakeholders to explore how older voluntarism contributes to the sustainability of aging
rural communities. Woven throughout the presentation of results are the three narratives
of aging in place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability
(introduced in Chapter 2), which aid in telling the story of the library, the volunteers and
the communities of Selwyn Township.
This chapter is organized around addressing the three objectives of the thesis 1) to
understand the experiences of older library volunteers, 2) to examine the challenges of
sustaining a rural library volunteer program and 3) to explore how older library
volunteers and library volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability
(see Table 5.1). The first section uses the lens of lived experiences to discuss the
individual experiences of the Selwyn Public Library volunteers. The chapter then outlines
the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program by discussing interpersonal,
operational and structural challenges the library is facing. The chapter then discusses the

76
implications for the volunteers for rural community sustainability and how the Selwyn
Public Library volunteers have the potential to contribute to the cultural, social, economic
and environmental sustainability of their local communities. Lastly, the chapter returns to
the narratives outlined above to summarize how the findings relate to the understanding
of aging in place, the changing role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability.
Table 5.1 Thematic summary of analytical frames and themes used to examine the
role of voluntarism in rural community sustainability
Analytical Frame

Theme

Individual experiences of older volunteers
Emotions

•
•

Burden of care
Frustration

Relationships

•
•

Community relationships
Organizational relationships

Health and well-being

•
•

Opportunities
Burden of care

Challenges of sustaining rural library volunteer program
Interpersonal challenge

•
•

Aging
Organizational relationships

• Recruitment
• Training
Structural challenge
• Organizational relationships
• Policy implementation
Implications for rural community sustainability
Operational challenge

Cultural sustainability

•

Diversity

Social sustainability

•

Community relationships

Economic sustainability

•
•

Organizational relationships
Burden of care

Environmental sustainability

•

Thrift stores

77
5.1 Individual experiences of older library volunteers
“I’m proud to say I’m a volunteer at the library.”
Selwyn Public Library volunteer

Through the lens of the lived experiences of the Selwyn Public Library
volunteers, this section discusses the individual experiences of older volunteers through
emotions (the emotions they feel about volunteering), relationships (the relationships they
form through volunteering) and well-being (how volunteering effects the personal health
and well-being of the volunteers). Themes such as the burden of care, frustration,
community and organizational relationships, as well as opportunities are representative of
the personal experiences of the library volunteers.
5.1.1 Emotions
A common emotion felt by the interview participants was that there was a heavy
burden of care associated with volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library. Burden of care
is in reference to the responsibility felt by volunteers that commit to volunteering to
sustain the Selwyn Public Library and other volunteer-run community organizations. In
the case of emotions, the burden of care was felt strongly by interview participants in
reference to the high level of commitment required to volunteer at the library. As the
volunteers’ duties include many jobs that use technology, including the operating system
used to check in and out books, it is required of the volunteers to keep up with the current
training and technology needed to perform such tasks. As a staff member of the library
stated,

78
It’s difficult because there is a certain level of training they need to do the jobs.
You need to commit yourself to having that training and that you’re going to be
here. It’s not just a one-time thing where you can just come in.
Such regular commitments to the library is becoming increasingly difficult for volunteers,
as they are choosing to migrate south for the winter, a finding that will be discussed
further in the proceeding section. With some volunteers not able to commit to weekly
shifts all year, they find it increasingly challenging to keep up with the changes
implemented within the library and find it difficult to reintegrate back into the library
when they return in the spring.
Expressed within the cohort of volunteers who identify as snowbirds who migrate
to warmer climates in the winter, but also in the cohort of volunteers who remain and
continue to volunteer throughout the winter, is the feeling of burnout, as the commitment
required by the library becomes too much. Along with keeping up with changes in the
library, the commitment required by the library is also in reference to the commitment
needed by the volunteers to attend their shift so the library can function on a daily basis.
As stated by a volunteer at the Lakefield branch in reference to not being able to attend a
shift, “You feel like you can’t let people down. You hate to call...and that’s why I went
down to just being on-call because I knew there was going to be too many times I
couldn’t.” This quotation expresses feelings of guilt associated with the burnout, which
was discussed at length in interviews and confirmed during focus group, as volunteers
felt guilty when they were not able to attend a shift due to various personal
circumstances.
As reported in Chapter 4, many of the Selwyn Public Library volunteers
contribute volunteer hours elsewhere within their communities (66%), requiring them to

79
prioritize their volunteering activities, which at times results in the volunteers prioritizing
other activities that do not require such a large personal commitment. In reference to the
quotation above, the interview participant from the Lakefield branch chose to go to an oncall basis rather than have a weekly shift due to other voluntary activities that they have
prioritized over the library.
Along with the burden of care and the feelings of guilt associated with the high
level of commitment required of Selwyn Public Library volunteers, feelings of frustration
were common within discussions in both interviews and focus groups. These feelings of
frustration were rooted within the requirement for volunteers to use a variety of different
technologies during their volunteering shift, such as the library operating system, the
public computers located within the libraries and answering technology related questions
from library patrons. With the library volunteer program containing many older
volunteers, volunteers find it challenging to keep up with the technology, as one
interview participant from the Ennismore branch stated, “The computer is the frustrating
part.” Participants stated that the age of the volunteers contribute to their discomfort
level with learning new technologies, as the older volunteers have trouble keeping up
with technology within the library and helping patrons with their technology issues.
Another library staff member describes this frustration by stating, “Some of the
volunteers are in their 80s and late 80s. They admit that they don’t get everything all the
time.”
As a result of these feelings of frustration towards using and learning new
technologies within the library, volunteers expressed that they have, at times, chosen to
not use technology on their volunteer shift at the library. Rather, they do tasks such as

80
shelf reading and filing, which does not require the use of a computer. In addition,
interview and focus group participants expressed how there was adequate computer
training, but there is a need for additional training opportunities. Selwyn Public Library
staff discussed how additional training could be used for volunteers to be taught more up
to date technologies used in the library such as the public computers and eBooks. In
addition to being trained on up to date technology, library volunteers felt that additional
training opportunities would be useful as it would increase their comfort level while
helping patrons. Interview participants explained that at times, there are no staff members
present in the library, and when a patron comes in with a technology related question,
they turn the patron away as they do not have the answer. Providing these additional
training opportunities could allow the volunteers to become more comfortable with
technology and address the emotional response of frustration and discomfort surrounding
technology.
5.1.2 Relationships
Discussions in both the interviews and focus groups shed light on both the
community and organizational relationships that are built through volunteering at the
Selwyn Public Library. In reference to community relationships, interview participants
discussed the importance of building meaningful relationships in the community through
the library. One way in which they build community relationships is by volunteering for
an institution of the community, as one volunteer from the Bridgenorth branch stated, “I
think it’s the library and the volunteers that provide a spot where people come in and
they sit down with the newspaper. We provide a welcoming place for people to come
into.” In validation of this experience, focus group participants discussed the positive

81
interactions they have with patrons who come in to use the library and how, through
those interactions, they develop meaningful relationships. Through these relationships
comes friendships, and in many instances, other volunteering opportunities within the
community.
As well, such positive interactions and relationships are created through the
volunteers acting as community liaisons. In focus groups with volunteers and staff,
participants spoke about their library branch acting as a community hub where residents
come in to inquire about other community services. It is within these interactions as well
that the volunteers build relationships with community members and thus, create a
positive relationship between community members and the Selwyn Public Library.
In addition to the relationships built within the community, participants also
expressed the importance of the relationships built within the Selwyn Public Library.
Seen within the survey results reported earlier, as well as discussed in both the interview
and focus groups, is the long-term commitment volunteers are making at the library.
Unlike the emotional commitment discussed in the previous section, commitment here
refers to the length of time in which volunteers continue to volunteer for the library. As
shown in the survey results, 51% of the library volunteers have been volunteering for 10
years or longer. During interviews, participants discussed the positive and supportive
environment the library provides which encourages them to continue to volunteer. In
reference to this supportive environment, in an interview with a member of the Board of
Directors, they stated about the volunteers, “They’re a really great group of people.
They’re totally committed to what they do.”

82
In addition, interview participants feel that both staff and board members
adequately support their voluntary efforts. In direct reference to the annual volunteer
appreciation dinner put on by the board and staff for the volunteers of the Selwyn Public
Library, another volunteer from the Ennismore branch stated, “They also have a very
good volunteer recognition program, so they make you feel loved.”
5.1.3 Health and well-being
Similar to experiencing emotions and creating community relationships, interview
participants’ experiences of volunteering also focused on the impact volunteering at the
Selwyn Public Library has on their health and well-being. One way volunteering affected
the health and well-being of the volunteers was through various inter-personal
opportunities they gained, such as opportunities to build social relationships and
opportunities to expand their personal skill sets.
Characterized as rural hamlets and a small-town village, the communities of
Selwyn Township have the potential to foster feelings of isolation, as geographically,
rural areas are more dispersed. Similarly, isolation can also occur after the death of a
spouse/partner, which leaves the living spouse/partner alone to seek new or additional
support networks. As discussed in Chapter 2, voluntarism is a means to counter feelings
of isolation due to the opportunities to develop social networks and relationships. The
findings from the interview and focus groups support these arguments, as a different
volunteer from the Bridgenorth branch stated in reference to their experience
volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library, “It’s a way to get out and socialize. You live
out in a rural area and you can’t walk around...you’re more isolated so it’s socialization
too.”

83
As with the experience shared above, there were many instances where interview
participants shared their experiences of creating and maintaining social networks while
volunteering. Participants described the relationships with their shift partners as being
important aspects of their lives. With commitment from the volunteers being longstanding, as discussed in the previous section, participants stated that their shift partner
becomes an integral component to their life. A staff member of the Selwyn Public Library
stated, “Some volunteers are like people’s main support. Like, some of these people live
on their own. Sometimes the volunteer on their shift becomes their main person to go to if
they have no family.” Developing these relationships with fellow volunteers was
described as a positive experience in both interviews, and in surveys, as 54% of
respondents indicated that the reason they volunteer is to network or meet people.
In addition to the opportunity to build social relationships, interview participants
described the opportunity that volunteering at the library provides to expand their
personal skill sets. In the previous section, where technology was viewed as a challenge
for volunteers, they also described the benefit to technology to their personal skill sets.
As another volunteer from the Lakefield branch stated,
I guess I learned a lot. The whole computer system, which I maybe never would
have got into as quickly because 17 years ago I didn’t own a computer. So, that’s
probably helped me along the way. You know, I’ll take a risk by clicking a button
and see what happens from there.
By being pushed outside of their comfort zones, interview participants described
themselves as now being “tech savvy”; a skill they use within the library as well as with
their own personal technologies at home.

84
Along with technology, volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library also allows
volunteers to expand their skill set through other personalized tasks. As presented in
Chapter 4, 67% of volunteers perform circulation desk duties on their shift. However,
17% of volunteers become specialized in specific tasks such as cataloguing new books
that come into the system. Such specialized tasks allow volunteers to become experts in
certain skills that become invaluable to the library, as a staff member stated, “I think
about the cataloguer here for example. If she left, I mean, I don’t even know what we
would do because I don’t have time to catalogue all those books.”
Where burden of care is seen as a theme in the emotional experience of
volunteers, it is also a theme in the connection between volunteering and the health and
well-being of volunteers. Here, the burden of volunteering is described as experiencing
feelings of burnout and boredom.
As presented in the survey results, the Selwyn Public Library volunteers also
participate in voluntary activities within their community in both a formal (67%) and
informal manner (71%). This finding is supported by both the interviews and focus
groups, as participants discussed how due to their many voluntary responsibilities, they
have feelings to being overwhelmed and thus, run the risk of burnout, as a volunteer from
the Lakefield branch stated, “I volunteer here at the library, I volunteer on my condo
board, I volunteer with the lake association. There’s only so much you can do.”
Local voluntary organizations such as Community Care Peterborough, the
Lakefield Community Food Bank, the Ennismore and District Horticultural Society and
the Bridgenorth Beautification Committee as well as informal voluntary activities such as
caring for an ill spouse or caring for grandchildren are many of the other activities that

85
interview participants stated they perform on a weekly basis. As a result, like the
discussion above regarding commitment, interview participants discussed prioritizing
their voluntary activities, or going to a less permanent, ‘on-call’ position at the library to
allow for a more flexible personal weekly schedule.
Similar to the experience of sharing voluntary commitment amongst other
community organizations, interview participants also discussed their experience with
weather, which posed challenges on the volunteer on shift but also on on-call volunteers.
In the survey results presented in Chapter 4, weather was not a significant barrier to
volunteering, with only 5% of respondents indicating it a barrier. However, in interviews
with volunteers, as well as through group discussions in the focus groups, winter weather
was outlined as a challenge that inhibits volunteers from attending their shifts,
contributing to a sense of absenteeism. With a policy of having two volunteers at the
library at all times, weather was described as a reason for early closure of the library, if
one volunteer could not make the drive in. Interview participants discussed the
importance and reliance the library has on on-call volunteers in situations such as these.
In the instance of a volunteer not wanting or being able to make the drive in to the library,
an on-call volunteer is contacted to see if they will be able to make the drive to cover the
shift in order for the library to remain open. However, on-call volunteers discussed
feeling accountable if they say they are not able to make it and the library closes early, as
the onus then is placed upon them to make the drive in bad weather.
Along with experiencing feelings of burnout, participants also discussed
experiencing feelings of boredom. These feelings were in association to being asked to

86
perform monotonous tasks on their weekly shift at the library, which hinder the
experience for the volunteer and leave them feeling unfulfilled.
With many of the library volunteers being retired professionals, they come to the
Selwyn Public Library with unique experiences and skills sets. However, volunteers, as
well as staff and board members, feel that the skills and experiences of the volunteers are
not being utilized during their time volunteering at the library. Monotonous tasks such as
shelf reading, while important to the daily functions of the library, is not viewed as a
value-added task for the volunteer. To enhance the experience for the individual
volunteers, discussions in both interviews and focus groups spoke to the importance of
open communication between volunteers and staff members to allow for the transfer of
ideas regarding new tasks that may be more suited towards individual experiences and
skills. Regarding utilizing the skills of the volunteers, during a focus group, a library
board member stated, “We also need to be proactive about using their skills because
they’d feel like somebody paid attention to their past and they would feel valued.”
Supporting the volunteers by providing opportunities for them to showcase their skills
and experiences would provide a more meaningful experience for the volunteers.

87
5.2 Challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer program
“They are aging. They are going to eventually age out of doing these jobs that we rely on
them to do...It’s hard to say what’s going to happen for us in the future.”
Selwyn Public Library staff member
Looking at various organizational challenges, this section uses interpersonal,
operational and structural dimensions as a lens to discuss the issues surrounding the
sustainability of the volunteer program at the Selwyn Public Library. Findings from both
the interviews and focus groups suggest that interpersonal challenges, referring to the
individual volunteers, operational challenges, referring to the internal operations of the
library and the volunteer program impede the sustainability of the volunteer program, and
thus, the Selwyn Public Library and structural challenges, referring to the external
relationships of the library. Themes such as aging, recruitment, training organizational
relationships and policy implementation, speak to these challenges and shed light on how
these challenges influence the volunteers, the volunteer program and the library.
5.2.1 Interpersonal challenges
Within the library lies challenges surrounding the volunteers and their
interactions with each other and with the volunteer program. Findings such as the aging
volunteer base at the library and issues surrounding commitment and time shed light on
these challenges to understand how they affect the sustainability of the volunteer program
at the Selwyn Public Library.
Supported by the survey results presented in Chapter 4 is the finding that the
volunteer base at the Selwyn Public Library is aging, with 89% of the volunteer base over
the age of 65. Similarly, in Chapter 2, the literature supports the notion of volunteering at

88
an older age, as it provides both physical and mental benefits to the older volunteer.
However beneficial, the interview participants discussed at length the challenges
surrounding volunteering in later life. Most notably, participants discussed that as they
age, they are no longer physically able to volunteer, with a volunteer from the Ennismore
branch stating, “I don’t know how many more years I’m going to be able to do it...I’m
getting more and more stiff with arthritis.” Similarly, an interview participant from the
Ennismore Community Thrift Shop recounted a volunteer who, at the age of 96, had to
stop volunteering due to age and mobility.
These issues surrounding the continuation of volunteering in older age poses
challenges on the library volunteer program, as staff member of the library states, “They
are aging. They are going to eventually age out of doing these jobs that we rely on them
to do...It’s hard to say what’s going to happen for us in the future.” As the volunteers
continue to age, the library expresses feelings of fear and uncertainty regarding the
sustainability of the volunteer base and thus, the sustainability of the library.
Paired with the physical challenge of volunteering in later life, interview
participants also described the challenge of committing to volunteering due to personal
circumstances. Several interview participants described having an ill spouse/partner, or
just recently dealt with the death of a spouse/partner, and how during those hard times,
they had to take time away from the library. As a volunteer from the Causeway Treasure
Trove stated,
The reason I had to quit...is because my husband is not well. I had to be around
more. I was away from home a lot. I was either at the church, or somewhere else
and not home enough. He needs me now. His heart is very, very bad.

89
While interview participants discussed the support they received from the library when
time off to care for an ill spouse/partner is needed, they still discussed the guilt associated
with taking time off, as the interview participants are aware of the repercussions on the
library if their volunteer spot is not filled.
Along with the physical and personal challenges associated with age, participants
in both the interviews and focus groups discussed time as being a challenge and barrier to
volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library. As mentioned above, volunteers are typically
over the age of 65 and are retired. Interview participants who stated that they were newly
retired have been putting activities such as travel and time with grandchildren at the top
of their priority list. Participants discussed the commitment and loyalty they felt towards
the library, however, they prioritized other social activities. Due to the desire to
participate in other activities, participants suggested the library create a more flexible
volunteer model to allow for individuals who would rather volunteer in short bursts,
rather than having to commit to a weekly, pre-determined shift.
As the Selwyn Public Library volunteers refer to themselves as newly retired,
many take this new work-free situation and develop a new lifestyle of migrating south for
the winter months, or to become a ‘snow bird’. With many volunteers taking on this
lifestyle of leaving for four to six months, the library struggles to replace those
volunteers, with interview participants describing volunteer availability reducing by 50%
as the winter weather deters volunteers from staying in the region. This challenging drop
in volunteer numbers is experienced in both the library and the thrift stores, with another
volunteer from the Treasure Trove Thrift Store stating, “In the winter time, when they go
away, when the snow birds go, it makes it difficult.” Where winter weather was discussed

90
earlier as a challenge in attending shifts, winter weather in this sense is seen as a factor
that inhibits a large portion of volunteers from committing to the library in the winter
months.
To replace the migrating volunteers, both the library and the thrift shops have
enhanced their recruitment to fill in the gaps in the volunteer schedule. However,
participants who self-identify as snow birds, discussed their experience upon returning in
the spring. They revealed it as being awkward when they want their regular shift back,
but a new volunteer has filled that role for five months. This conflict alludes to a large
sense of ownership volunteers have over their weekly shift, which makes it difficult for
scheduling.
In addition to aging and commitment is the organizational relationships that are
formed between the volunteers and the library which pose challenges for sustaining the
Selwyn Public Library volunteer program. One organizational relationship that was
identified by interview participants as a major challenge for sustainability was the
territoriality felt amongst thrift store volunteers. Specific to the thrift store volunteers is a
feeling of being protective of their branch, in terms of their relationship to the library, as
well as in terms of their relationship with their primary supportive body, Community
Care Peterborough. Due to these feelings, interview participants expressed a disconnect
between the thrift stores and the library. A township stakeholder discussed this disconnect
by stating the following,
We think of them as library volunteers because their efforts support the library.
But, I don’t think they identify so much with where the bottom line of their
operation goes. They think of themselves as thrift shop volunteers. I know the
Renewed Classics in Lakefield, I think they’re even more removed. They see
themselves as operating a store. They’re volunteering, they don’t get paid but

91
they’re retailing goods, they’re helping the community out, they’re providing
quality used clothing to people who need it. At the end of the day, if the money
goes to the library, that’s great.
This excerpt reveals how the thrift store volunteers consider themselves independent of
the library. Although proceeds from the sales at the thrift stores go to the library to
support children’s programming, the volunteers see themselves strictly as thrift store
volunteers and, thus, do not have a relationship with the library.
There is a sense of territoriality within the thrift store volunteers at the Causeway
Treasure Trove Thrift Store and the Ennismore Community Thrift Store. As described in
Chapter 3, volunteers at these two thrift stores are recruited through Community Care
Peterborough and the proceeds from the sales at these two thrift stores are divided 50/50
with the Selwyn Public Library. Due to these circumstances, Community Care
Peterborough has possession over the organization of these two thrift stores, which has
caused feelings of territoriality among the volunteers. The conflict between Community
Care Peterborough and the thrift store leads to confusion regarding the role of the
Community Care Peterborough volunteer coordinator and the role of the volunteers. A
volunteer for the Causeway Treasure Trove Thrift Store stated, regarding the confusion,
“She’ll come in when [the store manager] is not there and go through the books and
really, you know, it’s not her place. We’re doing a good job.” Similarly, another
interview participant from the Causeway Treasure Trove stated, “If we were left alone
we’d be fine. If we had more control over our own store, we’d be fine.” These
expressions of a “leave us alone” attitude were very common in the interviews with the
thrift store volunteers, as they expressed their ability to run the store by themselves and

92
the feelings that they do not need external support from the Community Care
Peterborough volunteer coordinator.
Similar to the expressions of territoriality among thrift store volunteers is the
feeling of loyalty within the library volunteers. Seen within the interview and focus
groups results is a deep-rooted loyalty felt by volunteers to their branch, the library staff
and their shift partner. As stated by a volunteer at the Bridgenorth branch,
There’s a lot of pride in their branch. That again, is one of the reasons why they
are such loyal volunteers, is that Bridgenorth is their library, Ennismore is their
library. They’re very proud of it and they want to keep it separate.
As loyalty shows dedication, in this case, loyalty is also seen as a challenge to the
sustainability of the Selwyn Public Library. The loyalty shown by the volunteers,
especially in relation to their branch, fosters a general sense of resistance to change, as
when asked in the focus group if they would consider volunteering at a different branch,
many participants stated “they would not”. With smaller branches, such as Ennismore,
interview participants state that there is usually a need for more volunteers. On the
contrary, larger branches, such as Bridgenorth, have turned down volunteers on occasion
since all their volunteer shifts are filled. However, even with an influx of volunteers, the
loyalty to the branch inhibits volunteers from traveling to another branch to fill in for a
shift at a different branch. Interview participants described this loyalty as hindering the
unification of the library, as the quote above describes, the vocabulary used is in
reference to the ‘Bridgenorth Library’, rather than Bridgenorth being one of three
branches of the Selwyn Public Library.

93
5.2.2 Operational challenges
In addition to interpersonal challenges are the challenges associated with the
internal operations of the Selwyn Public Library and the volunteer program. Firstly,
interview participants discussed the challenge of recruitment for the Selwyn Public
Library, a finding validated through the focus groups. In general, participants describe the
sense of urgency in reference to recruitment. Participants stated that there is a general
lack of volunteers, primarily in their desired demographic of newly retired. As discussed
in Chapter 4, survey results indicate that the primary recruitment method at the Selwyn
Public Library is word of mouth (66%). If that finding is coupled with the previous
section regarding an aging volunteer base, many participants fear the lack of
sustainability that provides to the volunteer program, as a board member stated, “I think
what happens is that friends meet friends and people, you know, this is kind of how it
works and it does work, but I'm not sure how sustainable that is in the long term." In
reference to the word of mouth recruitment method, this interview participant is
expressing fear for the future, if all the older volunteers continue to recruit their older
friends.
Participants stated that the preferred and desirable cohort of new volunteers would
be newly retired adults, who do not have many travel plans. However, interview
participants feel this is not happening, with a township stakeholder stating, “We’re not
getting young volunteers. That’s a huge issue. So, where are we going to get them in the
future?” When asked in the interviews and focus groups what the consequences would be
if the library volunteer program was not sustained, the consensus was that the library
would close, or hours the library branches are open would be cut drastically. Participants

94
understood that without a sustained volunteer base, the library would not be able to
support itself, a sentiment that was described as being unthinkable, as a staff member of
the Selwyn Public Library stated, “I feel like, when I say to people ‘you know, your
library wouldn’t exist without [the volunteers]’...It’s such a taboo thing to say...But it’s
the truth, so why are we tip-toeing around that?” Interview participants believe that if
volunteers and community members alike understood the role of the volunteers in the
library, they would hope that would encourage new volunteers to join and volunteer.
In terms of recruitment, interview participants feel like the volunteer base will
naturally replenish itself. As stated by another volunteer from the Bridgenorth branch,
There is always someone retiring. There are some young volunteers but most of
them are retired people. There are some that are still working that just come in
the evenings, but I think there is always somebody. Especially in this community.
As eluded to in this quotation, interview participants feel that Selwyn Township is a
desirable retirement community, thus, participants think that many new migrants retiring
in the area will want to find a new activity and hopes that they will choose volunteering at
the Selwyn Public Library. However optimistic, this process is problematic when
thinking of the challenging impact the snowbirds play on the retention of library
volunteers. There may be migrants coming into the area, however, they too may choose
to leave for a long duration throughout the winter.
Similar to the sentiments of the library volunteers, interview participants from the
thrift stores discussed a lack of recruitment of new volunteers for the thrift stores. Having
a similar demographic in terms of their volunteer base, many participants discussed the
need for more volunteers at the thrift stores to replace the older volunteers who are no

95
longer able to volunteer. Where the volunteers at the Renewed Classics Thrift Store in
Lakefield are recruited through the library, the thrift store volunteers at the Causeway
Treasure Trove in Bridgenorth and the Ennismore Community Thrift Store in Ennismore
are recruited through the local Community Care Peterborough office. Participants from
the Community Care affiliated thrift stores discussed in length how Community Care
does not actively recruit volunteers from the community and puts applications from new
volunteers on hold for so long that the eager volunteer loses interest.
Similar to the consequences at the library, the thrift store volunteers discussed
how when there are not two people available to volunteer during a shift, the thrift store
does not open. This poses challenges for community members, as the hours of operations
become dependent upon the volunteers’ commitment and availability to volunteer.
However, many interview participants from the thrift stores discussed how with more
volunteers on their roster, the less likely closure will happen.
Along with recruitment, training was identified as an operational challenge within
the Selwyn Public Library. When discussing the training provided to volunteers, the
participants expressed that due to the inconsistent training, there is a general lack of
consistency within each library and between branches and between shifts. During a focus
group, a volunteer at the Ennismore library stated, “I think a lot of it is learning on the
job and that’s fine, but then you follow what you’ve been taught.” In reference to the
training, this quotation describes how the onus of training new volunteers falls on the
volunteers already on that shift and questions if that seasoned volunteer does not train the
new volunteer appropriately, how is the new volunteer to know that is not the way of
correctly doing thing?

96
The lack of consistency is described as difficult for the patrons of the library as
well, as if they utilize the library on different days, they could have two different
experiences due to the lack of consistency of the training of the volunteers. A township
stakeholder stated,
I think the flavour of the volunteer group that’s in on a particular day may change
how the library is. I could see that two ways. One, it’s great. Two, it could be a
little difficult for the user...so that consistency might be a little bit of a challenge.
When discussing this challenge of training and the consequence of lack of consistency
within the library, interview participants expressed the urgency for a solid set of policies
and procedures for volunteers across all branches and for enforcement of such policies, a
finding that was validated and discussed further in the focus groups. Participants also
discussed the need for a staff member of the Selwyn Public Library to focus on training
and coordinating the volunteers, as they feel that the onus should not be on them to train
the new volunteers.
5.2.3 Structural challenges
Along with interpersonal and operational challenges, the participants also
discussed structural challenges at the Selwyn Public Library regarding the external
relationships of the library. Legislatively, libraries within the Ontario Public Library
system follow the Public Libraries Act, which regulates the individual library’s Board of
Directors and provides acting guidelines for the operations of public libraries (Public
Libraries Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.44). In addition to the Public Libraries Act, the
Federation of Ontario Public Libraries has the Ontario Public Library Guidelines in its
seventh edition, which provides community-based norms for public libraries in Ontario.

97
Guidelines include recommendations on policies, resources and services that library
board and staff are welcomed to follow to achieve accreditation (Ontario Public Library
Guidelines, 2017).
Following both the Public Libraries Act and the Ontario Public Library
Guidelines, the Board of Directors create policies for their individual public libraries. In
the context of the Selwyn Public Library, the Board of Directors created policies under
which the library runs in order to manage the day-to-day operational tasks of the library.
Policies include, but are not limited to the Safety, Security and Emergencies Policy and
volunteer policies which include recruitment, training, supervision, recognition,
dismissal, death, the role of volunteer coordinator and store manager, resignation, leave
of absence and record keeping (Selwyn Public Library, 2015). Within these legislative
and policy frameworks, structural challenges centering on mediating organizational
relationships and policy implementation are evident.
In reference to the relationship between the library and the thrift stores, interview
participants discussed a polarization between the two institutions. Interview participants
from both thrift stores and the library alike, as well as discussion in focus groups referred
to a divide between the volunteers, which is said to be attributed to the volunteering tasks
performed and indicative of a level of uncertainty in policy implementation. A volunteer
from the Causeway Treasure Trove Thrift Shop stated,
I hate to use the word uppity because that’s not a very nice word, but they just feel
they’re a little more superior in their role. They’re more literate, they’re looking
after the library. We’re just selling second hand clothes. How uncool is that.

98
Similarly, interview participants also eluded to the fact that volunteers generally
are unaware of the connection between the thrift stores and the library. Interview
participants from the thrift stores explained that at times, their interactions with library
volunteers regarding their connection was full of confusion, as library volunteers did not
know how the thrift stores supported the library. Through this discussion, interview
participants observed the importance of knowledge sharing and how having a mutual
understanding and clarity of policy between the thrift store volunteers and the library
volunteers could lead to integration and mutual respect and recognition.
Likewise, interview participants expressed a challenge in terms of the polarization
between thrift stores and the Selwyn Public Library involving recruitment policies.
Following provincial legislation (Bill 113, Police Record Checks Reform Act, 2015,
C.30) both the Selwyn Public Library and Community Care Peterborough require
volunteers to obtain a police and vulnerable sector check prior to beginning volunteering.
However, due to the polarized nature of the organizations, when volunteers wish to
volunteer for both, there is no file sharing system in place that allows for one police
check to be used for both organizations. Another Causeway Treasure Trove volunteer
stated regarding the hassle,
“The only criticism I have...when I applied here at the library, I went through all
the police checks and all that which was kind of onerous and they take time and
what not. Then, when I applied to the thrift sore, even though I did it only a
couple of months sooner, I had to go through the whole rigmarole again. I’m
thinking, if you’re under the same umbrella, then one should do for the other.”

99
As eluded to by the participant, a collaborative approach to recruitment between the
Selwyn Public Library and Community Care Peterborough in terms of a file sharing
system could alleviate the hassle and encourage inter-organizational volunteering.
In addition to the external relationship with the thrift store, structural challenges
were also found within the external relationship to library policy. The first policy which
results in challenges for the volunteers is the policy of when the staff member is absent,
there must be two volunteers at the library at all times. This is seen as a challenge as it
causes sentiments of guilt when a volunteer is not able to make a shift and cannot find a
replacement, because in that circumstance, the library would close. However, the policy
is generally responded to well, as a volunteer from the Ennismore branch stated,
I think it’s probably quite responsible of them to say ‘no we should not open
unless there are two volunteers’ especially given the fact that a lot of the
volunteers are older and it’s not likely to be the place where there would be a
disruption in terms of a person coming in with a knife or something untold.

5.3 Implications for rural community sustainability
“This is kind of how it works and it does work,
but I'm not sure how sustainable that is in the long term."
Selwyn Public Library board member

Along with the library, Selwyn Public Library volunteers contribute to the
sustainability of the communities of Selwyn Township. Both the library and the
volunteers have the potential to contribute to the cultural, social, economic and
environmental sustainability of their local hamlets, and small-town villages in various
reasons. Through the need for more diversity, as well as continued community
relationships, organizational relationships, the burden of care and the role of the thrift

100
stores, the Selwyn Public Library volunteers help to keep their communities resilient and
places to live and grow old.
5.3.1 Cultural sustainability
As discussed in Chapter 2, cultural sustainability refers to sustaining the cultural
vitality of communities by advancing development to allow human groups to retain their
identity, sense of community and heritage. However, participants expressed concerns that
there is a general lack of diversity within the Selwyn Public Library, as a board member
stated, “It’s not a diverse volunteer base and I think we need to have diversity...I’m
talking about gender and race and everything to be a public institution that represents
our public.” In reflecting back to the survey results presented in Chapter 4, the
demographic data supports this homogenous nature of the volunteer base and interview
participants fear that residents who do not fit the mold of the volunteers may feel
excluded from volunteering or even utilizing the library and its services.
In addition to lack of diversity within the volunteer base, participants also
expressed that they see the lack of diversity also in the programing offered by the Selwyn
Public Library. With Selwyn Township directly adjacent to the Curve Lake First Nation
Community, participants expressed feelings of frustration that the library does not offer
any sort of indigenous programing. A focus group with volunteers outlined the sentiment
that diversity within the programing offered would attract a more diverse user group to
the library and would allow for cross-cultural sharing of knowledge and skills. Along
with a lack of indigenous programing, interview participants felt that programing the
library current offers is excluding older age demographics. Currently, many of the
programs offered by the library are children’s programs. Interview participants discussed

101
the benefits of having these programs, but also highlighted the lack of programing offered
specifically for adults or older adults. Similar to the effect of including cultural programs,
interview participants feel that adding additional programing to cater to older age groups
would diversify the library patron group.
5.3.2 Social Sustainability
In addition to how the volunteers and the Selwyn Public Library could positively
affect the cultural sustainability of the communities of Selwyn Township, they also
influence the social sustainability. Social sustainability refers to strengthening the sense
of community and sense of place, with an emphasis on social equity and justice. Through
community relationships and service delivery, the library volunteers support and sustain
their social environments to keep them thriving socially.
Through developing a relationship with the community itself, interview
participants describe the connection they began to have with their community once they
began volunteering for the Selwyn Public Library, as well as the numerous other
organizations they volunteer for. This connection stems from the sentiments interview
participants have towards giving back to their community and contributing positivity to
its sustainability through volunteering. As a volunteer from the Causeway Treasure Trove
Thrift Shop stated, “When I decided to retire, I knew I didn’t want to just sit at home and
twiddle my thumbs. I wanted to do something in the community.” As this quotation
alludes, and as supported by the survey results presented in Chapter 4, the Selwyn Public
Library volunteers work on behalf of many other organizations within their local
communities, such as Community Care Peterborough, the Lakefield Community Food
Bank, the Ennismore and District Horticultural Society, The Bridgenorth Beautification

102
Committee and local churches. A volunteer from the Lakefield branch exemplified the
commitment of the volunteers by stating, “They’re volunteers with a capital V. They do it
everywhere!”
Interview participants described the reason for volunteering within their
community was to give back and contribute to the community in which they want to grow
old in. In addition, as supported by the survey results presented in Chapter 4, 78% of
survey respondents have been living in Selwyn Township for 10 years or more;
volunteering is seen as a way to take pride in their local community. To reiterate this
point, a staff member of the Selwyn Public Library stated, in reference to volunteering,
“It just makes it a richer community when you do have participation in it. I think people
take more pride in their own community if they’re involved in it.”
In addition to connectivity within the community, volunteers also contribute to the
social sustainability of Selwyn Township by providing essential services to the
community. As discussed in Chapter 2, the restructuring of health and social services in
rural areas has led to many gaps in services and it has fallen on the shoulders of
volunteers to fill in these gaps in services. This is seen within the findings from the
interviews and focus groups, as participants described that they knew there was a need
within the community, and they saw volunteering as a way to address that need, as a
volunteer from the Ennismore Community Thrift Store stated, “I see that we need them
desperately or things just wouldn’t happen.”
Interview participants described the need in their community as services that
cater to older people and described these services as ones that will benefit them as they
continue to age and will serve them in later life. An interview participant who also

103
volunteers for Community Care Peterborough as a volunteer driver described their
motivation for volunteering there as, “I live out of the city, so, I’m going to eventually
need their help. If I work now, then I know that I won’t feel guilty of phoning them and
asking them for help when the time comes.” Sustaining these community services, which
includes the Selwyn Public Library through volunteering, allows older residents of these
community to continue to age in place and be able to be self-sustained due to the help of
these organizations and the volunteers that keep them running.
Additionally, as discussed in the previous section regarding experiences of
relationships for the individual volunteer, the library is described as a place where
community connections are made. These connections add to the social sustainability of
Selwyn Township, as they foster social relationships between the library, volunteers and
community members.
5.3.3 Economic sustainability
In addition to cultural and social sustainability, the Selwyn Public Library
volunteers also contribute to the economic sustainability of Selwyn Township. Here,
economic sustainability refers to sustaining the natural, human and/or social capital of a
community. Through organizational relationships and the burden of care, the volunteers
and the library provide an economically feasible way to meet the needs of the rural
community and to keep it economically viable, as the library represents a public service
and economic amenity that contributes to the local and regional economy of Selwyn
Township

104
In this section, organizational relationship refers to the relationship amongst
branches. As discussed in Chapter 4, an amalgamation occurred in the late 1990’s/early
2000s that caused three distinct libraries to become three branches in one unified library
system. As the unified system is a positive for the community, where residents of
Peterborough County can borrow books at any of the three branches, the amalgamation
did not come without challenges. A township stakeholder discussed this challenge by
stating, “It’s two different communities. You’ve got a smaller community, you’ve got a
rural retirement cottage lake community that you’re putting together into one system and
that was a challenge I think.”
Another challenge the library faced during the amalgamation was the fact that the
Lakefield Public Library was forced to adopt the volunteer model previously used by the
then Smith-Ennismore Public Library (see Chapter 4). Still today, this is a point of
contention among volunteers, primarily those from the Lakefield branch, as the volunteer
model led to the loss of paid staff members. A volunteer from the Lakefield branch
explained the transition and their frustration by stating,
Over time, as we went through the amalgamation with Smith Township...there
was a lot of controversy over that because we had paid positions in the library
and there was the attitude of Smith people was that ‘we don’t need paid staff. You
should follow too.’ I find that very hard because really, you’re putting someone
out of work basically and you’re replacing them with somebody who already has
a pension and has worked so, it’s kind of a sore point for me.
Although amalgamating the libraries created an economically feasible and unified library
system, the contention remains today regarding the forced adoption of the volunteer
model on the Lakefield branch.

105
Although the Selwyn Public Library views itself as a unified library with three
distinct branches, the amalgamation of the townships of Smith, Ennismore and Lakefield
in 2001, created divided communities that interview participants describe as resulting in
polarized library branches. A volunteer from the Ennismore branch describes this
polarization by stating,
There is a library group in Lakefield, there is one in Bridgenorth and there is a
group here and they are not interrelated in any way. It’s still a very separate
thing, and I think you can see that in the township.
With a feeling of polarization and otherness in reference to other branches, the interview
participants expressed the need for staff to step forward and act as a process of integration
between the branches. Interview participants are hopeful however, as a new CEO in the
library as of August 2017, has been tasked with liaising between branches.
In addition to the economic sustainability brought on by amalgamating the three
library branches, the burden of care is seen here as another way in which the volunteers
create economic sustainability in Selwyn Township. Like the previous section on social
sustainability, in this sense, volunteers feel morally responsible to volunteer to provide
services to their community. As stated by a volunteer from the Ennismore branch,
I think the isolation helps because if you want it done you’ve got to get it done.
So, I think people pick up the slack and so it’s because we want our parks to be
clean, we want our gardens to be lovely, we want our library to work and we
realize in a more isolated community that if you don’t pick it up, you’re not going
to have it.
Speaking about the isolation commonly found in rural communities, this interview
participant described the feelings of many others of “stepping up and stepping in” to keep
services running.

106
5.3.4 Environmental sustainability
Along with cultural, social and economic sustainability, the Selwyn Public
Library volunteers, more specifically the thrift store volunteers, play an active role in the
environmental sustainability of the communities of Selwyn Township. In this sense,
environmental sustainability refers to sustaining both natural and human environments.
Interview participants from the three thrift stores associated with the Selwyn Public
Library discussed the importance of the thrift stores in the community as an outlet for
residents to bring in their used clothing and household items. Having an establishment
like the thrift stores in each of the communities of Selwyn Townships allows for second
hand items to be redistributed back into the community instead of being thrown out and
ultimately going into a landfill. An interview participant from the Causeway Treasure
Trove in Bridgenorth described this service by stating, “It’s a place where they can drop
off their discarded, not wanted items, and know it’s going to be recycled somehow, some
way.”
In addition to sustaining the natural environment (recycling), the Selwyn Public
Library and the volunteers contribute to the sustainability of the social environmental
contexts in Selwyn Township. Through the description of the findings in this section, the
ways in which the library and the volunteers contribute to the cultural, social, economic
and natural environmental helps to sustain a positive environment for aging and positive
community development.

107
5.4 Summary
The chapter presented findings from the interviews and focus groups to examine
the experiences of older volunteers, the challenges of sustaining rural voluntarism, and
how volunteers and volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability.
Throughout these findings are three narratives, which are threaded through in order to
help tell the story of the Selwyn Public Library and its volunteers.
Aging in place is seen within the findings as an underpinning reason these older
volunteers contribute expansively to their community. Through examining the emotions
and age of the volunteers, their commitment levels and all the organizations in which they
volunteer for, it is evident that they are doing what they can to keep their communities
viable, sustainable, and “good places to grow old” (Keating, 2008). Choosing to
volunteer at the library but also at organizations within the community is key to keeping
services running in rural communities to cater to the needs of the older residents, but as
the findings show, volunteers are choosing these organizations that will serve themselves
in later life as well.
The narrative of the changing role of voluntarism is seen throughout the findings
in reference to the changes needed to be made at the library to cater to the mobile
lifestyles of newly retired volunteers. Even though volunteers are committing to the
library for 10 or more years, as described in Chapter 4, the findings in this chapter
showcase the changing wants and needs of older people, and subsequently, older
volunteers. With a desire from volunteers to travel for both long and short periods of
time, as well spending time with family, and volunteering for several other organizations

108
within the community, the Selwyn Public Library is going to have to adapt their
volunteer model to meet the needs of these volunteers to sustain their volunteer base.
The changing role of voluntarism narrative is also seen within the issues of
territoriality between volunteers and organization and the training and recruitment at the
Selwyn Public Library. With sentiments of territoriality being expressed by thrift store
volunteers, it becomes evident that for these volunteers, their wants and needs are to
become more independent from Community Care Peterborough. Training and
recruitment reflect the changing role of voluntarism as the volunteers see these as integral
processes that will aid in the sustainability of the volunteer model.
Lastly, the narrative of rural community sustainability is seen throughout the
findings, as the Selwyn Public Library volunteers largely contribute to their local
communities. Through the desire for diversified programming and volunteers, the moral
responsibility of providing local services and the environmental sustainability efforts of
the thrift stores, the findings suggest that the library volunteers and the Selwyn Public
Library have the potential for contributing to the cultural, social, economic and
environmental sustainability of Selwyn Township.

109

Chapter 6
Discussion and Conclusions
This final chapter provides a discussion of the findings presented in Chapter 4 and 5 as
well as a conclusion that reflects upon the contributions of the research and provides
future research directions. It is organized into seven sections beginning with a summary
of how the findings relate to the fulfilling the thesis objectives 1) to understand the
experiences of older library volunteers, 2) to examine the challenges of sustaining a rural
library volunteer program and 3) to explore how older library volunteers and library
volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability. Next, it discussed key
aspects of the thesis as they relate to the three narratives of aging in place, the changing
role of voluntarism and rural community sustainability. The third section builds upon the
literature in Chapter 2 by conceptualizing the Selwyn Public Library as a ‘contested space
of older voluntarism’ and how the relationships associated with the library are contested
in related to experiencing voluntarism. The fourth section outlines the contributions the
thesis makes conceptually, empirically and at the community level, including specific
recommendations to the Selwyn Public Library board on ways to sustain the volunteer
program. The next section presents a critical reflection on the research, providing the
limitations and future research directions. Lastly, the chapter sums up the thesis with
some concluding comments regarding the research and the connection between older
voluntarism and rural community sustainability.

110
6.1 Summary of findings
The following section discusses how the findings from Chapter 5 shed light on
these three objectives and how they relate back to the overall goal of the thesis.
Understanding these three objectives in more depth allows for the goal of the thesis, to
explore how older voluntarism contributes to the sustainability of aging rural
communities.
6.1.1 Objective 1: To understand the experiences of older library
volunteers
The first objective focused on the experiences of the individual library volunteer.
The findings explored experiences, through the lens of the lived experience of the Selwyn
Public Library volunteer, which were both positive and negative in nature, but reflect the
feelings and motivations behind volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library. Key findings
included the frustration the volunteers felt in terms of the reliance on technology and
commitment required of the volunteers as well as the burnout associated with the
responsibility are experiences that are negative but show the high commitment the
volunteers feel towards the library. Although they experienced frustration in regards to
technology, and the lack of knowledge around new technology, the volunteers persisted
through and continued to volunteer regardless of their frustration. In reference to the
responsibility and subsequent burnout that comes from the high commitment levels asked
of the volunteers, the volunteers continue to want to provide support to the library,
regardless of the consequences. Snowbirds explained that even though they were unable
to volunteer during the winter, they were eager to continue once they got back in the
spring and summer months.

111
In addition to negative experiences, positive experiences included the
relationships built between volunteers and between volunteers and the community. These
social and organizational relationships were discussed as positive aspects that enhanced
their experience of volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library. As presented in the survey
results, these relationships show that community is at the forefront of the experience of
the individual library volunteer. The experience with their relationship to their local
community allowed them to feel more connected to other community members and other
community services that created not only relationships, but also some other volunteering
opportunities for participants. In addition to community relationships, the volunteers also
experienced positive social interactions between other volunteers. As presented in the
interview and focus groups results, this was a predominate part of their experience of
volunteering at the library as many volunteers become friends and a support in each
other’s lives.
Understanding the experiences of the individual library volunteers sheds light on
their motivation to volunteer at the Selwyn Public Library and what drives them to
continue to volunteer within the library, but also speaks to their volunteering experiences
within the community as well. Through the findings presented in Chapter 5, regarding the
experiences of the individual volunteers is a strong sense of place. The individual
volunteers experience a connection to their community enough to counteract feelings of
frustration, to continue to commit to the library and to continue to develop relationships
within and outside of the library.

112
6.1.2 Objective 2: To examine the challenges of sustaining a rural
library volunteer program
The second objective focused on the challenges of sustaining a rural library
volunteer program. Interpersonal, operational and structural challenges are used to
discuss the issues surrounding the sustainability of the volunteer program at the Selwyn
Public Library. Challenges presented in the findings were the aging volunteer base,
organizational relationships, recruitment and training, which all in some ways impede the
sustainability of the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program.
In terms of these challenges, although they impede the sustainability of the
volunteer program, it is important to reflect on them as ways to learn and adapt in order
to promote positive sustainability. In reference to the aging volunteer base, the library
will have to adapt to the volunteer’s needs as they continue to grow older but continue to
want to actively volunteer at the library. Training and recruitment must be adapted in
order to create consistency across branches, so the volunteers are able to deliver
consistent service across branches and shifts. The challenge of organizational
relationships, which includes polarization, territoriality and loyalty are learning tools to
learn from the past to pave the way for a more unified future, between library branches,
and between library and thrift stores.
Creating sustainability in the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program can help
to promote sustainability within the community. Creating a stable volunteer base allows
for the library to remain open and be able to continue to provide the community services
it provides to the residents to Bridgenorth, Ennismore and Lakefield.

113
6.1.3 Objective 3: To explore how older library volunteers and library
volunteer programs contribute to rural community sustainability
The third objective focused on how the library volunteers contribute to the
sustainability of rural communities. Using the four pillars of sustainability (cultural,
social, economic and environmental), the findings describe the ways in which the Selwyn
Public Library volunteers have the potential to contribute to the local communities of
Selwyn Township. The interview and focus group findings examined diversity, or lack
thereof, relationships, the burden of care and the role of the Thrift Stores to present the
ways in which the volunteer directly contribute to the sustainability of the communities.
Through the presentation of findings associated with this objective, it is evident
that through acts of volunteering, there is a potential contribution made to the
sustainability of the community, whether it be through cultural, social, economical or
environmental contexts. Although dependent on role and individual experience of
volunteering, the findings presented in the thesis showcase the ways volunteering can act
as a catalyst for positive community sustainability.
The Selwyn Public Library volunteers, during their time volunteering at the
library, but also during their time volunteering for other community organizations, see to
that their local communities are able to have local services, whether it be community
services, or health and social services, for their residents.

114
6.2 Discussion
In addition to speaking directly to the three objectives of the thesis, the findings
presented also speak to the three narratives discussed in Chapter 5 that are interwoven as
threads of inquiry throughout the thesis. The following section discusses these narratives
and reflects upon them in relation to the findings.
6.2.1 Aging in place
As reviewed in Chapter 2, rural communities have undergone cycles of change
that are attributed to a rapidly aging population and a general lack of services within the
community that cater to the needs of the older residents (Joseph & Cloutier-Fisher, 2005;
Joseph & Skinner, 2012). Rural communities rely on voluntarism to fill in the service
gaps and provide essential services to the community. In terms of the first narrative,
aging in place refers to aging at home or in a community safety and independently. In
order to age in place in rural communities, residents rely on these volunteer-run services
to help them age safety and independently in their home (Skinner et al., 2014).
As shown in both the survey results and the findings from the interviews and
focus groups, the Selwyn Public Library volunteers are older. They themselves are
experiencing aging and are aging in place in a rural community. This acts as a personal
motivation for the individuals to volunteer in order to sustain volunteer-run organizations
in later life. In direct reference to the interview and focus group findings, participants
stated that they volunteer for organizations such as Community Care Peterborough, so
they will not feel guilt when the tables turn, and they are the ones needing to utilize
services. In addition, volunteers have a deep-rooted sense of community and, thus,

115
volunteer to keep organizations running that cater to the needs to the older residents of
their community and create “good places to grow old” (Keating, 2008).
6.2.2 Changing role of voluntarism
As Chapter 2 states, voluntarism is a way rural communities respond to the
changing roles and responsibilities surrounding the provision of health and social support
services. Voluntarism helps to strengthen the local capacity of rural communities to
respond to changes in order to keep the communities vibrant (Skinner, 2014).
Upon reflection, the findings from Selwyn Township support this changing role of
voluntarism. As discussed in the preceding section, the Selwyn Public Library volunteers
fill in service gaps in their communities by volunteering at multiple voluntary
organizations to support aging in place for community residents and for themselves.
However, along with the role of voluntarism, the wants and needs of the individual
volunteer are also changing. In the case of the thesis, these changes are attributed to the
older age of the volunteer and where they are in their life course (retirement).
The findings presented in both Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 suggest that once the
volunteers retired from their particular field of employment, they are not wanting to step
into a long-term retirement commitment, something that is assumed of them by older,
more long-term volunteers. Newly retired volunteers stated that they began to prioritize
other things, such as spending time with family, volunteering for multiple organizations
and traveling, both short term and seasonally, over a regular, long-term volunteering
commitment at the Selwyn Public Library. The changing role of voluntarism in this
respect is critical for the library to understand in order to adapt to the changes to ensure

116
sustainability of the volunteer program for continued success as a community
organization.
6.2.3 Rural community sustainability
The third narrative interwoven within the findings is that of rural community
sustainability. In Chapter 2, older voluntarism is mentioned as a way to help facilitate
successful and healthy aging in place, as well as a pathway of integration between older
people and aging places, which in turn helps to promote positive rural community
sustainability (Skinner et al., 2016).
These actions, of facilitating aging in place and integrating older people and aging
places are evident within the findings. While discussing the two other narratives, it is
evident that the Selwyn Public Library volunteers facilitate aging in place. By
volunteering to fill in service gaps, they are providing necessary services to older
members of the community, so they can age in place successfully and healthily. The
findings suggest that the volunteers feel the personal responsibility to keep these local
services running, as they are aware of the repercussions of these types of services closing
would have on the community. With themselves, as they age, and the community in the
forefront of their minds as motivation, the Selwyn Public Library volunteers contribute to
the sustainability of their local communities by keeping them culturally, socially,
economically and environmentally vibrant.
The following section presents a critical examination of the relationship between
aging, older voluntarism and rural community sustainability by reflecting upon ‘contested
spaces of older voluntarism’ as a means of further understanding the complexity of rural

117
aging. The five dimensions are presented within the individual, program and community
scale.
6.3 Contested spaces of older voluntarism
Discussed in Chapter 2 is the concept of contested spaces of rural aging. Here,
contested spaces are locations where conflicts engage actors whose social positions are
defined by the control of resources and/or access to power (Skinner & Winterton, 2018).
These conflicts relate to both the rights and access to different spaces and the future
trajectories of the spaces. In the case of rural aging, contested spaces form at the
intersection of rural and aging spaces. Using the work of Skinner and Winterton (2018) as
a foundation, an additional view of contested spaces can be seen as emerging from the
findings, as the findings present dimensions of “contested spaces of older voluntarism”.
Here, contested spaces are formed at the intersection of aging spaces and spaces of
voluntarism that challenge the right and responsibility to volunteer. This section
highlights five dimensions of the contested spaces of older voluntarism, which are seen
on the individual, program and community scale.
6.3.1 Individual
At the individual scale, the experiences of volunteers are both shaped by and
contribute to contested spaces of older voluntarism. The first dimension is that contested
spaces of older voluntarism emerge through the feeling of responsibility. This feeling of
responsibility is seen within the individual volunteers, as they believe they, as community
members, bear the responsibility of providing services missing within their communities.
Volunteering at the Selwyn Public Library, but also at many other volunteer-based

118
community services allows the individuals to provide to their community something that
would not otherwise be available. These feelings of responsibility are contested, however;
as firstly, the age of the individual can begin to conflict the increased feeling of
responsibility. As noted in the findings, the individual volunteers at the Selwyn Public
Library are aging. Although the volunteers are still able to volunteer, as they continue to
age, their ability to volunteer may decrease. Additionally, the responsibility of
volunteering is contested through the level of commitment of the individual volunteer.
The volunteers feel they have a responsibility to their community; however, the high
level of commitment to volunteering for multiple organizations can leave the individual
volunteer feeling burnt out. Attention should be paid to the ability of the volunteer and
the commitment they are providing to the organization in order to ensure a positive
environment to experience voluntarism.
A second dimension of contested spaces of older voluntarism emergent at the
individual level is that contested spaces of older voluntarism are dependent upon the
aging life course. Here, conflict is created dependent upon where the volunteer is at in
their life course. The findings discuss how volunteers in the different stages of life course
(from newly retired, to older volunteers) have challenged views of what successful
voluntarism is. Volunteers who are in the older stage of life are the ones who are able to
commit to the level of volunteering required from organizations, such as the Selwyn
Public Library. It is the newly retired individuals, after migrating from another
community who prioritize traveling and spending time with family over long volunteer
commitments.

119
6.3.2 Volunteer program
In addition to contested spaces of older voluntarism emerging at the individual
level, they also present themselves at the volunteer program level, in the case of the
thesis, the volunteer program at the Selwyn Public Library. A third dimension is that
contested spaces of older voluntarism are created as a result of local territoriality. The
findings from the thesis allude to this dimension of contested spaces of voluntarism in the
discussion involving the relationships between the thrift stores and their governing
organization Community Care Peterborough. Conflict emerges in these discussions as the
volunteers at the two Community Care/Selwyn Public Library thrift stores (Causeway
Treasure Trove and the Ennismore Community Thrift Shop) begin to express their right
to volunteer at the thrift store by contesting the administrative authority from Community
Care. Volunteers indicated that they would rather be left alone to handle the day to day
operations of the thrift stores themselves and that they did not appreciate when
Community Care’s volunteer coordinator imposed themselves on the store. By expressing
their right and responsibilities of volunteering at the thrift stores, the volunteers begin to
dispute the nature of the volunteering by challenging the power Community Care has
over the thrift stores.
A fourth dimension in the volunteer program level is that contested spaces of
older voluntarism emerge over the right to volunteer. The right to volunteer in this
context becomes contested due to the nature of volunteer recruitment. As indicated in
Chapter 4, the primary means of volunteer recruitment at the Selwyn Public Library is
word of mouth. This proves to be an exclusive form of recruitment, as it is usually the
friends of the older, women volunteering who become new volunteers. This is in contrast

120
to the need for diversity within the volunteer program and conflicts the rights of any
individual who wishes to volunteer, as if they do not previously know a volunteer, their
chances of becoming a Selwyn Public Library volunteer are slim. By expanding
recruitment methods beyond word of mouth, volunteer organizations such as the Selwyn
Public Library will have the ability to include a diverse group of volunteers, rather than
the ones previously known by a volunteer.
6.3.3 Community
A fifth dimension to contested spaces of older voluntarism at the community level
is contested spaces of older voluntarism are created through interactions at the local
level. This speaks to the polarization of volunteering within the Township of Selwyn.
Here, volunteers ignore the larger township and refer to the importance of volunteering in
their local community only (Bridgenorth, Ennismore or Lakefield). Volunteers
understand the importance of volunteering and the contribution it makes to their
community but create conflict when referring to their individual community rather than
the township as a whole. Although the amalgamation of Smith, Ennismore and Lakefield
Townships did not present itself as a challenge in the thesis, these notions of loyalty to
past townships still hold true in volunteers referencing communities, as community is on
a local level, rather than thinking of the municipality.

121
6.4 Contributions
This section will outline the contributions the thesis makes, conceptually,
empirically and at the community level.
6.4.1 Conceptual contributions
The findings from the thesis contribute to the concepts of and debates on aging,
voluntarism and rural community sustainability, which were identified in Chapter 3 as the
core conceptual framework under which the thesis operates. Firstly, the thesis contributes
to the concepts of voluntarism and rural aging as it demonstrates the ways older
voluntarism is a way to experience aging in rural communities. The findings expand on
the discussion in Chapter 2 surrounding the personal benefits of volunteering on the older
individual by providing examples of these benefits on the Selwyn Public Library
volunteers.
Secondly, the thesis contributes to the concept of rural community sustainability
as it shows first hand how older voluntarism has the potential to be a catalyst for positive
community sustainability. As presented in Chapter 2, the concept of rural community
sustainability is mentioned as an outcome of voluntarism integrating older people and
aging places. In the case of the thesis, the findings suggest that the older people interact
with their aging community through voluntarism at the Selwyn Public Library but also
through other community organizations, which in turn creates positive rural community
sustainability.
Thirdly, the thesis contributes to emerging debates on the ‘contested spaces of
rural aging’ (Skinner & Winterton, 2018). As voluntarism can be viewed as a window

122
through which to experience and transform rural aging, critically examining the contested
spaces of older voluntarism in aging rural communities allows for a deeper understanding
of the experiences and processes that create the conflicted spaces. By articulating five
new dimensions of contested spaces, the thesis further elaborates on the connection
between older voluntarism and rural community sustainability.
6.4.2 Empirical contributions
Along with conceptual contributions, the thesis also makes empirical
contributions. Firstly, the research provided demographic context on the Selwyn Public
Library and their volunteers. As described in Chapter 4, the data provides context into the
typical Selwyn Public Library volunteer that is a married or widowed female, 65-74 years
old, who holds a non-university certificate or diploma, has worked in the education sector
and makes $60,000 to $80,000 annually. In addition, the data demonstrates the
commitment of the library volunteers to the library and other community organizations
and demonstrates their motivations to volunteer and the barriers that hinder them from
volunteering more.
Furthermore, the research contributes to the understanding of rural communities
in Canada regarding volunteering. The data shows first hand that rural communities in
Canada are facing an aging population and it is the older residents who are taking on the
responsibility of volunteering in order to provide services to their communities.
Lastly, the thesis demonstrates, methodologically, an example of a successful
community-based research project. From the initial consultation, the researcher worked
with the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors to develop a project that would fill

123
their needs and encourage change through the community contributions and the
recommendations provided in the follow section.
6.4.3 Community contributions
The thesis also contributes to the community, both at the township level and for
the Selwyn Public Library community. Firstly, it shows the connection between the
Selwyn Public Library and the broader community, as it demonstrates the intersection of
library volunteers and their volunteering roles in other organizations. As demonstrated in
the findings, it is these volunteers and their commitment to their communities that make
Selwyn Township a sustainable rural community for their older population.
Secondly, the thesis contributes to the understanding of the volunteer-based model
in which the Selwyn Public Library operates for rural libraries in Ontario, and elsewhere.
As previously mentioned, the volunteer-model used by the Selwyn Public Library is
unique within the provincial library system, with the average number of volunteers in
public libraries in populations of 15,001 to 30,000 is 23 (Ministry of Tourism, Culture
and Sport, 2016). The findings show that the 174 volunteers at the Selwyn Public Library
successfully contribute to the daily functions of the three branches.
In addition, the thesis provides the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors
recommendations for how the sustainability of the volunteer program could be improved.
Using data from the interviews and focus groups, the follow section provides insights on
ways in which to continue to success of the volunteer program.

124
6.4.4 Recommendations for Selwyn Public Library
As mentioned in the previous section, one way the thesis offers contributions to
the community is through providing the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors with
recommendations. The following eight key strategies offer a means for sustaining the
library volunteer program in order to ensure the success of the program and the library.
The recommendations are categorized according to the three challenges as described in
Chapter 5 (interpersonal, operational and structural) to allow for the recommendations to
directly reflect the findings. These recommendations are also made available in a
community report (see Appendix J).
The following two recommendations speak to the interpersonal challenges within
the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program.
1. Continue the positive interactions with library volunteers. This
recommendation is to ensure the volunteers are continued to be adequately trained and
recognized. In terms of technology training and workshops, it is recommended that the
library continue with their constant support of their volunteers. Providing ongoing
training opportunities regarding the technologies used within the library as well as
additional workshops on personal technology allows the volunteers to become more
familiar and comfortable using technology that will translate into their role as library
volunteer. In addition, it is recommended that the library continue to provide the
volunteers with recognition. Informal recognition, in the form of just saying thank you to
the volunteers provides them with feelings of gratitude and willingness to continue
volunteering as they see their efforts being recognized on a regular basis. Formal
recognition, in the form of the annual volunteer appreciation dinner, provides a larger

125
scale form of recognition towards all library and thrift store volunteers. This type of
recognition not only allows for the volunteers to feel valued but allows them to interact
with one another in a more informal way.
2. Enhancing communication between board/staff and volunteers. Currently, there
is no formal means of communication to allow volunteers to check in and voice their
concerns and opinions on library matters. Through discussions with the interview
participants, they spoke to the value an open communication would have on the library.
Suggestions for communication would be to implement an anonymous suggestion box in
the staff/volunteer quarters of the library, where volunteers can input their suggestions for
change, their opinions or any concerns they may have about their volunteer shift at the
library. Additionally, regular check-ins between librarians and volunteers would prove
beneficial. Having one-on-one meetings between the branch librarian and the branch
volunteers will allow for issues, comments and concerns to be discussed and addressed in
a private and confidential manner.
The following three recommendations address the challenges of the internal
operations of the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program.
3. Creating a more unified library system. Presently, the Selwyn Public Library is
facing issues of polarization between the three library branches. Instead of being viewed
as the Selwyn Public Library, rather it is viewed as the Bridgenorth, Ennismore and
Lakefield libraries, respectively. Having a unified view of the Selwyn Public Library as a
whole would enhance the usership across the township and would increase the movement
of volunteers within the library system. In respect to the availability of volunteers,
unification could be viewed if there was a position (paid or volunteer) that was focused

126
on this issue. Training and coordination of the volunteers could be done with a focus on
inter-library volunteering, rather than having volunteers attached to one particular branch.
This approach may not be feasible with long-term volunteers, rather this recommendation
would be most beneficial when recruiting new volunteers to the library.
4. Revise volunteer model to increase flexibility. As discussed throughout the
findings, the volunteers at the Selwyn Public Library prioritize other things in their life,
like time with family and traveling over volunteering. They are no longer wanting to
make the long-term commitments to the library, where they are required to attend weekly
shifts. Creating a more flexible volunteer model to cater to these needs will allow
community members to be able to volunteer, or current volunteer to be able to continue to
volunteer but in a less structured manner. Allowing volunteers to choose a short burst of
volunteering activity, such as children’s reading programs that is seasonal or a book sale
that is on for one weekend presents opportunities to volunteer for those people not
wanting to commit.
5. Standardizing policies and procedures across all branches. As discussed in
Chapter 5, the lack of consistency between branches and between shifts pose challenges
for the library and the volunteers. A standardized policies and procedures model will aid
in the consistency issue, as all volunteers, whether they are new to the library or have
been volunteering for 20 years, will need to follow it. In addition, a consistent training
model is also recommended. To add to the recommendation outlined at the beginning of
this section, having one staff or volunteer in charge of training new volunteers takes the
responsibility of training off of the older, long-term volunteers who feel it is not their job
and who may be improperly training.

127
The final three recommendations address the challenges surrounding the external
structural relationships of the Selwyn Public Library volunteer program.
6. Clarity of connection between thrift stores and library. As discussed in Chapter
3, the thrift stores are responsible for donating 50% (Causeway Treasure Trove and the
Ennismore Community Thrift Shop) and 100% (Renewed Classics) of their earnings to
the Selwyn Public Library that helps to fund the library’s children’s programs. The
findings suggest that there is a disconnect between the two institutions, and generally, the
library volunteers do not know how the thrift stores contribute to the library. A
recommendation is to use an event like the volunteer appreciation dinner where
volunteers across thrift stores and library branches get together to introduce the thrift
stores and to educate both sets of volunteers on their connection and how they work
together to keep the library sustainable. This has the potential to increase the connection
between thrift stores and volunteer. In addition, further coordination with Community
Care Peterborough regarding the responsibilities of each organization has the potential to
alleviate the confusion regarding roles of the organization and roles of the volunteer.
7. Accreditation with the Ontario Public Library Guidelines Monitoring and
Accreditation Council. Using the guidelines to audit the governance, policy development,
operations and services the library provides, the Selwyn Public Library could become an
accredited public library which firstly, shows the local community the that library is
meeting provincial wide terms. Secondly, it allows for them to provide a consistency of
services with public libraries across Ontario. Lastly, conducting the audit which leads to
the accreditation will allow the Selwyn Public Library to become aware of changes need
to be made and appropriate development plans to become implemented.

128
8. Create a full-time volunteer coordinator position. Creating a full-time
volunteer coordination position (volunteer or paid staff) allows the preceding
recommendations to be addressed. Having a member of the library personnel focused
directly on the volunteers allows for continued recognition, enhanced communication,
unification, flexibility, standardization and mutual understanding to be achieved.
6.5 Reflections on the research
The following section provides reflections on the research. Firstly, it presents
limitations of the thesis in the conceptual, operational and application phase. Secondly, it
will discuss future research directions that derive from the limitations. These research
directions provide opportunities for the expansion of this research, or additional research
directions that expand on the theoretical framework of aging voluntarism and rural
community sustainability.
6.5.1 Limitations
Throughout the phases of this research, there were limitations that presented
themselves. In the conceptual phase, one limitation was the limited body of literature
surrounding the role of rural libraries in community sustainability. In the presentation of
Chapter 2, the literature discussed was centered on health and social care services, with
libraries notably absent from the literature. This has resulted in using an exploratory
inquiry into the role of libraries, as this is a novel view into the role of community
services in rural community sustainability.
Two limitations presented themselves in the operational phase of the research. In
the approach to the research, conducting a case study of the Selwyn Public Library

129
provides limitations regarding the transferability of the findings. The thesis presented
findings that may be particular to this case study; therefore, generalizations regarding
volunteer-based community organizations should be done with significant caution.
Conducting a comparative study between different community organizations, within
different rural townships in Ontario or elsewhere in Canada could provide a deeper
understanding of how to sustain a volunteer-based community organization and the role
of the volunteers in the sustainability of the rural community.
Additionally, the operational phase saw limitations in the recruitment of research
participants. Firstly, there were limitations in who was chosen to be a participant in the
research. Research participants included Selwyn Public Library volunteers, staff
members, members of the Board of Directors as well as select township stakeholders. A
key group of library stakeholders that were not recruited were library patrons. Due to the
scope of the thesis, patrons were not included in order to maintain the timeline of the
project. As well, they were not selected to participate, as the nature of the thesis was to
understand the sustainability in an operational and administrative capacity, something
library patrons may not fully be aware of.
A second limitation in the recruitment of research participants was the lack of
participation from thrift store volunteers. Over the course of the recruitment, the
researcher had a difficult time recruiting thrift store volunteers to participate in both
interviews and most notably, the focus groups (n=2 participants). This could be due to the
lack of understanding between the library and the thrift store volunteers. However,
having a limited and uneven distribution of participants from the three thrift stores limited
the data collecting specifically regarding the thrift stores could have deepened the

130
findings on the subject regarding the connection of the thrift stores to the Selwyn Public
Library.
An additional limitation in the operational phase of the research was not
conducting focus groups with townships stakeholders. This approach was taken as the
other participant groups of volunteers, staff members and board members provided more
in-depth understanding of the Selwyn Public Library and the volunteers, whereas the
township stakeholders were consulted due to their thorough understanding of the
township.
Lastly, a limitation presented itself in the application phase of the research. Due to
the timeline of the thesis, as well as the nature of the community-based partnership with
the Selwyn Public Library Board of Directors and the Trent Centre for Aging & Society,
the thesis will not be able to evaluate the recommended changes implemented by the
library board from the results of the research.
6.5.2 Future research directions
The limitations presented above address gaps in the research that can also
represent future research directions. These future research directions allow the scope of
the research project to be expanded in order to increase the depth of understanding on the
role of older volunteers in rural community sustainability. Firstly, the expansion of the
research to include additional library stakeholders as research participants. Creating a
research project that focuses on library patrons allows the scope of the research to widen
to understand what the perception of the volunteers and the library volunteer program is
on the patrons who use the library. In addition, threads of inquiry could be to understand

131
if community members are interested in volunteering, and why or why not they might be
thinking about volunteering, and what barriers they may face.
Secondly, a future direction of research could be to conduct a case study on a
similar volunteer-based organization in another rural township or urban settings in
Ontario This could allow for a comparison between the research done for this thesis and a
similar organization undergoing sustainability issues of their volunteer base to be able to
provide richer recommendations that may apply to a variety of different types of
organizations, in different types of settings.
Lastly, a future research direction would be to expand the thread of inquiry on
older volunteers and rural communities to other rural communities across Canada, as well
as internationally. There is growing international interest in the concepts of aging,
voluntarism and rural community sustainability. For instance, Australia’s rural regions
are undergoing similar changes as the rural Canadian context and could benefit from
conducting studies similar to the thesis (Winterton & Warburton, 2012).
6.6 Concluding comments
“It’s not just about books. It’s everything else that we give to the community.”
Selwyn Public Library volunteer
Rural communities in Canada are experiencing changes, from a rapidly aging
population to a gap in the provision of services. To cope with change, rural communities
rely heavily upon older voluntarism in order to be resilient and to deliver the services
their residents need in order to age in place. By conducting a case study of the Selwyn
Public Library, this thesis explored the role of older voluntarism in the sustainability of

132
an aging rural community in Ontario, Canada through understanding the experiences of
older library volunteers, examining the challenges of sustaining a rural library volunteer
program and exploring how older library volunteers and library volunteer programs
contribute to rural community sustainability.
While the thesis used the case of a rural, volunteer-based library, the role of older
voluntarism is so much more than the services they provide to the library. As the above
quote alludes to, the role of the older library volunteers and the library volunteer program
extends out of the confines of the library, outside of the realm of books, and extends into
their local communities where they contribute to the success and sustainability of the
places they call home.