INFORMATION LITERACY SKILLS PROFICIENCY AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT
OF SELECT 12TH-GRADE STUDENTS AT A HIGH-MINORITY HIGH-POVERTY
SCHOOL

ABSTRACT
Thomas, Miriam, Information literacy skills proficiency and academic achievement of
select 12th-grade students at a high-minority high-poverty school. Doctor of Education
(Literacy), May, 2018, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, Texas.
Purpose
Responding to a deficit in research on information literacy skills proficiency at the
secondary level, and specifically in a low-socioeconomic urban school district, the
purpose of this mixed methods study was to explore and to compare the information
literacy skills knowledge and proficiency of 12th-grade students to their academic
achievement. These students ranged academically from low-achieving to high-achieving,
at a large high-minority, high-poverty urban school district. This comparison was made
by using an information literacy skills assessment, Tool for Real-time Assessment of
Information Literacy Skills (TRAILS) to ascertain job market or college and career
readiness for employing information literacy skills after high school. The TRAILS is an
online multiple-choice assessment, created based on the American Association of School
Librarians' (AASL) Standards for the 21st-Century Learner. TRAILS assesses students
on five criteria: ((a) developing the research topic; (b) identifying potential sources; (c)
developing, using, and revising strategic searches; (d) evaluating sources and
information; and (e) using information responsibly, ethically and legally.
Method
For the quantitative phase, Pearson's product-moment correlation coefficients was
employed to analyze scores from the TRAILS assessment and academic achievement, as
measured by collegiate and weighted GPAs of 12th-grade students. Following the
quantitative phase, qualitative interviews were conducted using extreme-case criteria of

iv

students scoring highest and lowest on the assessment. Mixed analysis was conducted by
comparing interview response data to participant assessments to deepen the
understanding of perspectives on information literacy knowledge.
Findings
Findings indicate there was a correlation between TRAILS scores and academic
achievement based on collegiate and weighted GPA. The majority of students achieving
higher TRAILS scores also correlated with earning a higher GPA, and the majority of
students receiving the lowest TRAILS scores similarly were associated with lower GPAs.
Males scored higher for total correct, while having a slightly lower GPA. Qualitative
findings indicated higher-achieving students have a better perception of job market or
college and career readiness as compared to lower-achieving students.
KEY WORDS: Information literacy, Academic achievement, Tool for real-time
assessment of information literacy skills, TRAILS, Poverty, Minority, High-achieving,
Low-achieving, Secondary, High school, GPA.

1
CHAPTER I
Introduction
Across decades, ensuring students are prepared to be lifelong learners and
productive contributors to society has been important to educators like me. As a
librarian, teaching individuals to become self-sufficient learners who ethically assemble
and utilize credible, reliable information for academic and personal research is a primary
teaching objective. Additionally, my belief is all students graduating from secondary
institutions should be information literate, regardless if they are directly entering the job
market or continuing education postsecondarily. However, as educators we must instruct
students how to recognize the significance of understanding what information literacy
entails. According to Zurkowski (1974):
Information is not knowledge; it is concepts or ideas which enter a person’s field
of perception, are evaluated and assimilated reinforcing or changing the
individual’s concept of reality and/or ability to act. As beauty is in the eye of the
beholder, so information is in the mind of the user. (p. 4)
Zurkowski (1974), former president of the Information Industry Association, first coined
the phrase “information literacy” (p.1), and forecasted the varied routes and sources of
available information emerging throughout the decades (Badke, 2010). His
recommendation to the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science
proposed the establishment of a universal program to achieve widespread information
literacy in the ensuing 10 years. Furthermore, Zurkowski (1974) declared people to be
information literates when they could employ information resources in work functions
and when they could utilize primary resources in resolving inquiries. Later, Burchinal

2
(1976) proclaimed a new set of skills must be acquired to be considered information
literate, such as locating and using information for problem-solving, in order to make
efficient and effective decisions. Additionally, Owens (1976) avowed:
beyond information literacy for greater work effectiveness and efficiency,
information literacy is needed to guarantee the survival of democratic institutions.
All men are created equal but voters with information resources are in a position
to make more intelligent decisions than citizens who are information illiterates.
(p. 27)
As indicated, the 1970s brought a plethora of definitions to the meaning of
information literacy; however, with the introduction of the computer age in the 1980s, a
rapidly evolving information environment was ushered (Behrens, 1994). Subsequently,
the American Library Association’s ([ALA], 1989) final report of the Presidential
Committee on Information Literacy, defined information literacy as a set of four skills
necessitating individuals to: (a) recognize, (b) locate, (c) evaluate, and (d) utilize
information effectively. Based on the aforementioned skills, the Association of College
and Research Libraries (ACRL), also a division of ALA, developed in 1999 the following
five Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education, describing an
information literate student (ACRL, 2000).


Standard One - The information literate student determines the nature and
extent of the information needed.



Standard Two - The information literate student accesses needed
information effectively and efficiently.

3


Standard Three - The information literate student evaluates information
and its sources critically and incorporates selected information into his or
her knowledge base and value system.



Standard Four - The information literate student, individually or as a
member of a group, uses information effectively to accomplish a specific
purpose.



Standard Five - The information literate student understands many of the
economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information and
accesses and uses information ethically and legally. (ACRL, 2000)

More recently, ALA members adopted a new definition of information literacy, which is;
Information literacy is the set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective
discovery of information, the understanding of how information is produced and
valued, and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating
ethically in communities of learning. (ACRL, 2015, p. 3)
In addition, ACRL members adopted a new framework underscoring that, “Students
have a greater role and responsibility in creating new knowledge, in understanding the
contours and the changing dynamic of the world of information, and in using
information, data, and scholarship ethically” (ACRL, 2015, p. 2). According to Farmer
and Henri (2008), “the early twenty-first century is giving rise to the ‘knowledge age’
with the awareness that information in itself cannot solve problems; it is the effective use
of information that promised solutions. People need to be information literate” (p. ix).

4
Job Market and College and Career Readiness
Harvey, Slate, Moore, Barnes, and Martinez-Garcia (2013) asserted readiness for
postsecondary academic success is essential for college and career readiness. ACT
(2008), formerly American College Testing, administrators defined College and Career
Readiness as:
the acquisition of the knowledge and skills a student needs to enroll in and
succeed in credit bearing first-year courses at a postsecondary institution, such as
a two or four-year college, trade school, or technical school, without the need for
remediation. (p. 1)
Nonetheless, readiness for the workplace requires the same rank of knowledge and skills
(ACT, 2008). Conley (2011) described various categories of readiness, as follows:


Work ready – meets basic expectations regarding workplace behavior and
demeanor



Job ready – possess specific training necessary to begin an entry level position



Career -ready – possesses key content knowledge and key learning skills and
techniques sufficient to begin studies in a career pathway



College ready – is prepared in the four keys to college and career readiness
necessary to succeed in entry level general education courses; (a) key content
knowledge; (b) key cognitive strategies; (c) key learning skills and techniques;
and (d) key transition knowledge and skills

Statement of Problem
In 2008, as indicated in Texas Education Agency’s ([TEA], n.d.) Texas Essential
Knowledge and Skills (TEKS), secondary students are required to produce research

5
projects in most core subject areas. According to the Texas College and Career
Readiness Standards adopted by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (2009),
producing academically acceptable research projects entails using information literacy
skills. Therefore, students must; (a) recognize what information is needed, (b) locate the
necessary information, (c) evaluate its credibility and reliability, and (d) employ the
information within their project in an ethical manner. The Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board members consider the use of these standards as an indicator of
problem-solving and critical thinking skills for college and career readiness (Educational
Policy Improvement Center [EPIC], 2008). However, the problem is determining the
proficiency level attained by graduating 12th-grade students, to ascertain job market or
college and career readiness. According to Gross and Latham (2012), “many students
come to college without proficient information literacy skills” (p. 574).
Some research exists on information literacy skills and students’ lack of
proficiency in transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education (e.g., Gross,
Latham, & Armstrong, 2012; Smith, Given, Julien, Ouellette, & DeLong, 2013).
However, scant research is available on information literacy skills proficiency at the
secondary level, preparing students for job market or college and career readiness
(Kovalik, Yutzey, & Piazza, 2013). For students entering the workforce after graduation,
information literacy skills are required for researching job openings and business-related
information for employment seekers (Inskip, 2015). As students enter college, they will
most likely be faced with mining information sources for research projects and studies,
and will generally need a good foundation to accomplish this successfully. Averill and
Lewis (2013) reported students they paneled “wished they had received additional

6
instruction in the research process at the secondary level or that they had paid more
attention to the instruction they were given” (p. 114). Despite access to myriad
information sources, students’ aptitudes for finding, evaluating, and applying information
are negligible (Averill & Lewis, 2013).
Subgroups of Information Literacy
As noted previously, many definitions of information literacy have evolved over
the years, and some of these definitions are indicative of thinking critically, using
information ethically, and recognizing how information is presented. Information
manifests in numerous multi-media formats, ranging from simple to complex, including
printed words, pictures, graphs, and charts (Eisenberg, Lowe, & Spitzer, 2004).
According to Eisenberg et al. (2004), negotiating complex information formats requires
skillfully comprehending associated information literacies, such as computer, visual, and
digital.
Computer literacy. This skill requires students be cognizant of employing a
computer for word processing, developing spreadsheets, and utilizing other software tools
(Eisenberg et al., 2004). Being computer literate not only requires students to manipulate
documents and interact personally with information, but according to Eisenberg and
Johnson (2002), the computer is an extension of information processing. For example,
students may exhibit information digitally via presentations to teachers and other students
or electronically construct visually graphic assignments. Vaz (2004) asserted computer
literacy might lead to a better life, when students understand how to evaluate,
communicate and stay up-to-date with changing information, while also comprehending
how information is integrated socioculturally into their lives.

7
Digital literacy. Digital resources are electronically produced resources found
online requiring students to critically examine and determine if the information is
credible and reliable (Eisenberg et al., 2004). According to Cordell (2013),
undergraduate students should have a level of digital literacy to accomplish academic
tasks; therefore, professors are now including assignments utilizing social networking
and multimedia sites, such as Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter, in their syllabi. Cordell
(2013) suggested these curriculum additions require an additional level of learning with
which students should become accomplished digital information users (Cordell, 2013).
Kivunja (2015) indicated with the plethora of information formats in the 21st century,
employees will be required to manage information daily; and thus, will need to be
prepared.
Visual literacy. Braden and Hortin (1982) defined visual literacy as the ability,
“to understand and use images, including the ability to think, learn, and express oneself in
terms of images” (p. 41). Making sense of visual information, such as photographs and
illustrations, is based on prior observations of our environment (Eisenberg et al., 2004).
Visual literacy is composed of three components; (a) visual learning—acquiring and
constructing knowledge visually, (b) visual thinking—mental organization of shapes and
images, and (c) visual communication—expressing ideas using symbols (Moore &
Dwyer, 1994; Wileman, 1980).
Methodological Framework
Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, and Turner (2005) defined mixed methods research, “as
the class of research where the researcher mixes or combines quantitative and qualitative
research techniques, methods, approaches, concepts, or language in a single study or set

8
of related studies” (p. 19). Mixed methods should be employed to answer research
questions in an exceptionally thorough manner (Johnson et al., 2005). Collins,
Onwuegbuzie, and Sutton (2006) developed a 13-step mixed methods typology, which is
separated into three parts, to help researchers discuss their findings using rich, thick
descriptions and explanations. Initially, I discuss the first five steps of the typology,
constituting part one—formulation of the research.
Collins et al. (2006) posited 13-steps for mixed methods research. The 13-steps
can be grouped within three stages. First, is the Formulation Stage. Within this stage are
the first five steps: (a) Step 1: determining the mixed goal of the study; (b) Step 2:
formulating the mixed research objective(s); (c) Step 3: determining the rationale of the
study and the rationale(s) for mixing quantitative and qualitative approaches; (d) Step 4:
determining the purpose of the study and the purpose(s) for mixing quantitative and
qualitative approaches; and (e) Step 5: determining the mixed research question(s).
Second, is the Planning Stage consisting of two steps: (a) Step 6: selecting the mixed
sampling design and (b) Step 7: selecting the mixed research design. The third stage is
the Implementation Stage, which is inclusive of: (a) Step 8: collecting quantitative and/or
qualitative data; (b) Step 9: analyzing the quantitative and qualitative data using
respective analyses techniques; (c) Step 10: validating/legitimating the mixed research
findings; (d) Step 11: interpreting the mixed research findings; (e) Step 12: writing the
mixed research report; and (f) Step 13 reformulating the mixed research question(s).
These 13 steps are both interactive and recursive (Collins et al. 2006).
Goals and objective of study. Nine goals of a mixed methods research study,
identified by I. Newman, Ridenour, C. Newman, and DeMarco (2003) are: (a) to add to

9
the knowledge base; (b) to have a personal, social, institutional, and/or organizational
impact; (c) to understand complex phenomena; (d) to measure a change; (e); to predict;
(f) to test new theories; (g) to generate new ideas; (h) to inform constituencies; and (i) to
examine the past. Three of these goals are employed in this study: (a) to add to the
knowledge base; (b) to have a personal, social, institutional, and/or organizational impact;
and (c) to understand complex phenomena.
In order to assist practitioners in developing pertinent instructional strategies for
information literacy, the first goal of adding to the knowledge base was to understand and
to compare information literacy skills knowledge and information literacy skills
proficiency among 12th-grade students in a high-minority, high-poverty urban school
district. This comparison, by using an information literacy skills assessment, was to
ascertain job market or college and career readiness for employing information literacy
skills after high school. As a result of findings of this assessment, a connection was made
to the second goal of having an organizational impact. To effect change by helping to
increase information literacy skills in the district where I am employed, I provided
current research that might support the need for including information literacy skills as
part of the secondary curriculum for all students. Martin, Garcia, and McPhee (2012)
noted the Commission on the Future of Higher Education in 2006 and the National High
School Summit Report of 2005 each documented the rising urgency of preparing high
school students for college coursework. The suggested pathway to accomplish this task
is by strengthening the school curriculum in instructing information literacy skills and
enhancing the partnership between secondary and postsecondary institutions to prepare
college bound students (Martin et al., 2012). Effecting organizational change within the

10
district could mean formulating K-16 collaborations between school librarians and area
university academic librarians to enhance information literacy preparedness for our
students.
In addition, by using a social learning lens via application of Vygotsky’s (1978)
Sociocultural Theory and Bandura’s (1971) Social Learning Theory, the third goal of
understanding complex phenomena was to comprehend how students in lowsocioeconomic, high-minority, urban high schools are academically impacted by familial,
social, and cultural factors. Goal three was accomplished by analyzing participant
information literacy skill assessments, grade-point average (GPA), and participant
perceptions of their information literacy skills via interviews to determine how this
proficiency influenced academic achievement. York, Gibson, and Rankin (2015) posited,
“Academic achievement is almost entirely measured with grades (by course or
assignment) and GPA” (p. 7). The objective of this mixed methods study was to assess
information literacy skills, as well as, to explore participant perceptions of job market and
college and career readiness.
Purpose of study. Responding to a deficit in research on information literacy
skills proficiency at the secondary level, and specifically in a low-socioeconomic urban
school district, the purpose of this mixed methods study was to explore and to compare
the information literacy skills knowledge and proficiency of 12th-grade students. These
students ranged academically from low-achieving to high-achieving, at a large highminority, high-poverty urban school district. The school was a comprehensive high
school. In 1918, members of the Commission on the Reorganization of Secondary
Education, in their Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education report, created the term

11
comprehensive school (Department of the Interior, 1918). In their report, commission
members asserted that a comprehensive school is a typical high school “embracing all
curriculums in one unified organization” (Department of the Interior, 1918, p. 24).
According to Wraga and Lowe (1996) and Wraga (1998) non-comprehensive schools are
vocational schools; however, that definition has broadened in recent years to include
schools not labeled as comprehensive. For this study, the sampling framework focus was
students in a traditional comprehensive high school.
This study included mixed methods, reflective of a pragmatist paradigm, which
focuses on the best method to answer the research question at hand. As a pragmatist
(Onwuegbuzie & Leech 2005), applying a mixed methods framework to this research
allowed for a rich study via substantial quantitative analyses of the participants’
information literacy skills assessment, and a comparative uncovering and examination of
qualitative data and themes through targeted follow-up interviews (Creswell, 1995).
Being a pragmatist allowed me to concentrate on the research problem (Creswell, 2009)
of information literacy skills knowledge and proficiency in low-socioeconomic, highminority high school, employing quantitative and qualitative methods to understand the
differences and similarities among the varied students. Epistemologically and
axiologically, my view is culture influences the knowledge of and value of high-poverty,
minority, students’ eruditions of information skills. As a high school information literacy
specialist/librarian in a low-socioeconomic, high-minority urban school district, my
desire was to understand how the results of this research can support students, at all
achievement levels, to be prepared to effectively and efficiently use information literacy
skills to enter the job market or to be college and career ready.

12
Educational Significance
By understanding gaps in knowledge and in proficiency of information literacy
skills using the social constructivist paradigm throughout this study, school librarians can
assist high-poverty, minority urban secondary students in comprehensive and noncomprehensive schools, to become more information literate for job market and for
college and career readiness. Based on the social constructivist’s paradigm that
knowledge is constructed socially and shared with other individuals (Bryman, 2001),
Vygotsky’s (1978) sociocultural theory indicated learning is a social event and happens
when interaction between the learner and other people in their surroundings occur.
Moreover, collaborations between public school librarians and postsecondary academic
librarians in information preparedness might ensure incoming freshmen are equipped in
applying information literacy skills necessary for postsecondary transition.
Conceptual Framework
As formulated by Addison and Meyers (2013), using synthesized historical
information literacy and library science literature, the conceptual framework of
information literacy employed in this study is characterized by three pillars: (a)
information literacy as acquiring information age skills, (b) information literacy as
cultivating thinking skills, and (c) information literacy as engaging in information as a
social construct. The first concept purports 21st century learners have an abundance of
digital sources available via the ubiquitousness of electronic devices and other
information sources (Eisenberg et al., 2004); thereby, sanctioning advancement in
information literacy skills (Addison & Meyers, 2013). The second conceptualization
emphasizes information literacy cognitively for problem-solving, critical thinking, and

13
other intellectual skills. The third concept conveys general individual experiences of
“living, learning, and working in an information-rich society,” in which technology
frequently changes and expectations continuously evolve (Addison & Meyers, 2013, p.
7).
Concept one. Information literacy is represented by the acquisition of
information age skills in supposition the learner employs ALA’s information literacy
standards of locating, evaluating, and effectively using required information. The history
of information literacy skills began before information was digitized, when bibliographic
instruction occurred during the 1980s, requiring manual inquiry by researchers to be
comprehensive, accurate, current, and reliable (Taylor, 1986). Later, information
management was added to information age skills (Bundy, 2004); however, being skilled
at managing information has developed more in theory than in practice (Addison &
Myers, 2013). School libraries support the information literacy perspective of skill
acquisition because it supports schools’ missions of lifelong learning (Bundy, 2004).
Eisenberg et al. (2004) espoused, “an economy based on information requires workers
who will know how to locate, analyze, manage, interpret, use, and present information in
all of its formats” (p. 176).
Concept two. Information literacy as cultivating habits of mind is primarily a
cognitive conceptualization, concentrating on how the brain processes information,
emphasizing reflexivity of tasks and critical problem solving (Wolf, 2003). Various
process models exist, such as Eisenberg and Berkowitz’s (1990) Big Six research method,
which encompasses six research steps. From project conception to completion, the
student would follow these steps: (a) defining the task, (b) seeking information strategies,

14
(c) locating and accessing information, (d) utilizing information, (e) synthesizing
information, and (f) evaluating resources. Additionally, Kuhlthau’s 1991 information
seeking research model revealed research phases and the thoughts, feelings, actions, and
strategies associated with each, as the researcher transitions through each phase. The
Independent Investigation Method (Sheldon & Morse, 2002) follows a 7-step process,
which offers basic level and proficient level features, can be used individually or by
student groups. The seven steps are: (a) choosing a topic, (b) goal setting, (c) researching
sources, (d) organizing and noting sources, (e) evaluating goals, (f) organizing the
product, and (g) research presentation (Sheldon & Morse, 2002).
Concept three. Information literacy as a social practice is aligned with
sociocultural literacy scholars promoting information literacy as proficiencies through
which learners must maneuver (Addison & Meyers, 2013). Formed under the perspective
of the multi-literacies framework, sociocultural literacy scholars envisioned information
literacy as the ability to move through society (New London Group, 1997). This ability
to move through society is accomplished by adapting learned knowledge for daily social
or work environments in a continually evolving information rich society (Addison &
Myers, 2013). Depicted in Figure 1 is my interpretation of the conceptual framework,
intertwining the three perceptions of information literacy. When acquiring information
age skills, it is important to formulate a habit of utilizing a process on research projects,
while also working with and learning from others.

15

Acquiring information
age skills
Recognize, locate, evaluate,
and interpret information

Cultivating habits of
the mind
Information research
process models, i.e. Big
Six, Independent
Investigation Method
(IIM)

Engaging in
information-rich
social practices
Working with others,
asking questions, and
sharing good
information research
tools and habits

Figure 1. Conceptual framework of concept connections. This graphic demonstrates how
each of the three concepts has a connection to the other.

16
Theoretical Framework
Coley and Baker (2013) asserted:
children raised in poverty today will grow up in circumstances that, the data tell
us, will give them a small, if not negligible, chance of following a path that will
lead them to a markedly better place than where they began. (p. 2)
In the last several years, as an educator working in a Title I school district providing free
or reduced rate lunches to a substantial portion of a predominantly Hispanic, ethnically
diverse population, this researcher has questioned how familial, social, and cultural
factors affect learning and knowledge mastery of ethnically diverse high-poverty
secondary students. According to Wang, Bruce, and Hughes (2013), “growing attention
is being given to the principles of sociocultural theories and their application to IL
research in community, workplace, and school contexts…” (p. 297). Further, Wang et al.
(2013) asserted that information literacy is entrenched within the sociocultural lens of
various societies, and it is imperative as educators we understand community protocols in
order to become efficient teachers of information literacy (Tuominen, Savolainen, &
Talja, 2005).
Vygotsky and other cohorts (John-Steiner & Mahn, 1996) initially framed
sociocultural schemes in the 1920s and 1930s. Vygotsky (1978, 1986) described
socioculturalism as an interaction between the learner and other people or other
measures, acknowledging a connection between cognitive development and practices and
customs of particular groups is present. According to Johnson (2009), no segregation
exists between cognitive development and the social, cultural, and historical frameworks
from which they develop. Vygotsky (1978) affirmed learning is developed via two

17
avenues: (a) interactively between the learner and social interactions and (b) interactively
within learners themselves. In 2011, the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
indicated more than 19.9 million students, hailing from various cultures, were enrolled in
institutions of higher learning (Blas, 2014). According to Blas (2014), “understanding
the basic elements of a student’s culture empowers instructors to teach effectively,
building on a shared foundation of knowledge” (p. 33). Based on the social constructivist
paradigm that knowledge is constructed socially and shared with other individuals,
Vygotsky’s (1978) sociocultural theory endorsed that learning is a social event, and
happens when interaction between the learner and other people and happenings within
their surroundings occur. Vygotsky’s sociocultural framework postulates: (a) cognitive
development occurs by interacting socially through activities; (b) development is
dependent upon cultural sign systems, such as oral and written language and number
systems; (c) development occurs mentally via acquiring and internalizing language; and
(d) development occurs through learning with skilled support in the zones of proximal
development. According to Vygotsky, learning does not occur when the task is too easy,
but occurs in the zones of proximal development (ZPD) in tandem with adult assistance.
Genishi and Dyson (2009) emphasized, “regardless of children’s culture, ethnicity,
gender, language, race, or social class, their learning is profoundly social” (p. 8).
Bandura’s (1971) Social Learning Theory has three key learning concepts that
were applied to this study. The first concept is children can learn by observing.
Observational learning is integral when teaching information literacy skills by
demonstrating how to access information. The second concept is, children should have a
sense of accomplishment, which is paramount to producing research projects because

18
students should believe goals can be accomplished, and they should feel proud of their
achievements. The third concept, behavior change, is not an indicator of learning.
Sometimes a person can learn the skill; however, the skill might not be used or
demonstrated. This example is another instance wherein Bandura’s (1971) Social
Learning Theory might be employed within the classroom. Students can have knowledge
of information literacy skills; however, perchance proficiency is not being exhibited
during their research.
In his Funds of Knowledge studies, Moll (1992, 1994) concluded many Hispanic
children are regarded as having limited intellectual capability. Conceivably, teachers are
not evaluating a student’s knowledge outside of what is considered the standard. Moll,
Amanti, Neff, and Gonzalez (1992) explained some teachers might not recognize or find
significance in multicultural experiences Hispanic students can share. Kiyama and RiosAguilar (2017) supported funds of knowledge acknowledging that teachers should use
student backgrounds as a knowledge source. When examining methods to teach diverse
cultures, perhaps importance should be placed on building upon the information these
students have gained in their individual cultural experiences and relating to it to their
understanding and demonstrating of information literacy skills.
Literature Search, Identification, and Eligibility Procedure
The review of literature examination is central to understanding the research
topic, considering why the topic is important, and refining research themes (Hendry &
Farley, 1998). Searches for relevant studies were executed employing applicable
keywords discovered in article titles, article abstracts, or articles themselves. A list of
potential key words was developed based on dissertation themes including: (a)

19
information literacy, (b) college and career readiness, (c) twelfth-grade students, (d)
minority students, (e) high-poverty students, (f) urban school districts, (g) traditional
school, (h) non-traditional school, (i) comprehensive school, (j) non-comprehensive
school, (k) high achievement, and (l) low achievement. A Boolean search was then
conducted employing search strategies using various two- to three-word combinations of
the focus themes. Utilizing the aforementioned key words resulted in 4,454 returned
studies from ERIC, Library and Information Science Source, and Information Science
and Technology, of which 2,227 were selected to examine for dissertation research
support. According to Cronin, Ryan, and Coughlan (2008), paring down studies to final
results was vital for information management; however, acquiring the necessary literature
was also crucial.
Research Questions
Quantitative research questions. The following quantitative research question
addressed high-poverty, minority secondary students’ scores on an information literacy
skills assessment in comparison to grade-point average.
To determine if a correlation was present between information literacy skills
proficiency and academic achievement as measured by GPA of 12th-grade high school
students in a diverse school setting, the following research question was explored:
What is the relationship between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive school?
Qualitative research questions. The following questions were addressed after
the quantitative phase by selected participants based on scoring criteria:

20
1. What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a traditional
comprehensive school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for job
market or for college and career readiness?
2. How have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced the
perceptions of information literacy skills needed for job market or for college
and career readiness?
Mixed methods research question. The following mixed methods research
question was addressed to reveal a deeper understanding of the connection between the
assessment and the perceptions:
According to Bandura’s three key concepts, children learn by observing, children
need a sense of accomplishment, and children’s behavior change is not an indicator of
learning. Integrating these three concepts, what is the relationship between perceptions
of two groups of students; specifically, 12th-grade higher-achieving and 12th-grade
lower-achieving students’ information literacy skills and their information literacy
assessment proficiency?
Quantitative Research Hypotheses
The following two quantitative hypotheses were tested in this study:
1. A relationship exists between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive
school;
2. A difference exists in information literacy knowledge between higher-achieving
and lower-achieving 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive high
school on an information literacy assessment.

21
Definition of Terms
Comprehensive schools. The comprehensive school model, established in the
early 20th century, offers instruction in a variety of curricula to educate children,
eventually preparing them for the employment or college (Grubb & Lazerson, 2004).
Collegiate GPA. Collegiate or unweighted scale is based on the grade attained
and not on class difficulty. Collegiate GPA scale ranges from 0.0 to 4.0 (Lindsay, 2015).
The selected school uses the term Collegiate GPA as the type of GPA based on the 4.0
scale.
High-achieving. According to the Cambridge Dictionary, a high-achiever is
defined as “a person who achieves more than the average person in their work” (“high
achiever, 2017). In this study, high achieving is defined as those students performing
above grade level academically as indicated by a collegiate GPA between 4.0 and 2.5 on
a 4.0 school scale.
Information literacy. Behrens, in her 1994 study of information literacy
definitions throughout history, indicated information literacy has moved from tool-based
to cognitive skills. The ALA (1989) defines information literacy as the ability to identify,
to uncover, to assess, and to employ information in an effective and ethical manner.
Lower-achieving. Cambridge Dictionary defines a low-achiever as a person who
achieves “less than the average” (“low achiever”, 2017). In this study, low-achieving is
defined as those students performing at or below grade level as indicated by a GPA
below 2.5 on a 4.0 school scale.
Weighted GPA. Weighted GPA ranges on a scale from 0 to 5.0, taking into
account AP and/ Honors courses. An A on the weighted scale is considered 5.0 based on

22
the difficulty of the class (Lindsay, 2015). The selected school uses a 6.6 weighted scale;
however students may have a higher weighted GPA due to other course associated
factors. For example, students taking pre-AP courses have a 7.6 weighted scale, and
students taking AP, Gifted and Talented, and Duel Credit courses have an 8.6 weighted
scale.
Delimitations
A comprehensive high school in a Title I urban school district, having an
estimated enrollment of more than 70,000 students near Houston, Texas, is the focus of
this study. The research was limited to 12th-grade students at this comprehensive
secondary school. The foci of the study were restricted to students’ information literacy
skills knowledge for academic achievement, their perceptions of information literacy
skills proficiency for job market or college and career readiness, and sociocultural factors
influencing readiness.
Limitations
Lincoln and Guba (1985) indicated trustworthiness encompassed four
components: (a) credibility, (b) transferability, (c) dependability, and (d) confirmability,
and “these are the constructionist equivalents to internal and external validity, reliability,
and objectivity” (p. 300). According to Onwuegbuzie (2000), internal and external
validity and credibility threats could occur at any one or all three phases of the inquiry
process, which include: (a) research design/data collection, (b) data analysis, and (c) data
interpretation. These threats can occur at specific times in the quantitative and qualitative
components of a research study. Onwuegbuzie and Johnson (2006) declared
legitimation, validity as characterized in mixed methods study, is complex; nonetheless,

23
addressing these threat types was paramount to the trustworthiness of the research,
irrespective of the quantitative or qualitative components. In the following paragraphs, I
have identified and discussed several threats to internal and external validity occurring in
the quantitative phase, internal and external credibility in the qualitative phase, and
legitimation in the mixed methods phase.
Quantitative phase – external validity. External validity is characterized by
determining whether generalizations can be made to research findings (Onwuegbuzie &
Leech, 2007b). Examples of external validity threats possibly occurring during one or
more stages of the quantitative phase are: (a) population validity, (b) ecological validity,
and (c) specificity of variables (Onwuegbuzie, 2000). Each of these threats is discussed
in the following sections and how they manifested during this study.
Population validity. According to Onwuegbuzie (2003), population validity is an
important outcome in most research studies, and it can arise at the research design/data
collection, data analysis, or data interpretation stages. Specifically, population validity is
characterized by extending data findings to the general population schema of the study.
In this study, the population framework is 12th-grade students attending a high-minority,
high-poverty urban school; therefore, population validity was a threat because findings
could only be generalized to similar groups.
Ecological validity. An important component to most quantitative research studies
(Onwuegbuzie, 2000) or the quantitative phase of mixed methods research studies,
ecological validity refers to application of findings across variables, such as changing the
circumstances, the environment, or the framework. Appling the findings across variables
establishes the resultant data as independent of the setting. Ecological validity can occur

24
at the research design/data collection or data interpretation stage (Benge, Onwuegbuzie,
& Robbins, 2012). Because this study took place in a Title I, urban area school district
which had high-poverty, minority participants, ecological validity was a threat.
Specificity of variables. Generalizations of study findings cannot be made when
variables are deemed exclusive to the research study. These variables could include: (a)
participants, (b) setting, (c) context, (d) duration, (e) independent variable definition, (f)
and/or types of instruments used (Benge et al., 2012). Specificity of variables threat can
transpire at the research design/data collection or data analysis stage. The population
variables of high-poverty, minority students in an urban environment, Tool for Real-time
Assessment of Information Literacy Skills ([TRAILS], 2016), the online information
literacy assessment instrument, and researcher created interview questions employed in
this study, were unique. This uniqueness rendered study findings as not generalizable.
Quantitative phase – internal validity. Internal validity refers to the causal
relationship inferred by the researcher between study variables (Onwuegbuzie, 2003;
Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2007b. Internal validity threats that might occur in the
quantitative phase are: (a) maturation, (b) researcher bias, and (c) behavior bias. Each of
these threats is discussed in the following sections.
Maturation. The threat of maturation occurs when the participant allows time to
elapse between the study’s implementation and completion. This time lapse can create
variations intellectually, mentally, or physically precipitating emotions akin to fatigue,
boredom, or motivation incorrectly attributable to the independent variable (Benge et al.,
2012). This is a threat I was not be able to control. Thus, maturation was a limitation of
this study, and this threat arose during the research design/data collection stage due to the

25
various circumstances such as Hurricane Harvey closing school and other delays to start
data collection.
Researcher bias. Research bias can occur in the research design/data collection
stage and/or the data analysis stage. When researcher bias occurs in the quantitative
phase, the researcher’s values and characteristics have tarnished data. These data might
be considered not reliable. The data collection process might be tainted if the bias affects
participants (Benge et al., 2012). As a researcher, my responsibility was to remain as
objective as possible despite the importance of the subject matter to me. All participants
were treated equally during data collection, and none of the participants were assisted in
any way.
Behavior bias. Behavior bias can transpire at the beginning of a study if the
participant has an intense inclination or disinclination to the study instrument
implementation (Benge et al., 2012). Behavioral bias can occur at the research
design/data collection stage. This threat occurred at the outset. When initially seeking
participants, the TRAILS instrument was described as 30-multiple choice questions.
However, changes to the assessment had occurred, unbeknownst to the researcher,
increasing the TRAILS assessment to 45-questions. This change was noticed and
commented upon by the initial group of participants.
Qualitative phase – external credibility. External and internal credibility
threats can also develop within the three stages of the research process in the qualitative
phase: (a) research design/data collection, (b) data analysis, and (c) data interpretation.
According to Onwuegbuzie and Leech (2007b), “external credibility pertains to the
confirmability and transferability of findings and conclusions” (p. 235). External

26
credibility threats presented during the study are: (a) researcher bias, (b) interpretive
validity, and (c) reactivity (Benge et al., 2012). Each of these threats is discussed in the
following sections.
Researcher bias. Because the researcher was the instrument by which data were
collected, researcher bias might occur unintentionally, contaminating data collection in
altering participants’ behaviors or experiences. Researcher bias might passively affect
legitimation via researcher attributes, such as the researcher’s clothing worn, the
researcher’s ethnicity, or the researcher’s gender (Onwuegbuzie, 2003). Other forms of
researcher bias are a priori knowledge of the participant and researcher mannerisms.
Researcher bias can occur during the data collection, analysis, and/or interpretation
stages. To help eliminate the threat of researcher bias, I participated in a debriefing
session in which I was digitally interviewed by a neutral party, allowing for reflexivity of
my participant interviews. Questions asked were: a) In what ways did knowing
something about your interviewee advance, enhance, or distract from the interview and
the interpretation process?; (b) What findings surprised you?; and (c) To what extent do
you think your own empathy and insights of the participants evolved during the course of
the interviews? To reduce researcher bias during analyses and interpretation of data, a
qualitative software program was used to code and to categorize data to determine
themes.
Interpretive validity. Interpretive validity refers to the ability to interpret the
participant’s meaning as the meaning intended (Maxwell, 1992). By analyzing the
interviewees’ words verbatim, I gained perspective and intentions to construct meaning

27
accurately and credibly. In addition, my debriefing process permitted reflexivity and
impartiality.
Reactivity. Reactivity might occur when the participant alters her/his response due
to awareness of participating in a research study (Onwuegbuzie, 2003). This was a
possible threat because any of the students might want to illuminate their responses more
positively. However, the researcher advised participants of their anonymity throughout
the study and engaged participants to member check their transcribed interview for
correctness.
Qualitative phase – internal credibility. Internal credibility is characterized as,
“the truth value, applicability, consistency, neutrality, dependability, and/or credibility of
interpretations and conclusions within the underlying setting or group” (Onwuegbuzie &
Leech, 2007b, p. 234). An example of internal credibility threats taking place throughout
the research process of the qualitative phase of the study are; (a) descriptive validity, (b)
observational bias, (c) confirmation bias, (d) voluptuous validity, and (e) reactivity. Each
of these threats is discussed in the following sections.
Descriptive validity. Descriptive validity indicates accuracy and adequacy of what
the participant has expressed verbally and non-verbally (Maxwell, 1992). The validity of
the transcript is based on it being verbatim, inclusive of emotions. The data must reflect
accurately and adequately the participant’s volume, pitch, and voice quality. This threat
was addressed by audio and video recording interviews in order to capture accurate
responses. This threat was also addressed in the member checking session.
Observational bias. This bias occurs when insufficient data are collected by the
researcher. Observational bias can occur at the data collection or data analysis stage. At

28
the data collection stage and data analysis stages, the threat to credibility is represented
by an inadequate sampling of participant words or behaviors collected and/or analyzed,
respectively (Onwuegbuzie, 2003). Observational bias transpires when there is not
protracted engagement of the participant (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Observational bias
was eliminated by scheduling 30-minute individual interview sessions and arranging
follow-up questions for clarification.
Confirmation bias. As a result of having a priori knowledge of the information
literacy skills students should possess and having had previous interaction with some of
the students, confirmation bias was a viable threat to internal credibility. Confirmation
bias occurs when assumptions and conclusions are based on previous information of a
participant, and not thorough data interpretation a posteriori (Benge, et al., 2012). To
avoid confirmation bias, I allowed themes to emerge from the data naturally.
Voluptuous validity. The researcher, embracing self-reflexivity of her/his
knowledge base of the assimilated data is the criteria for this validity (Onwuegbuzie &
Leech, 2007b. By employing a debriefing procedure, I was able to reflect on my role as
the researcher and not as a librarian who teaches information literacy to high school
students. Thereby, as a researcher, I concentrated on interpreting and producing accurate
and credible data.
Mixed methods legitimation. Onwuegbuzie and Johnson (2006) presented
various legitimation concerns in mixed methods research relating to integration of
quantitative and qualitative data. Also, researchers state legitimation is not merely an
outcome; it is perceived as a process, as well. Legitimations appearing during the mixed

29
methods phase of this research are: (a) sequential legitimation, (b) weakness
minimization legitimation, and (c) multiple validities legitimation.
Sequential legitimation. Onwuegbuzie and Johnson (2006) asserted sequential
legitimation is threatened by how much meta-inferences are reduced when reversing
quantitative and qualitative phases. Meta-inferences resulting from mixed data should be
of quality, mitigating the effect of mixing stronger and weaker inferences from each
phase (Onwuegbuzie & Johnson, 2006). This study is a sequential quantitative –
qualitative study, and careful attention was paid to inferences made from each phase in
order to lessen the sequential legitimation threat.
Weakness minimization legitimation. This legitimation is optimized in mixed
methods research because the researcher methodically designs the study (Onwuegbuzie &
Johnson, 2006). The researcher: however, was responsible for assessing how the
strengths of one phase compensates for the weaknesses of the other, and plans the study
accordingly (Onwuegbuzie & Johnson, 2006). Weakness minimization was addressed
when the researcher analyzed and interpreted the results, producing a high-quality metainference by consciously combining a weak inference from one phase with a strong
inference from the other.
Multiple validities legitimation. According to Onwuegbuzie and Johnson (2006),
this legitimation presents itself in most mixed methods research studies. Multiple
validities legitimation refers to addressing all validities in each research phase—
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed. Threats to multiple validities were addressed as
noted in the above quantitative and qualitative threats to external and internal validity and
credibility.

30
Assumptions
A primary assumption was participants would complete the information literacy
assessment both honestly and thoroughly. Additionally, the researcher assumed the data
the assessment yielded were credible, based on its documented tested reliability and
validity. Lastly, an assumption was that researcher produced instruments, such as
qualitative interview questions, produced trustworthy data. If any of these assumptions
was not satisfied, resultant data were not accurately collected and reported. I gained
participants’ trust by assuring them confidentiality was of utmost importance, and care
was taken to ensure their anonymity, encouraging them to respond openly and honestly.
Also, the researcher advised the participants the assessment was not timed nor reported as
a grade, and they were encouraged to do their best.
Organization of Study
Provided in Chapter I was information establishing the foundation of the study,
which included the background of the study, statement of the problem, methodological
framework, educational significance, research questions, research hypotheses, conceptual
framework, theoretical framework, definition of terms, research questions, delimitations,
limitations, along with overall organization of the study. Prevailing literature and
research methodology comprises the subsequent two chapters. Chapter II encompasses
extant literature regarding comprehensive schools, the history of information literacy and
its evolution, in concert with literature on the associative skills required to be information
literate and prevailing reasons for not being information literate. Moreover, information
literacy skills requirements for employment after graduation or for college and career
readiness, and teacher/librarian collaborations within and between secondary and

31
postsecondary institutions to increase readiness are reviewed. Research methods,
inclusive of participants, sampling scheme, instruments, procedures, and data analyses
are delineated in Chapter III. Chapter IV describes findings and analysis of data, and
Chapter V is a discussion of findings.

32
CHAPTER II
Review of Related Literature
Research for this chapter represents literature defining, supporting, and
encouraging use of information literacy in secondary and postsecondary education. A
close examination of the literature helped me understand how high-poverty, minority
students attain and retain information literacy skills proficiency upon high school
graduation. Moreover, practitioners might be able to resolve any problems arising during
instruction in preparing students for the job market or college and career readiness
through understanding of the provided literature. The literature reviewed for this mixed
methods study includes topics, such as: (a) how comprehensive schools developed; (b)
how information literacy has evolved; (c) why information literacy is important in
secondary and postsecondary institutions; (d) what information literacy assessment
studies reveal; (e) what are high school instructional practices and college expectations;
(f) who can affect student proficiency; and (g) how sociocultural factors and
socioeconomic status affect high school students.
Organization of Literature Review
The review of literature employs Onwuegbuzie and Frels (2016) Seven Steps to a
Comprehensive Literature Review. The comprehensive literature review utilizes nonlinear and recursive steps to flesh out supporting literature, while engaging in a
transparent method of presenting research (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016). These steps are
as follows:


Step 1: “Exploring Beliefs and Topics”



Step 2: “Initiating the Search”

33


Step 3: “Storing and Organizing Information”



Step 4: “Selecting/deselecting Information”



Step 5: “Expanding the Search—Media, Observation(s), Documents,
Expert(s), and Secondary Data (MODES)”



Step 6: “Analyzing/synthesizing Information”



Step 7: “Presenting the CLR report” (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016, p. 58)

After following these 7-steps, the specific headings presented in this review of the
literature are: (a) comprehensive schools; (b) evolution of information literacy; (c)
information literacy in the 21st century; (d) information literacy significance; (e) high
school information literacy readiness and college expectations; (f) information literacy
instruction; (g) assessing information literacy skills and research skills; (h) instructional
collaborations in building information literacy skills; (i) sociocultural factors and
information literacy instruction; and (j) high-minority, high-poverty school
characteristics. A summary will conclude this chapter.
Adhering to the Seven Steps of a Comprehensive Literature Review
Step 1: Exploring beliefs and topics. Onwuegbuzie and Frels (2016) denoted, in
order to present a comprehensive literature review, the first step is to consider our social
and cultural belief systems based on our past life experiences. Greene (2006) postulated
four areas relate to the study of human beings. The first area is associated with one’s
core philosophical or epistemological beliefs. As noted in Chapter 1, epistemologically,
my worldview is culture and family of low-socioeconomic status, minority students
influences the learning of information literacy skills. Figure 2 represents the researcher’s
worldview—intrinsic beliefs, combined with intrinsic truths equates to knowledge.

34
Axiologically, I value education and learning for all, and I value my learning and the
ability as a practitioner to share those skills with students. By working in a lowsocioeconomic school district comprised of predominately Hispanic and African
American students, I aspire to incorporate my pedagogical knowledge and value systems
as a teacher-librarian, to inform our students on how to obtain knowledge using
information literacy skills to help them become successful societal contributors. By
researching the information literacy skills proficiency of students in my selected school
and district, I hoped to gain a better sociocultural understanding of an instructional
methodology for teaching information literacy.

Knowledge
Proficiency

Figure 2. Relationship between truth and beliefs. This figure illustrates the relationship
between what one perceives as truth--information literacy skills, and student’s beliefs—
family, social, and culture equates to knowledge received.

Step 2: Initiating the search. The next step in creating a comprehensive
literature review involved multiple undertakings (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016), which

35
included; (a) selecting pertinent databases for topic, (b) initiating a search of topic
literature, (c) examining extant topic material, (d) identifying key words for topic
searches, and (e) refining topic searches. These steps helped the researcher create an
audit trail, documenting the review of literature process and illuminating the “literature
reviewer as an original and critical thinker who inspects and reflects on all aspects of the
process and product” (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, p. 86). In adhering to step 2, initially I
selected the following databases, as indicated by Table 1, to conduct related article
searches; (a) Education Resources Information Center (ERIC), (b) Library & Information
Science Source, and (c) Information Science and Technology. After selecting the
databases, I initiated my search using Boolean terminology on my selected topic of
information literacy and college and career readiness of graduating secondary students. I
elected Full-Text and Peer Reviewed as limiters for returned articles. Examining extant
literature encompassed reading the article abstracts to determine if they were viable for
the study; and this action precipitated further identification of key words yielding
additional refined literature.

36
Table 1
Literature Search Results
Key Words

Search
Mode

Numb
er of
Hits

Search
Source

Limiters

Sampling
of Abstracts

information literacy
(abstract) AND "high
school" (open)

Boolean/
Phrase

57

ERIC

Full text

45

information literacy
(abstract) AND skills
(open) NOT
elementary (Open)

Boolean/
Phrase

462

information literacy
(abstract) AND
library or librarian
(open) AND
secondary (open)

Boolean/
Phrase

187

"information
literacy" (abstract)
AND library (open)
AND high school
(open)

Boolean/
Phrase

38

Peer
reviewed
ERIC

Full text

155

Peer
reviewed
Library &
Information
Science
Source

Full text

Library &
Information
Science
Source

Full text

115

Peer
reviewed

38

Peer
reviewed

Note. This table represents a sample of databases searched by the researcher and ensuing results.
Step 3: Storing and organizing information. According to Onwuegbuzie and
Frels (2016), literature should be stored and organized using a system that works best for
the researcher. Suggestions include basic storage, such as notecards, spreadsheets, and
research management software programs. In organizing my reference sources, I created a
Summary Table of Literature spreadsheet documenting pertinent article information such
as: (a) Article Title; (b) Article Authors; (c) Publication Year; (d) Type of Article;
Method—Qualitative, Quantitative, or Mixed Methods; (e) Abstract; (f) APA Citation;
(g) Select/Deselect; and (h) MODES-Media, Observations, Documents, Experts,

37
Secondary Data. Additionally, I used Mendeley Desktop and Mendeley Web-based
Reference Management System to store and organize my literature. With Mendeley as
my organization tool, I categorized my studies into topical literature review subheadings,
emphasized material by highlighting significant information of each article, and used the
notes section to store important literature data.
Step 4: Selecting and deselecting information. In this fourth step, the researcher
determined the studies viability in supporting the topic based on three criteria, “(a) sound
argument, (b) evidence, and (c) consequences” (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016, p. 157). In
selecting and deselecting articles for my literature review, I first rewrote the abstract to
get a better understanding of how this information applied to information literacy skills.
Afterward, I selected and deselected studies, noting on my spreadsheet the reasoning
behind the decision. Once decisions were completed, I searched the Sam Houston State
University (SHSU) online databases using the article title, downloaded the article, and
subsequently added the article to the Mendeley reference manager.
Step 5: Expanding the search MODES. To produce a comprehensive literature
review beyond gathering previous literature, the researcher should expand the search to
include various data formats (Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016). These formats included
using one or more of the following MODES: (a) Media—incorporating audio or video
recordings; (b) Observation(s)—direct observation of topic concepts; (c) Documents—
using dissertations and theses, government documents, or blogs; (d) Expert(s)—
interviewing well-cited authors; and (e) Secondary data—analyzing already used or raw
data. In discovering research for this review of literature, I uncovered several MODES to
incorporate. For media, I located a video discussing media literacy in the classroom, a

38
video on teaching information literacy, and a video suggesting the best website for
teaching and learning information literacy skills. For observations, I observed teachers
working with students on research papers and helping students navigate databases.
Additionally, I observed students using information literacy skills during research
projects, many preferring to use Google above school databases, in many instances. My
documents included a dissertation validating the reliability of the TRAILS information
literacy assessment and information literacy standards literature from the ALA website.
Step 6: Analyzing and synthesizing information. Onwuegbuzie and Frels
(2016), continued in step 6 of their 7-step process for conducting a comprehensive review
of literature, by defining the difference between analyzing and synthesizing information,
and dictating various methods for accomplishing each. Examining a summary of the
literature documented on my Excel spreadsheet, I initially analyzed the literature
abstracts and printed articles directly pertaining to my subheadings. Secondly, I reviewed
the method section, conclusion/results, and references of the studies, and categorized
each study into the appropriate topic heading or subheading, both in print and in the
Mendeley software program. Thirdly, I created an outline with my topic headings and
subheadings and included at least two APA citations to support each heading and
subheading.
Step 7: Presenting the CLR report. After the completing Steps 1-6 iteratively,
the researcher determined how the comprehensive literature review was presented
(Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016). Using the acronym “AVOW—act, visualize, orally
present, and write”—(Onwuegbuzie & Frels, 2016, p. 280), suggested inventive ways the
comprehensive literature review can be delivered. For this study, my delivery was

39
disseminated via writing. In the writing plan, Onwuegbuzie and Frels recommend the
following tasks: (a) “Determine the goal;” (b) “Determine the intended outlet;” (c)
“Determine the intended audience;” (d) “Revisit belief systems;” and (e) “Create an
outline” (pp. 280-281). The goal of this comprehensive literature review was primary
research to support the outlet of my dissertation research study. The intended audience
included, but was not limited to, professors, administrators, colleagues, peers, and
students. My belief systems, as noted earlier, manifested themselves via the literature
selected and presented in the created outline representing significant key word topics and
subtopics, as presented below.
Comprehensive Schools
The history of traditional high schools and curriculum standardization can be
traced back as far as 1893, when the National Education Association (NEA) appointed a
committee of college presidents to develop a college preparatory curriculum for
secondary students (Mirel, 2006). Charles Eliot, President of Harvard University and
leader of The Committee of Ten, framed their final report documenting every subject
taught in high school should be taught at the same higher academic level to all students
regardless of their path upon graduation (Mirel, 2006). However, as demographics in the
United States began to vary in the early 20th century, another group under the NEA
umbrella, the Commission on the Reorganization of Secondary Education, filed a report
in opposition of The Committee of Ten’s proposal (Mirel, 2006). The Commission on
the Reorganization of Secondary Education in its report, Cardinal Principles of
Secondary Education, declared school curricula should be diverse to accommodate the
differences in students’ abilities because the commission did not deem all students to be

40
college material (Mirel, 2006). Subsequently, vocational studies were added to the
traditional secondary schools to formulate a comprehensive high school, inclusive of
academic and vocational studies; thereby, catering to all student levels—from high school
to workforce through to college and career (Wraga, 1998).
Evolution of Information Literacy
Paul Zurkowski (1974) signified information literacy as an important program
objective, and libraries and librarians integral components of that program. Zurkowski
(1974) declared information literates are those who “have learned techniques and skills
for utilizing the wide range of information tools, as well as primary sources in molding
information solutions to their problems” (p. 6). All others, Zurkowski (1974) identified
as information illiterates, declaring the following: “While the population of the U.S.
today is nearly 100% literate, only a small portion—perhaps one-sixth, could be
characterized as information literates” (p. 7).
During the 1970s, bibliographic databases started emerging to what is now
considered the precursor to contemporary digital resources (Cowan, 2014). According to
Cowan (2014), these initial databases required the assistance of a librarian, who was
considered the expert in maneuvering through this new technology in bibliographic
instruction. In the 1980s, non-intuitive instruments, such as CD-ROMS and early online
databases, demanded the patron to remember operations to open, to search, to print and/or
to save data. Cowan (2014) asserted, “These new methods of searching were a kind of
grammar of research, without which the researcher would remain functionally illiterate
with regard to seeking certain types of information, mostly academic” (p. 25). Cowan

41
conceded emerging search methods compelled the researcher to utilize new vocabulary
and typing commands such as enter, return, and mouse clicking.
By the 1990s, more research was conducted online via the Internet and,
subsequently, research courses were added to curricula across the United States.
Librarians were again at the center of this continued evolution in demonstrating to
students how to unearth information by mining various academic databases in search of
credible resources (Cowan, 2014). The 21st century brought with it a new information
age and a plethora of new databases and online resources. The ACRL group of the ALA
asserted students are unable to learn everything they need to know in their discipline
within a few years of school (ACRL, 2000). Therefore, being information literate
allowed students to engage in critical thinking skills, enpabling students to search for
information; thereby, empowering students to become life-long learners (ALA, 2013).
Table 2 displays information literacy definitions through the years.

42
Table 2
Information Literacy Definitions through the Years
Author/Organization

Definition

Zurkowski (1974).

People trained in the application of
information resources to their work can
be called information literates.

Burchinal (1976, p. 11).

“To be information literate requires a new set
of skills. These include how to locate and use
information needed for problem-solving and
decision-making efficiently and effectively."

ALA (1989, p. 1)

“To be information literate, a person
must be able to recognize when
information is needed and have the
ability to locate, evaluate, and use
effectively the needed information”

Doyle (1994, p. 40)

“Information literacy is the ability to
access, evaluate and use information
from a variety of sources, to recognize
when information is needed, and to know
how to learn”

ACRL (2000, p. 2)

“Information literacy is a set of abilities
requiring individuals to “recognize when
information is needed and have the ability to
locate, evaluate, and use effectively the
needed information.” Information literacy, on
the other hand, is an intellectual framework
for understanding, finding, evaluating, and
using information - activities which may be
accomplished in part by fluency with
information technology, in part by sound
investigative methods, but most important,
through critical discernment and reasoning.
Information literacy initiates, sustains, and
extends lifelong learning through abilities
which may use technologies but are ultimately
independent of the learner”
(continued)

43
Author/Organization

Definition

Horton (2008, p. 53)

“Information literacy means the set of skills,
attitudes and knowledge necessary to know
when information is needed to help solve a
problem or make a decision, how to articulate
that information need in searchable terms and
language, then search efficiently for the
information, retrieve it, interpret and
understand it, organize it, evaluate its
credibility and authenticity, assess its
relevance, communicate it others if necessary,
then utilize it to accomplish bottom-line
purposes”

Bruce (2008, p. 6)

“Information literacy is being able to draw
upon different ways of experiencing the use of
information to learn”

Lloyd (2010, p. 1)

“Information literacy is a socio-cultural
practice, one that is embedded and
interwoven through the practices that
constitute a social field (i.e. a context)
and as such is subject to collaborative
arrangements and activities. It is
constituted by a set of interwoven
understandings that guide interaction and
is linked to the activities around
information and knowledge sanctioned
by any given setting.”

Note. Reprinted [adapted] with permission from Information literacy as an important
competency for the 21st century by S. Virkus, 2011, Journal of the Bangladesh
Association of Young Researchers, 1(2), pp. 17-18.

Information Literacy in the 21st Century
In 1982, futurist John Naisbitt penned, ‘We are drowning in information but
starved for knowledge’ (Naisbitt as cited in Breivik, 2005, p. 22). This sentiment is
particularly apropos today because students are inundated with information from the
Internet. Breivik (2005) asserted, “With the seductiveness of the Internet added to the

44
problem, it has become one of education's greatest challenges to teach students the skills
needed to test the reliability, currency, and relevance of the information they find” (p.
22). Saunders, Severyn, and Caron, 2017 proclaimed in a Pew Research Center study,
“middle and high school students conduct research almost exclusively through free online
Web services” (p. 277). Google and online encyclopedias such as Wikipedia were used
most often at 94% and 75%, respectively (Purcell, Brenner, & Rainie, 2012). When using
online sources to uncover credible information, Horrigan and Gramlich (2017) posited
75% of Hispanic and 70% of Black students desired more training. Information literacy
skills, in concert with technology competency, are essential subjects needing to be taught
during K-12 years; however, Breivik (2005) contended students coming out of high
schools are not prepared to conduct research.
Not only is information literacy seen domestically as an essential skill in the 21st
century, but internationally as well. In 2003, information literacy experts from 23
countries and all continents, convened in Prague, and The Prague Declaration: Towards
an Information Literate Society was drafted (UNESCO, 2003). The members declared an
“Information Society” is important in edifying knowledge beginning with communities
through to nations and from individuals upward to institutions. The representatives
further acknowledged:
Information Literacy encompasses knowledge of one’s information concerns and
needs, and the ability to identify, locate, evaluate, organize and effectively create,
use and communicate information to address issues or problems at hand; it is a
prerequisite for participating effectively in the Information Society, and is part of
the basic human right of lifelong learning. (UNESCO, 2003, p. 1)

45
According to the declaration, governments are responsible for closing the digital divide
by ensuring interdisciplinary courses encouraging information literacy are added to
curriculums to produce citizens who are members of an information literate society and
who are job market competitive (UNESCO, 2003).
Information Literacy Significance
Job market. According to Vansickle (2002), as students end their formal
education in high school, whether pursuing degrees, careers, or job training, they most
likely will rely on digital information in all aspects of their lives. This reliance
underscores the point that information literacy proficiency is significant in processing the
innumerable resources overwhelming students. Not understanding how to process
academic sources ultimately influences students to utilize familiar sources for research
projects, such as Google, as opposed to reliable sources (Head & Eisenberg, 2009).
Additionally, O’Sullivan and Dallas (2010) examined the research process of high school
seniors, and Asher and Duke (2012) yielded similar conclusions regarding college
students’ search strategies. Vansickle (2002) ascertained students might locate
information, but not encompass the skills to recognize whether the information is credible
and relevant. Despite digital accessibility, proficiency in using information literacy skills
in the workplace has been called into question (Inskip, 2015). The difficulty lies in the
transferability of skills from the school environment to the work environment (Inskip,
2015).
The 21st century has seen the evolution from a predominantly agricultural and
industrial based economy to an information and service-based economy (Toffler, 1990),
which requires employees with elevated skills (Hedrick, Homan, & Dick, 2015).

46
According to Hedrick et al. (2015), over fifty-percent of students entering the workforce
directly from high school are lacking skills in oral and written communication and critical
thinking and problem solving; thus, indicating young adults are ill-prepared to be
successful in the labor market (Casner-Lotto & Barrington, 2006). Information literacy
skills, the ability to locate, comprehend, and employ information, is required for a myriad
of jobs (Weiner, 2011); and employees who are desirous and capable of learning these
skills are important to companies hiring them (Salehudin, 2016).
College and career. Fifty percent of 21st century college students are forecasted
not to graduate, in part, due to information literacy skill shortfalls (Carr & Rockman,
2003). In a ProQuest (2016) survey, over 84% of librarians responded they believe
“information literacy affects graduation rates” and over 97% of librarians indicated
“information literacy contributes to success in the workforce” (p. 1). Owen (2010)
articulated five problems students have employing information literacy, which are: (a)
general knowledge deficiency in that “students don’t know what they don’t know” (p.
21); (b) research topic and questions deficiency for not adhering to a research process; (c)
web-search deficiency and lack of ability to conduct academic searches; (d) evaluating
information non-critically using nonacademic over academic articles, and (e) using
information inefficiently and lacking the ability to synthesize information. Conversely, a
study of majority first-time college students’ assessment of information literacy skills
yielded a strong relationship between honors courses—Advanced Placement,
International Baccalaureate, and College Preparatory—studied in high school and
information literacy skills competency (Fabbi, 2014). Smalley (2004) supported this

47
evidence, asserting some first-year college students are better prepared in utilizing
information literacy skills than others.
High School Information Literacy Readiness and College Expectations
Since 1998 the ALA and American Association of School Librarians (AASL)
have mapped out information literacy instruction for elementary and secondary students.
This plan includes the AASL Standards for the 21st Century Learner published in 2007 as
an instructional guideline for librarians teaching information literacy (Godbey, 2013).
Despite AASL standards, high school librarians indicated many students have not
acquired sufficient information literacy skills upon graduation (Islam & Murno, 2006).
Godbey (2013) affirmed, “the gap between the skills expected from high school
graduates and the skills actually demonstrated by entering college students reveals a need
for substantial change in information literacy instruction…” (p. 3). Presented in Table 3
are the AASL standards, as well as corresponding student learning expectations via
curriculum instruction by end of 12th-grade (AASL, 2007).

48
Table 3
American Association of School Library Teaching and Learning Standards
AASL Standard

What student is expected to know

1. Inquire, think critically, and gain
knowledge

Develop and research a thesis statement
Select the appropriate database for a
specific information need.

2. Draw conclusions, make informed
decisions apply knowledge to new
situations, and create new knowledge

Use acceptable search strategies –
Boolean, key words
Use both divergent and convergent
thinking to formulate alternative
conclusions and test them against the
evidence.

3. Share knowledge and participate
ethically and productively as members
of our democratic society

Use technology and other information
tools to organize and display knowledge
Conclude an inquiry-based research
process by sharing new understandings
and reflecting on the learning.

4. Pursue personal and aesthetic growth.

Seek information for personal learning in
a variety of formats and genres
Practice safe and ethical behaviors in
personal electronic communication and
interaction.

Note: Adapted with permission from Standards for the 21st century learner by AASL,
2007, Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
In 2017, the AASL arm ALA announced new standards, including the following
learner framework:
1. INQUIRE: Build new knowledge by inquiring, thinking critically, identifying
problems, and developing strategies for solving problems.
2. INCLUDE: Demonstrate an understanding of and commitment to
inclusiveness and respect for diversity in the learning community.

49
3. COLLABORATE: Work effectively with others to broaden perspectives and
work toward common goals.
4. CURATE: Make meaning for oneself and others by collecting, organizing,
and sharing resources of personal relevance.
5. EXPLORE: Discover and innovate in a growth mindset developed through
experience and reflection.
6. ENGAGE: Demonstrate safe, legal, and ethical creating and sharing of
knowledge products independently while engaging in a community of
practice.
7. This new framework is learner centered and concentrated on fostering critical
thinking (AASL, 2017).
High school readiness. Varlejs and Stec (2014) declared even though complaints
about lack of readiness of incoming freshmen persist, scant information on the reasons
for the lack of readiness is available. In their study seeking explanations of the lack of
information literacy readiness from high school to college, Varlejs and Stec (2014)
researched incoming freshmen enrolled in a first-year course requiring use of library
resources. The researchers examined research skills of the freshmen, utilizing their
scores to determine the level of research skills transferred from high school. The
respective school librarians were contacted to answer interview questions relating to class
visitation and information literacy instruction of their former students. Librarians were
not advised students were categorized based on high-group and low-group scores;
however, librarians of students in the higher scoring group were able to elucidate more on
class visitation schedules and library use of their students. Varlejs and Stec (2014)

50
related some school librarians distinguished between college-bound and noncollegebound students regarding information literacy, but other librarians believed “planning for
college was the rule rather than the exception” (p. 7). Neither socioeconomic nor
language indicators could be regarded as a factor in most student results; however, some
schools demonstrated a strong adverse relationship between English language learners
and college planning (Varlejs & Stec, 2014).
College expectations. Demonstrating information literacy skills proficiency in
college has not met with academic expectations of incoming students (Averill & Lewis,
2013). Moreover, academicians indicate students considered as “digital natives,” those
native to the language of technology (Prensky, 2001), are in effect “digital illiterates”
because of their inability to navigate primary and secondary information sources, instead
relying on tertiary resources (Averill & Lewis, 2013). At the postsecondary level, many
universities are requiring information literacy instruction (Averill & Lewis, 2013); yet,
despite being digital natives, many students are not proficient in differentiating between
types of resources, nor can they successfully evaluate credible and reliable sources (Islam
& Murno, 2006). In their study, Islam and Murno (2006) assessed information literacy
specialists/librarians at the secondary and postsecondary levels. After mapping the
AASL instructional standards with the ACRL standards, Islam and Murno (2006)
developed a survey to measure: (a) the most and least information literacy skills
addressed in high school; (b) librarians’ perceptions of student information literacy skills;
(c) barriers to proper information literacy instruction; and (d) how conducive library
environments are to instruction. Islam and Murno (2006) posited the standard most
taught was Standard Five, which deals with understanding access and use of information.

51
The standard least addressed was Standard Four, which focuses on efficient use of
information, such as organizing and presenting content. Regarding librarians’
perceptions of students’ information literacy proficiencies, over 76% believed students
had a positive or very positive attitude toward libraries and learning (Islam & Murno,
2006). Barriers to proper information literacy instruction were expressed in comments at
the end of the survey, and the majority expressed administrators were not supportive of
information literacy in schools. Ninety-nine percent of the librarians surveyed
acknowledged their library was equipped with the Internet and over 90% of librarians
indicated they had access to other technology and subscription databases (Islam &,
Murno, 2006).
Assessing Information Literacy and Research Skills
Information literacy skills assessment most often occurs at the postsecondary
level because colleges and universities are more financially attached to implementing
information literacy curricula for which they must account for fiscally (Connor, Radcliff,
& Gedeon, 2001). When employing information literacy skills, research performed at
California State University confirmed information literacy assessments and information
research skills provide students with the requisite strategies for student improvement and
confidence (Dunn, 2002). Results from the study revealed upper-class students clearly
evaluated resources for context and content, and implemented strategies in their research
paradigm. Contrariwise, Haglund and Herron (2008) administered a library anxiety test
in concordance with an information literacy assessment to incoming freshmen. Their
findings indicated a difference level between high-achieving and low-achieving students;
however, study results suggested “that many students could be information illiterate”

52
upon entering college (p. 50). In addition, Haglund and Herron (2008) discerned lower
skilled students exhibited exaggerated perceptions of their abilities, and they postulated
opposite perceptions for higher skilled students. There was no indication library anxiety
affected the assessment results (Haglund & Herron, 2008).
Gross and Latham (2007) similarly researched student self-assessment of their
information literacy skills in conjunction with library anxiety. In their study, Gross and
Latham (2007) employed the competency paradigm, which theorizes students’ selfassessments will be greater than their actual skill levels. Their findings, comparable to
those of Haglund and Herron (2008), did not yield a connection between self-assessment
and library anxiety; however, the findings supported the competency theory, in that the
dichotomous relationship between self-assessment and skill level emerged.
Kohrman (2003) theorized higher education students are “woefully unprepared
for the high level of technology found in postsecondary academic libraries today” (p. 1).
Research encompasses more than Internet skills; it requires research proficiency as well.
Many students are familiar with school computers and use them; yet, confidence falters
for some students when employing computers for research (Kohrman, 2003). Many
researchers implicated library anxiety, or fear of computers, as the culprit (Ayersman,
1996; Rosen, Sears, and Weil, 1987). Kohrman (2003) cited Onwuegbuzie and Jiao’s
(2000) procrastination study, affirming library anxiety related to fear of failure and also
to correlated students’ postponement of performing research to perceived barriers they
had with library staff and library comfortability. Kovalik, Yutzey, and Piazza (2012)
ascertained, by surveying high school seniors on their application of information literacy
skills for research projects, students indicated they were able to locate information

53
utilizing library resources. However, participants noted they needed assistance in
determining the best sources and in evaluating resource material (Kovalik et al., 2012).
Instructional Collaborations in Building Information Literacy Skills
The number of students transitioning from high school to college has significantly
increased over the last several years, resulting in a need for adequate preparation at the
secondary level for transitioning students to be prepared for higher education (Godbey,
2013). Collaboration between school libraries and university libraries is an integral piece
in student preparation, and has been since the later part of 1980, when universities formed
partnerships with area schools (Borthwick, 2001). Throughout the past several years,
library and information literacy standards have been published (Godbey, 2013);
nonetheless, a gap exists between “skills expected from high school graduates and the
skills actually demonstrated by entering college students” (Godbey, 2013, p. 2). Because
of the gap between knowledge and skill, Hull and Taylor (2003) proposed changes in
information literacy skills instruction and additional communication between secondary
and higher education schools. Callan and Kirst (2008) declared, “Perhaps one of the
reasons for the skills gap between high school and college is the fact that student
standards are established in separate orbits. K-16 faculty members rarely work together
on standards, curricula or assessment” (p. 3).
Kersh and Masztal (1998) analyzed collaboration studies of K-12 and university
partnerships enduring for a minimum of three years, and documented what makes a
successful collaboration. To help ensure a positive collaboration there should be: (a)
clearly defined goals, (b) detailed leadership design, (c) equally shared relationship, (d)
total commitment from partners, (e) administrative assistance, (f) program evaluation,

54
and (g) reciprocal communication (Godbey, 2013). Not only is it important to for K-12
school librarians maintain successful collaborations with postsecondary librarians to
assist students transitioning to college, but collaborations between high school teachers
and high school librarians are equally essential for effective instruction of information
literacy skills (Islam & Murno, 2006).
Sociocultural Factors and Information Literacy Instruction
Vygotsky (1978) posited there is a relationship between learning and
development, unlike other theorists who postulated learning and development occurred
dichotomously. Hypothesizing, “Learning awakens a variety of internal developmental
processes that are able to operate only when the child is interacting with people in his
environment and in cooperation with his peers… (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 90), the Russian
psychologist advanced the idea of the zone of proximal development. The ZPD is, "the
distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem
solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem-solving
under adult guidance, or in collaboration with more capable peers" (Vygotsky, 1978, p.
86).
John-Steiner and Mahn (1996) attested to Vygotsky’s theory of ZPD, when they
postulated students who bring their own culturally developed knowledge and values to
the classroom transform the class into one that is more participatory and supportive with
group exploration. Being aware of cultural backgrounds in education is important
because teachers can employ cultural information within lesson activities (Blas, 2014).
Interweaving student cultures into the classroom promotes sociocultural literacy
benefitting both teacher and student (Blas, 2014).

55
A sociocultural literate librarian can assist students in identifying topical
information, by instructing classes of various backgrounds to select subjects that can be
seen as controversial to society, but not offensive to another culture (Blas, 2014).
According to Blas (2014):
Using several topics that do not offend any cultural beliefs will allow students to
explore other cultures as they learn about the method of research. Knowledge of
culturally important beliefs is critical when introducing possible topics to
research. Sociocultural literate educators can identify safe, interesting, yet still
controversial topics as research questions for classroom examples to minimize
distraction without crossing a taboo. (p. 38)
Wells (2008) declared students learn best when their comfortability is challenged on
cultural issues.
According to Wang, Bruce, and Hughes (2013), “growing attention is being given
to the principles of sociocultural theories and their application to IL research in
community, workplace, and school contexts…” (p. 297). Wang et al. (2013) continued,
by asserting information literacy is entrenched within the sociocultural lens of various
societies, and it is imperative as educators we understand community protocols in order
to become efficient teachers of information literacy (Tuominen, Savolainen, & Talja,
2005). According to Johnson (2009), no segregation exists between cognitive
development and the social, cultural, and historical frameworks from which they develop.
Vygotsky (1978) affirmed learning is developed via two avenues, interactively between
the learner and social interactions, and interactively within learners themselves.
High-Minority, High-Poverty School Characteristics

56
As U.S. demographics continue to shift, underprivileged and minority young
adults will spearhead a decline in education levels and income levels of the U.S. job
market (Greenhow, Walker, & Kim, 2009). In 2001, NCES, indicated high-poverty
students have a lower high school graduation rate and lower college admission rate than
higher-income students (NCES, 2001). Moreover, the NCES suggested high-poverty,
minority students need more academic and social advocacy than higher-income students
(Greenhow et al., 2009).
Becker indicated a disparity when employing information and communication
technologies between high socioeconomic status students and low-socioeconomic Black
students and Hispanic students. Greenhow et al. (2009) described problems of online
connection speed, technology access and support, and teachers’ technology prowess as
reasons students might not use technology effectively and efficiently for course projects
in low-socioeconomic areas. American Association of School Librarians (2011)
conducted a national survey of urban librarians to ascertain strategies and resources to
recommend to schools with high-poverty, minority students. Fifty-one percent of
librarians responded that 80% of their students qualify for free or reduced-rate lunch, and
56% of respondents noted that at least 80% of their students were non-white. American
Association of School Librarians (2011) asserted, “Urban school librarians serve a
disproportionately high number of minority students” (p. 2).
Palardy, Rumberger, and Butler (2015) conducted a study investigating
socioeconomic, racial, and linguistic school segregation. Palardy et al.’s (2015) study
was based on the premise, “American high schools are highly segregated by
race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and English language status” (p. 1). Due to these

57
factors, minority and low-socioeconomic students’ actions and academic performances
are adversely affected because of the tendency for poor Hispanic students and poor Black
students to attend segregated schools (Palardy et al., 2015).
Summary
As noted in the literature reviewed, the meaning of what information literacy is
and what it means to be information literate has evolved over the years. Research
indicates, for varied reasons, short-falls exist in literacy skills of graduating job searchers
and of students seeking higher education. Nevertheless, this research may help eradicate
these deficits, by determining relationships between knowledge assessment and
perceptions of information literacy skills and utilization levels of students at these diverse
levels of achievement. By analyzing student assessments and student perceptions,
insights into the best method of instruction for this particular demographic might be
revealed. Additionally, the review of literature demonstrates collaboration between
school librarians and teachers and secondary librarians and postsecondary academic
librarians are opportunities to remedy shortfalls in information literacy skills. These
collaborations offer an opportunity to better prepare students regardless if they are
entering the job market immediately after high school graduation or matriculating into
postsecondary education.
The research in this study, assessing knowledge and perceptions of information
literacy skills, may add to the knowledge base of uncovering best practices to develop
skill levels. These skills are important for poor, minority students, who are at different
academic levels, to grasp when researching job markets or for being college and career
ready. Being information literate allows individuals to think critically about the

58
information they confront, enabling them to evaluate it independently, which; therefore,
empowers them to govern their own educational development in becoming lifelong
learners.
Research presented in Chapter II encompassed: (a) comprehensive schools; (b)
evolution of information literacy; (c) information literacy in the 21st century; (d)
information literacy significance; (e) high school information literacy readiness and
college expectations; (f) information literacy instruction; (g) assessing information
literacy skills and research skills; (h) instructional collaborations in building information
literacy skills; (i) sociocultural factors and information literacy instruction; and (j) highminority, high-poverty school characteristics. A summary concluded this chapter.
Chapter III provides an explanation of mixed methods methodology, including; (a)
sampling framework, (b) research designs, (c) research instruments, (d) research
procedures, and (e) data analysis.

59
CHAPTER III
Method
Introduction
In this mixed methods research study, survey data and interview responses were
collected to provide comprehensive data analyses of participant assessments and
participant perspectives on information literacy knowledge (Creswell, 2002). Johnson
and Onwuegbuzie (2004) indicated the design strength of doing mixed methods research
is how pictures and texts can significantly support the figures. In contrast, numbers can
add precision to support pictures and texts (Johnson & Onwuegbuzie, 2004).
Additionally, conclusions can be stronger via integration and validation of evidence, and
weaknesses of each data type can be minimized as a result of data convergence. Previous
studies relating to this subject focused primarily on first-year postsecondary students who
lacked proficiency in information literacy skills for college research (Averill & Lewis,
2013; Smith et al., 2013; Varlejs & Stec, 2014). Moreover, scant literature exists offering
insight into high-poverty, minority students in an urban metropolitan environment vis-àvis utilization of information literacy skills for job market and college and career
readiness upon graduation. In this research, requisite information literacy skills for 12thgrade students were evaluated for post-secondary job market and college and career
readiness. In addition, student perceptions of information literacy skills required for job
market and college and career readiness were examined.
The methodological framework for this study continues to follow Collins,
Onwuegbuzie, and Sutton’s (2006) 13-steps for mixed methods research with the
Planning Stage: Step 6 and Step 7, and the first step of the Implementation Stage: Step 8.

60
As a review, Chapter I began with the first 5 steps: (a) stating the mixed goal of the
study; (b) identifying the mixed research objective; (c) determining the rationale for
utilizing a mixed methods design, as well as the study rationale; (d) recognizing the
purpose for the study, along with the purpose for employing quantitative and qualitative
methods; and (e) detailing the quantitative, qualitative, and mixed research questions.
This chapter begins with a review of the research questions and hypotheses,
followed by Step 6 and Step 7—the mixed methods sampling design and the mixed
methods research design, respectively. The mixed methods sampling design includes a
description of population and participants and describes the sampling scheme and
research design in the quantitative phase and in the qualitative phase. Additionally,
ethical considerations are explained for each. Step 8—the data collection process
follows. The data collection process includes descriptions of the quantitative instrument,
implementation procedures, and data analysis method. An overview of the qualitative
instrument, implementation procedures, and data analysis process ensues. Chapter III
concludes with a description of the mixed methods data analysis procedure and chapter
summary.
Step 5: Research Questions
Quantitative research question. The following quantitative research question
addressed high-poverty, minority secondary students’ scores on an information literacy
skills assessment in comparison to grade-point average.
To determine if a correlation was present between information literacy skills
proficiency and academic achievement, as measured by GPA of 12th-grade high school
students in a diverse school setting, the following research question was explored:

61
What is the relationship between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive school?
Qualitative research questions. The following questions were addressed after
the quantitative phase by selected participants based on scoring criteria:
1. What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a traditional
comprehensive school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for
job market or for college and career readiness?
2. How have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced
the perceptions of information literacy skills needed for job market or for
college and career readiness?
Mixed methods research question. The following mixed methods research
question was addressed to reveal a deeper understanding of the connection between the
assessment and the perceptions:
According to Bandura’s (1971) three key concepts, children learn by observing,
children need a sense of accomplishment, and children’s behavior change is not an
indicator of learning. Integrating these three concepts, what is the relationship between
perceptions of two groups of students; specifically, 12th-grade higher-achieving and
12th-grade lower-achieving students’ information literacy skills and their information
literacy assessment proficiency?
Quantitative Research Hypotheses
The following two quantitative hypotheses were tested in this study:

62
1. A relationship exists between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive
school;
2. A difference exists in information literacy knowledge between higher-achieving
and lower-achieving 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive high
school on an information literacy assessment.
Step 6: Research Sampling Design
Continuing with Step 6 of the 13 steps, Sampling Design includes information on
sample size, sampling scheme, and sample characteristics. According to Onwuegbuzie
and Collins (2007), mixed methods sampling designs can be grouped by time orientation,
such as if the components occur sequentially or concurrently, and by the relationship
between the quantitative and qualitative samples, such as, if the samples are: (a)
identical—the same participants are in each study component; (b) parallel—participants
in quantitative and qualitative stages are different; however, one is drawn from the other;
(c) nested—participants in one phase of the research are a subset of the other phase; or
(d) multilevel—involves participants representing two or more samples coming from
different populations samples. The design utilized in this mixed methods study was
sequential nested—participants in the qualitative phase were selected from the
quantitative sample group.
Study Population. To address sample size and sample characteristics for both the
quantitative and qualitative phases of the study, participants were selected from an
overall population of approximately 4,101, 12th-grade students enrolled in a large
metropolitan urban school district. The majority of the student population of the district

63
is represented by Hispanic students (72.6%) followed by African American students
(23.1%), with small percentages of White students (2.2%) and Asian students (1.2%)
(TEA, 2017). The district reports 34.5% of the population are comprised of English
Learners.
Furthermore, the district documents economically disadvantaged and at-risk
students at rates of 86.2% and 73.0%, respectively (TEA, 2017). The initial sample
framework of this study, at the beginning of the August 2017 school year, was
approximately 920, 12th-grade students attending a high-minority, high-poverty, Title I
school in the selected school district. Students included in the sample framework were
impacted by a hurricane. The displacement of students from the hurricane affected the
participant sample, causing the sampling framework of 12th-grade students to be reduced
to approximately 835 by study completion. Texas Education Agency (2017) reported the
following ethnic distribution for the selected campus: (a) 91% Hispanic; (b) 6.5% African
American; (c) 1.8% White; (d) .02% Asian; and (e) .03% Two or More Races.
Moreover, 84.8% of students classified as Economically Disadvantaged, 76.6% of
students classified as At Risk, and 17.2% of students classified as English Language
Learners were reported (TEA, 2017).
Study Participants. The campus was purposefully selected from seven senior
high school campuses across the district. The traditional comprehensive high school of
approximately 3,000 10th, 11th, and 12th grade students, included a mixture of low- and
high-achieving students, and had a school librarian/literacy specialist and library onsite.
The school selected for the study was predominately Hispanic, yet ethnically diverse, and
realized a cross-section of academic levels. Students registered in the selected school and

64
enrolled in six 12th-grade English 4 classes were chosen utilizing convenience sampling.
After attending a meeting with the six teachers where the researcher asked permission to
talk to students, the researcher visited the 12th-grade English classes to seek participant
volunteers. After describing the purpose and procedures of the study to the class,
students who raised their hand, volunteering to participate, received the letter of consent
if they were 18-years of age or over; or students received the letter of consent and parent
permission form if they were below 18 years-old.
Sampling Scheme - quantitative phase. A fully mixed sequential nested
sampling design of equal status (Leech & Onwuegbuzie, 2009) was employed. A
convenience scheme was applied for the quantitative phase, wherein students who
volunteered were assessed using an online Information Literacy Assessment (ILA).
According to Onwuegbuzie and Leech (2007a), convenience sampling indicates a
participant’s willingness and availability to participate in a research study. G*Power 3.1
statistical software (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007) was utilized to determine
the smallest sample size necessary to ensure accurate and reliable findings (Onwuegbuzie
& Leech, 2007a). The estimated minimum sample size was n = 115 students and was
ascertained by employing an a priori statistical power analysis (Cohen, 1988) for a
Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. The statistical power analysis using
G*Power 3.1 (Faul et al., 2007) revealed a sample size of 115 participants was needed to
detect a moderate effect size (i.e., f = .3) at the 5% level of statistical significance and a
power of .95. The final sample was comprised of 129 participants (i.e., 78 females, 51
males; and 118 Hispanics, 10 African Americans, and one White), exceeding the

65
estimated a priori minimum sample size. Hence, indicating adequate statistical power for
testing the hypotheses (Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2004).
Using a roster of students having permission to participate, I generated, via
TRAILS, a portable document format (PDF) of 160, 4-digit codes, and I assigned a
unique 4-digit number to each student at the time of assessment. Concurrently, I
documented the associated self-reported student GPA for each student; thus, formulating
a student roster of assessment activation codes and GPAs privy only to me. I gave listed
students, who signed and returned their informed letter of consent to participate in the
assessment, and when necessary a parent permission form, their letter of assent to be
signed prior to the assessment. Participants were given their individual code to access the
online assessment on a yellow sticky-note for them to keep for accessing their scores at a
later time. The TRAILS assessment login page was displayed on the computers in the
computer lab by the researcher. Students used their assigned 4-digit code to initiate the
assessment.
Sampling scheme - qualitative phase. Creswell (2007) noted three to five
interviews are adequate for a case study; however, Onwuegbuzie and Leech (2007a)
asserted, “qualitative researchers should provide a rationale for decisions made regarding
the length and number of interviews” (p. 108). Participants in the qualitative phase were
selected employing extreme-case sampling (Johnson & Christensen, 2013) via the
findings from the quantitative assessment data portion. To further explore student
perceptions of information literacy skills proficiency and utilization of information
literacy skills for the job market and college and career readiness, participants for this
phase were selected based on two criteria, either not meeting or exceeding a minimum

66
score on the Tool for Real-time Assessment of Information Literacy Skills. Four
participants were selected for the qualitative phase. Students selected were advised in the
initial letter of consent, and parent permission form when necessary, distributed and
explained by the researcher. However, the researcher, upon scheduling the interview,
reviewed the purpose and procedures of the qualitative phase of the study.
Criterion sampling (Onwuegbuzie & Collins, 2007) and purposeful comparative
sampling (Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2007b) were used qualitatively to further analyze the
assessment scores (Onwuegbuzie & Collins, 2007). A class report was generated from
the TRAILS assessment, and the extreme-case criterion, participants whose assessment
scores fell above 70% or whose assessment scores were below 30% on the assessment
reports, was applied. The comparative sampling was employed to compare student
scores with each other, such as by gender and home language. Due to the low number of
diverse ethnicities and equally as low number of participants in ethnic categories other
than Hispanic, comparative sampling was not used for ethnicity. Using the PDF roster
generated for the quantitative phase, I selected four participants for the 30-minute
individual semi-structured interviews based on score criteria. Students selected were
reminded of the letter of consent distributed and explained by the researcher, describing
purpose, procedures, and GPA disclosure for the quantitative phase of the study. The 30minute individual interviews were conducted during normal school hours in the
unoccupied library computer laboratory or in a vacant office. The selected location was
based on the quietest and least likely room to be interrupted during the interview.
Participants were offered selected dates and times from which to choose, to meet their
respective schedules for their interview.

67
Ethical Considerations
Prior to research commencement, full disclosure of the study’s intentions and
interview procedures were reviewed with appropriate school district personnel and the
university’s International Review Board (IRB), obtaining permissions from each to
conduct the study. I applied for permission to conduct all phases of the study through the
Sam Houston State University Institutional Review Board (IRB), as well as permissions
from the requisite superintendents and principals of the independent school district
overseeing the participating school campus. After receiving permissions from both the
participating school district and the IRB committee, participants were recruited and
apprised of the purpose and process of the study. Informed consent, encompassing the
quantitative and qualitative portion, was obtained from all interested participants for
TRAILS assessment, GPA disclosure, and interview. Parental consent for participants
under the age of 18 was also obtained. Assessments were conducted in the library
laboratory, which consisted of 14 computers. No more than eight participants were
assessed at one time, and the researcher remained with the participants during the
assessment. Average assessment completion time was 30 minutes; however, students
were allowed up to one-hour to complete. Two of the individual interviews took place in
the library computer laboratory, and two took place in an unoccupied office near the
library. Interviews lasted between 17 and 30 minutes. Participants were advised their
participation could be terminated at any time during the study. Names and any other
identifying participant information were kept confidential for both the quantitative and
qualitative phases, and pseudonyms were used where needed. All resulting data,
including all audio recordings and video recordings, were stored in a secure location and

68
will be held for a period of 3 years, after which time they will be destroyed (Sieber,
1992). I also advised participants that TRAILS scores, self-reported GPAs, and all other
data will remain confidential, and kept locked in a file cabinet in the librarians’ office that
only the researcher can access. (See Appendix A for IRB permission and Appendix B for
parental consent and student assent forms.)
Step 7: Research Design
The study used an equally, mixed non-experimental research design, sequential
and purposeful in nature. The quantitative portion utilized both a correlational research
design (i.e., Research Questions 1-3) and a quasi-experimental research design (i.e.,
Research Question 4), and was reflective of a postpositivist paradigm (Creswell, 2009).
A social constructionist paradigm research approach was utilized qualitatively.
According to Gergen (1985), “Social constructionist inquiry is principally concerned with
explicating the processes by which people come to describe, explain, or otherwise
account for the world (including themselves) in which they live” (p. 266).
This study included a mixed methods research design, reflective of a pragmatist
paradigm. As a pragmatist (Onwuegbuzie & Leech 2005), applying a mixed methods
framework to this research allowed for a rich study via substantial quantitative analyses
of the participants’ information literacy skills knowledge through the TRAILS
assessment, and a comparative uncovering and examination of qualitative data and
themes through targeted follow-up interviews (Creswell, 1995). Being a pragmatist
allowed me to concentrate on the research problem (Creswell, 2009) of information
literacy skills knowledge and proficiency in a low-socioeconomic, high-minority high
school, employing quantitative and qualitative methods to understand the differences and

69
similarities among the varied students. Epistemologically and axiologically, my view
was that culture influences the knowledge and value of high-poverty, minority students’
erudition of information skills. As a high school information literacy specialist/librarian
in a low-socioeconomic, high-minority urban school district, my desire was to understand
how the results of this research can support students, at all achievement levels, to be
prepared to effectively and efficiently use information literacy skills after graduation
when directly entering the job market or to be college and career ready when continuing
their academic endeavors. Quantitative and qualitative data for this study were collected
sequentially and subsequently analyzed consecutively.
Step 8: Data collection
Instrument quantitative phase. The quantitative instrument was the TRAILS
knowledge assessment designed by researchers at Kent State University, as a tool for
librarians and teachers to assess students’ information literacy skills (Schloman &
Gedeon, 2007). TRAILS is an online multiple-choice assessment that was created using
the AASL Standards for the 21st-Century Learner, and the instrument is publicly funded
and offered at no-cost (Schloman & Gedeon, 2007). According to Schloman and Gedeon
(2007), TRAILS was “designed as a classroom tool that enables a library media specialist
to easily obtain a snapshot of skill levels in order to better tailor instruction efforts” (p.
45).
The researcher created a class session of the online assessment for participants.
After signing assent form, each participant was assigned a distinct 4-digit code for each
student to input to launch the assessment instead of their name. Therefore, anonymity
was assured for anyone other than the researcher, and pseudonyms were assigned for

70
discussion purposes. The researcher also programmed the TRAILS assessment to display
questions randomly, thereby, discouraging collaboration between participants. I
facilitated the TRAILS assessments, remaining with students as they completed the
questions, and only I had access to the Excel spreadsheet of codes given to each
participant. Even though students were allowed one hour to complete the 45-question
general assessment (Appendix C), all students completed the assessment in under one
hour. The TRAILS encompassed the following five information literacy research
categories: (a) developing the research topic; (b) identifying possible sources; (c)
developing, using, and revising strategic searches; (d) evaluating sources and
information; and (e) recognizing responsible use of information ethically and legally
(TRAILS, 2016). The assessment responses consisted of four answer choices per
question, and students were scored on the percent of total correct responses. Feedback to
the researcher was provided in the form of reports for total group and per individual
student basis on each of the five research process categories. This feedback allowed the
librarian and 12th-grade English teachers to determine student strengths and weaknesses
in conceptualizing information literacy research skills within the various assessment
categories. By using the original link to TRAILS and inputting their original student
code, once the questionnaires were completed and the class session closed, students could
view their scores and review items in order assessed. By reviewing responses, students
were allowed to work on weaknesses and improve skills before entering the job market,
workforce training, or college admission.
Salem (2014), conducted a reliability test on the four TRAILS grade-level
assessments, 3rd, 6th, 9th, and 12th-grade, using the Rasch model of Item Response

71
Theory. The reliability test was, “based on overall scale reliability, item fit to scale,
distractor function, lack of bias based on differential item functioning analysis, item
difficulty spread, and content coverage” (Salem, 2014, p. ii). On the 12th-grade 35question draft test utilized, “the scale level indices indicate an acceptable level of test
reliability (a = 0.82)” to test information literacy” (Salem, 2014, p. 94). The item
reliability index indicating items will remain in their order of difficulty after repeated
administrations was item reliability = 0.98. According to Salem, reliability scores are on
a 0 to 1 scale with closer to 1 being favored (Salem as cited in Bond & Fox, 2007).
Additionally, Salem (2004) tested construct validity of the TRAILS assessment and
concluded the assessment measures information literacy and results “also provide
evidence that the student performance on the tests is not related to the reading involved
on test items” (pp. 132-133).
Qualitative phase. According to Johnson and Christensen (2013), the foci of
qualitative research are on examining events or phenomena and on comprehending
idiosyncrasies of distinctive populations. Johnson and Christensen (2013) expressed the
stated purpose in a qualitative study should help the researcher:
1. “Convey a sense of an emerging design by stating that the purpose of the
study is to describe, understand, develop, or discover something” (p. 98).
2. “State and define the central idea that you want to describe, understand or
discover” (p. 98).
3. “State the method by which you plan to collect and analyze the data by
specifying whether you are conducting an ethnographic study, grounded
theory, case study, or phenomenological study” (p. 98).

72
4. “State the unit of analysis and/or the research site (e.g., fourth-grade students
participating in a specific program)” (p. 98).
Consequently, the qualitative instrument employed in this study was comprised of
individual semi-structured interviews, a dialogue between one or more participants, as
defined by Creswell (2005), via open-ended interview questions as reflected in Appendix
D. According to Creswell (2003, 2007), interviews require preparation, construction of
effective questions, and interview implementation. The interview questions used in the
qualitative phase were constructed based on information literacy skills learned,
information literacy skills used, and on how they feel about their assessment responses.
Additionally, questions were developed incorporating my theoretical framework of how
sociocultural—family, social, cultural—factors affect academic achievement. Questions
included, but were not limited to how family, social, and cultural influences have affected
students’ perceptions of and acclimatization to learning information literacy skills for job
market and college and career readiness. In addition, non-verbal communication data as
identified by Onwuegbuzie and Frels (2012) was analyzed. One or more of the nine nonverbal cues analyzed and interpreted are: (a) proxemics—physical distance between
researcher and interviewee; (b) chronemics-pacing of speech and length of conversation
silence; (c) kinesics—body posture and/or movement; (d) paralinguistics—pitch, volume,
voice quality; (e) optics—use of eyes during interview; (f) linguistics—language syntax;
(g) oculesics—eye use during conversation; (h) olfaction—noticeable smells during
interview; (i) gestation—sense of taste; and (j) kinetics--use of touch (Onwuegbuzie &
Frels, 2012). Wolgemuth et al. (2015) proclaimed:

73
… a growing body of literature points to the potential value of interviews as
opportunities for self-reflection, appraisal, catharsis, being listened to, responded
to emphatically, and to being validated (p. 354)
By employing a semi-structured one-on-one individual interview, follow-up questions
were asked in order for participants to expound upon responses when necessary.
Procedure
Quantitative phase procedure. The researcher established a class session,
specifically for study participants, in the TRAILS online assessment program prior to
data collection. A class code was generated allowing class results and individual student
statistics to be viewed during and after assessment completion. Afterward, the researcher
created an Excel spreadsheet of 160 4-digit numbers, developed from the TRAILS
website, to assign to participants for anonymity. Next, a meeting was scheduled with
12th-grade English Language Arts (ELA) teachers to discuss the research and the benefits
to the participants and teacher. Permission had already been granted by the principal to
proceed with the assessment, and ELA teachers also granted permission to speak to their
individual classes for volunteers. After consent forms were distributed and collected by
the researcher, time and date for the assessments were scheduled. Students were
scheduled by contacting each 12th-grade English teacher per class who had study
volunteers. Permission from respective English teachers was asked for the students to
come to the library during their English period. If students were not available during the
English class, students were requested during an elective class. Library student aides
delivered official school student request passes to participants in their respective classes;

74
however, only the English teachers, participants, and researcher were cognizant of the
reason for the library visit.
After arriving in the library, the participant(s) was escorted into the library’s
computer laboratory, and each student was given the participant assent form to sign.
Next, a 4-digit code was written down and handed to each participant. At that time,
participants were asked to self-report GPA. Collegiate and weighted GPAs and class
standings were subsequently verified through a spreadsheet of all 12th-grade students
from the Counseling Department. The quantitative phase occurred over a 5-week period,
employing the following implementations by me as the researcher:
1. Week 1: Visited three of the six 12th-grade ELA teachers and talked to students
about the study’s purpose and the assessment process. The process was described
to each of the three English classes and volunteers were given consent/parent
forms. A lock-box was placed in each classroom for students to insert signed
forms. Signed forms were collected on Wednesday and again on Friday.
2. Week 2: The TRAILS information literacy assessment was conducted for students
who had returned their consent forms and requisite parent permission forms for
students under 18-years of age. Forms were emptied from lock-boxes on
Wednesday and at end of the week.
3. Week 3: The TRAILS information literacy assessment was conducted for students
unable to be assessed the previous week, and the researcher visited more English
classrooms seeking volunteers. Forms were collected from lock-boxes at the end
of the week.

75
4.

Week 4: The TRAILS information literacy assessment was conducted for
students unable to take the previous week and the final group of English
classrooms was visited to seek participants. Lock-boxes were emptied on
Wednesday and Friday of the week.

5. Week 5: The TRAILS information literacy assessment was conducted with
remaining students who had turned in consent/parent forms; however, due to
scheduling, had not been assessed. Lock-boxes were retrieved from all 12thgrade English teachers’ classrooms.
All forms were distributed by the researcher via English classes approximately one
week prior to each TRAILS assessment date. The assessment date was determined by
the researcher and affected teachers based on student availability during their English
classes. If the participant was not available during their English class, he or she was
requested to come to the library during an elective class. A locked box was left in
each 12th-grade English teacher’s classroom, and the returned and signed documents
were collected by the researcher from each class twice per week during the week
previous to the scheduled assessments. All signed documents were kept secure in a
lockable file cabinet in the researcher’s office. The researcher’s office remained
closed and locked whenever the researcher was not there.
Using a roster of students having permission to participate, I generated, via
TRAILS, a PDF of 160 4-digit codes; and I assigned a unique 4-digit number to each
student at the time of assessment. Concurrently, I documented the associated selfreported student GPA for each student; thus, formulating a student roster of
assessment activation codes and GPAs privy only to me. I gave listed students, who

76
signed and returned their informed letter of consent to participate and parent
permission form if necessary, their letter of assent to be signed prior to the
assessment. Participants were given a unique 4-digit code on a yellow sticky-note,
and students were instructed to retain the code in order for them to access their score
after all participants were evaluated and the assessment closed. Prior to meeting with
each participant group, the researcher arranged the computer laboratory to have the
TRAILS login page displayed on the computers. Students used their individually
assigned 4-digit code to activate the assessment. No more than eight participants
were assessed at one time, and in many cases as few as one. The researcher remained
with the participants during the assessment to ensure silence.
The postpositivist paradigm (Creswell, 2009), exhibited in the quantitative phase,
was used to explore how knowledge of information literacy skills affects academic
achievement. This was accomplished by comparing information literacy assessment
scores, a percentage score based on correct number of answers of the 45 questions, to a
self-reported student collegiate GPA and a weighted grade point average. According to
York, Gibson, and Rankin (2015), GPA is an indicator of academic success, defined as
“academic achievement, attainment of learning objectives, acquisition of desired skills
and competencies…” (p. 5). A correlational analysis was used to compare the TRAILS
assessment scores and GPAs of participants to determine the relationship between
information literacy skills knowledge and academic achievement.
Qualitative phase procedure. Creswell (2007) noted three to five interviews are
adequate for a case study; however, Onwuegbuzie and Leech (2007a) asserted,
“qualitative researchers should provide a rationale for decisions made regarding the

77
length and number of interviews” (p. 108). Not only does Creswell (2007) suggest that
participants selected are appropriate, but the interview should be conducted in an
appropriate environment that is comfortable and unrestricted, to cultivate information
sharing. Prior to commencement of the interviews, full disclosure of the intentions and
procedures of the study were reviewed with each participant, written informed consent
was granted by the participant, and no risks to the participant were revealed. The semistructured one-on-one interviews of the selected four students were conducted over a
two-week period.
The four participants were purposefully selected based on the extreme case of
lowest and highest scores. Two students, one African American male, and one Hispanic
female were initially selected from the lowest scorers; however, the Hispanic female did
not feel comfortable being interviewed in English; therefore, another Hispanic female
scoring next lowest was selected. Two Hispanic males scored the same highest score on
the assessment, and interviewee selection was based on convenience of availability. The
female participant selected from the higher scoring participants, was purposefully
selected as she was also the valedictorian of the class. The interviews were conducted
during normal school hours and at times conducive to the student. The interviews were
executed within one-week after the completion of the quantitative phase. Two interviews
were conducted in the computer room of the school library and two interviews were
conducted in an empty office just outside of the library. Selection of interview location
was based on the quietest room at the scheduled time. The computer laboratory consisted
of 14 computers surrounding the square perimeter, and two round tables with four chairs

78
each were situated within the middle of the room. The room had two windows, covered
with blinds, facing into the library. The blinds remained closed during each interview.
Each student was asked to participate in a 30-minute individual interview,
consisting of 15, basic descriptive, open-ended questions (Appendix D), and each student
was video and audio recorded. Recordings were subsequently transcribed by Rev.com
transcription service, and to maintain anonymity, no identifying factors were included.
The information on the video and audio recordings were triangulated as I listened to the
audio recordings and viewed and listened to the video recordings. Participants member
checked their respective transcript for accuracy and authenticity (Creswell, 2003).
Michael, a male of Hispanic ethnicity whose home language was Spanish, was the
first participant interviewed after the close of the quantitative information literacy
assessment. Michael’s interview was conducted in the school library’s computer
laboratory at approximately 7:50 in the morning during his off period. The interview,
which lasted approximately 17 minutes, was both audio and video recorded. Michael has
a collegiate GPA of 3.16 and a weighted GPA of 5.86, scoring 78% on the TRAILS
assessment. After hand delivering the interview transcript to Michael, I asked him to
review it and return to me personally. The following week, Michael visited the library
and advised there were no corrections or changes to the verbiage, and he was satisfied
with the transcript as it was written.
Darius, an African American male with English speaking parents, was the second
participant to be interviewed; and he represents the lowest extreme of the TRAILS
assessment results scoring 22%. This interview was held the same day as Michael’s, and
also in the school library computer laboratory. However, Darius’s interview was

79
conducted in the early afternoon during his fourth-period class where he is assigned as an
aide to a counselor housed in the library. The interview lasted just over 17 minutes.
Approximately one week after the interview, Darius was given the interview transcript on
a Friday during his same fourth-period counselor aide class. Darius was asked to review
the transcript for authenticity of verbiage and meaning, and he was requested to return the
transcript to the researcher with any corrections or additions. Upon seeing Darius, the
following week during his 4th-period class, I asked him if there were any corrections to
his transcript interview, and he indicated everything was correct and he had no additions.
Darius’s collegiate GPA is 2.40, his weighted GPA is 4.64.
The third interviewee was Diana, and she represents the higher extreme, scoring
73% on the TRAILS assessment. Diana was a Hispanic female, her home language is
Spanish, and she is the valedictorian of the graduating class, holding a 3.98 collegiate
GPA and a 7.76 weighted grade point average. This interview was conducted in an
empty office just outside of the library during the afternoon of the scheduled fourthperiod class time. Diana’s interview was conducted the following week after the first two
interviews. Diana was an early release student, having no fourth- and fifth- period
classes, and the interview lasted just over 30 minutes.
The fourth interviewee, Eliza, has a 2.24 GPA and scored at 27% on the TRAILS
assessment. This interview was conducted in the same empty office as the third
interview. Eliza was requested to come to the library by the researcher previous to the
interview, and at that time she was scheduled to return during the fifth-period of the
school day when she was scheduled for early release with no class scheduled. Eliza’s
interview lasted over 34 minutes. The following week when Eliza visited the library, she

80
was given the transcript and asked to review it for errors or changes. Approximately oneweek later Eliza visited the library again and stated there were no corrections; however,
she had been encouraged by her boyfriend to add more information about her family. As
of this writing, additional information has not been received.
Guba and Lincoln’s (1989) authenticity criterion of fairness ensures data are
authentically co-constructed by having participants member check the transcript to
improve accuracy and credibility (Creswell, 2003). Other authenticity criteria embodying
constructionist understanding and assisting in increasing legitimation that might be
pertinent to this study are: (a) ontological authenticity—the degree to which the
researcher evaluates how the participant has become more knowledgeable and aware, (b)
educative authenticity—the criteria by which those involved in the interview process
have become more considerate of others, (c) catalytic authenticity—the extent by which
actions are facilitated and stimulated by participants, and (d) tactical authenticity—the
extent to which participants are empowered to act on the results and ensuing
comprehension from a given study. Validating and legitimating data is inclusive of Step
10 in the 13-step mixed methods process.
After member checking the transcribed documents, each participant indicated
their responses were accurately reflected. Using my field notes, created after speaking
with each interviewee regarding their transcription, I evaluated the dialogue between the
researcher and interviewees when discussing their transcript for genuineness of meaning.
Ontological authenticity was evident when Darius told the researcher after reading the
transcript he had a better understanding of information literacy. Catalytic authenticity
was exhibited by Eliza when she indicated, after prompting from her boyfriend, she

81
wanted to add more information about her family dynamics. Table 4 reflects the five
authenticity criteria used in the interviews for this study.
Table 4
Authenticity Criteria
Criteria
Criteria 1:

Provide equitable representation of stakeholder values through processes
such as interviewee member checking and interviewer debriefing.

Criteria 2:

Promote the interactive growth of stakeholders through interviewing and
debriefing processes.

Criteria 3:

Clarify both the representative and divergent values of stakeholders

Criteria 4:

Encourage stakeholder actions to emerge from increased awareness and
resolution of divergent understandings

Criteria 5:

Support the ability of stakeholders to collect, document, follow up on, and
collaboratively assess data from a position of increased understanding of
both representative and divergent values

Note. Criteria adapted from Guba and Lincoln (1989) and Onwuegbuzie et al. (2008).

I compared the video recording to the audio transcription, employing transcribing
conventions for editing purposes. By comparing the video data to the audio transcription,
I was able to triangulate the participants’ narrative with their voiced expressions, as well
as expand my scope of understanding their responses, by analyzing their chronemics and
paralinguistics from the video recording (Denham & Onwuegbuzie, 2013). Basic
descriptive questions were included in the interviews allowing participants to inform and
to illuminate their experiences of learning and using information literacy for the job
market or college and career readiness. Moreover, by using a hermeneutic approach in
this explanatory multiple case study in this phase of the mixed methods research design

82
(Ivankova, Creswell, & Stick, 2006), I gained insight and understanding into student
motivations for learning, comprehending, and using information literacy skills.
To establish study authenticity, the researcher participated in a debriefing
interview (Guba and Lincoln, 1989). The debriefing interview was conducted digitally
by having a cohort member ask questions of me to which I responded digitally. I was
asked three pre-selected questions: (a) In what ways did knowing something about your
interviewee advance, enhance, or distract from the interview and the interpretation
process?; (b) What findings surprised you?; and (c) To what extent do you think your
own empathy and insights of the participants evolved during the course of the interviews?
These questions were utilized as means to assess researcher bias (Onwuegbuzie, Leech,
& Collins, 2008). As mentioned previously, authenticity gauges are: (a) ontological
authenticity; (b) educative authenticity; (c) catalytic authenticity; and (d) tactical
authenticity (Guba & Lincoln, 1989) and were employed to triangulate researcher
authenticity of the study.
Step 9: Data Analysis
Quantitative analysis. Employing a statistical power analysis of .95 using
G*Power 3.1 a priori sample size of 115 participants sufficed for conducting a Pearson
product-moment correlation. Effect sizes were reported for all significant findings, and a
.05 level of statistical significance was used. Conditions for small, medium, and large
effect sizes (Cohen, 1988) was determined utilizing the omega squared (Field, 2005), and
a statistical analysis tool, such as Microsoft’s Statistical Package for Social Sciences
version 24 (SPSS) software program, was utilized to analyze all data collected in the
quantitative phase of this study. A data file was created in the SPSS and all data were

83
imported for analyses employing Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. Data
files analyzed included assessment data scores, GPAs – collegiate, based on a 4.0 scale
and weighted, based on added points for Advanced Placement (AP) and Gifted and
Talented (GT) classes, and other descriptive statistics including gender, ethnicity, and
home language.
Qualitative analysis. Qualitative data analyses were completed by employing the
software program QDA Miner Version 5.0.18 (Provalis Research Version, 2016a) to code
and to categorize emerged themes and QDA Miner’s component part, generating
significant topics. Typically, understanding what a person says is directly correlated to
their word usage, and repeated words are more salient to them (Ryan & Bernard, 2003).
These emergent data were used to determine themes and significant meanings by use of
constant comparative method and discourse analysis. By examining participants’
interview texts, linguistic expressions, and social attitudes related to educational values
and information literacy were analyzed and exposed via the constant comparative method
(Glaser, 1965). Additionally, interviewees’ data were mined seeking language to edify
Gee’s (2005) seven building tasks. By applying multiple analyses to the data, the study’s
veracity was bolstered (Leech & Onwuegbuzie, 2007).
The constant comparative method is situated within the grounded theory approach
to qualitative analysis (Glaser & Straus, 1967), with comparison utilized as the main tool
for data examination (Tesch, 1990). According to Tesch (1990),
The method of comparing and contrasting is used for practically all intellectual
tasks during analysis: forming categories, establishing the boundaries of the
categories, assigning the segments to categories, summarizing the content of each

84
category, finding negative evidence, etc. The goal is to discern conceptual
similarities, to refine the discriminative power of categories, and to discover
patterns. (p. 96)
When conducting the constant comparative method, transcripts for each interviewee were
input into QDA Miner, codified into categories, and subsequently themed for patterns.
Coding allowed the researcher to condense data while heuristically capturing the most
meaningful material (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2013). This procedure was an
important step in qualitatively analyzing interview data because of the interpretive
content and significance of thematic revelations (Gonzales, Venzant-Sampson, Valle, &
Onwuegbuzie, 2015). Participants’ data were thematically categorized based on
chunking interview responses and assigning labels via the qualitative data analysis tool.
Examining data for similarities and differences illuminated the meaning of each student’s
expressions via the constant comparative method. Constas (1992) proposed three
categorizing components: (a) origination, which instigated from the interviewees; (b)
verification, which involved confirmation of data findings by comparing to previous
comparable research (Boeije, 2002); and (c) nomination, which entailed me naming
emerging categories after interview data are dissected.
Georgaca and Advi (2011) stated, “…discourse analysis is a social constructionist
approach. For social constructionism, reality and identity are systematically constructed
and maintained through systems of meaning and through social practices” (p. 148). By
employing Gee’s (2005) seven building tasks, focus was placed on participants’
constructed relationships and how they might be enacted throughout the interview. Gee’s
first building task is significance—how did the participants’ language connote important

85
matters. Practices, also described as activities, is the second building task Gee describes
as how language is enacted. The analyzed data answered the question, in what activities
did the participants engage? The third task, identities, seeks language on what roles
participants’ construct in their language—what identities might be enacted by the
participants? Relationships is the fourth task, and is used to indicate the various types of
relationships, such as student, worker, or organization with whom the participants
communicate. How participants perceive what is proper and appropriate in our society
reflects the fifth task of politics; and the sixth task of connections examines how
participants might associate the relevancy of characteristics in their language. The last
building task is sign systems and knowledge and encompasses the diverse languages and
belief systems interviewees might utilize and enact in their interview.
Mixed data analysis. This study was equally weighted, sequential quantitativequalitative analysis of data from each TRAILS information literacy assessment, which
determined the 4 qualitative research participants after analyzing scores. Outliers—
lowest and highest assessment scorers—were selected to comprise the qualitative sample
group. Furthermore, qualitative data from the interview texts were quantitized using
qualitative coding software WordStat 7.1.20 (Provalis Research, 2014), a component
QDA Miner Version 5.0.18, allowing for validation and confirmation of patterns and
conclusions of the mixed data (Bazeley, 2003). Sandelowski, Voils, and Knafl (2009)
acknowledged, “Quantitizing, commonly understood to refer to the numerical translation,
transformation, or conversion of qualitative data, has become a staple of mixed methods
research (e.g., Boyatzis, 1998; Greene, 2007; Onwuegbuzie & Teddlie, 2003; Teddlie &
Tashakkori, 2006)” (p. 208).

86
After analyzing various mixed methods analysis strategies, Onwuegbuzie and
Combs (2010) developed a framework for analyzing mixed data. Their framework
consists of the following 13 criteria:
1. Rationale/purpose for conducting the mixed analysis
2. Philosophy underpinning the mixed analysis
3. Number of data types that will be analyzed
4. Number of data analysis types that will be used
5. Time sequence of the mixed analysis
6. Level of interaction between quantitative and qualitative analyses
7. Priority of analytical components
8. Number of analytical phases
9. Link to other design components
10. Phase of the research process when all analysis decisions are made
11. Type of generalization
12. Analysis orientation
13. Cross-over nature of analysis
A brief description of how the first seven criteria manifested during the mixed methods
analysis phase follows.
The purpose, criteria one of Onwuegbuzie and Combs (2010) mixed methods data
analysis framework, of ensuring complementarity, is to “measure overlapping but also
different facets of a phenomenon, yielding an enriched, elaborated understanding of that
phenomenon” (Greene et al., 1989, p. 258). Utilizing a mixed methods analysis resulted
in complementarity attributable to expanding the 129 quantitative results via explanation

87
through qualitative interviews (Greene et al., 1989). An additional purpose of executing
mixed methods analysis was to develop understanding of information literacy skills and
instruction beyond the online assessment (Greene et al., 1989).
For criterion 2, as mentioned previously my paradigmatic view is pragmatism,
which, according to Onwuegbuzie and Combs (2010), affords a more “practical and
outcome-oriented method of inquiry that is based on action and leads, iteratively…” (p.
412). Criterion 3 comprises the two data types analyzed – quantitative and qualitative;
and for criterion 4 a total of three data analyses were used. A Pearson Correlation was
conducted on descriptive and inferential quantitative data and constant comparative and
discourse analysis for qualitative data. Criterion 5 of time sequence was sequential,
wherein, the quantitative phase occurred first and then informed the qualitative phase.
The level of interaction between the quantitative phase and qualitative phase is parallel.
Teddlie and Tashakkori (2009) asserted quantitative data, using descriptive and
inferential data and thematic analyses via qualitative data are two distinct processes;
however, each provides an understanding of the other event leading to similar or contrary
results. Following criteria 7, the priority of the analyzed components was of equal
importance. The qualitative interviews were as significant to comprehending the
quantitative data, as the quantitative data were to understanding participant information
literacy skills.
Summary
In Chapter III the methodology and study design are described. This study used
an equally, mixed non-experimental research design, sequential and purposeful in nature.
The purpose of this mixed methods study was to explore and to compare the information

88
literacy skills knowledge and proficiency of 12th-grade students. To that end, Chapter III
began with a review of the quantitative research question and qualitative research
questions, along with the quantitative hypotheses followed by the mixed methods
research question. A review of Collins’s et al. (2006) first 5 steps of their 13-step mixed
method research process was presented, and steps 7-10 were introduced. In Chapter III, I
described the study methodology consisting of: (a) sampling design, (b) research design,
and (c) data collection. Sampling Design was inclusive of population, participants, and
ethical considerations. Within Research Design were quantitative and qualitative
typologies and research paradigms. Data collection methods, of describing instrument
used and procedure followed for each phase, ensued. Chapter IV delineates results,
reiterating the study’s purpose, followed by the quantitative research question and results,
qualitative research questions and results, mixed analysis research question and results,
and ends with a chapter summary.

89
CHAPTER IV
Results
Introduction
The purpose of this mixed methods study was to explore and to compare the
information literacy skills knowledge and proficiency of 12th-grade students to their
academic achievement. This purpose was accomplished by comparing scores from an
online information literacy assessment, TRAILS, to student collegiate and weighted
GPAs. This research was in response to a deficit in research on information literacy
skills proficiency at the secondary level, and specifically in a high-minority, lowsocioeconomic, urban school district. The second purpose was to ascertain perceptions of
12th-grade students’ knowledge of information literacy skills for job market and for
college and career readiness and their viewpoints regarding familial, social, and cultural,
influences on their achievement. The secondary purpose was achieved via individual
semi-constructed interviews of select participants.
Quantitative Results
Research Question. The following quantitative research question addressed highpoverty, minority secondary students’ scores on an information literacy skills assessment
in comparison to grade-point average.
To determine if a correlation was present between information literacy skills
proficiency and academic achievement, as measured by GPA of 12th-grade high school
students in a diverse school setting, the following research question was explored, What
is the relationship between knowledge of information literacy skills and academic
achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive school?

90
Research Hypotheses
The following two quantitative hypotheses were tested in this study:
1. A relationship exists between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive
school;
2. A difference exists in information literacy knowledge between higher-achieving
and lower-achieving 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive high
school on an information literacy assessment.
Means and standard deviations were initially examined for each of the following
pairs of variables: (a) percentage score of total correct answers on TRAILS online
assessment and collegiate GPA and (b) percentage score of total correct answers on
TRAILS online assessment and weighted GPA. Examination of scatterplots depicting the
relationship between total correct and collegiate GPA and total correct and weighted
GPA illustrated a positive linear relationship. Indication of positive linear relationship
supported the calculation of several coefficients. The standardized skewness coefficient
(i.e., the skewness value divided by the standard error of skewness) along with the
standardized kurtosis coefficient (i.e., the kurtosis value divided by the standard error of
kurtosis), indicated no significant deviation from normality for all but one of the
variables. The standardized skewness for total responses correct on the TRAILS
assessment was .84 and the standardized kurtosis coefficient was -1.26. With regard to
collegiate GPA and weighted GPA, the standardized skewness was -3.81 and -2.65,
respectively, along with the kurtosis for each at .49 and .66, respectively. Because the
majority of standardized coefficients fell within the normal range of -3.00 and 3.00

91
(Onwuegbuzie & Daniel, 2002), indicating no significant deviation from normality, a
series of parametric analysis procedures, namely, Pearson's product-moment correlation
coefficients were conducted. Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 5.
Table 5
Descriptive Statistics for TRAILS Assessment Scores and Reported GPA
Variable Name

N

M

SD

Total Correct

129

51.74

12.72

Collegiate GPA

129

2.99

0.63

Weighted GPA

127

5.44

1.07

Pearson’s r revealed a relationship between total correct and collegiate GPA as
statistically significant, r(129) = .55, p < .001. According to Cohen (1998), the positive
relationship between the two variables revealed a moderate effect size. By squaring the
correlation coefficients, it was determined each variable explained about 30% of the
variance in each other. Moreover, statistical significance was revealed between TRAILS
score and weighted GPA, with a slightly stronger relationship between the variables,
r(127) =.63, p < .001, revealing a moderate to large effect size (Cohen, 1998). The
strength of variability between TRAILS score and weighted GPA increased, r2 = .40 or
40%. The total number of participants for weighted GPA is slightly smaller because
there was no weighted GPA reported for two students. For each correlation between
TRAILS score and either collegiate or weighted GPA, a relationship between knowledge
of information literacy skills and academic achievement was revealed.

92
The assessment included five areas of assessment on the research process. In
Table 6, Means and Standard Deviations are displayed for TRAILS Total Score and each
sub assessment.
Table 6
Descriptive Statistics for Means and Standard Deviations of Category Variables
N=129
Variable Name

M

SD

TRAILS Total Score

51.7364

12.71596

Develop Topic

58.2745

18.35605

Identify Sources

40.3101

19.99758

Search strategies

49.0853

17.68740

Evaluate Resources

58.6667

20.19334

Use Information Responsibly

54.9147

17.78080

Statistical significance was also demonstrated between TRAILS score and
Gender. Of the 129 participants, 51 were male students and 78 were female students.
Table 7 depicts the means and standard deviations of male and female for each of the
variables.
Table 7
Descriptive Statistics for Means and Standard Deviations for Gender Variables
Variable Name

M

SD

TRAILS Total Score (N =129)

51.74

12.72

Male (n =51)

51.14

12.66

Female (n =78)

52.13

12.81

93
Pearson’s r for TRAILS score by gender and weighted GPA also demonstrated
statistical significance for males, r(51) = .57, p < .001, explaining the variance of r2 = .32
or 32% between the variables, a moderate effect size (Cohen, 1988). Statistical
significance was also revealed for females with a slightly stronger effect size, r(78) = .68,
p < .001, and variance of r2 = .46 or 46%. According to Cohen (1988), the positive
relationship between the two variables revealed a moderate to large effect size.
Means and standard deviations for the variables examined, specifically, TRAILS
score for the five TRAILS sub assessment research categories by gender are presented in
Tables 8 and 9. Examination of a series of scatterplots illustrated a positive linear
relationship between TRAILS score and weighted GPA, as well as, weighted GPA with
each of the five TRAILS research categories. A lack of significant deviation from the
linearity in distribution of scores validated the calculation of several correlation
coefficients.
Table 8
Descriptive Statistics for Means and Standard Deviations of Male Group for Category
Variables
n = 51
Variable Name

M

SD

TRAILS Score

51.1373

12.66494

Develop Topic

58.2745

20.24755

Identify Sources

38.6275

19.90172

Search strategies

49.9020

17.67400

Evaluate Resources

60.5294

20.72520

Use Information Responsibly

51.4118

15.95892

94
Table 9
Descriptive Statistics for TRAILS Assessment Scores and Reported GPA for Female
Participants
n = 78
Variable Name

M

SD

TRAILS Score

52.1282

12.81574

Develop Topic

58.1154

17.14338

Identify Sources

41.4103

20.11166

Search strategies

48.5513

17.79001

Evaluate Resources

57.4487

19.87797

Use Information Responsibly

57.2051

18.62086

Figure 3 demonstrates scores in the five sub-assessment areas by gender and
home language. Home Language and Gender SD are displayed for each sub-assessment
area. Figure 4 depicts scores in each of the sub-assessment areas on the TRAILS
according to higher- versus lower- achieving students, based on collegiate GPA. Lowerachieving students are designated as those with collegiate GPAs below 2.5 on a 4.0 scale.

95

Sub-assessments by Home Language and Gender
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Develop Topic

Identify Sources
English n=43

Search Strategies

Spanish n=86

EvaluateSources

Male n=51

Use Info Responsibly

Female n=78

Figure 3. Sub-assessments categorized by home language and by gender.

Achievement Level

20%
Higher‐achievers
Lower‐achievers

80%

Figure 4. Division of higher-achieving and lower-achieving participants. The resents the
percentage of participants designated as higher-achieving – GPA greater than 2.5 and
lower-achieving – GPA lower than 2.5.

96
Qualitative Results
The semi-structured one-on-one interviews of the selected four students were
conducted over a two-week period. The four participants were purposefully selected
based on the extreme case of lowest and highest scores. Two students, one African
American male, and one Hispanic female were initially selected from the lowest scorers;
however, the Hispanic female did not feel comfortable being interviewed in English;
therefore, another Hispanic female scoring next lowest was selected. Two Hispanic
males scored the same highest score on the assessment, and interviewee selection was
based on convenience of availability. The female participant selected from the higher
scoring participants, was purposefully selected because she was the valedictorian of the
class. The interviews were conducted during normal school hours and at times conducive
to the student,
Each student was asked to participate in a 30-minute individual interview. The
interview consisted of 15, basic descriptive, open-ended questions (Appendix D), and
each student was video and audio recorded. Recordings were subsequently transcribed
by Rev.com, a transcription service, and only pseudonyms were used. At no time were
student names included on audio or video recordings. Once the recordings were
transcribed, triangulation occurred by the researcher listening to the audio recordings and
viewing the video recordings. Following transcription, the participants member checked
their transcripts for accuracy and authenticity (Creswell, 2003).
Michael, a male of Hispanic ethnicity whose home language was Spanish, was the
first participant interviewed after the close of the quantitative information literacy
assessment. Michael’s interview was conducted in the school library’s computer

97
laboratory at approximately 7:50 in the morning during his off period. The interview,
which lasted approximately 17 minutes, was both audio and video recorded. Michael has
a collegiate GPA of 3.16, a weighted GPA of 5.86, and scored 78% on the TRAILS
assessment. After hand delivering the interview transcript to Michael, I asked him
review it and return to me personally. The following week, Michael visited the library
and advised there were no corrections or changes to the verbiage, and he was satisfied
with the transcript as it was written.
Darius, an African American male with English speaking parents, was the second
participant to be interviewed; and represented the lowest extreme of the TRAILS
assessment results, scoring 22%. This interview was held the same day as Michael’s and
in the school library computer laboratory. However, Darius’s interview was conducted
during the early afternoon of his fourth-period class where he is assigned as an aide to a
counselor housed in the library. The interview lasted just over 17 minutes.
Approximately one week after the interview, Darius was given the interview transcript on
a Friday during his same fourth-period counselor aide class. Darius was asked to review
the transcript for authenticity of verbiage and meaning, and return the transcript to the
researcher with any corrections or additions. Upon seeing Darius, the following week in
his 4th-period class, I asked him if there were any corrections to his transcript interview,
and he indicated everything was correct and he had no additions. Darius’s collegiate
GPA is 2.40, his weighted GPA is 4.64.
The third interviewee was Diana, and she represents the higher extreme, scoring
73% on the TRAILS assessment. Diana is a Hispanic female, her home language is
Spanish, and she is the valedictorian of the graduating class, holding a 3.98 collegiate

98
GPA and a 7.76 weighted grade point average. This interview was conducted in an
empty office just outside of the library during the afternoon of the scheduled fourthperiod class time. Diana’s interview was conducted the following week after the first two
interviews. Diana was an early release student, having no fourth- and fifth- period
classes, and the interview lasted just over 30 minutes.
The fourth interview was conducted in the same empty office as the third
interview. Eliza was requested to come to the library by the researcher before the
interview, and at that time she was scheduled to return during the fifth-period of the
school day when she was slated for early release with no class scheduled. Eliza’s
interview lasted over 34 minutes. The following week when she visited the library, she
was given the transcript and asked to review for errors or changes. Approximately one
week later, Eliza visited the library again and stated there were no corrections; however,
she had been encouraged by her boyfriend to add more information about her family. As
of this writing, additional information has not been received. Eliza has a 2.24 GPA, but
had no weighted GPA at the time because she had recently returned to school after
dropping out. Eliza scored at 27% on the TRAILS assessment.
Qualitative Research Questions. The following questions were addressed after
the quantitative phase by selected participants based on scoring criteria:
1. What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a traditional
comprehensive school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for
job market or for college and career readiness?

99
2. How have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced
the perceptions of information literacy skills needed for job market or for
college and career readiness?
Qualitative data analyses were completed by employing the software program QDA
Miner Version 5.0.18 (Provalis Research, 2016a), to code and categorize emerged themes
and significant meanings by use of constant comparative method and discourse analysis,
by mining interviewees’ data seeking language to edify Gee’s (2005) seven building
tasks. Qualitative data will commence with constant comparative results.
Constant comparative method results. Through coding participants’ transcripts,
emergent data themes revealed from the first research question are: (a) comprehending
information literacy; (b) utilizing research process; (c) instructional and collaborative
influencers; and (d) life after graduation. First, each participant was asked to define the
term Information Literacy. Table 10 denotes each participant’s response. To safeguard
confidentiality, all participants have been de-identified by a pseudonym.

100
Table 10
Theme -- Comprehending the Term Information Literacy
Participant

Statement

1. Michael

“Well, it's basically like being able to read. So, you read
information and you understand what it means.”

2. Darius

“When I hear the word ‘information’, I think about school.
I think about me doing a research or a paper. I think about
English class, to be specific. Yeah, just researching about a
specific type of person, or something like a project.”

3. Diana

“I think of information literacy as being able to navigate the
internet because the internet is where I get most of my
information from. It's the easiest, fastest, I think the most
reliable way to get as many sources as I feel like I need to
from different perspectives. I think that navigating the
internet is navigation literacy.”

4. Eliza

“I think of like the whole genre of like writing and books
and just literature itself.
Like data or surveys, kind of.”

Note: Response to question, “When you hear the term information literacy, what does
that mean to you?
For the theme Utilizing Research Process, responses were categorized based on
the steps in the research process according to AASL and ACRL standards. These
standards included; (a) topic choice (b) selecting resources, (c) organizing sources, (d)
evaluating sources, and (e) citing sources. Table 11 reflects responses of participants
when utilizing the research process.

101
Table 11
Theme – Utilizing Research Process
Participant
1. Michael

Statement
I found that the internet is a really powerful tool to find
information, and not just find it, but find it quicker.
…we used a search engine and we also used websites where they
only post like scientific articles.
Michael also added when discussing selecting sources:
Well, back then, I'd researched like one source. But now, I
research like three or four different sources, because they could
have like different points of views, and different information, and
most of the time, one source would contradict what the other
source would say. But then the other two sources would back one
of the two, so yeah
Well, the most difficult part is narrowing down what information
you want to keep in your paper and what information you don't
need. Because most of the time, like I find I'm intrigued by what I
read and I want it all in the paper. But you can't do that. You have
to compact to what the assignment is listing.
When discussing plagiarizing Michael shared:
Well, one of the things is like don't plagiarize because ... I mean,
you're assigned an assignment, but you have to be original about it.
You can't copy off other peoples' work. Also, fact-checking
yourself because you don't want to write a paper, and sort of seem
contradictory to what you're trying to say in your paper.

2. Darius

I like to look at news sources 'cause you know that's a credible
source. Stay away from Wikipedia and all that. I like news
sources, newspapers. Just stuff that's credible. I just stay with stuff
on paper that you can go back and see that it's something real and
it's credible to use.
I read it and then I just, you know, kind of put it in my own words.
Not so much the exact same thing, but I just would read it and I
would add stuff to it that they don't have, maybe, or not use the
things that they have and use something different, but still pertains
to the information that you have.
(continued)

102
Participant

Statement
Well, what I do first if this is on a specific person or like, on
euthanasia ... when I wrote a paper on euthanasia. First you look up
the definition and you watch stuff on it to see what it is and what's it
about. Then you start to look up individual cases. Real life scenarios,
what happened, people that have used it, people that are against it,
and people that went to jail for euthanizing other people when it was
not legal

3. Diana

Diana expressed when discussing her process:
The first thing that I do is, I usually go to Wikipedia. I'll read it for
an overview and I'll go down to the bottom of the page and there's
a lot of sources there. A lot of them are primary and their linked
online, so I can just go ahead and click them. Go through that.
I do, do a Google search for them and I go through Google Books.
Then I start going into maybe articles. Then I go ahead and I'll go
to the Smithsonian AP Archives. I think I mentioned Google
Books. I'll start going through there.
After that, once I have narrowed down my books or my sources,
I'll go down to usually the Houston Public Library or Rice.
When discussing selection of sources Diana offered:
Okay. Usually what I do is I'll go through it. I'll read the source. I
do this all online, so I'll go ahead and copy and paste from the
source into a Google document just so that I have quotes if I want
to go back and look at them.
I separate them by sources, by primary and secondary and then by
category, so a website dissertation or others. Then I'll go ahead and
print them out. Then I go ahead and highlight things that I think
are particularly important. Then I'll go ahead and jot down my
comments and write things like that. …Then I'll start building a
story. I think especially for competition and for myself to build an
argument it's good to build a story, so I'll go ahead and build it
from the context. I usually have three main points and I'll build it
from there. I'll try to build the story from my comments. I'll build a
thesis and use my sources to support my thesis. I guess it's better to
say, I use the sources to create a thesis. So my thesis supports the
sources.
(continued)

103
Participant

Statement
Regarding evaluating sources Diana affirmed:
I can very quickly decide whether a source is credible or not by just a
quick scan of the author, title, website link, publisher. I can very
quickly do that where before I used to really have to think about it
and wonder whether it was credible or not.

4. Eliza

When asked about writing a research paper Eliza stated:
I guess the first time I did like an actual research paper that I
remember was my sophomore year. It was for ... I was in a
restaurant management class. We were doing applications, like
what are they called? Resumes. We were doing resumes, so that
was the first. It was so hard for me. I don't know why, but it
seemed so hard, like I had the time. It just seemed difficult at the
time, but now, now I could just,,,
Kind of like putting it together or trying to think of volunteering or
my credibility stuff, that I know and stuff, so yeah.
In addition, Eliza shared:
I actually, I remember in middle school, I think it was my sixth
grade that I did ... Someone in the military or like in the war.
Someone that did in the war, and I forgot his name, but it was a
person, like a veteran. I did almost looked up everything that I
know about him, or this specific person.

Note: Response to question, “When completing projects, what steps do you take to find
information? What process do you use for rewriting or paraphrasing your sources?
The third theme is instructional and collaborative influences. This theme delved
into how each participant interacted with learning and utilizing the research process.
Table 12 reveals participants’ interactions with significant people who have assisted in
their learning.

104
Table 12
Theme – Instructional and Collaborative Influencers
Participant

Statement

Michael

Well, during third or fourth grade, I was introduced to computers
and the internet, in general.
I found that the internet is a really powerful tool to find information,
and not just find it, but find it quicker

Darius

…my teacher taught me to research, go into depth, you know, more
specific information.
My English ... yeah, my English teachers mostly. And my mom,
she's ... She goes to school to be a teacher. She's gonna be an
English teacher, so that's pretty much helpful too.

Diana

It's Miss Sanders. She has been my sponsor since 9th grade, so I go
to her for help. Sorry, not since 9th grade, but since 10th grade. I go
to them for help. Also, a lot of the help I get is from online sources,
so the competitions that I do for History Fair, so there are a lot of
projects for me to go through and look at and see what they did.
... He's graduated or moving on. He graduated but he is studying
Physics at a pretty good school. Before, I didn't really think ... I've
been into Physics since middle school but I didn't ever really think I
could do it. Then I saw him from here get into a really competitive.
Really good college, and that made me feel like I could do it.
I switched abruptly from going into Economics. I wanted to work on
Wall Street and go to Harvard and that's what I was gonna do. He
started teaching me about the things that he encountered in college
now that he's in college and he started talking to them about me and
it made me realize how many things that there are for me to do and
that I can take up. Independent projects and do them on my own. I
don't necessarily have to follow the route of taking a bunch of AP
classes to do well.
(continued)

105

Participant

Statement
That I can take classes outside at college. There's another instance
this Summer. I went to a Physics, math, computer science,
Astronomy program. It was residential and it was for 6 weeks. We
did research there. We tracked an asteroid. We determined its orbit
after coding some programs. The people there are ridiculously
motivated. Also, ridiculously ambitious. They were just great
people to be around.

Eliza

Restaurant management, culinary. Culinary was the reason why I
went to school. It was my favorite. My chef, she was awesome. She
made me want to be a chef.
When I was dropped out for basically almost a whole year out of
school, so like after Christmas break, I just never went back. That
was last year. So now, I came here in October. That was the first
time I'm back at school. So that time being was very ... It was a huge
reality check. I knew it was hard. Everyone said it's going to be as
hard as it is. I lost my people skills. I only had interaction with one
human for like that period of time, so being online was the only
contribution to society I had, basically. It was a lot.

Note: Response to question, “When completing research projects, who do you ask for
assistance?
The last theme explored, regarding using information literacy skills and
preparedness, was researching for college and career. Participants answered question
regarding readiness for life after high school graduation. Table 13 indicated responses
revealed.

106
Table 13
Theme – Life after high school graduation – researching colleges and careers
Participant

Statement

1. Michael

Well, I've taken dual credit classes, and at colleges, and what I find is
that the professors, they give you the work, and they expect you to
finish it, and understand it. I think high school, they don't do that.
They want you to learn it, which is good. But I think they're holding
our hands too much. So, yeah…I do think I'm prepared for ... I think ...
Well, I want to make computers more accessible to people. Because I
find that, like for example, I don't have like a computer at home. But I
do have a mobile device, but I'd also like to like make the technology
we have today, and make it better. Like advance humanity.

2. Darius

“I've researched it for college or jobs, or if the town ... like the college,
but also research the town.
“…I think that'd be good for looking for jobs, too, because now most
things are online. You know what I mean? There's not a lot of paper
applications and stuff, so if you just go in, "Are y'all hiring?" "Yeah,
it's online," and then you don't know what to do or where to go, then
that's an issue

3. Diana

When asked about readiness for after high school graduation, Diana
shared:
I definitely do think so. I would say that it is entirely because of
History Fair. I have done personal interviews with people. I have gone
to museums. I have met up with people in order to ... I have met with
people who are from Russia or the Soviet Union era. I've talked to
them about what their experiences were like so that I could use it in
my project. I definitely do think that I am prepared to either find
people who can help me, find sources or locations where I can go to

4. Eliza

I got accepted to Auguste Escoffier. I'm not sure if I've pronounced it
right, but that's in Austin. I was all about them. I researched the school,
what I could go for an interview. They called me on the regular. That's
when I knew I got accepted because they did like a ... They sent
someone to my school, and they did like a presentation on how
amazing it is. Then I sent them my email and all that, and then they
called me back. Like years later, and I'm like wow. You remember me.
(continued)

107

Participant

Statement
But I actually changed my career path to criminal justice. I want to be
a probation officer now. Yeah, so now, I need to do research on that,
actually. I know I need psychology and some type of ... Yeah, is it
psychology? Yeah, I'm pretty sure it's psychology

Note: Response to questions, “How have you used the research process to research
colleges and careers? Do you feel that you’ve been adequately prepared for life after
graduation?”
Discourse Analysis. The second research question, How have sociocultural (e.g.,
family, social, cultural) factors influenced the perceptions of information literacy skills
needed for job market or for college and career readiness?, was answered employing
discourse analysis and specifically using three of Gee’s (2005) seven building tasks: (a)
significance; (b) practices; (c) identity; (d) relationships; (e) politics; (f) connections; (g)
knowledge. The following emergent themes: (a) motivating forces – internal and
external; (b) participating in projects; and (c) familial, social, and cultural influencers
were analyzed using significance—how did the participants’ languages connote important
matters; practices, also described as activities—how language is enacted, and
relationships—what are the various types of relationships with whom the participants
communicate.
Gee’s (2005) first building task of significance in Table 14 revealed that
interviewees’ motivation was derived from various entities, and the relevance participants
assigned to job market and college and career readiness within their sociocultural sphere.

108
Table 14
Examples of Language Conveying Significance of Learning Information Literacy Skills
Respondent

Behavior or Word Phrase

Michael

Well, I want to make computers more accessible to people. … I'd
also like to like make the technology we have today, and make it
better. Like advance humanity.
Well, I've taken dual credit classes, and at colleges, and what I find is
that the professors, they give you the work, and they expect you to
finish it, and understand it

Darius

Just to see if there's a lot of racism on there. You need to know about
that stuff. And then in other cities, they have different laws and
different things you can and cannot do. Just ... And when you go on
vacation, you need to research the area you're living in, if it's a good
area, if it's a bad area. Racism. If it's ... Racism is everywhere, but if
it's more. You know, more like know where places to go and where
not to go.
I have three best friends and one of them has graduated high school
already. He's already in college 'cause he's graduated. He's already
in college now, so that's motivational to have people that around you
that are going to college that are actually doing something, 'cause
then it makes you wanna be ... 'Cause you know you are who you
hang around with. It makes you wanna be better and wanna go to
college and be more motivational. He

Diana

…in 7th grade, the summer of 7th grade where we went to this
academic camp up in Sherman, Texas. The people who were in there
had to have a certain SAT score so it was a different crowd of people
who were there. That definitely made me realize who it was that I
was competing with to get into college. There were people there who
had their parents pay for a tutor to have them study for the SAT that
they took to get in. Their parents were engineers and they spoke
English and they were American. That really kind of shaped me.
There was one time where we played this social cultural game down
in the basement and our TA, she was studying women's studies. She
had us lineup and she wanted us to take a step for every question that
we answered a yes to. There were things like, "Do your parents speak
English?" "Do you qualify for healthcare?" I remember these things,
(continued)

109

Respondent

Behavior or Word Phrase
right? "Or is your first language Spanish, English or another
language?" I forget what the other questions were but they stratified
us into different levels and you could very obviously see that. At
some point she asked white males to take a step up and everyone else
stay behind because she wanted to show us that these are the things
that we encounter in life. At that point I remember being there and I
was like at the bottom of the pyramid. It's such a vivid memory and
that was a really ... That had a really big impact on me.

Eliza

I'd say my sophomore year, I was really bad. I messed up my whole
high school experience, basically. I wish I could tell myself ... I wish
myself now could tell myself back then what to do and not to do.
(Replying to motivation:)
My boyfriend, actually. He's the one that actually got me enrolled
here. He keeps me out of trouble. He's really good for me. He's
really good.
I like one-on-ones. I appreciate this. I actually learn and understand
better if I just go up to the teacher and ask her myself, instead of like,
"Now, does anyone have any questions?" And I was thinking my
question. I'm saving it, so I can go up to her and ask her.
But not everyone is that ... I don't want to say motivated but active,
I'd say. Not physically active but interaction, active-wise. Like a lot
of people don't want to speak in class. They just want to get through
the day and get home.
People might need that a little bit more, not confrontation, but a little
one-on-one to actually help. Like I wish I had help my freshman and
sophomore year, junior year, especially my senior year. I lost a lot of
hope. When I was in school, I'm like, I know I'm not going to
graduate. I'm not going to be surprised if I don't graduate. I just gave
up on myself, honestly. I knew I was giving up.

Note: Response to questions, “Thinking about your cultural and social surroundings,
describe how your family and friends have helped you in your academic achievement?
How did they influence you to succeed academically?”
Practices is the next building task analyzed, and Gee (2005) described practices as
the activities that are enacted throughout the language. Practices were disclosed via

110
activities, Michael, Darius, Diana, and Eliza participated in, such as Science Fair, History
Fair, and job searches. Table 15 demonstrates activities that effected participants’
academic achievement.
Table 15
Examples of Language Conveying Practices of Using Information Skills Socioculturally
Participant

Practices

Michael

So basically, if it's like a science fair…But like, for example,
research papers, one year we had to do, "How is technology helping
humanity advance?" And we wrote an article on space exploration
and how technology is helping us reach further distances throughout
our universe. So, yeah.
Well, most of the time, we have kind of like the basic idea of how
we want our research paper to look like. So, like in our first body
paragraph, we talk about how technology is very useful, and how it's
been helping NASA with space exploration. So that'd be like the
first thing we researched, and then after that, we'd research how it
can also save lives, and what not. So basically, chronological order.

Darius

In middle school. When I did the history fair, I did a website on civil
rights and I did it individually on Martin Luther King.
Everyone knows about Martin Luther King, but my teacher taught
me to research, go into depth, you know, more specific information.
About 8th grade, 8th grade I think that's when you really ... and then
9th grade, it's like okay. You put it to use. You know what I mean?

Diana

I started researching for competitions in sixth grade but I don't think
I really understood what that meant, being able to pick out a primary
source and understand that there's bias in it. I didn't really
understand that.
… a lot of the help I get is from online sources, so the competitions
that I do for History Fair, so there are a lot of projects for me to go
through and look at and see what they di
I can go through their annotative bibliographies, look at what
sources they chose and why they chose them, and look at how they
used the sources that they did in the website. And that's how I guide
myself.
(continued)

111

Participant

Practices

Eliza

I've taken business management and restaurant management and
statistics and speech, all that. So you would think that would help
me on paper kind of, but I can honestly say, I haven't learned a
specific thing that I can ... You know? Like those classes would
benefit me on paper, but in real life, it wouldn't reallyLast year, I was also a senior. I actually dropped out, but I'm back. I
actually was, last October I was signing up for FASFA, and I
actually got accepted to this college in Austin, but I didn't graduate,
so I didn't go. Then I actually had three jobs before, and they weren't
online applications, but I do online applications, but they never
seem to be that good. I never got like an application to hear me
back.

Note: Response to questions, “When completing research projects, what steps do you
take to find information? Where do you look? When did your start learning and
understanding the research process?”
For the building task of relationships, language that shared information on how
family impacted the qualitative participants’ academic achievement was mined.
Participants also shared influences of other significant individuals influencing their lives.
Table 16 describes the relationship between each participant’s family with their academic
achievement.

112
Table 16
Examples of Language Conveying Relationships of Using Information Skills
Socioculturally
Participant

Relationships

Michael

Well, both of my parents are Hispanic, and they don't know much
about computers, and all that. So I think that always trying to be very
like correct with like, so I can answer the questions more often, and
help them a lot more. So basically like my parents depend on me, to
help them understand like different question that they have. Yeah
Well, my family, they always push me. Like to be a better person, and
to like be better than them. So, they've already set the standard, and as
long as I'm over that, they're okay with me. So, they basically, they're
basically helping me by encouraging me to do more. To do better.
Well, the thing with friends is that you want to be like ... Well, in the
group I'm in, you want to be like better than everybody else, so it's like
basically like with any competition, you want to get like a great grade,
but you also want to be better, have a better paper than your friends.
So, I think having friends helping you with research paper, or being in
a group together, it can help you. But it can also be bad because you
could like sidetrack yourself, and you won't know how to like be able
to control that. Most of the time.

Darius

Well, most of my inside family, like the people you live with: mother,
sister, brother. They've all went to college but their moms, their sisters,
they didn't. When we go to family gatherings and everything, they
always tell the importance of going to college 'cause they haven't went
and we see them struggle ...
well, not struggle but not where they wanna be because they didn't go
to college. So they help me by seeing both sides. This is what it looks
like when you go to college, and this is what it looks like when you
don't. You have to struggle to get there and make ends meet.
You know, both are ... can be done, but seeing point of views helps you
a lot.
It's very motivational 'cause she finished college at 50. She went and
then she stopped and then she went, but now she's finally did it ... has
(continued)

113

Participant

Relationships
done it. I'm like, well if she can do it, I most definitely can. And 50,
and it was an online course. It's hard online for her, 'cause you know,
the computer don't be working and the internet. So, if she can do it
under all them circumstances ... being a single mother, it's online, still
working, bills, at 50 years old ... I most definitely can do it.
My culture. I think my culture, the African culture, it helps me a lot.
When we have Black History Month, they say all the facts on the
announcements about what he have achieved, what we have done.
That's very motivational as well. It's like, oh, I come from a culture
that's so brilliant and creative and things like that. So, it gives me
motivation, and again, if they can do it ... especially back then. There
wasn't computers. You had to go look in the book and everything. If
they can do anything like that, then I most definitely can. So, it's
motivational.

Diana

Okay, my first language is Spanish. My parents only went to grade
school. At some point, maybe 7th grade when I was taking ... Or 8th
grade when I was taking Algebra and I needed help on it, I realized that
I couldn't anymore ask my parents for help.
I never really could because they only speak Spanish. I guess from an
early age I had to learn to be independent. I think that, that has ... I
think the fact that my parents didn't go to high school and they don't
speak English has definitely made me ... Or forced me to be
independent.
School meetings I do that by myself. Or scheduling things, I do that by
myself. Or college things, I do that by myself. I have their support but
I've had to take a lot of initiative. I guess it's been both a good and a
bad thing because it has forced me to be independent but I don't have
their help. Not necessarily because they don't want to give it. But just
because they can't tell me about their experience applying to college
because they didn't.
My parents are first generation immigrants. I'm a first-generation
immigrant. I am a DACA student. The opportunities that are given to
me I'm very grateful for them because I know that I wouldn't have them
in Mexico. Like taking all of these AP classes. You don't do that in
Mexico.
(continued)

114

Participant

Relationships
Speaking English and having the opportunity to even apply and have
some hope that I can get accepted to such good schools, has really been
shaped by the fact that I am an immigrant and it makes me feel really
grateful. It makes me want to take advantage of every opportunity and
create opportunities for myself because I don't want the things that my
parents have done to go to waste.
I want to do well and represent I guess where I come from.
I actually, I enrolled myself here, so I'm my own guardian. I don't live
with my family currently. I haven't lived with them in a few years
actually, since my dad, since I was a sophomore, and then my mom
since like eighth grade. I'd say my sophomore year, I was really bad.
They weren't very much a part of my schooling, I'd say. They weren't a
part of my ... They weren't involved much.

Eliza

Then I'd say my junior year, junior year I was in Corpus Christi. It was
an emotional year for me, but I played softball, and that was ... I went
to school just for softball, so that was the only time I played. My family
over there, they were really ... That was the best year I did in grades,
just for softball. They encouraged me to do softball and encouraged me
to keep my grades up for softball, so I could keep playing and do what
I love. Those were just my relatives. That wasn't my immediate family.
My dad, we're not on speaking terms right now, and my mom, we're
like barely. We're kind of talking but like not on the everyday basis.
My siblings, I'm the youngest out of five, so they ... We don't talk on a
daily basis either, but I know they're there. We're always kind of
spread out.
Note: Response to question, “In what ways has your culture affected your desire to
succeed academically?”
Mixed Analysis Results
Mixed methods research question. The following mixed methods research question was
addressed to reveal a deeper understanding of the connection between the assessment and
the perceptions:
According to Bandura’s (1971) three key concepts: (a) children learn by
observing, (b) children need a sense of accomplishment, and (c) children’s behavior

115
change is not an indicator of learning. Integrating these three concepts, what is the
relationship between perceptions of two groups of students; specifically, 12th-grade
higher-achieving and 12th-grade lower-achieving students’ information literacy skills and
their information literacy assessment proficiency?
In executing a mixed-analysis of quantitative and qualitative data, Figure 5 is a
chart of the sub-assessment scores for each participant. Table 17 indicates participants’
responses regarding developing topic and identifying sources. Table 18 shows
participants’ responses relating to search strategies and evaluating resources, and Table
19 indicates each participants’ responses about how they use information ethically and
responsibly.

Interviewees' Sub‐assessment Scores
100
89

90
80

89

78

88

78
70

78

70

67

70
60

50

50

44
38

40

30

30
20

22

20
11

25

22

22

11

10
0
Develop Topic

Identify Sources
Michael

Search Strategies
Darius

Diana

Evaluate Resources

Use Info Ethically

Eliza

Figure 5. Interviewees’ sub-assessment scores. This table displays the sub-assessment
scores for each qualitative interviewee participant.

116
Table 17
Theme – Utilizing Information Literacy Skills – Develop Topic and Identify Sources
Participant

Statement

1. Michael

Well, most of the time, we have kind of like the basic idea
of how we want our research paper to look like. So, like in
our first body paragraph, we talk about how technology is
very useful, and how it's been helping NASA with space
exploration. So that'd be like the first thing we researched,
and then after that, we'd research how it can also save lives,
and what not. So, basically chronological order.
…for example, research papers, one year we had to do,
"How is technology helping humanity advance?"
we used a search engine and we also used websites where
they only post like scientific articles.

2. Darius

In middle school. When I did the history fair, I did a
website on civil rights and I did it individually on Martin
Luther King
I like to look at news sources 'cause you know that's a
credible source

3. Diana

I started researching for competitions in sixth grade but I
don't think I really understood what that meant, being able
to pick out a primary source and understand that there's bias
in it. I didn't really understand that.
I didn't understand that a secondary source has its own
analysis in it and it has its own bias too. Really I don't think
I began to understand that until 9th, 10 grade.

4. Eliza

This year, I just finished an IPC research paper for which
energy source is better. So, I looked at all the different
types of energy sources, like renewable, fossil fuels, wind,
thermal, and just basically which one is better, which one
we should switch to or use more often in the whole world.

Note: Responses to questions, “When completing research projects, what steps do you
take to find information? Where do you look?”

117
Table 18
Theme – Utilizing Information Literacy Skills – Search Strategies and Evaluating
Sources
Participant

Statement

1. Michael

I research like three or four different sources, because they
could have like different points of views, and different
information, and most of the time, one source would
contradict what the other source would say. But then the
other two sources would back one of the two, so yeah.
Well, the most difficult part is narrowing down what
information you want to keep in your paper and what
information you don't need. Because most of the time, like I
find I'm intrigued by what I read and I want it all in the
paper. But you can't do that. You have to compact to what
the assignment is listing.

2. Darius

Now I've found I've learned to give more information,
where you just can't ... You can Google it and people are
like, "Oh, that's what it is." You need to find the
information and put it on your paper that you just can't
Google it and there it goes. You need to put stuff that you
actually have to read, and click this link, and then research
this person and see when they were involved. So just the
more information is better.

3. Diana

The first thing that I do is, I usually go to Wikipedia. I'll
read it for an overview and I'll go down to the bottom of the
page and there's a lot of sources there. A lot of them are
primary and their linked online, so I can just go ahead and
click them. Go through that.
I do, do a Google search for them and I go through Google
Books. Then I start going into maybe articles. Then I go
ahead and I'll go to the Smithsonian AP Archives. I think I
mentioned Google Books. I'll start going through there.
(continued)

118
Participant

Statement
I can very quickly decide whether a source is credible or
not by just a quick scan of the author, title, website link,
publisher. I can very quickly do that where before I used to
really have to think about it and wonder whether it was
credible or not

4. Eliza

I was just looking online. We would go to like computer
labs, and we'd just go online to like ... I would just grab
sentences from website, from website. A lot of websites…
I remember doing papers, but I just can't remember the
topic or what class.
I know some websites were not as good as others and some
are not as accurate or recent. There's millions of websites.
I would usually pick the first, the few first websites that
would pop out. If they have reviews, or if I could see how
many people visited this website so and so times, I would
trust that more.
I wouldn't exactly go to Wikipedia because I heard those
are just opinions and sometimes not always facts. I would
go to websites that are specifically just for that subject, like
some type of science. It seems legit, like certified. It
seemed very professional.

Researcher

Do you remember how you went about writing the paper?

Eliza

I'll go off-topic, like how I was speaking to you, and now
I'll go off-topic. But I would try to keep it in this one main
idea, to get my point across. I would just try to kind of
make it personal, like connect it to my life, how I see it in
my everyday life.

Note: Responses to questions, “What do you find is the most difficult part of the research
process? When you're completing your projects for a competition or otherwise, how do
you find your information? Where do you look?”

119
Table 19
Theme – Utilizing Information Literacy Skills – Using Information Ethically and
Responsibly
Participant

Statement

1. Michael

Well, one of the things is like don't plagiarize because ... I
mean, you're assigned an assignment, but you have to be
original about it. You can't copy off other peoples' work.
Also, fact-checking yourself because you don't want to
write a paper, and sort of seem contradictory to what you're
trying to say in your paper.
Well, I try to, if I'm reading an article, I try to write down
what I perceive from the article, and then I re-read it again,
and I try to like take it off from that.

2. Darius

…I read it and then I just, you know, kind of put it in my
own words. Not so much the exact same thing, but I just
would read it and I would add stuff to it that they don't
have, maybe, or not use the things that they have and use
something different, but still pertains to the information that
you have.

3. Diana

As to whether I cite everything, I don't think that's ... The
only places where that's been an issue is when I've use a
photo and I'll upload it in and somebody will remind me
that I didn't cite it, so I'll go back and do that.
Usually personally in my set of documents, I usually do
have everything cited. It's usually when I present it where I
forget to include it.

4. Eliza

(This area was not specifically addressed by Eliza)

Note: Responses to questions, “What process do you use for rewriting or paraphrasing
your sources? Describe your process for citing sources in your research projects?”
Summary
Chapter IV began with a review of the purpose and goal of this research study,
which was to explore and to compare the information literacy skills knowledge and

120
proficiency of 12th-grade students to their academic achievement. Quantitative research
question and hypotheses were delineated, followed by quantitative results from the
TRAILS online assessment. The second purpose was to ascertain perceptions of 12thgrade students’ knowledge of information literacy skills for job market and for college
and career readiness; in addition to their viewpoints regarding how familial, social, and
cultural factors influence their academic achievement. A review of the qualitative
research questions ensued, and qualitative results from four extreme-case interview
participants were examined. Chapter IV ended with results from mixed methods analysis
of the qualitative participants and their TRAILS results, and a summary. Chapter V
commences with a review of this study, succeeded by quantitative results discussion,
qualitative results discussion, implications for educational practices, and
recommendations for future research. A summary concludes this study.

121
CHAPTER V
Discussion, Implications, and Recommendations
Introduction
In 2008, as indicated in TEA (n.d.) TEKS, secondary students are required to
produce research projects in most core subject areas. According to the Texas College and
Career Readiness Standards adopted by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board
(2009), producing academically acceptable research projects entails utilizing information
literacy skills. Therefore, students must: (a) recognize what information is needed; (b)
locate the necessary information; (c) evaluate its credibility and reliability; and (d)
employ the information within their project in an ethical manner. The Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board considers the utilization of these standards as an indicator
of problem-solving and critical thinking skills for college and career readiness (EPIC,
2008). However, the problem is determining the proficiency level that has been attained
by graduating 12th-grade students, to ascertain job market or college and career
readiness. According to Gross and Latham (2012), “many students come to college
without proficient information literacy skills” (p. 574).
Some research exists on information literacy skills and students’ lack of
proficiency in transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education (e.g., Gross,
Latham, & Armstrong, 2012; Smith, Given, Julien, Ouellette, & DeLong, 2013).
However, scant research is available on information literacy skills proficiency at the
secondary level, preparing students for the job market or college and career readiness
(Kovalik, Yutzey, & Piazza, 2013). For students entering the workforce after graduation,
information literacy skills are required for researching job openings and business-related

122
information for employment seekers (Inskip, 2015). As students enter college, they will
most likely be faced with mining information sources for research projects and will
generally need a good foundation to accomplish these tasks successfully.
The purpose of this mixed method study was two-fold. The first purpose was to
explore and to compare the information literacy skills knowledge and proficiency of
12th-grade students to their academic achievement. This purpose was accomplished by
comparing scores from an online information literacy assessment, TRAILS, to student
collegiate and weighted GPAs. This research was in response to a deficit in research on
information literacy skills proficiency at the secondary level, and specifically in a highminority, low-socioeconomic urban school district. The second purpose was to ascertain
perceptions of 12th-grade students’ knowledge of information literacy skills for job
market and college and career readiness; in addition to their viewpoints regarding how
familial, social, and cultural factors influence their achievement. The secondary purpose
was achieved via individual semi-constructed interviews of select participants. The
purposes of the study were met by engaging the following research questions and
hypotheses.
Research Questions
Quantitative research questions. The following quantitative research question
addressed high-poverty, minority secondary students’ scores on an information literacy
skills assessment in comparison to grade-point average.
To determine if a correlation was present between information literacy skills
proficiency and academic achievement as measured by GPA of 12th-grade high school
students in a diverse school setting, the following research question was explored:

123
What is the relationship between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive school?
Quantitative Research Hypotheses
The following two quantitative hypotheses were tested in this study:
1. A relationship exists between knowledge of information literacy skills and
academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive
school;
2. A difference exists in information literacy knowledge between higher-achieving
and lower-achieving 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive high
school on an information literacy assessment.
Qualitative research questions. The following questions were addressed after
the quantitative phase by selected participants based on scoring criteria:
1. What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a traditional
comprehensive school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for job
market or for college and career readiness?
2. How have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced the
perceptions of information literacy skills needed for job market or for college
and career readiness?
Mixed methods research question. The following mixed methods research
question was addressed to reveal a deeper understanding of the connection between the
assessment and the perceptions:
According to Bandura’s three key concepts, children learn by observing, children
need a sense of accomplishment, and children’s behavior change is not an

124
indicator of learning. Integrating these three concepts, what is the relationship
between perceptions of two groups of students; specifically, 12th-grade higherachieving and 12th-grade lower-achieving students’ information literacy skills
and their information literacy assessment proficiency?
By meeting the two purposes of the study, three goals were fulfilled: (a) to add to
the knowledge base; (b) to have a personal, social, institutional, and/or organizational
impact; and (c) to understand complex phenomena. To assist practitioners in developing
pertinent instructional strategies for information literacy, the first goal of adding to the
knowledge base was to understand and to compare information literacy skills knowledge
and information literacy skills proficiency among 12th-grade students in a high-poverty,
high-minority urban school district. This comparison, by using an information literacy
skills assessment, was to ascertain job market or college and career readiness for
employing information literacy skills after high-school. Because of findings of this
assessment, a connection was made to the second goal of having an organizational
impact. To effect change by helping to increase information literacy skills in the district
where I am employed, this study provided current research that might support the need
for including information literacy skills as part of the secondary curriculum for all
students. Martin, Garcia, and McPhee (2012) noted that the Commission on the Future of
Higher Education in 2006 and the National High School Summit Report of 2005 each
documented the rising urgency of preparing high school students for college coursework.
The suggested pathway to accomplish this task is by strengthening the school curriculum
in instructing information literacy skills and enhancing the partnership between
secondary and postsecondary institutions, to prepare college bound students (Martin et

125
al., 2012). Effecting organizational change within the district could mean formulating K16 collaborations between school librarians and area university academic librarians, to
enhance information literacy preparedness for our students.
In addition, by using a social learning lens via application of Vygotsky’s (1978)
Sociocultural Theory and Bandura’s (1971) Social Learning Theory, the third goal of
understanding complex phenomena was to comprehend how students in lowsocioeconomic, high-minority urban high schools are academically impacted by familial,
social, and cultural factors. Goal three was accomplished by analyzing participants’
information literacy skill assessments, GPAs, and extreme-case participants’ perceptions
of their information literacy skills via interviews, to determine how proficiency impacts
their academic achievement. The purpose of this mixed methods study was to assess
information literacy skills, as well as, to explore participant perceptions of job market and
college and career readiness.
Discussion of Results of Data Analyses
In this mixed methods research study, survey data and interview responses were
collected to provide comprehensive data analyses of participant assessments and
participant perspectives on information literacy knowledge (Creswell, 2002).
Quantitative and qualitative data for this study were collected sequentially, and
subsequently analyzed consecutively. The summary of results will commence with the
quantitative portion, immediately followed by a summary of the qualitative and mixed
analysis findings. The summary of results includes Step 11 and Step 12 of Collins et al.’s
(2006) 13-step mixed method process: (a) Step 11—interpreting the mixed research
findings and (b) Step 12—writing the mixed research report.

126
Quantitative findings. The TRAILS, the quantitative tool of this mixed methods
study, is a 45-question online multiple-choice information literacy assessment that was
created using the American Association of School Librarians' (AASL) Standards for the
21st-Century Learner (TRAILS, 2016). The TRAILS is publicly funded and is offered to
educators at no-cost (Schloman & Gedeon, 2007). According to Schloman and Gedeon
(2007), the TRAILS was “designed as a classroom tool that enables a library media
specialist to easily obtain a snapshot of skill levels in order to better tailor instruction
efforts (p. 45). The online assessment evaluated the following five information literacy
research categories: (a) developing the research topic; (b) identifying possible sources;
(c) developing, using, and revising strategic searches; (d) evaluating sources and
information; and (e) recognizing responsible use of information ethically and legally
(TRAILS, 2016). The assessment included 45 multiple-choice questions, with four
answer choices per question. Students were scored on the percent of total correct
responses.
The objective of this study was to determine if a relationship existed between
knowledge of information literacy skills and academic achievement among 12th-grade
students in a traditional comprehensive high school. One hundred-twenty-nine highpoverty, minority students enrolled in a Title I high school were assessed on their
information literacy skills employing the Tool for Real-time Assessment of Information
Literacy Skills. Using results of the score of total correct responses from each TRAILS
assessment, a comparison was made to each student’s collegiate and weighted GPAs to
determine if there was a correlation. This correlation was performed answering the
research question to determine if: (a) a relationship existed between knowledge of

127
information literacy skills and academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a
traditional comprehensive school and (b) a difference existed in information literacy
knowledge between higher-achieving and lower-achieving 12th-grade students in a
traditional comprehensive high school on an information literacy assessment.
Findings indicate there was a correlation between the TRAILS scores and
academic achievement based on collegiate and weighted GPAs. Most students achieving
higher TRAILS scores also correlated with earning a higher GPA, and the majority of
students receiving the lowest TRAILS scores similarly were associated with lower grade
point averages. Males scored higher for total correct, while having a slightly lower GPA.
The female highest collegiate/weighted GPA was 3.98/7.76, respectively; however, the
participant’s TRAILS score, while at the higher end of correct score percentages, was
slightly lower amongst male and female students. Overall, male and female participants
demonstrated a positive relationship between the degree of the TRAILS score percentage
and collegiate/weighted GPA ranking. The English or Spanish home language indicators
for each participant revealed a correlation between level of the TRAILS score and
collegiate/weighted GPA scales; however, there was no substantial difference between
the level of correlation among the two home languages.
Analysis of each of the five sub-assessments examined: (a) developing the
research topic; (b) identifying potential sources; (c) developing, using, and revising
strategic searches; (d) evaluating sources and information; and (e) using information
responsibly, ethically and legally, corresponded to the total score findings, validating a
relationship between information literacy skills and academic achievement. Nine
questions were included in each sub-assessment category, and all findings substantiated

128
both hypotheses. The first hypothesis signified a relationship exists between knowledge
of information literacy skills and academic achievement among 12th-grade students in a
traditional comprehensive school. The second hypothesis corroborated a difference
exists in information literacy knowledge between higher-achieving and lower-achieving
12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive high school on an information literacy
assessment.
Qualitative Findings. Following the quantitative phase of this mixed methods
study, four participants were selected using extreme case scoring criteria. Two students
were selected from each of two TRAILS categories—scores over 70% and scores under
30%, to participate in a 30-minute interview. The four individual semi-structured
interviews sought to answer the following qualitative questions:
1. What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a traditional comprehensive
school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for job market or for college and
career readiness?
2. How have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced the
perceptions of information literacy skills needed for job market or for college and career
readiness?
To address the first research question, themes revealed from interview data were: (a)
comprehending information literacy; (b) utilizing research process; (c) instructional and
collaborative influencers; and (d) life after graduation. First, each participants was asked
to define the term Information Literacy. To ensure confidentiality, pseudonyms were
used for all participant names.

129
Comprehending information literacy. Michael, a male of Hispanic ethnicity
whose home language was Spanish, was the first participant interviewed. Michael had a
collegiate GPA of 3.16 and a weighted GPA of 5.86and scored 78% on the TRAILS
assessment, answering 35 of the 45 questions correctly. When addressing the first theme
of comprehending information literacy Michael shared a rudimentary understanding of
information literacy as, “Well, it's basically like being able to read. So, you read
information and you understand what it means.” Even though Michael’s definition was
basic, he did express in his interview an understanding of the information literacy
process. Michael’s highest score on the sub-assessment was evaluating resources with
88% of that category’s questions answered correctly
Darius, an African-American male, scored 22%, answering 10 questions
correctly. At the lowest end of the TRAILS score, Darius has a 2.40 and 4.64
collegiate/weighted GPA, respectively. He responded to defining information literacy as:
When I hear the word "information”, I think about school. I think about me doing
a research or a paper. I think about English class, to be specific. Yeah, just
researching about a specific type of person, or something like a project.
Darius scored lowest in develop topic at 11% correct of the 9 questions for that category.
Diana was the next interviewee. Diana held a 3.98/7.76 collegiate/weighted GPA
and answered 73% of the 45 TRAILS questions correctly. Diana’s definition of
information literacy revealed:
I think of information literacy as being able to navigate the Internet because the
Internet is where I get most of my information from. It's the easiest, fastest, I

130
think the most reliable way to get as many sources as I feel like I need to from
different perspectives. I think that navigating the Internet is navigation literacy.
Navigating the Internet is part of understanding information literacy; however,
information literacy encompasses other literacies. According to Eisenberg et al. (2004),
negotiating complex information formats requires skillfully comprehending associated
information literacies, such as computer, visual, and digital.
Eliza scored 27% on the TRAILS assessment and carried at 2.24 GPA; and at the
time of the assessment, there was no weighted GPA recorded for her. Eliza had recently
returned to school after dropping out the previous year. When asked to define
information literacy Eliza stated:
I think of like the whole genre of like writing and books and just literature itself.
When probed again asking what the word ‘information’ meant to her, Eliza responded:
“Like data or surveys, kind of.”
At that point in the interview, I explained that information literacy related to constructing
research. Eliza’s lowest score was 11% for develop topic. Figure 6 represents key
responses among the four participants regarding comprehending information literacy.

131

Michael

Darius

"So, you read information and you
understand what it means.”

"I think about me doing a research
or a paper."

Diana

Eliza

“I think of information literacy as
being able to navigate the internet
because the internet is where I get
most of my information from. "

“I think of like the whole genre of
like writing and books and just
literature itself."

Figure 6. Key responses from interviewees when asked to define the term information
literacy.
Utilizing the research process. The second theme of utilizing the research
process, Michael stated he uses the Internet and he finds it “is a really powerful tool to
find information, and not just find it, but find it quicker.” Michael also stated, “I use the
information that I find and I find a way to apply it to my like paper, and I try to credit
them, as well because you don't want to be plagiarizing.” This statement corresponds to
Michael’s score of 78% for using information ethically and responsibly. Part of the
research process is selecting and deselecting resources. To this point, Michael shared:
The most difficult part is narrowing down what information you want to keep in
your paper and what information you don't need. Because most of the time, like I
find I'm intrigued by what I read and I want it all in the paper. But you can't do
that. You have to compact to what the assignment is listing.
This statement is analogous to Michael’s score of 78% for develop, use, and revise search
strategies.

132
Darius revealed when utilizing the research process for finding credible sources
and understanding reliability and credibility of sources:
I like to look at news sources 'cause you know that's a credible source… I think
understanding research is good 'cause knowledge is power. You know, if you
know what you're talking about ... Everyone wants to say their side of the story
but they really don't know what they're talking about. So, with Trump ... Everyone
hates Trump, but I don't really speak on it because I don't know. I feel like you
should do your research. You should know how to research so when stuff comes
up, you could voice your opinion… But if it's a matter that I wanna know, then
I'm lucky enough to know how to do the research and find out.
Darius substantiates understanding credible resources with his highest score of 38% for
evaluating sources and information.
Diana described part of her search strategies as:
The first thing that I do is, I usually go to Wikipedia. I'll read it for an overview
and I'll go down to the bottom of the page and there's a lot of sources there. A lot
of them are primary and they’re linked online, so I can just go ahead and click
them. Go through that.
I do, do a Google search for them and I go through Google Books. Then I start
going into maybe articles. Then I go ahead and I'll go to the Smithsonian AP
Archives. I think I mentioned Google Books. I'll start going through there.
Diana’s highest score of 89% was in develop, use, and revise search strategies consistent
with the category of develop topic.

133
Eliza recalled instances where she was required to do a research project, and her
process consisted of, “…just looking online. We would go to like computer labs, and
we'd just go online to like ... I would just grab sentences from website, from website. A
lot of websites…” When Eliza was asked how comfortable she was searching for
information on the Internet, she responded, “I feel confident sometimes, but over the
years, I know some websites were not as good as others and some are not as accurate or
recent. There's millions of websites.” However, Eliza recognized the importance of
credibility and reliability in research when she stated,
I wouldn't exactly go to Wikipedia because I heard those are just opinions and
sometimes not always facts. I would go to websites that are specifically just for
that subject, like some type of science. It seems legit, like certified. It seemed very
professional.
Eliza scored highest at 44% for using information responsibly, ethically, and
legally, and second highest for evaluating sources and information.

Figure 7. Responses from participants about utilizing information literacy. This graphic
illustrates interviewees’ key responses to questions on how they use information literacy
skills.

134

Instructional and collaborative influencers. The next theme of instructional and
collaborative influencers, indicated educators, such as History Fair/Science Fair
sponsors/teachers, or close friends influencing skills participants used when researching.
Michael shared, “I've taken dual credit classes, and at colleges, and what I find is that the
professors, they give you the work, and they expect you to finish it, and understand it.”
Darius stated his English teacher was instrumental in teaching him research skills, and
Diana’s support stemmed from her History Fair sponsor. Eliza also indicated,
Culinary was the reason why I went to school. It was my favorite. My chef, she
was awesome. She made me want to be a chef. Being a chef, I was actually
researching salaries and where they would be located best and like how to start
off, like their business or somewhat.
Despite the dichotomous scores between higher- and lower-achievers, there was an
attachment to an educator, perhaps indicative of opportunities to make a difference.
Job market or college and career readiness. The last theme explored, answered
the first research question, What are the perceptions of 12th-grade students in a
traditional comprehensive school regarding obtaining information literacy skills for job
market or for college and career readiness? The students’ responses centered on the
perceptions of their readiness for college and career as related to their information
literacy skills. When responding to the question of being adequately prepared for college
research, Michael ascribed his readiness to taking dual credit courses at a community
college, and replied,
I do think I'm prepared for ... I think ... Like I'm not sure about like the other
students at our school, because I find that most of them, they only go through one

135
or two articles, and then they're like, ‘Oh, well, that's it. I found my information.’
I don't think that's like, that's healthy for their learning.
Darius responded that he intends to continue to post-secondary, “I'm a smart
student, but I'm a horrible test taker… I was like, ‘I ain't gon' make it. My SAT scores.’
But going more into depth about this school and what they do and find out that helps me
now.” Darius was specifically referring to a university which has a program for students
not scoring well overall on the SAT test.
Diana answered,
I definitely do think so. I would say that it is entirely because of History Fair. I
have done personal interviews with people. I have gone to museums. I have met
up with people in order to ... I have met with people who are from Russia or the
Soviet Union era. I've talked to them about what their experiences were like so
that I could use it in my project. I definitely do think that I am prepared to either
find people who can help me, find sources or locations where I can go to.
(Since this interview, Diana has been accepted to attend Massachusetts Institute of
Technology [MIT], Columbia, Harvard, and Yale in the fall).
Eliza revealed during the interview that she had dropped out the previous year,
and shared:
I wish I talked to my counselor more often in the previous years to actually keep
me on track. I know I'm on track, to keep me in my lane. I know I'm on the right
track, so I cannot be stressing the whole year and be thinking, what if I'm not
doing this right? What if I'm not going to graduate? What if everything's wrong?
And I just messed up from the beginning.

136
Eliza stated she plans to stay in school, and replied when asked about graduation, “Yes.
I'm going to be ... I'm excited. I am. I'm going to be ready. I'm going to be prepared.”
(Since the interview, Eliza has increased her collegiate GPA to 3.37 and has established a
weighted GPA of 5.63).

Michael

Darius

"I do think I'm prepared for ... I think
... Like I'm not sure about like the
other students at our school.."

“I'm a smart student, but I'm a
horrible test taker."

Diana

Eliza

“I definitely do think so. I would say
that it is entirely because of History
Fair."

“I wish I talked to my counselor more
often in the previous years to actually
keep me on track."

Figure 8. Responses from participants about college and career readiness. This figure
illustrates responses from qualitative participants when asked if they were ready to
transition to the job market or to college and career.
Significance. Three of Gee’s (2005) seven building tasks were used to analyze
discourse from the four participants for the second qualitative research question, How
have sociocultural (e.g., family, social, cultural) factors influenced the perceptions of
information literacy skills needed job market or for college and career readiness? Using
Gee’s task of significance — how did the participants’ language connote important
matters, interviewees articulated motivating forces, whether internal and external, playing
a consequential role in their employing information literacy skills. Michael imparted of

137
importance to him was, “to make computers more accessible to people.” Darius stated
researching cities “to see if there's a lot of racism... You need to know about that stuff.
And then in other cities, they have different laws and different things you can and cannot
do.”
Diana voiced significance surrounding an incident that affected her, when she
remembered an incident that occurred during 7th-grade. Diana was selected to attend a
camp based on SAT scores. She reflected,
That definitely made me realize who it was that I was competing with to get into
college. There were people there who had their parents pay for a tutor to have
them study for the SAT that they took to get in. Their parents were engineers and
they spoke English and they were American. That really kind of shaped me.
The significance of Eliza’s motivating force was expressed as,
I'd say my sophomore year; I was really bad. I messed up my whole high school
experience, basically. I wish I could tell myself ... I wish myself now could tell
myself back then what to do and not to do.”
As demonstrated via each respondent’s verbiage, significance was connoted through
language of what mattered to them.
Activities. Gee’s (2005) second task was analyzed through the lens of activities or
practices language that implied important matters. When asked how participating in
Science Fair helped with research skills, Michael responded, “It's helped a lot. I mean, it
teaches us I think researching. It teaches us more than what teachers would teach us in
their classroom.” Darius participated in History Fair in middle school, but discontinued
during his high school years. However, he also verbalized activities that mattered stating,

138
When I did the History Fair, I did a website on civil rights, and I did it
individually on Martin Luther King. Everyone knows about Martin Luther King,
but my teacher taught me to research, go into depth, you know, more specific
information.
Diana stated, “I started researching for competitions in sixth grade and continued
participating in History Fair throughout high school.” She continued, “… a lot of the
help I get is from online sources, so the competitions that I do for History Fair, so there
are a lot of projects for me to go through and look at and see what they did.”
Relationships. Relationships was the last building task analyzed examining
language, signifying the importance of family, social, and cultural influences. Michael
noted the importance of his parents when he stated:
Well, both of my parents are Hispanic, and they don't know much about
computers, and all that. So, I think that always trying to be very like correct with
like, so I can answer the questions more often, and help them a lot more. So
basically, like my parents depend on me, to help them understand like different
question that they have… Well, my family, they always push me. Like to be a
better person, and to like be better than them.
Darius also expressed a strong connection with the relationship between him and culture.
Darius shared:
My culture. I think my culture, the African culture, it helps me a lot. When we
have Black History Month, they say all the facts on the announcements about
what we have achieved, what we have done. That's very motivational as well. It's
like, oh, I come from a culture that's so brilliant and creative and things like that.

139
So, it gives me motivation, and again, if they can do it ... especially back then.
There wasn't computers. You had to go look in the book and everything. If they
can do anything like that, then I most definitely can. So, it's motivational.
During the interview, Diana shared that she was a Deferred Action for Childhood
Arrivals (DACA) student. Articulating the relationship shared with her parents, Diana
expressed:
Okay, my first language is Spanish. My parents only went to grade school. At
some point, maybe 7th grade when I was taking ... Or 8th grade when I was taking
Algebra and I needed help on it, I realized that I couldn't anymore ask my parents
for help. I never really could because they only speak Spanish. I guess from an
early age I had to learn to be independent. I think that, that has ... I think the fact
that my parents didn't go to high school and they don't speak English has
definitely made me ... Or forced me to be independent.
Eliza expressed how her sociocultural relationships have shaped her, as well. Eliza
revealed the following:
I actually, I enrolled myself here, so I'm my own guardian. I don't live with my
family currently. I haven't lived with them in a few years actually, since my dad,
since I was a sophomore, and then my mom since like eighth grade. I'd say my
sophomore year, I was really bad. They weren't very much a part of my
schooling, I'd say. They weren't a part of my ... They weren't involved much.
As demonstrated by participant responses, family, social and cultural influences impacted
Michael, Darius, Diana, and Eliza during their secondary years of learning. According to
Welton and Martinez (2014), “For a majority of students, family members, many of who

140
lacked a college education themselves, were driving forces behind students’ college
aspirations” (p. 213).

Michael

Darius

"Like to be a better person, and to like
be better than them."

“It's like, oh, I come from a culture
that's so brilliant and creative and
things like that. So, it gives me
motivation, and again, if they can do
it ... especially back then."

Diana

Eliza

“I think the fact that my parents
didn't go to high school and they
don't speak English has definitely
made me ... Or forced me to be
independent."

“I'd say my sophomore year, I was
really bad. They weren't very much a
part of my schooling, I'd say. They
weren't a part of my ... They weren't
involved much. ."

Figure 9. Responses from participants on the significance of their relationships. This
figure illustrates the relationships that were instrumental in shaping the participants.
Mixed Analysis Findings
The mixed analysis of the TRAILS assessment and interviews from the four
participants, examined the following mixed methods research question: according to
Bandura’s (1971) three key concepts, children learn by observing, children need a sense
of accomplishment, and children’s behavior change is not an indicator of learning.
Integrating these three concepts, What is the relationship between perceptions of two
groups of students; specifically, 12th-grade higher-achieving and 12th-grade lowerachieving students’ information literacy skills and their information literacy assessment
proficiency?

141
Michael, Darius, and Diana have each participated in History Fair and/or Science
Fair throughout their secondary education. Perhaps, their participation accounts for
understanding the basics of completing the research process based on Bandura’s
concepts. Michael, Darius, and Diana each would have had opportunities to observe
from their History Fair/Science Fair sponsor or teacher, and could have received a sense
of accomplishment from participating and earning awards; however, participatory
behavior was not an indicator of their learning. Eliza noted she learned best one-on-one,
she felt accomplished when she was accepted into culinary school, and behavior of
dropping out of school was not a learning indicator for her. Nevertheless, proficiency
levels exist between each of them, as indicated by their TRAILS assessment score.
Although each interviewee indicated they “looked-up” information on the Internet, both
Michael and Diana expressed the most details in their process.
In Michael’s process, he indicated he researches several sources. He admitted,
“The most difficult part is narrowing down what information you want to keep in your
paper and what information you don't need.” Diana related, “…once I have narrowed
down my books or my sources, I'll go down to usually the Houston Public Library or
Rice.” She continued explaining:
I separate them by sources, by primary and secondary and then by category, so a
website, dissertation or others. Then I'll go ahead and print them out. I can very
quickly decide whether a source is credible or not by just a quick scan of the
author, title, website link, publisher. I can very quickly do that where before I
used to really have to think about it and wonder whether it was credible or not.

142
Whereas, Darius and Eliza each described their process in different terms. Darius stated,
“I like to look at news sources 'cause you know that's a credible source. Stay away from
Wikipedia and all that. I like news sources, newspapers. Just stuff that's credible.” Eliza
disclosed when researching information for a science project:
I wouldn't exactly go to Wikipedia because I heard those are just opinions and
sometimes not always facts. I would go to websites that are specifically just for
that subject, like some type of science. It seems legit, like certified. It seemed very
professional.
When information literacy scores were compared to perceptions of information literacy
skills, the higher-achieving participants expressed their process in a more informative
manner and delivered more information than the lower-achieving students.
Connection of Results with Existing Literature
As indicated in the literature review, there have been many definitions of
information literacy throughout the years. However, ALA (1989) in the final report of
the Presidential Committee on Information Literacy, defined information literacy as a set
of four skills requiring individuals to: (a) recognize, (b) locate, (c) evaluate, and (d)
utilize information effectively. American Association of School Libraries (2017)
developed a new Standards Framework for Learners encouraging students to critically
think about their research process and identifying sources. The standards’ tenets are to;
(a) inquire, (b) include, (c) collaborate, (d) curate, (e) explore, and (f) engage. The six
standards are compared to the five sub-assessments in Table 20.

143
Table 20
American Association of School Library teaching and learning standards
AASL Standard (2017)

TRAILS sub-assessment

INQUIRE - Build new knowledge by
inquiring, thinking critically, identifying
problems, and developing

Develop a topic
Identify Potential Sources

INCLUDE - Demonstrate an understanding
of and commitment to inclusiveness and
respect for diversity in the learning
community
COLLABORATE - Work effectively with
others to broaden perspectives and work
toward common goals.

Develop, Use, and Revise Search Strategies

CURATE - Make meaning for oneself and
others by collecting, organizing, and
sharing resources of personal relevance.

Evaluate Sources and Information

EXPLORE - Discover and innovate in a
growth mindset developed through
experience and reflection.
ENGAGE - Demonstrate safe, legal, and
Recognize How to Use Information
ethical creating and sharing of knowledge
Responsibly, Ethically, and Legally
products independently while engaging in a
community of practice
Note: Adapted with permission from AASL Standards Framework for Learners by ALA,
2017, Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Quantitative results connection. The five sub-assessments parallel five problem
areas students have using information literacy skills. According to Owen (2010) students
were challenged in: (a) general knowledge deficiency in that “students don’t know what
they don’t know” (p. 21); (b) research topic and questions deficiency for not adhering to a
research process; (c) web-search deficiency and lack of ability to conduct academic

144
searches; (d) evaluating information non-critically using nonacademic over academic
articles, and (e) using information inefficiently and lacking the ability to synthesize
information. These deficiencies as reported by Owen (2010) were evident in the
participants’ responses. Fifty-eight percent of questions labeled under develop topic were
answered correctly. Scores were consistent with the sub-assessment category of
evaluating sources and information, which was another area indicated by Owen (2010) as
being problematic for students. Identifying potential sources was the lowest scored subassessment at 40%. According to Head and Eisenberg (2009), not understanding how to
process academic sources ultimately influences students to utilize familiar sources, such
as Google, for research projects, as opposed to reliable sources. Despite being digital
natives, many students are not proficient in differentiating between types of resources nor
can they successfully evaluate credible and reliable sources (Islam & Murno, 2006).
Qualitative results connection. Each of the qualitative participants indicated
they do their research online, and little was mentioned about utilizing print sources. As
the review of literature concedes, “With the seductiveness of the Internet added to the
problem, it has become one of education's greatest challenges to teach students the skills
needed to test the reliability, currency, and relevance of the information they find”
(Breivik, 2005, p. 22). This sentiment is continued by Saunders et al. (2017) who
proclaimed in a Pew Research Center study, “middle and high school students conduct
research almost exclusively through free online Web services” (p. 277).
Even though databases are available to these students at school, when speaking of
using the school, public or university libraries, other than Diane, none of the participants
admitted to researching through their district’s databases. Purcell, Brenner, and Rainie

145
(2012) declared Google and online encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, were consumed
most often by students, with Google being used at 94% and Wikipedia being used at 75%
of the time for research. When using online sources to uncover credible information,
Horrigan and Gramlich (2017) theorized 75% of Hispanic students and 70% of Black
students desired more training. The desire for more training was reinforced when Averill
and Lewis (2013) reported students they paneled “wished they had received additional
instruction in the research process at the secondary level or that they had paid more
attention to the instruction they were given” (p. 114). Despite access to myriad
information sources, students have a limited propensity for finding, evaluating, and
applying information (Averill & Lewis, 2013).
Connection of Results with Theoretical Framework
Through a social learning lens, via application of Vygotsky’s (1978)
Sociocultural Theory and Bandura’s (1971) Social Learning Theory, study results
revealed how students in low-socioeconomic, high-minority urban high schools are
academically impacted by familial, social, and cultural factors. Michael, Darius, Diana,
and Eliza shared stories of how their culture or family impacted their learning.
Vygotsky’s (1978) ZPD is defined as, "the distance between the actual developmental
level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem-solving under adult guidance, or in
collaboration with more capable peers" (p. 86). The concept of ZPD was manifested
when each participant discussed working together with other students or teachers on
projects. Through sociocultural connectivity, integrating family, social, and cultural
factors, students might indeed discover, “learning awakens a variety of internal

146
developmental processes that are able to operate only when the child is interacting with
people in his environment and in cooperation with his peers…” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 90),
Implications for Policy and Practice
Findings from this research were presented to key school district personnel,
including the district’s library services program director, to determine whether the
TRAILS assessment is a viable tool for our district, and in particular, our demographics.
Additionally, findings from this study will be examined to assess information literacy
instruction opportunities within the district. Moreover, findings can be used to discuss the
possibility of developing a sociocultural information literacy assessment that is relevant
to my school district’s student population. By developing a more sociocultural
assessment of information literacy skills, based on cultural experiences, when in a school
or district that is largely of another diverse culture, results might ascertain skill
deficiencies more accurately. Perhaps future instruction can be targeted to guarantee
students are more information literate for job market and college and career readiness
supported by their experiences. The analyzed data from this research can subsequently
be shared with district educators to improve ways of teaching information literacy skills
in a culturally sensitive way.
However, before determining the necessity of a socioculturally relevant
information literacy assessment, districts must decide how information literacy skills are
to be included within curriculum and instruction. Throughout each of the participants’
responses on utilizing the research process, instructional and collaborative influencers,
and job market and college and career readiness, no student indicated instruction from
their teacher or librarian on learning information literacy skills. As previously noted,

147
TEA’s, (n.d.) TEKS, established secondary students are required to produce research
projects in most core subject areas. However, according to Gross and Latham (2012),
“many students come to college without proficient information literacy skills” (p. 574).
In addition, if students are to have a more streamlined transition from secondary
to postsecondary education, significant collaborations should be established. Hull and
Taylor (2003) proposed changes in information literacy skills instruction and additional
communication between secondary and higher education schools. The American
Association of School Librarians and the ACRL each have standards illustrating the
capabilities of an information literate person; however, according to Callan and Kirst
(2008), “perhaps one of the reasons for the skills gap between high school and college is
the fact that student standards are established in separate orbits. K-16 faculty members
rarely work together on standards, curricula or assessment” (p. 3). Establishing strong K16 collaborations between local schools and universities might result in stronger
information literacy skills of incoming college freshmen or for individuals going directly
into the workforce.
Recommendations for Future Research
For Step 13, the final step of the 13-step mixed method typology, Collins et al.
(2006) stated, “The report writing step leads to a reformulation of the research questions
for subsequent phases or studies” (p. 72). Reformulating the research questions for this
study would mean to inquire why there are differences in information literacy skills
among secondary students, and how information literacy skills can be taught for students
to be prepared for the job market or be college and career ready. Further research is
needed in secondary schools to determine the consistency of instruction given to students

148
and by whom. Myriad research exists on students who have transitioned from high
school to college; however, little research exists on students’ preparation while in
secondary school and even less research on schools’ curriculum mandated requirements.
I assessed skills and perceptions; however, to obtain a complete image of why students
are not ready, systemic research from classroom to school district is important in
understanding why students are ill-prepared for academic research. Not only are
students’ perceptions important, but high school teachers’ perceptions of student
expectations versus actual student compositions are integral to understanding how to
address the information literacy problem. Analyzing districts’ scope of lessons to be
taught and the sequence in which the information should be taught, relating to
information literacy skills, would contribute to the body of research to assist in
uncovering an instructional solution.
Summary
Understanding gaps in knowledge and in proficiency of information literacy skills
allows school librarians in high-poverty, high-minority urban secondary schools to assist
students in becoming more information literate for the job market and college and career
readiness. Vygotsky (1978), in his sociocultural theory, indicated learning is a social
event and happens when interaction between the learner and other people in their
surroundings occur. Therefore, collaborations in information preparedness among public
school librarians, teachers, and postsecondary academic librarians might ensure incoming
college freshmen are equipped with essential information literacy skills when
transitioning to postsecondary institutions.

149
As a librarian, teaching individuals to become self-sufficient learners who
ethically assemble and utilize credible, reliable information for academic and personal
research is my primary teaching objective. My belief is all students graduating from
secondary institutions should be information literate, regardless if they are directly
entering the job market or continuing into higher education. However, as educators we
must instruct students how to recognize the significance of understanding what
information literacy entails. The American Association of School Librarians (2011)
asserted, “Urban school librarians serve a disproportionately high number of minority
students” (p. 2). According to Palardy et al. (2015), “American high schools are highly
segregated by race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and English language status” (p. 1).
Due to these factors, minority and low-socioeconomic students’ actions and academic
performances are adversely affected because of the tendency for poor Hispanic students
and poor Black students to attend segregated schools (Palardy et al., 2015). As a librarian
teaching at a high-poverty, high-minority school, ensuring my students are information
literate is fundamental because as Owens (1976) declared:
beyond information literacy for greater work effectiveness and efficiency,
information literacy is needed to guarantee the survival of democratic institutions.
All men are created equal but voters with information resources are in a position
to make more intelligent decisions than citizens who are information illiterates.
(p. 27)
By becoming more sociocultural-minded teachers, perhaps educators can build stronger
relationships in low-socioeconomic, urban school districts. Stronger relationships may
help produce critical thinkers who will, in turn, be able to make connections with

150
information via inquiry and investigation. Thus, forging stronger information literacy
skills to ensure job market and college and career readiness; consequently, generating an
information literate citizenry.