POTENTIAL WORKPLACE VIOLENCE IN ASSUMED LOW-RISK
ENVIRONMENTS: LIBRARY EMPLOYEE PERCEPTIONS AND SAFETY
CONCERNS
An Applied Doctoral Project submitted
by
AMY E. HELFRITZ

Abstract
Employees in assumed low-risk environments—environments where safety, while
assumed, may not be realistic—are an underrepresented demographic in research. The
purpose of this project was to examine the personal perceptions and safety concerns of
employees in a particular assumed low-risk environment, a public library, regarding potential
workplace violence occurring in their place of employment. Using a qualitative case study
design, data were collected through an anonymous online survey sent to 19 employees of a
public library located in the Midwest region of the United States, and through personal semistructured phone interviews. Research findings showed that most respondents demonstrated
an overall awareness of potential workplace violence in their work environment, and many
participants referenced very specific concerns regarding disconcerting library patron
behaviors. Three main themes emerged from the data, including awareness of potential
workplace violence, concerns involving defiant youth, and the desire for additional
management support. The findings from this project can be used to create or improve
workplace violence policies and procedures in public libraries, and to address the mental
health needs of employees in assumed low-risk environments. Project findings also provide
a foundation for future research regarding these environments.

Key words: perception, public libraries, risk, safety concerns, workplace violence
iii

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce this Applied Doctoral Project on potential
workplace violence in assumed low-risk environments. Workplace violence and safety
concerns in high-risk careers and organizations where the potential for crime is elevated,
such as law enforcement and the military, are the focus of numerous scholarly and
professional studies. In contrast, research is lacking in regard to professions and businesses
where safety is typically expected and workplace violence is presumed highly unlikely.
The following sections of this chapter explain the project, which examined the selfreported effects of potential workplace violence on workers in a public library, an assumed
low-risk environment, and focused on the workers’ personal perceptions and safety concerns.
General Statement
Workplace violence (WPV) is defined by the United States Department of Labor’s
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) as “violence or the threat of
violence against workers” (United States Department of Labor, 2002, p. 1). Certain
organizations and careers are considered high-risk regarding their likelihood to face issues
involving crime, including WPV. These organizations and careers are often branded
potential targets for violence and have an expectation of risk associated with them, based
solely on the fundamentals of the job descriptions and requirements. For example, Chappell
and Di Martino (2006) explain that policing is a “high-risk occupation where responding to
violence often represents a routine hazard. Sometimes that hazard can prove to be extremely
dangerous and distressing” (pp. 71-72).
On the other end of the risk spectrum are those careers and environments, such as
bookstores or coffee shops, which are typically assumed to be safe by the general public.

1

This project specifically addressed the perceptions and safety concerns of workers in these
types of assumed low-risk environments, a demographic that is currently underrepresented in
research, regarding potential WPV. An assumption of this project, which will be further
discussed later in this chapter, is that the majority of American society is accustomed to
having safe gathering areas, or assumed low-risk environments, where violence does not
occur and is not expected. Workers in these types of assumed low-risk environments may
have a different perspective, and may have safety concerns that are not realized by the
general public or discussed in research, which is what this project addressed. Howard (2011)
explains, “Employees know the specific issues that they face, and this influences their
perceptions of acts and perpetrators of WPV,” (p. 1049).
As types of crimes, levels of violence, and instances of terrorism increase throughout
the country, these expectations are challenged and environments’ risk levels change. An
example of these changes in risk levels is public schools. Once considered safe
environments, increased incidents of violence in public schools across the nation have
changed this perception. Ruffini (2006) explains, “Just a few decades ago, the very notion
that children would be murdered in their schools by other children was unthinkable” (p. 159).
A mass shooting in Colorado Springs, Colorado demonstrates the difference between
high-risk and assumed low-risk organizations, which were both affected during the crime.
On Friday, November 27, 2015, Robert Lewis Dear opened fire at a Planned Parenthood
office and killed three people, including Officer Garrett Swasey. Officer Swasey was on
duty at the University of Colorado in Colorado Springs (UCCS) when he responded to the
call for help at the Planned Parenthood office, located within 10 miles of UCCS. Dear

2

injured an additional nine people, including five more police officers during the shooting,
(Shoichet, Stapleton, & Botelho, 2015).
Planned Parenthood is a controversial business with both strong support for, and
opposition to, its mission which focuses largely on women’s reproductive rights (Planned
Parenthood Federation of America Inc, 2017). The controversy surrounding Planned
Parenthood and its propensity to perform abortions puts the organization in a higher risk
category regarding safety, with clinics across the United States being targeted by criminal
acts throughout history. Due to this history of violence, it is a reasonable assumption that
workers at this clinic would be at a higher risk of violence than if they worked at an assumed
low-risk business, like a coffee shop or library. Additionally, the responding law
enforcement officers’ job requirements, as previously discussed, also put them in a high-risk
category.
During the attack, people at a nearby grocery store and other local businesses were
told to shelter-in-place (Turkewitz, 2015), which means taking refuge in an interior room
within a facility with few or no windows (OSHA, 2015). A grocery store would typically be
considered an assumed low-risk environment where people gather with an expectation of
safety; however, that was not the case during this incident. While the grocery store itself was
not the target, its proximity to the Planned Parenthood clinic increased its risk for violence.
People unfamiliar with that Planned Parenthood clinic’s location or history would typically
not consider getting groceries, or working at a grocery store, a high-risk event.
As society faces increased threats regarding WPV, the types of organizations that are
now at risk are changing, and the potential for violence increases in assumed low-risk
environments, as happened with the previously discussed public schools. This is an

3

important aspect and implication of this project, as acknowledging and addressing
employees’ personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in
these types of assumed low-risk environments may provide organizations with the
opportunity to better address the mental health needs of their workers.
As American society has begun to acclimate to lockdowns, calls to shelter-in-place,
and increased violence in schools, there are other environments in the United States where
safety is still largely assumed, if considered at all. An example of this type of assumed lowrisk area is public libraries. Therefore, the population sampled for this project, which can
potentially be generalized to other assumed low-risk occupations, is public library workers.
Libraries and library workers represent the types of organizations and employee
positions that are often considered low-risk for potential WPV incidents. “Little
consideration is usually given to the fact that librarians are also quite likely to experience an
act of violence or aggression from members of the public during their working lives”
(Chappell & Di Martino, 2006, p. 81).
While society’s general expectation is safety in environments such as public libraries,
that does not mean that crimes are not being committed in these areas. This further indicates
the importance in understanding the perceptions and safety concerns of workers in these
environments, as was the focus of this project. In reference to libraries, Kahn (2008) states,
“The very nature and concept of cultural institutions make their collections vulnerable to
theft and their staff open to harm” (p. vii). Incidents of violence occurring at public libraries
across the country include shootings, stabbings, and rapes. As this project was being
conducted, two public library workers were killed and four others wounded during a shooting
at a public library in Clovis, New Mexico (Peet, 2017). Additionally, the headlines “Boy, 13,

4

charged in rape of 8-year-old girl at New York Public Library” (Parascandola, Paddock,
Lestch, & Hutchinson, 2013), “Man in critical condition after shooting outside Tooele
library” (Adams, 2010), and “Army veteran, 75, saves 16 children from knife attack at public
library” (Chasmar, 2015), all illustrate criminal activity at public libraries throughout the
country.
Environments like public libraries are still considered low-risk, despite the types of
aforementioned crimes being committed in them and on their properties. While the
eradication of crime and terrorism is not realistic, gaining insight into the personal
perceptions and safety concerns of employees working in these environments on a daily basis
is feasible through this project. The project results provide assumed low-risk organizations
with data that can potentially be used to address the mental health needs of workers through
the creation or improvement of trainings, policies, and procedures regarding WPV.
Statement of Problem
The general research problem for this project was that while issues regarding highrisk occupations have been identified and studied, there is a lack of knowledge regarding
risks in environments that are often considered low-risk for potential WPV incidents in the
United States. This project focused on these types of assumed low-risk organizations.
The specific research problem for this project was that employees’ personal
perceptions and safety concerns in regard to potential WPV in assumed low-risk
environments are largely unknown, which means that these types of organizations are
potentially not addressing their employees’ needs regarding safety. This could negatively
impact the professional and emotional well-being of employees, and in turn, the overall
success of the organizations.

5

The importance of this project lies in understanding the perceptions and safety
concerns of those working in environments where safety, while assumed, may not be
realistic. Examples of assumed low-risk environments include organizations and businesses
such as libraries, coffee shops, and other areas where people often gather with an expectation
of safety. An increase in violence in these types of environments, which will be discussed in
upcoming sections, demonstrates the need and relevancy for research to be conducted on this
topic.
There is a lack of theoretical knowledge regarding how safety concerns dealing with
potential WPV affect workers in assumed low-risk organizations, specifically in regard to
mental health and emotional well-being. Gaining insight into the perceptions of this
demographic provides the opportunity for organizations to potentially use the collected data
to address the mental health needs of workers dealing with the psychological effects that can
occur when safety concerns exist.
Safety concerns regarding the possibility of violence in the workplace have the
potential to impact both the professional and personal needs of employees, and could lead to
negative effects in individuals’ mental and physical health, as well as organizations’ overall
productivity and effectiveness. Jain, Saeed, Arnaout, and Kortum (2012) explain that
“Psychosocial risks and related workplace problems such as work-related stress, workplace
violence, and bullying are now widely recognized major challenges to occupational health
and safety” (p. 326), and exposure to these kinds of risks has shown a potentially detrimental
impact on the mental, physical, and social health of workers. Additionally, the authors state,
“At the organizational level, work stress can lead to a deteriorated work climate, and can

6

have an impact on product and service quality as well as the image of the organization” (p.
326).
This project contributes to research by providing insight as to the personal
perceptions and safety concerns of workers in assumed low-risk organizations, environments
where risk for WPV may not typically be considered. This insight may potentially be used
by practitioners, organizations, and researchers in addressing the needs of workers in these
types of environments.
Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this Applied Doctoral Project was to examine Dewey Public Library
(DPL)1 employees’ personal perceptions, safety concerns, and self-reported effects of
potential WPV occurring in an organization where an overall expectation of safety is
generally present. Since the purpose of the project was to gather data directly from
employees in an effort to better understand their personal perceptions regarding WPV,
qualitative research was an appropriate method to use for this project. Qualitative research
involves the examination of qualities or characteristics that cannot be completely reduced to
numerical values, such as complex human situations involving behaviors or people’s in-depth
perspectives (Leedy & Ormrod, 2013).
Surveys and semi-structured interviews were both used to gather the data.
Specifically, an anonymous online survey was distributed to 19 employees at DPL, a public
library located in the Midwest. Participants who chose to share additional information spoke
with the researcher on the phone in individual semi-structured interviews (Leedy & Ormrod,

1

A pseudonym has been used for the name of the participating organization.

7

2013). The interviews allowed the researcher to ask additional questions to gain clarification
and to obtain further information from participants’ answers.
Data collected from this project provide DPL with information that can potentially
assist them in more effectively recognizing, understanding, and addressing their employees’
mental health needs and concerns regarding safety in their assumed low-risk work
environment. Specific findings from the project include information dealing with
employees’ safety concern levels, as well as any physical, mental/emotional, and professional
effects experienced from these safety concerns. This insight into worker safety perceptions
can potentially assist DPL in creating or improving WPV prevention and preparedness
trainings.
Additional broader outcomes of the project, which can be generalized and may be
beneficial to other assumed low-risk organizations, include a potentially heightened
awareness for the possibility of WPV occurring in organizations where this is not typically
considered. This awareness could have the potential to lead to better WPV prevention and
incident readiness through the creation or improvement of policies, procedures, and trainings
in these types of organizations.
Importance of the Project
The results of this project are potentially useful to practitioners, organizations, and
researchers, by providing insight into the perspectives of a demographic previously
underrepresented in research: workers in assumed low-risk environments. Specifically, the
project focused on the perceptions and safety concerns of these workers regarding potential
WPV occurring in the assumed low-risk work environment of a public library.

8

The importance of this project lies in understanding the perceptions and safety
concerns of those working in environments where safety, while assumed, may not be
realistic, and utilizing the collected data from the project to make necessary changes in
addressing the needs of these workers. There is a lack of theoretical knowledge regarding
how safety concerns dealing with potential WPV affect workers in assumed low-risk
organizations, specifically in regard to mental health and emotional well-being. Gaining
insight into the perceptions of this demographic will provide the opportunity for
organizations to potentially use the collected data to address the mental health needs of
workers dealing with the psychological effects that can occur when safety concerns exist.
For example, results from Aytaç and Dursun (2012) show that “the practice of the
organisation giving information and training on workplace violence prevention is effective in
reducing the rate of employee depression” (p. 3030).
If employees do not feel they are being treated respectfully by management, which
can include feelings of safety, that disconnect may be reflected in their work through them
providing less than stellar service (Patterson, 2004). Conversely, acknowledging safety
concerns of employees provides businesses with the opportunity to demonstrate to their
employees that they care about their safety. Vinarski-Peretz and Carmeli (2011) refer to this
as “care felt,” defined by the authors as “the extent to which a person feels that other
organizational members (i.e., coworkers) care for her or him” (p. 43). The authors explain
that care felt is positively linked to psychological conditions, facilitating the positive
development of psychological conditions such as safety, meaningfulness, and availability.
When these psychological conditions are present, and employees feel supported by their
organizations, it can result in positive outcomes for both the employees and the organization

9

as a whole. Chappell and Di Martino (2006) address these kinds of outcomes in their
research, discussing the impact WPV has on organizations in regard to direct costs, indirect
costs, and intangible costs, which includes factors such as absenteeism, turnover, morale, and
commitment.
Additionally, Probst, Gold, and Caborn (2008) state that there are links between job
stress and both physical and mental health issues. The authors also refer to links between
WPV and harassment and psychosomatic disorders, e.g., gastrointestinal disturbances,
headaches, and ulcers. Employees dealing with these kinds of ailments may have lowered
productivity, thereby affecting the overall effectiveness of the workplace (Probst, Gold &
Caborn, 2008). Work from Jain et al. (2012) supports this, explaining that being exposed to
bullying, harassment, and other forms of violence at work are significant social stressors that
can result in various symptoms of self-reported ill-health and stress. The results of these
health issues can potentially interfere with the workers’ job performance and attendance,
thereby affecting the entire organization (Probst, Gold & Caborn, 2008).
Changes in modern society, such as increases in terroristic acts in the United States
and changes in levels of violence perpetrated during crimes are occurring rapidly, as
indicated by events such as the Las Vegas massacre, the deadliest mass shooting to date in
modern history in the United States (Norman, 2017). These kinds of shifts regarding crime
will require conscientious businesses to make changes to their safety measures to further
protect their employees and comply with legal requirements. The Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) states that employers are required to provide their employees
with a safe working environment (OSHA, 2015). The data retrieved from this project
provides insight into how employees perceive the safety of their work environments.

10

The primary challenge of this project was time-sensitivity. The United States is
facing a rapidly changing crime culture, with new types and levels of crime happening daily,
and increases in terrorist activities occurring more frequently. This means the status of
currently assumed low-risk environments is beginning to change relatively quickly. These
changes indicated a need for data to be collected and analyzed as soon as possible, so the
results of this project could be made available to organizations for use in addressing current
safety and mental health issues for employees in assumed low-risk environments.
While eradication of WPV is not realistic, the data gained from this project provides
insight that can potentially be used by organizations to create more direct, pro-active
trainings, policies, and procedures, regarding WPV in assumed low-risk environments.
Furthermore, organizations can use the data to assist in addressing the mental health and
well-being of their employees when dealing with the topic of potential WPV incidents; this
may include understanding what issues need to be addressed, how to address them, and
potentially providing mental health wellness programs for employees.
Data pertaining to the personal perceptions, safety concerns, and self-reported effects
of potential WPV of workers in assumed low-risk environments are potentially useful and
important to practitioners, organizations, and researchers. The findings of this project are
expected to have far-reaching implications, as they have the potential to contribute to the
fields of criminology, organizational leadership, psychology, and library science, by
providing direct insight into employees’ personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding
potential WPV in assumed low-risk organizations. Practitioners in each of these fields can
use the findings of this project to further efforts in improving issues surrounding WPV,

11

specifically in assumed low-risk environments. The data collected from this project also
provide an important foundation for further research in this area.
The results of this project are directly beneficial to the management and frontline
workers of DPL, since employees from this organization are the participants in the project.
The collected data from the project provide DPL management with insight into the personal
perceptions and safety concerns of its employees, allowing the organization to potentially
create or improve training opportunities, policies, and procedures regarding WPV.
Additionally, DPL can potentially use the data from the project to create a program or
workshop that addresses the specific mental health needs of its employees when facing the
potential of WPV.
Conceptual Framework
The first significant attention was drawn to the subject of WPV in the United States
when a rash of incidents involving homicides occurred in connection to the United States
Postal Service (USPS) during the mid-1980s and early 1990s (Farkas & Tsukayama, 2012).
Awareness of WPV continued to rise over the years following the USPS incidents, with the
international organization Association of Threat Assessment Professionals forming in 1992,
and the USPS organizing the first major conference dedicated to the topic of WPV in 1993.
In 2001, the United States experienced the September 11th terrorist attacks, which
changed the fundamental idea that WPV came from within. The expectation that WPV was
conducted by disgruntled employees or customers, or was the outcome of domestic or
stalking relationship issues, was challenged by the introduction of the additional external
threat of terrorism (Rugala & Isaacs, 2004). The connections between WPV and terrorism
will be discussed further in Chapter II.

12

Over the years, additional conferences, workshops, and think tanks have been formed
to continue the efforts to understand and prevent WPV. Numerous publications on the topic
have been produced by government organizations, however, publication dates are less
frequent than might be expected. For example, at the time of this writing, the most recent
Workplace Violence Fact Sheet published by the U.S. Department of Labor Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is dated 2002. In subsequent years, and as further
information has been obtained regarding WPV risks, the department has created additional
publications specific to certain careers and environments. In 2009 “Workplace Violence:
Recommendations for Workplace Violence Prevention Programs in Late-Nite Retail
Establishments” was written, followed by “Workplace Violence: Preventing Violence against
Taxi and For-Hire Drivers Fact Sheet” in 2010. The most recent guide produced by the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regarding WPV, “Workplace
Violence: Guidelines for Preventing Workplace Violence for Healthcare and Social Service
Workers,” was created in 2016. As these publications indicate, research is dictating
acknowledgment of WPV in higher-risk professions and environments. However,
information on the focus of this project, assumed low-risk professions and environments, is
greatly lacking.
Studies that examine the health effects of issues like stress at work (Jain et al., 2012)
and experiencing actual WPV attacks (MacIntosh et al., 2010) have been conducted, but
research involving the mental health effects from concerns regarding potential WPV
occurring is lacking. In 2005 the Bureau of Labor Statistics conducted a 36-question survey
on WPV, but only one question related to the mental health and well-being of employees
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2006). The survey was distributed to those in various industries,

13

but was completed by representatives of the establishments, so results were presumably not
self-reported by the affected employees themselves.
At the time of this writing, the current theoretical framework regarding WPV focuses
on higher risk careers and organizations, and examines the effects of actual events; however,
there is a lack of knowledge regarding the viewpoints and safety concerns of workers in
assumed low-risk environments, particularly in regard to potential versus actual WPV, as
well as the mental health effects these concerns have on these workers. This project
examined these issues, thereby contributing insight to the existing body of knowledge on
WPV regarding a demographic that was previously underrepresented in research.
Research Questions
The purpose of this project was to examine the personal perceptions and safety
concerns of workers in assumed low-risk environments, specifically employees of DPL.
Surveys and interviews were conducted with public library workers to acquire data to answer
the research questions of the project.
There were four overarching research questions addressed through this project: (1)
What are the personal perceptions of public library workers at Dewey Public Library
regarding workplace violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (2) What
specific safety concerns do public library workers at Dewey Public Library have regarding
workplace violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (3) How do public
library workers at Dewey Public Library feel their safety concerns affect them physically,
emotionally/mentally, and professionally? and (4) What kinds of trainings or other measures
would public library workers at Dewey Public Library like the library management to
implement in order to address their safety concerns?

14

Survey questions were distributed to 19 employees at DPL, a public library located in
the Midwest. Additional questions were given to employees who chose to further participate
in follow-up semi-structured interviews with the researcher. The data collected from the
survey and the interviews addressed the overarching questions for this project. The results of
the data analysis provide insight into the personal perceptions and safety concerns of workers
in assumed low-risk organizations. This insight may potentially assist practitioners,
organizations, and researchers in future endeavors regarding workers in assumed low-risk
environments, which was the goal of this project.
Overview of Project Design
The qualitative method was used for this project to examine employees’ personal
perceptions, safety concerns, and self-reported effects of potential WPV occurring in
organizations where an overall expectation of safety is generally present. Qualitative
research involves the examination of qualities or characteristics that cannot be completely
reduced to numerical values, such as complex human situations involving behaviors or
people’s in-depth perspectives (Leedy & Ormrod, 2013). The use of qualitative research was
appropriate for this project, as the purpose of the project was to gather data directly from
employees in an effort to better understand their personal perceptions regarding WPV.
Surveys and semi-structured interviews were both used to collect the qualitative data.
An anonymous online survey was distributed to 19 employees of DPL, a public
library located in the Midwest. Participants who chose to share additional information spoke
with the researcher on the phone in individual semi-structured interviews (Leedy & Ormrod,
2013). The interviews allowed the researcher to ask additional questions in order to gain
clarification or to obtain further information from participants’ answers.

15

A final report was written upon completion of the project; the write-up includes
survey results and researcher recommendations based on the findings of the collected data,
overall project research, and the accumulated knowledge of the researcher. The project
design will be discussed further in Chapter III.
Definition of Terms
In order to maintain consistency and clarity, this section provides definitions of
important terms utilized throughout the project, which may be unfamiliar or have multiple
meanings. While these terms may typically be defined in a variety of ways, depending on the
resource cited, the following definitions were used for the purpose of this project.
Additionally, sources were specifically chosen based on those definitions which most closely
aligned with the purposes of this project.
According to Oxford Dictionaries, “violence” refers to “behavior involving physical
force intended to hurt, damage, or kill someone or something” (Oxford University Press,
2016). The term “workplace violence” (WPV) is defined by the United States Department of
Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration as “violence or the threat of violence
against workers” (United States Department of Labor, 2002).
Workplace violence has a classification system, originally identified in 1995 by the
California Division of Occupational Safety and Health, which includes four types of
offenders (Bartol & Bartol, 2014). The summarized definitions of each type of offender are
as follows: (a) Type I: “This offender has no legitimate relationship to the workplace or the
victim and usually enters the workplace to commit a criminal action such as a robbery or
theft;” (b) Type II: “This offender is the recipient of some service provided by the victim or
workplace and may be either a current or former client, patient, or customer;” (c) Type III:

16

“This offender has an employment-related involvement with the workplace. The act of
violence is usually committed by a current or former employee, supervisor, or manager who
has a dispute with another employee of the workplace;” and (d) Type IV: “This offender has
an indirect involvement with the workplace because of a relationship with an employee,”
such as a spouse, family member, or friend. “This type of violence follows the employee
into the workplace from the outside” (Bartol & Bartol, 2014, pp. 319-320).
While this project focused on WPV in general, and was not limited to a specific type,
it was expected that most employee concerns would revolve around Types I and II.
However, it was noted that information referring to any of the classifications could
potentially be revealed in the participant data. Therefore, the use of the term “workplace
violence” in this project refers to any and all of the four types of offenders.
The term “terrorism,” as explained by Marsala (as cited in Bartol & Bartol, 2014), is
viewed broadly as:
(a) the use of force or violence (b) by individuals or groups (c) that is directed toward
civilian populations (d) and intended to instill fear (e) as a means of coercing
individuals or groups to change their political and social positions. (p. 328)
Oxford Dictionaries defines the term “safety” as “the condition of being protected
from or unlikely to cause danger, risk, or injury” (Oxford University Press, 2016). For the
purpose of this project, the term safety refers to issues regarding WPV and criminal activity
only, and does not refer to non-malicious, on-the-job accidents causing bodily harm or injury
such as tripping or falling.
The definition of “perception,” according to Merriam-Webster, is “a: awareness of
the elements of environment through physical sensation; b: physical sensation interpreted in

17

the light of experience” (Merriam-Webster, 2017). The project used this definition in regard
to the personal perceptions of public library workers.
The term “patron” is utilized in library services to refer to library users (Colorado
State University Libraries, 2013, “Library Lingo: P”).
The terms “assumed low-risk” and “assumed high-risk” were used in this project to
describe occupations, organizations, and environments typically expected by the general
public to have a low risk or high risk, respectively, of being targeted for and/or experiencing
criminal activity. The next section further details the use of these terms in regard to this
project.
Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations
The following information addresses the assumptions, limitations, delimitations, and
potential weakness specific to this project. The generalizability of the project’s findings is
also discussed.
Assumptions
The term “assumed low-risk” is a mainstay of this project. This phrase is used to
refer to occupations, organizations, and environments that the general public typically
considers, or assumes to be, unlikely targets for criminal activity. In contrast, the term
“assumed high-risk” is used to refer to those occupations, organizations, and environments
where criminal activity is typically expected or assumed. The assumption for this project lies
within the public’s expectations and perceptions of safety in certain gathering areas and work
environments.
For the purpose of this project, the terms “assumed low-risk” and “assumed highrisk” were utilized with the assumption that the general public in the United States views and

18

expects certain environments to be safe, based on them being so historically. Even in
neighborhoods where the overall risk of crime is higher, certain locations have an assumed
expectation of greater safety than others.
Limitations
The main limitation in this project was the representative sample, based on
geographic limitations. However, while the sample was limited to workers in a single public
library located within the Midwest, the library does serve the entire city’s population,
therefore exposing it to varying demographics of patrons. While more geographically
diverse samples can be more advantageous regarding project results, the variance within the
patrons served by the sampled public library employees provided useful foundational results,
which may be generalized on a larger scale for future research.
Delimitations
The scope and delimitations or boundaries of the project were set to focus only on
public library workers’ personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential WPV
occurring in their places of employment. At the time of this writing, research in the area of
employee concerns in assumed low-risk work environments is currently lacking, therefore
the project provides an initial foundation for future research and findings. The project
deliberately focused on providing a baseline for understanding workers’ personal feelings,
viewpoints, and observations on this subject. Therefore, the focus of the project was not to
gather additional personal information, such as workers’ coping mechanisms, nor was it to
find solutions to the problem of WPV.
The data for this project were collected through self-reporting via the online survey
system SurveyMonkey, as well as through personal interviews. Self-reporting is often

19

considered a weakness in research studies, due to potential reliability issues. Leedy and
Ormrod (2013) explain that sometimes participants “intentionally misrepresent facts,” and
other times “people’s memories for events are often distortions of reality—what they think
happened isn’t always what did happen” (p. 190). However, the entire purpose of this project
was to understand and gain insight into the inner feelings and concerns of the participants.
Therefore, self-reporting was not considered a weakness for this particular project.
The findings from this project have the potential to be generalizable beyond the scope
of employees in public libraries. Workers in other assumed low-risk environments, such as
coffee shops, bookstores, and other businesses where an expectation of safety is generally
present, likely share similar perceptions and concerns. The results of this project, therefore,
can provide general implications for other assumed low-risk organizations, and be beneficial
for businesses seeking to create pertinent safety training and employee mental health
programs.
Summary
This project provides insight into employees’ personal perceptions and safety
concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in their assumed low-risk work environments.
Qualitative research implemented through online surveys and phone interviews was
conducted with participants who were employees in a public library located in the Midwest.
The results of the project research are potentially generalizable to workers in other
assumed low-risk organizations, in addition to public libraries. Results may also be utilized
in creating or improving WPV trainings, policies, or procedures for organizations, and are
potentially beneficial in addressing mental health needs for employees in relation to safety
concerns.

20

The forthcoming chapters provide additional information regarding this project.
Chapter II, Literature Review, explains the search strategy used to collect the literature and
presents a detailed examination of the literature and research. Chapter III, Method, further
explains the methodology used for this project. Information about the study participants,
procedures, ethical concerns, and data analysis are also included in Chapter III. Chapter IV,
Findings, Evaluation of Findings, and Recommendations, presents and discusses the results
of the data and includes an evaluation of the project findings. Implications and
recommendations are also included in Chapter IV.

21

CHAPTER II: LITERATURE REVIEW
The purpose of this chapter is to present a review of the literature related to this
project on employees’ personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential
workplace violence (WPV) occurring in assumed low-risk environments, specifically public
libraries. The review examines literature in four main categories that pertain to the project
topic: criminology, organizational leadership, psychology, and public libraries.
The chapter provides an examination of both historical and current information on the
subject of WPV, and provides an explanation of the search strategy used to collect literature,
including specific search engines and terms used. The majority of the chapter focuses on the
actual literature review, which provides a critical analysis of resources related to this project,
and addresses the lack of theoretical knowledge pertaining to this project.
The data collected from this project provide direct insight into the perspectives of
employees working in assumed low-risk environments where safety is generally expected
and WPV is considered highly unlikely, an area of research where theoretical knowledge is
currently lacking. Results from this project can potentially be used by organizations and
businesses to address the mental health needs of workers dealing with the psychological
effects that can occur when safety concerns exist in the workplace.
The results can also assist organizations and businesses in creating WPV training and
prevention plans, which can potentially decrease safety concerns in workers, whereby
contributing positively toward workers’ mental health. Each of these aspects will be
discussed in further detail later in this chapter. Chapter II concludes with a summary of key
points regarding the literature review.

22

Search Strategy
The search strategy for this literature review included the use of online databases that
provide access to online research articles from professional journals, as well as professional
books. Hard copies of textbooks and additional research books, retrieved from libraries and
bookstores, were also used for the literature review.
The EBSCOhost online research databases that were used for the review were
Business Source Complete, PsycARTICLES, and PsycBOOKS. Additionally, ProQuest,
PubMed Central, and SAGE Journals Online search engines were also used.
A variety of search terms were entered in each search engine to retrieve relevant
information for the review. Search terms fell under four main categories: criminology,
organizations, psychology, and libraries. Due to the high level of integration within these
categories, crossover of terms was common, and many of the terms were combined to create
additional searches; however, terms and phrases are only listed once under the most
appropriate main category, as to avoid duplication. The terms in each category below are
listed alphabetically.
Under the category of criminology, the search terms “crime, hard targets, high risk,
low risk, risk, safety, safety climate, safety concerns, security, soft targets, terrorism,
victimology, victims, violence, violent, workplace safety,” and “workplace violence” were
used.
The organizations category included the search terms “businesses, employee fear,
employee perception, employee viewpoints, employee well-being, environmental design, job
satisfaction, librarians, libraries, library employees, library workers, locus of control,

23

organizations, policies, productivity, psychological contract, psychosocial risks at work,
public libraries, sense of security,” and “work-related stress.”
The psychology category included the search terms “aggression, behavior, concerns,
effects, fear, health, mental effects, mental health and work, perception, physical effects,
psychology, stress,” and “well-being at work.”
The search regarding the libraries category used variations of the previously listed
search terms, with the addition of the term “patrons,” and a separate search regarding the
history of public libraries.
Throughout the review, information was compared, contrasted and synthesized for a
thorough evaluation of the general topic of WPV and its various effects on both organizations
and individual employees. The review also includes relevant news stories to provide
examples of current events that connect to the research, and further demonstrate a need for
this project.
Historical and current resources were both used in the research process to provide an
integrated, critical analysis of the literature. While the most current resources, dating within
one month to three years from retrieval, were searched for and preferred (aside from the
historical aspects of the topics), much of the available research relevant to the project’s
specific areas of interest regarding WPV and employee safety is older. The broad topic of
WPV does receive attention, including from the government, but assumed low-risk
environments are not the focus of that attention. Instead, OSHA, while acknowledging that
WPV occurs in all industries, is focused on WPV issues regarding healthcare and social
assistance jobs (American Society of Safety Engineers, 2017). This is reflected in
publications from OSHA; the specific areas of current focus have up-to-date information

24

available, but publications regarding general information on WPV is much older. For
example, at the time of this writing, the most current available fact sheet that includes basic
information on general WPV from the U.S. Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) website is dated 2002. While the information may be
accurate, it still indicates the need for updates regarding the topic of violence in the
workplace, and also explains why there is a vast date range in the resources used for this
review.
A history of WPV is also included in the review of literature. Additional historically
seminal studies are referenced throughout the literature review, as previously mentioned, to
provide further foundational information in support of the research questions.
While the lack of current research regarding employee perceptions and safety
concerns specific to WPV in assumed low-risk environments lessens the available current
literature for review, it also further justifies the need for this project. Workplace violence is
an ever-increasing issue with constantly changing characteristics, and is especially prevalent
at the time of this writing. Understanding its impact on employees is vital and projects like
this are necessary in order to strengthen the research database so data can be used to assist
organizations, and society as a whole, in dealing with WPV issues.
The topic of WPV involves a variety of disciplines. The following sections of this
literature review examine three such disciplines: criminology, organizational leadership, and
psychology. The fourth section of the chapter examines the special characteristics of public
libraries, which is the sample population used for this project. Each of these areas directly
connects to the others, and is related to the focus of this project: employees’ personal

25

perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in assumed low-risk
environments.
Section I: Criminology
The first section of this literature review focuses on the area of Criminology, defined
by Bartol and Bartol (2014) as “the multidisciplinary study of crime” (p. 509). The authors
explain that criminology seeks to understand, explain, change, and prevent criminal behavior
(Bartol & Bartol, 2014, p. 7). The specific area of criminal behavior this project addresses is
workplace violence (WPV). This section of the chapter is important as it provides
foundational information regarding WPV, and aids in understanding aspects of the topic that
may affect the personal perceptions and safety concerns of employees, specifically those in
assumed low-risk work environments, the focus of this project.
Workplace Violence
Workplace violence (WPV), as defined by the United States Department of Labor’s
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and as used for this project, is
“violence or the threat of violence against workers” (United States Department of Labor,
2002). While this definition appears straightforward, there are various challenges in creating
a basic definition for such a complicated topic.
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) explain that even the seemingly clear term
“workplace” is now elusive with so many people working remotely from home and other
locations (p. 3). Additionally, most definitions limit WPV as strictly physical. For example,
Bartol and Bartol (2014) state that WPV “refers to incidents in which the offender intends to
cause serious physical or bodily harm to an individual or individuals within an organization
or to the organization itself” (p. 318). This emphasis on physical harm neglects

26

psychological harm and the mental health aspect of WPV, which will be addressed in detail
in the forthcoming Psychology section of this chapter.
The subject of WPV includes a wide variety of criminal behavior. While the general
perception of WPV may often coincide with gun violence, and guns are often the means used
in WPV incidents, many other behaviors beyond shootings, both physical and non-physical,
are indicative of violence in the workplace. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(2015), shootings accounted for 78 percent (405 fatal injuries) of all workplace homicides
that occurred in 2010; however, workplace shootings only account for a small portion of
nonfatal workplace injuries. In practice, Chappell and Di Martino (2006) explain, WPV
includes a wide range of behaviors which often continue or overlap (p.16). Examples of such
behaviors include, but are not limited to, intimidation, bullying, stalking, rape, innuendo,
name-calling, swearing, ostracism, aggressive posturing, spitting, punching, interfering with
work tools and equipment, threats, robbery, and homicide (p. 16).
Furthermore, a highly debated challenge in defining WPV is determining if and when
there is a difference between WPV and terrorism. For the purposes of this project, terrorism
is included within the definition of WPV, and will be discussed in further detail later in this
chapter.
As previously stated, there are many challenges in creating a definitive, all-inclusive
definition of WPV. This is due to the large variety of behaviors covered by the term,
vagueness regarding acceptable behaviors, and diversity in thinking regarding what
constitutes violence in different contexts and cultures (Chappell & Di Martino, 2006, p. 16).
For the purpose of this project, WPV is defined as “violence or the threat of violence against
workers” (United States Department of Labor, 2002).

27

Types of workplace violence. The California Division of Occupational Safety and
Health first identified the WPV classification system in 1995 to differentiate between types
of WPV, based on the offender’s relationship to the organization. There are four different
types of WPV, each of which is outlined below (Bartol & Bartol, 2014, pp. 318-319).
Type I: “This offender has no legitimate relationship to the workplace or the victim
and usually enters the workplace to commit a criminal action such as a robbery or theft.”
Late-night retail establishments like convenience stores and restaurants are common victims
of Type I WPV. Terrorism and hate crimes are also included in this category.
Type II: “This offender is the recipient of some service provided by the victim or
workplace and may be either a current or former client, patient, or customer.”
Type III: “This offender has an employment-related involvement with the workplace.
The act of violence is usually committed by a current or former employee, supervisor, or
manager who has a dispute with another employee of the workplace.” Offenders in this
category are often referred to as “disgruntled employees” who have been fired, or who have
some other issue with the organization.
Type IV: “This offender has an indirect involvement with the workplace because of a
relationship with an employee.” This kind of violence follows an employee from outside
into the workplace, as it is perpetrated by someone the employee has a relationship with,
such as a current or former spouse, relative, or friend.
History of workplace violence. Historically, as mentioned in chapter one, the idea
of WPV as it is known today is a relatively new concept. Farkas and Tsukayama (2012)
explain that during the mid-1980s and early 1990s prominent attention was given to WPV, as
no fewer than 13 workplace homicides involving United States Postal Service (USPS)

28

workers occurred during that timeframe. This includes Patrick Sherrill’s execution of 14
coworkers and himself at the post office in Edmonton, Oklahoma. Following suspension
from his job at the Edmonton Post Office, Sherrill returned to the post office to commit the
killings, making the incident “one of the worst mass murders committed by a single gunman
in American history” (Chappell & Di Martino, 2006, p. 9). It was this event that led to the
term “going postal,” which is now often associated with disgruntled employees committing
acts of WPV, despite the USPS stating that this idea, and thereby the phrase, is a “myth”
because postal workers are not as likely as workers in other environments to become victims
of homicide (U.S. Postal Service Annual Report, 2000, as cited in Rugala & Isaacs, 2004,
p.11).
While the rash of USPS incidents are largely noted as the documented beginning of
WPV, other largescale WPV events also occurred during this time. For example, in 1987,
the year after the Sherrill murders, a former US Air employee named David Burke took
revenge on his former boss for terminating him by shooting crew members of an in-flight jet,
resulting in the death of 42 other people (Farkas & Tsukayama, 2012).
In response to the growing problem of violent behaviors, various groups began
convening and searching for ways to address the issue of violence in the workplace. An
international organization, the Association of Threat Assessment Professionals, was formed
in 1992, followed by the convening of the USPS’s first major conference addressing WPV in
1993. During this time, books and articles in professional journals started to appear, alerting
organizations to the threat of WPV and offering strategies to address the challenges
associated with it (Farkas & Tsukayama, 2012).

29

Despite early efforts to curb WPV, incidents continued to occur. For example, Bruce
and Nowlin (2011) documented that the following WPV attacks, among others, all took place
during a two-month period in 2003: (a) an employee opened fire killing four and wounding
an additional five at a temporary employment service in Huntsville, Alabama; (b) a fired
warehouse employee killed six former co-workers in Chicago, Illinois; (c) a manufacturing
plant employee shot eight people, killing three of them, then turned the gun on himself in
front of the city’s police headquarters in Jefferson City, Missouri; and (d) a Lockheed Martin
Aeronautics Co. employee left a company ethics seminar in Meridian, Mississippi, returned
with a rifle and a shotgun, and killed six coworkers, wounded eight others, then committed
suicide. In addition to these kinds of WPV incidents that have occurred throughout the
country, a newer challenge regarding WPV is terrorism.
Terrorism as workplace violence. The United States has faced an increase in
threats and actual incidents of terrorism in recent years, heightening the risk for these types
of acts to occur in any area including assumed low-risk environments. Relevant to this
project, an increase in terrorism can potentially affect the perceptions and safety concerns of
employees working in assumed low-risk environments.
This section provides a foundation for understanding the basic aspects of terrorism
and addresses the current debate as to whether terrorism is considered WPV, since there is
currently no definitive, clear differentiation between WPV and terrorism. Fischhoff,
Gonzalez, Lerner, and Small (2012) explain that “People need to learn how large the risks
are, in order to balance protection from terrorism against other valued outcomes. They need
to learn the processes creating and controlling terror, in order to think critically about
proposals for managing it” (p. e1).

30

Farooq Malik, Abdullah, and Anak Uli (2014) state that fairly little research has been
done to establish how organizations might be affected by terrorism through the mutual
relationship between employee and organizational well-being. Furthermore, Farooq Malik et
al. (2014) explain that in considering the effects of terrorism, managers need to think beyond
protection of physical assets and disruption to operations. The authors state that managers
need to “consider the psychological effects of terrorism on the employees, and their options
to mitigate such effects through organizational interventions” (p. 156).
As stated in Chapter I, the definition of “terrorism” used for this project comes from
Marsella (2004), and is viewed broadly as:
(a) the use of force or violence (b) by individuals or groups (c) that is directed toward
civilian populations (d) and intended to instill fear (e) as a means of coercing
individuals or groups to change their political and social positions. (as cited in Bartol
& Bartol, 2014, p. 328)
While this is the definition used for this project, various sources define terrorism differently.
According to Achenbach (2015), terrorism is defined by The U.S. Code as
“premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by
subnational groups or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience” (para.
15). The FBI defines terrorism as “The unlawful use of force or violence against persons or
property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment
thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives” (para. 15). Achenbach (2015) states
that the National Institute of Justice admitted that “The search for a universal, precise
definition of terrorism has been challenging for researchers and practitioners alike” (para.
14).

31

Type I WPV, as previously explained and classified by the California Division of
Occupational Safety and Health, does include terrorism; however, other definitions of WPV
do not, creating inconsistencies in classification. In Type I offenses, the offender typically
has no legitimate relationship with the workplace and enters the organization with the intent
to commit a crime. While this definition of WPV is accurate in certain instances, it becomes
less fitting and produces classification confusion when terrorism is a possibility, or even a
certainty, especially if the perpetrator is somehow connected to the target. Examples of this,
which are beyond the scope of this project, include the 2009 and 2014 military base
shootings at Ft. Hood in Texas (Fernandez & Blinder, 2014), and the Vaughan Foods attack
in Moore, Oklahoma (Bailey, 2014).
At the time of this writing, the most recent attack where definitions of WPV and
terrorism were highly debated is the mass shooting in San Bernardino, California. In
December 2015, Syed Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, opened fire on employees of the
county health department who were attending a holiday party at the Inland Regional Center,
killing 14 people and injuring 21 others. The couple then instigated a gun battle with police
hours after the incident began, and were both fatally shot (Botelho & Ellis, 2015).
The perpetrator in this attack was an employee of the county health department,
which immediately raised the question of whether the incident was WPV or terrorism.
Assistant Director of the FBI’s Los Angeles field office, David Bowdich, initially stated that
it would be premature and irresponsible for him to call the attack terrorism (Achenbach,
2015), however, the following day he made the announcement that the mass shooting was
being investigated as “an act of terrorism” (Botelho & Ellis, 2015). The announcement was
made after it was discovered that Malik had posted a pledge on Facebook to an ISIS (Islamic

32

State in Iraq and Syria) leader during the shooting. It was also discovered that the couple had
a makeshift bomb lab in their apartment, where authorities found pipe bombs, additional
guns, and thousands of rounds of ammunition (Botelho & Ellis, 2015).
Creating clear distinctions between WPV and terrorism continues to baffle even those
who work closely with the issue. Mark Pitcavage, Director of the Center on Extremism for
the Anti-Defamation League, commented on the San Bernardino attack, stating, “Based on
what is known now about the case, it certainly is unusual and does not fit neatly into any of
the traditional models of violence that we’re familiar with” (Achenbach, 2015, p. 2).
Fischhoff et al. (2012) emphasize the importance of people acknowledging changes in
violence, specifically in regard to terrorism, stating “On each front, they need to update their
beliefs and choices as experience accumulates” (p. e1). This quote directly relates to the
purpose of this project in addressing the need for knowledge regarding WPV in assumed
low-risk environments.
An additional challenge in clarifying between terrorism and WPV, is the aspect of
international versus domestic terrorists. This argument was included in the 2009 Ft. Hood
shooting, when the federal government classified the attack as WPV because “the homegrown Hasan [perpetrator] didn’t meet the legal definition of an international terrorist”
(Martosko, 2014, para. 3).
Whether terrorism of any kind will continue to be intertwined with WPV according to
definitions, or if the classification system will be changed to clearly differentiate between the
two, is unknown. However, understanding the debate surrounding terrorism and its
connection to WPV is an important aspect of this project, as potential violence–no matter the
verbiage and whatever the form–has the potential to impact the perceptions and safety

33

concerns of workers in assumed low-risk environments, the focus of this project. As
previously mentioned, this project will include terrorism as a form of WPV since the
California Division of Occupational Safety and Health Classification System includes
terrorism under the category of Type I WPV.
Statistics regarding workplace violence. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016)
states that the number of fatal work injuries in 2015, the most recent statistics available, is
4,836. “Annual total of 4,836 fatal workplace injuries in 2015 was the highest since 5,214
fatal injuries in 2008” (Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries Summary, para. 1). Of these
4,836 fatalities, 417 were workplace homicides. “Workplace homicides rose by 2 percent to
417 cases in 2015, with shootings increasing by 15 percent, the first increase since 2012”
(Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries Summary, para. 8).
In general, official crime statistics are believed to be underestimated. The total
number of criminal offenses that are unknown by law enforcement or which go undetected is
referred to as the “dark figure” (Bartol & Bartol, 2014, p. 19), and should be considered
when addressing the issue and accuracy of statistics and WPV.
A specific challenge in determining accurate statistics regarding WPV is the
increasing arguments revolving around whether acts of terrorism occurring in businesses and
organizations are technically classified as WPV. For the purpose of this project, as
previously mentioned, terrorism is considered an aspect of WPV since it is included in the
Type I classification of WPV by The California Division of Occupational Safety and Health.
Although there are substantial barriers in obtaining accurate statistics regarding WPV,
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) state that “…there does appear to be evidence that both the
incidence and severity of workplace violence are increasing in many jurisdictions” (pp. 16-

34

17). The reason for this may reflect a growing awareness and condemnation by the
community, leading to an increase in incident reporting, “as well as an actual rise in the total
number of workplace violence events being committed in certain jurisdictions” (p. 17).
Assumed Risk
There is no guarantee in any environment that incidents of violence will not occur.
However, some work environments are considered high-risk, while others are viewed as lowrisk, based on the potential for WPV occurring. Jenkins, Fisher, and Hartley (2012) state that
certain factors including money-handling, not having a single worksite, required routine
travel, and routine face-to-face contact with large amounts of people, are related to a higher
victimization risk. OSHA (2015) also includes working with unstable people, working in
isolated areas or areas with high crime rates, working late at night, and working where
alcohol is served as additional factors that can raise the level of risk.
The amount of exposure to violence in work situations, and therefore risk-level, can
depend on the situations or circumstances in which a specific duty or task is being performed.
According to Chappell and Di Martino (2006), the kinds of situations that can increase the
level of risk include working alone, with the public, with people in distress, and with
valuables. The authors also include “working in an environment increasingly open to
violence, working in conditions of special vulnerability, working in military and paramilitary
organizations, and working in zones of conflict” (p. 73).
Further, Chappell and Di Martino (2006) explain, “it is widely acknowledged that
workers performing certain tasks are at special risk” (p. 71). An example of this kind of
high-risk profession is law enforcement, where police officers’ constant responses to violent
situations demonstrate a routine hazard that has the potential of being extremely distressing

35

and dangerous (p.72). A recent war on law enforcement has increased this risk even further.
“According to new preliminary data released by the FBI,” states Chiaramonte (2015), “the
number of law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty in 2014 nearly doubled to 51
from 27 the previous year” (para. 10). These statistics refer to officers who were feloniously
killed.
Other jobs that are now considered higher risk include healthcare professionals,
delivery drivers, customer service agents, and public service workers. OSHA (2015) states
that working alone or in small groups creates higher risk, however, since larger organizations
also tend to be targeted, as previously discussed, it is reasonable to deduce that any
environment or profession possesses a potential risk for violence, including assumed low-risk
environments, the focus of this project.
Workers in government and high-level monetary positions are also at an elevated risk,
since these types of agencies are often considered high-risk targets for terrorism, a form of
Type I WPV. Ruffini (2006) supports this in explaining that a person working as a clerk on
Capitol Hill, a businessperson on Wall Street, or an agent at the FBI headquarters would be at
more risk than someone who works at a local car dealership. He states, “Can I prove this
quantitatively with hard scientific data? No. Should I need to do so? I think not. It is just
plain common sense” (p. 248). This quote demonstrates the challenge of classifying violence
risk levels, as they are predictive in nature and cannot be specifically quantified.
The current societal mindset focuses on the idea that assumed safe zones are either
not at risk or at a lower risk for violence. Ruffini (2006) supports this stating, “Logic dictates
that the federal buildings in Washington D.C. are more at risk from a terror attack or
collateral damage than the side-by-side suburban stores in rural New Jersey” (p. 247). The

36

author further states that places like the Mall of America or Disneyland are probably at
higher risk than a local, relatively unknown mall somewhere, as they are American icons
known throughout the world and represent freedom, safety, security, and the affluent
American lifestyle. This theory may be challenged as lesser known establishments are
becoming more commonly targeted for terrorism, particularly by lone wolf terrorists.
The ease and broad reach of media today allows even “smaller” attacks and acts of
violence to potentially top the headlines and gain large amounts of attention. These kinds of
assaults may occur in small businesses, often considered low-risk, and be perpetrated by socalled lone wolf attackers. An example of this is the February 11, 2016 attack that occurred
in Columbus, Ohio. Mohamed Barry entered a small restaurant wielding a machete and
randomly attacked unsuspecting diners at their tables, sending four victims to the hospital.
According to Pearson (2016), the attack is being investigated as a possible “lone wolf” terror
attack. Increases in these kinds of attacks mean assumed low-risk organizations should be
prepared for incidents of WPV and terrorism, just like larger, higher-risk environments, and
should address the mental health needs of employees who are dealing with safety concerns.
The data collected from this project can be used in these efforts.
An element of surprise is often pursued in criminal activity and violence, especially in
acts of terror. However, Larsen (2007) states that Americans can never claim the excuse of
being surprised again, following the attacks of September 11th. He explains, “We do not
know when, but without question, terrorists will again attack our homeland. The appropriate
reaction for all Americans should be shock, but not surprise” (p. 271).
As previously discussed, while larger, more prominent organizations tend to be
considered higher risk, particularly for acts of terrorism, it is logical to consider the

37

possibility that attackers may switch that approach to less obvious targets in an effort to
broaden the scope of fear and remove any sense of safety throughout society. This means
that organizations of any size, including assumed low-risk environments, are at risk for
potential violence. The data collected from this project can potentially be used to assist
organizations in creating trainings and prevention plans regarding violence, whereby also
addressing the mental health needs of employees regarding their safety concerns. As Ruffini
(2006) explains, “Worst case planning for the most vile scenarios that terrorists can inflict
upon us is not indicative of paranoia, but of good sense” (p. 245).
There is also an additional challenge that risk levels can and do change, which is a
foundational concept for this project. Following the attacks of September 11th, Larsen (2007)
warned America that it needs to pay attention to the new security realities (p. 271). Bruce
and Nowlin (2011) explain that “Places and occupations, such as urban transit, health care,
social work, and teaching, which were once considered safe, have experienced increases in
workplace violence” (p. 295). Based on this, it is advisable that leadership in currently
assumed low-risk environments raise their awareness, as it is possible that their
organizations’ risk levels will increase as well. By examining the safety concerns of
employees in currently assumed low-risk environments, this project provides insight as to
employee perceptions regarding awareness of this possible change in risk level.
An example of how risk levels can change in organizations, moving from assumed
low-risk to higher risk, can be found by examining violence in public schools, which will be
discussed in the following section.

38

Public Schools
In recent history the United States has witnessed numerous attacks on schools, which
were traditionally considered low-risk environments due to a general expectation of safety
and freedom from criminal activity. Ruffini (2006) supports this in stating that a few decades
ago, it was inconceivable that children would murder other children in school. Society now
faces a reality of violence in schools, which puts both students and school employees at risk.
Public schools provide an example of changing risk levels, specifically in assumed
low-risk environments. While the teaching profession has been exposed to the possibility of
WPV for some time, the level of risk has now been heightened. That risk is compounded in
the United States, according to Chappell and Di Martino (2006), where a higher possibility of
mass shootings tends to be more common (p. 90). While school violence is not limited to
shootings, and includes acts such as stabbings, rapes, bullying, and other behaviors, gun
violence is often more highly publicized than other forms of violence.
A rash of school shootings occurred during the 1990s, with at least 10 incidents
taking place between 1996 and 1999. In April of 1999 two teenage males shot and killed 12
students and one teacher, injured 23 more students, and then committed suicide in a mass
shooting at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado (CNN Library, 2017). At the time
of this writing, the most recent mass school shooting occurred in February of 2018, when 17
individuals were killed at a high school in Parkland, Florida (CNN Library, 2018). Other
mass shootings and attacks in schools have occurred between the time of the Columbine and
Parkland shootings. In December, 2012, Adam Lanza murdered 20 children and six adults in
a mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut (Sgueglia &
Sanchez, 2015).

39

While the Sandy Hook shooting drew extra media attention due to the fact that it
happened in an elementary school, other violent incidents involving younger school children
have occurred in the past. Ruffini (2006) lists a six-year-old male who killed a fellow first
grader in 2002 with a .32 semi-automatic handgun as the youngest school murderer in a list
of school attacks from 1996 to 2005. “If we can’t keep a six-year-old from bringing a gun
into a first grade classroom and perpetrating terror upon his fellow students, what possible
chance do we have of preventing well-trained Islamist terrorists from doing worse things?”
(Ruffini, 2006, p. 168).
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) explain that the distress these attacks generate is
great and long-lasting, and affects not only the victims, but also the entire workplace and the
community involved. It is logical to assume that knowledge of attacks that are occurring
elsewhere may potentially affect the perceptions and safety concerns of employees in
currently assumed low-risk environments.
“A murderous attack upon a school is an example of the intrusion of this type of
violence into one workplace which most would have believed to be entirely safe and secure”
(Chappell & Di Martino, 2006, p. 6). This quote supports the importance in acknowledging
trends and changing risk levels in environments that are assumed to be safe, and
demonstrates the need for discovering and paying attention to the perceptions and safety
concerns of workers in assumed low-risk environments, as examined through this project.
Trends
Certain problems occurring in society are too immediate to be addressed by research
materials, such as professional and academic journals, since data collection takes time and
even the most recently published statistics do not always reflect current situations. For

40

example, the aforementioned issue of increased terrorism in America could currently be
classified as a trend, since many incidents and data are too recent to be included in research
publications. Acknowledging trends—specifically trends in violence—can be advantageous
in understanding and warding off potential problems such as violence in various
environments, including workplaces. Relative to this project, employees in assumed low-risk
environments may be witnessing trends in incidents regarding potential violence that have
otherwise not been acknowledged, which may affect their perceptions and safety concerns.
The aforementioned violence in schools is an example of an issue which began as a
trend and then escalated. Chappell and Di Martino (2006) state that violence progressively
occurring in work environments traditionally considered safe is a trend that “seems to reflect
a general growth in community violence and unrest, and the collapse of a number of societal
values,” and “violence in schools is part of this trend” (p. 90). Assumed low-risk
organizations potentially face the same outcome as schools in regard to their risk levels for
violence increasing.
As violence occurs, society often classifies initial incidents as “random” or “isolated
events,” and may tend to intentionally or unintentionally ignore trends, patterns, or increasing
frequencies of incidents. This denial can potentially prevent organizations from creating
action plans and policies to ward off further problems regarding violence early on, leading
assumed low-risk environments to “suddenly” become high risk. Organizational denial of
current trends in violence can affect the perceptions of those employees who feel their safety
concerns are being ignored by their employers, whereby also affecting the employees’
overall mental health, which will be discussed in the upcoming Psychology section. This
project examines those employee perceptions and safety concerns.

41

Section II: Organizational Leadership
Organizations have a legal and ethical responsibility to keep employees as safe as
possible, and this responsibility lies within the organization’s leadership. The following
section examines aspects of organizational leadership which factor in to safety issues in the
workplace, and which may affect employees’ perceptions and safety concerns regarding
violence potentially occurring in their assumed low-risk work environments, the focus of this
project.
Leadership and Responsibility
Organizational leaders are responsible, either directly or through delegation, for every
aspect of an organization, including safety. The Assistant Secretary of Labor for
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Dr. David Michaels, addressed this
responsibility stating that “Making a living shouldn’t have to cost you your life. Safe jobs
happen because employers make the choice to fulfill their responsibilities and protect their
workers” (OSHA, 2015, “Worker Fatalities,” para. 1).
Pfeffer and Salancik (2003) explain that a manager is a symbol of control over social
actions and outcomes of the organization. “The knowledge that someone is in charge and
that the fate of the organization depends on that person offers the promise of change in
organizational activities and fortunes” (p. 263). It is the responsibility of managers and those
in other leadership positions to be aware of the various aspects of WPV, recognize potential
violence-related problems before they grow, and take action and make necessary changes in
an effort to prevent future incidents. This can be done through trainings based in part on the
safety concerns of employees, such as those indicated in the data collected through this
project.

42

In addition to dealing with the potential for major WPV incidents such as mass
murder, employers are also constantly faced with daily issues related to WPV (Rugala &
Isaacs, 2004). Threats, bullying, stalking, intimidation, emotional abuse, and harassment can
potentially escalate and result in physically violent behavior, if left unchecked. Rugala and
Isaacs (2004) explain that these behaviors are what supervisors and managers are faced with
on a daily basis. These types of incidents are not always reported to the police (Rugala &
Isaacs, 2004), adding to the dark figure mentioned previously. If these types of behaviors are
ignored and not addressed by an organization’s leadership, they can escalate, leading to
further violence and a reduced level of employee confidence in the organization.
When these kinds of incidents occur, they create a climate of distrust and provoke
anxiety and fear in the workplace, explain Rugala and Isaacs (2004). The authors state that
all of these things further contribute to the problem of WPV. The mental health of
employees who are dealing with these forms of violence, whether perpetuated by co-workers,
customers, or others in the workplace may be negatively impacted, which will be discussed
further in the upcoming Psychology section of this chapter.
Leadership and the Work Environment
Rugala and Isaacs (2004) state that “Employees have the right to expect a work
environment that promotes safety from violence, threats, and harassment” (p. 15).
Leadership strongly influences an organization’s environment, and the creation and
enforcement of WPV policies and procedures, or the lack thereof, influences that
environment and affects the safety perception of employees. Aytaç and Dursun (2012)
explain that when clear, organized policies, practices and procedures against WPV are
absent, workers’ perception is that the organization tolerates such behavior.

43

However, Bruce and Nowlin (2011) state that the existence of an organizational
policy on WPV has not been found to reduce or eliminate incidents of WPV, despite both
employees’ and customers’/clients’ needs and rights regarding feeling safe. This information
does not reveal whether having the WPV policies dissuaded additional incidents, a
challenging statistic to obtain, but it does suggest that action beyond creating policies is
needed when addressing the issue of violence in a work environment. As the authors point
out, “A formal workplace violence policy is only as good as the supervisors and employees
who enforce the policy” (Bruce & Nowlin, 2011, p. 305). Organizations can potentially
provide trainings on WPV policies and procedures that focus on employees’ safety concerns
based on data collected from this project.
The environment of an organization, both actual and perceived, plays a significant
role in employees’ feelings of confidence regarding their safety. This is further explained
with the term “safety climate” which, according to Neal and Griffin (2006), refers to
“employees’ perception of the value of safety as reflected in a company’s policies, practices,
and procedures” (as cited in McGonagle, Walsh, Kath, & Morrow, 2014, p. 437). The safety
climate, according to Zohar (1980), “acts as a frame of reference that informs the ways
employees behave in terms of safety” (as cited in McGonagle et al., 2014, p. 437).
Zohar (2010) proposes that the safety climate is a product of social cognition where
workers form a perception of how much safety is valued, compared to other organizational
objectives (as cited in Phipps, Malley, & Ashcroft, 2012, p. 279). Ayteç and Dursun (2012)
add that “perceived violence climate is a manifestation of the idea of a safety climate” (p.
3027). It is the responsibility of an organization’s leadership to know how its employees

44

view their work environment in regard to safety, and to make changes, as necessary. The
results of this project have the potential to be used by organizations in this capacity.
Pfeffer and Salancik (2003) explain that organizations are not in complete control of
the conditions surrounding them. While this statement is true, it is still important for
organizations to take action regarding the aspects, both internal and external, that are within
their control. The reasons for this, beyond maintaining a safe environment, are twofold.
First of all, organizations are legally required to provide employees with a safe work
environment. According to OSHA (2015, “Workplace Violence: Enforcement,” para. 1),
there are currently no specific enforcement standards regarding WPV. However, the General
Duty Clause, Section 5(a)(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 states that
employers are required to provide employees with work environments that are “free from
recognizable hazards that are causing or likely to cause death or serious harm to employees”
(OSHA, 2015, “Workplace Violence: Enforcement,” para. 1). OSHA explains that the courts
have interpreted this clause to mean that employers are obligated to provide workers with
working environments that are “free of conditions or activities that either the employer or
industry recognizes as hazardous and that cause, or are likely to cause, death or serious
physical harm to employees when there is a feasible method to abate the hazard” (OSHA,
2015, “Workplace Violence: Enforcement,” para. 1). Employees expect their employers to
follow this law and provide them with a safe work environment, including safety from
violence, to the best of their ability. This expectation creates a psychological contract of
safety, defined by Walker (2013) as “the beliefs of individuals about reciprocal employer and
employee safety obligations inferred from implicit or explicit promises” (p. 31). The

45

psychological contract can affect employees’ perception of safety, especially if an employee
believes the organization broke the contract in some way.
Secondly, employees’ perception of safety in their workplace, the focus of this
project, is also affected by whether or not they believe the organization is cognizant and cares
about the safety of its employees. This takes effort and follow-through on the part of
leadership. As Pfeffer and Salancik (2003) explain, while safety in a work environment is
not guaranteed, employees expect their employers to take measures to ensure their safety to
the best of their ability. “Organizational environments are not given realities; they are
created through a process of attention and interpretation” (Pfeffer & Salancik, 2003, p. 11).
If leaders neglect safety issues like proper training, policies and procedures, and
environmental design such as proper lighting, employees’ perception and interpretation may
be that the organization does not value them and is not protecting them. However, through
worksite assessment, employers can identify methods for reducing potential WPV incidents
(OSHA, 2015).
Leadership and Barriers to Action
Barriers prevent issues regarding WPV from being addressed in organizations.
Understanding these barriers is of importance to this project as they can prompt safety
concerns among employees. “A good violence climate will be perceived by employees when
management emphasizes the control and elimination of violence and verbal aggression”
(Spector, Coulter, Stockwell, and Matz, 2007, p. 117).
If employees instead feel their organization is not aware of potential safety issues, or
is blatantly ignoring them, it can negatively affect their overall perceptions of safety in the
workplace. Additionally, if employees know leadership is aware of their safety concerns but

46

is disregarding them, this can also perpetuate negative perceptions. Tucker and Turner
(2014) explain that in facing hazardous work conditions, employees speaking up or voicing
their concerns regarding safety issues is a proactive response, as it can potentially lead to
improvements in the overall safety of the workplace (p. 1). However, Lieber (2011) states
that “management consistently fails to take reports from concerned employees seriously or
implement extra precautions” (p. 84). These kinds of barriers can affect employees’
perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential violence in the workplace, especially in
organizations where an assumption of safety may be present among leadership.
Despite the benefits that come from preparing for potential WPV, and the detrimental
outcomes that may occur if the risk is ignored, there are many reasons organizations fail to
acknowledge or prepare for potential WPV; one of these reasons is complacency.
Complacency. One of the dangers in not acknowledging, discussing, or seeking
ways to address potential problems regarding WPV is an overall attitude of complacency,
which can be detrimental to both individuals and organizations. The word complacency is
defined as “a feeling of being satisfied with how things are and not wanting to try to make
them better; self-satisfaction especially when accompanied by unawareness of actual dangers
or deficiencies” (Merriam-Webster, 2017).
While complacency may exist in organizations which have not been directly affected
by a violent incident, it is not realistic to take safety for granted. Larsen (2007) explains that
society needs to understand and prepare for the new security risks the country faces (p. 272).
The author states that “Violence against humans and terrorist acts that disrupt the economic,
social, and political order will continue, driven by territorial disputes, economic inequalities,
oil, water, politics, and religion” (Larsen, 2007, p. 269).

47

Lieutenant Colonel Joseph A. Ruffini spent over 20 years in the United States Army,
commanding combat forces throughout the world, and more than a decade in the military
assisting the United States in fighting the War on Terror. He provided operational
psychological warfare concepts to the White House National Security Council during
Operation Iraqi Freedom, and during his military career he developed tactical as well as
strategic defense plans to assist in America’s survival. He firmly believes that following 911 the worst attacks on America are yet to come, and strongly warns against complacency
(Ruffini, 2006).
Ruffini (2006) explains that both common criminals and terrorists attack where they
perceive weakness. Their preferred targets are communities where businesses, schools, law
enforcement, and citizenry-at-large are “uninformed, unaware, and ill-prepared” (p. 238).
This again supports the need for organizations to address the issue of WPV and employees’
safety concerns.
Larsen (2007) states that international terrorists’ prime target has become businesses.
He paraphrases Leon Trotsky, stating, “Business may not be interested in terrorism, but
terrorism is interested in business” (as cited in Larsen, 2007, p. 190). Based on this, it is
advisable for businesses to avoid complacency regarding safety, and to instead be informed,
aware, and prepared for potential safety threats, and to take action in lowering the risk of
being targeted for violence.
Robert S. Mueller, III, previous director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
states that the chosen targets for the 9-11 attacks, with the exception of the Pentagon, were
not military in nature, but instead “were workplaces where thousands of people gathered
every day to support their families and their country” (Rugala & Isaacs, 2004, p. 5). Due to

48

that fact, the theoretical context of WPV changed that day (p. 5). Chappell and Di Martino
(2006) further support this in saying, “Working environments that traditionally have been
relatively immune from violence are becoming progressively affected by workplace
violence” (p. 90).
Therefore, while the assumption exists that there are low-risk environments, as
referred to in this project, the notion that there are areas where crime will not happen, or that
certain areas are completely safe and risk-free, is not realistic, nor is complacency. “Violent
crime is no longer restricted to urban centres and ghettos…nearly everywhere people are
employed and business is carried out have become the latest sites for disgruntled, unhappy,
desperate, often psychiatrically impaired people to vent their rage” (Chappell & Di Martino,
2006, p. 112).
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) state that each year there are millions of employees
worldwide who incur violent incidents while working; however, the vast majority of people
do not expect that they will be a victim of WPV while at their jobs (p. 179). “Human beings
exhibit a natural tendency to slide into complacency fairly quickly, even with respect to
important things such as their personal safety” (Ruffini, 2006, pp. 237-238). Whether this is
due to ignorance, unawareness, denial, or organizational preparedness is unknown. This
outlook does, however, point to an attitude which reflects that even in the midst of proof and
statistics, people still maintain a “not me” view toward violence occurring to them. This
viewpoint, if held by an organization’s leadership, can be particularly problematic if it differs
from the views of frontline employees with safety concerns that are being dismissed due to
leadership’s complacency.

49

If administrators or others in charge of organizational policies become complacent
toward the potential for violence occurring, they can lessen the confidence of their employees
regarding safety in the workplace. Pease Selden and Downey (2012) support this stating,
“Feelings about management may be at the root of many judgments made in regard to the
workplace” (p. 102). In relation to this project, when complacency regarding the risk of
violence in the workplace exists among leadership, safety concerns among employees can
rise, lowering the overall perception of safety in the organization.
Additional barriers. In addition to complacency, denial is another barrier that
prevents issues of WPV from being addressed in organizations. Ruffini (2006) states,
“Complacency is not an option, and denial is deadly” (p. 261). While WPV is a legitimate
concern for those in decision-making roles, not all decision-makers recognize or take actions
to reduce the risks that exist regarding WPV. The Department of Health and Human
Services (2006) states that a prevailing corporate attitude or denial that WPV could actually
occur might be so strong that leadership remains unconvinced that they need to address the
issue, and until tragedy strikes, potential WPV is not recognized as a high priority. When
this is the case, employees may believe that the organization has a lack of regard for their
safety, as previously discussed, and is breaking the aforementioned psychological contract
(Walker, 2013). In relation to this project, this belief can create additional safety concerns
among employees and negatively affect their overall perception of safety in the workplace.
Hall, Dollard, and Coward (2010) state that the psychosocial safety climate (PSC),
which refers to the combined perceptions dealing with the protection of employees’
psychological well-being and the organizations policies, practices, and procedures, is greatly
driven by the beliefs and values of management. “Managers who have little regard for

50

workers’ well-being, such as in a low PSC environment will ignore high demand scenarios”
(Idris & Dollard, 2011, p. 324).
In addition to denial, the perspective of leadership can also be a barrier in regard to
organizations actively working to lower the risk of WPV. Leadership which is isolated from
customers or the public may view risk differently than employees who are on the frontlines
working directly with customers. Hoobler and Swanberg (2006) address this issue based on
their collected data regarding WPV. “It appears that frontline workers understand the
problem and even its potential solutions, yet human resources and management personnel are
slow to recognize current HR policies are not adequately addressing this social problem” (p.
244).
According to Howard and Wech (2012), “Supervisory positions are more likely to
experience internally generated WPV and less likely to experience externally generated
WPV” (p. 115). This could explain why some leadership may not view WPV as a problem.
If leaders feel confident and safe with their employees and those internal relationships, they
might not consider the dangers frontline workers may be experiencing from external threats.
Just because risk pertaining to WPV may not be perceived or acknowledged does not mean it
does not exist. Earlier work by Keyes and Heim (1996) states that ambiguous incidents like
machinery that has been sabotaged, an employee being berated in front of peers, or an
employee who was harassed and later found assaulted or killed at a location away from the
workplace, can often represent instances of work-related violence that have been overlooked
(as cited in Fleming & Harvey, 2002).
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) point out another barrier in regard to addressing
WPV. “One identified failure is that many superiors still underestimate the seriousness of

51

the problem” (p. 233). This again points to the importance of leadership listening to and
addressing the safety concerns of workers in varying roles throughout the organization, the
focus of this project. “Violence at work is seen increasingly to be a major problem that has
to be tackled, and tackled now” (Chappell & DiMartino, 2006, p. 296).
Lastly, monetary issues may also present barriers to organizations’ willingness to
address the issue of WPV. Leadership is often hesitant to spend money, especially in areas
where need is not statistically or financially proven. Chang et al. (2012) support this stating,
“Until a clear linkage is established between favorable climate perceptions and prevention
efforts, organizations may be hesitant to invest in interventions that target the improvement
of climate perceptions” (p. 658). Many decision-makers in organizations are focused on
statistics and require firm numerical proof that moving forward with any type of prevention
plan or training is necessary, much less cost-efficient. Chang et al. (2012) explain that if an
emergency has not already occurred, or an immediate risk is not perceived by those in
leadership positions, it can be difficult to sell an organization on investing in preventative
measures.
Proving a need for increasing preventative measures regarding WPV when no
incidents have occurred can be challenging. The Department of Health and Human Services
(2006) states that the value of preventing WPV by reducing liability and turnover, as well as
increasing productivity, is not well understood in many organizations. However, safety and
security are not optimal or advisable areas to cut costs. Garcia (2001) referenced this by
asking “How much risk is the facility willing to accept versus the cost of reducing that risk?”
(p. 271).

52

If leadership does not take the initiative to address issues of violence or potential
violence in the workplace, the effects can be dire, as discussed in the upcoming section on
legalities and risks. This again demonstrates the importance and need for organizational
leadership to devote attention to the subject of WPV, and to address employee safety
concerns, as focused on in this project.
Legalities and Risks
There are many potential negative outcomes when leaders do not consider the
legalities involved with WPV. Meadows (2007) states, “Violence in the workplace can result
not only in lawsuits but also can invite a great deal of adverse publicity for a business” (p.
134). Therefore, “Employers should always be aware that they may face criminal or civil
negligence charges for acts of violence in the workplace” (Meadows, 2007, p. 138).
Organizations can often avoid legal issues by providing WPV trainings and being
proactive and paying attention to employees’ perceptions and safety concerns regarding
potential violence in their work environment, as focused on in this project. Sexual
harassment, a form of WPV, provides a pertinent example of this. Elkins and VelezCastrillon (2008) explain that “Victims’ perceptions are important because feelings of
unfairness may lead them to pursue litigation” (p. 1449). The authors state that there is a
strong relationship between legal risks connected to sexual harassment and the way victims
“perceive potentially harassing behaviours and the companies’ responses to victims’
complaints” (p. 1436). Furthermore, the authors state that “Personal, organizational and
cultural characteristics influence the interpretations that victims give to potentially harassing
behaviors” (p. 1437). Therefore, leaders need to be aware of the potential consequences to

53

their actions if they choose to downplay incidents of WPV, as employees’ perceptions can
lead to legal action.
Rugala and Isaacs (2004) state that “when the violence comes from an employee or
someone close to an employee, there is a much greater chance that some warning sign will
have reached the employer in the form of observable behavior” (p. 14). In connection to this,
OSHA (2015) states that “An employer that has experienced acts of workplace violence, or
becomes aware of threats, intimidation, or other indicators showing that the potential for
violence in the workplace exists, would be on notice of the risk of workplace violence,” and
in response, should implement a variety of tools aimed at WPV, including a prevention
program and training (“Workplace Violence: Enforcement,” para. 2). When this does not
happen, and WPV risks continue to increase, it is a reflection on the organization’s
leadership. Chang, Eatough, Spector, and Kessler (2012) support this in their reference to
research which states that increased attacks are related to poor leadership.
In addition to legal risks, there are other ways WPV issues impact organizations.
Rugala and Isaacs (2004) state that WPV can cause economic loss for employers due to lost
work time, increased workers’ compensation payments, medical expenses, and damaged
employee morale and productivity. Meadows (2007) supports this stating, “Workplace
violence often results in loss of time from work, increased workers’ compensation claims,
and increased insurance premiums” (p. 134). Hoobler and Swanberg (2006) explain that
injuries from violence occurring on the job cost organizations billions of dollars annually and
point to associations between the stress connected to WPV and aggression with high
turnover, lower worker commitment, and reduced productivity. All of these result in

54

potential financial loss for an organization, and can seriously affect the mental health of
employees, as addressed in the following section on Psychology.
Section III: Psychology
Psychology is defined by the American Psychological Association as “the study of
the mind and behavior” (American Psychological Association, 2017). This project focused
on the mental health aspect of psychology, as it relates to the psychological effects of
employees’ safety concerns regarding potential WPV. According to the World Health
Organization ([WHO], 2014), the term mental health refers to “a state of well-being in which
every individual realizes his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life,
can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a contribution to her or his
community” (Mental Health section, para. 1).
One area where individuals’ mental health needs can be neglected or dismissed is
WPV, including direct, indirect, and potential, as focused on in this project. Drach-Zahavy
(2008) addresses the importance of mental health in the workplace by stating, “Concerns for
workers’ mental health in the workplace should enjoy efforts equal to those made out of
concern for their physical health” (p. 211). While society often gives more attention to direct
victims of violence with visible injuries, as Blythe (2002) explains, indirect victims may also
struggle psychologically with witnessing or experiencing violence vicariously. Mental health
may also be affected in individuals who are concerned about the potential for violence
occurring. The following section addresses the connections between mental health and
WPV, both actual and potential.

55

Mental Health in the Workplace
Spector et al. (2007) refer to “the damaging effects of working in a setting perceived
to be dangerous” (p. 125). When workers are concerned about safety issues in their place of
employment, that concern can manifest itself through mental and physical ailments,
eventually affecting job performance, and potentially, the overall effectiveness of the
organization as a whole. Spector et al. (2007) explain that the workplace climate regarding
violence might impact psychological strains. The authors’ findings indicated significant
correlations between perceived danger and physical symptoms, depression, and anxiety (p.
125).
Probst, Gold, and Caborn (2008) state that there are links between job stress and
health issues, such as mental distress and cardiovascular issues. Research conducted by these
authors also refers to links between WPV and harassment and psychosomatic disorders like
ulcers, headaches, and gastrointestinal disturbances. Workers dealing with these kinds of
physical ailments potentially triggered by WPV concerns may have higher absenteeism and
turnover rates, ultimately impacting the overall effectiveness of their organizations.
Emotions and feelings about the workplace itself also contribute to employees’ attitudes and
productivity.
Lord et al. (2002) explain that there are various ways emotions can influence
organizational behavior. “Some of the ways are direct, such as the triggering of behavior by
emotions, whereas other ways are indirect, such as emotions influencing behavior through
mediating mechanisms like motivation or cognition” (p. 7). Idris and Dollard (2011) point
out that negative emotional reactions are more likely to occur in employees who continually
experience certain kinds of job demands, including emotional demands, which can then lead

56

to an erosion of health. Nahrgang, Morgeson, and Hofmann (2011) further support this,
explaining that job demands including risks, hazards, and emotional conflict, impair the
health of employees and lead to burnout.
Concerns about issues in the work environment, specifically WPV, affect the mental
and physical health of employees. In turn, this can potentially affect the organization as a
whole, not only by negative employee perceptions of safety, but also due to employee
concerns manifesting as issues such as absenteeism, lower productivity, and lessened
commitment to the organization. According to work by Neuman and Keashly (2004),
“employees who experienced persistent workplace aggression were more bothered by the
general work environment, had lower levels of job satisfaction and organizational
satisfaction, and higher intent to leave the organization” (as cited in Pease Selden & Downey,
2012).
Niven, Sprigg, Armitage, and Satchwell (2013) explain that the effects violence has
on its victims is influenced by the interplay between WPV exposure and how victims
respond. The following information examines how some specific aspects of WPV can
negatively affect the mental health of employees.
Beyond Physical Harm
A specific challenge in dealing with mental health in relation to WPV is the lack of
recognition that not all incidents of WPV include physical acts, but many are instead
grounded in psychological tactics of aggression, such as bullying and harassment. Since
there is often no overt physical evidence in these kinds of WPV, the effects are often more
readily ignored. Schindeler (2014) supports this in stating, “While the criminality of physical

57

violence is unquestioned, there is greater controversy with respect to those acts of
interpersonal workplace violence which result in psycho-social injuries” (p. 372).
Aggression. Assessing aggression in general, and interpersonal workplace
aggression specifically, is difficult, according to Fredericksen and McCorkle (2013). The
authors state that this is due to the variety in definitions, vagaries of human perception, and
issues with self-reporting.
Acts of aggression can be direct or indirect and include tactics such as insulting,
demeaning, shouting, gossip, and denigrating others when they are not present (Fredericksen
& McCorkle, 2013). Lieber (2011) lists other acts which can also be considered
inappropriate workplace aggression, including ostracism, sabotage, slamming doors,
aggressive eye contact, and workplace pranks, among other actions.
Inappropriate forms of aggression are classified under the umbrella of WPV (Lieber,
2011), but as previously mentioned, since the effects of these behaviors tend to be, or at least
start out as, psychological instead of physical they are often overlooked by leadership.
However, when employees face these types of behaviors on a daily basis, whether instigated
by co-workers or customers, it can affect their mental health negatively. According to
seminal work by Rogers and Kelloway (1997), “perceived risk of future aggression was
associated with decreased psychological and physical well-being, as manifested by
depression, sleep disturbances, and psychosomatic symptoms” (as cited in Dupré, Dawe, &
Barling, 2014, p. 2361).
In relation to this project, it is important to note that “being a victim of workplace
aggression might also influence individuals’ regard for their organization” (Dupré et al.,
2014, p. 2361). Generally, employees are not as likely to feel emotional attachment to their

58

employing organizations when they are victims of aggression at work (Dupré et al., 2014),
which can potentially lead to higher turnover rates for organizations. Both direct victims and
those who witness aggression in the workplace are affected, although the effects are stronger
for direct targets even though there is a greater exposure to vicarious aggression for witnesses
(Dupré et al., 2014).
“Most cases of full-fledged acts of workplace violence start with inappropriate
workplace aggression” (Lieber, 2011, p. 84). At its worst, aggression in the work
environment can lead to workplace homicide or the perpetuation of harm socially,
economically, and morally (Fredericksen & McCorkle, 2013).
Bullying. One specific form of aggression is bullying. Cowan (2012) states that
bullying in the workplace is gaining more attention throughout the world, specifically among
human resource professionals. According to Fitzpatrick et al. (2011), “General workplace
bullying is a substantial problem for individuals and for organizations” (p. 492).
As with the term aggression, researchers have found that defining bullying proves
difficult. “Researchers have conceptualized bullying in many ways, complicating
measurement and subsequent understanding of it” (MacIntosh, Wuest, Gray, & Aldous,
2010). Fitzpatrick et al. (2011) explain that workplace bullying behaviors have been given
numerous names over the years, and Cowan (2012) supports this, stating that multiple labels
currently are associated with bullying in the workplace. According to Vickers (2011),
bullying consists of repeated actions, with some people believing the key component and
motivation is the bully’s intention to harm.
Bullying in the workplace has the potential to affect employees in a variety of ways,
both psychologically and physically. Sperry (2009) states that bullying is understood as a

59

harmful form of workplace abusiveness that has health consequences for victims. MacIntosh
et al. (2010) state, “Our study found that being bullied resulted in headaches, disturbance in
sleeping and eating patterns, anxiety, diminished energy, disrupted concentration and
depression” (p. 911). The authors added that participants in their study also reported feelings
of anger, fear, and hopelessness, as well as a lack of joy and declining self-confidence due to
feeling silenced, discredited, isolated, and discounted (MacIntosh et al., 2010). Furthermore,
the authors point to various research that discusses additional symptoms and effects of WPV,
including burnout, long-term fatigue, distress and sleep disturbances, increased sickness,
depression, and other psychological symptoms.
Jain et al. (2012) further support this, explaining that “the link between bullying and
physical, mental and psychosomatic health symptoms is well established” (p. 326). These
symptoms, the authors state, include such things as stress, depression, self-blame, reduced
self-esteem, phobias, sleep disturbances, and digestive and musculoskeletal problems.
“While governments and many organizations have introduced policies in response to
workplace bullying, there is little evidence that they have been successful in either the
prevention or resolution of the problem” (Hutchinson, 2012, p. 637). The results of this
project provide insight as to employees’ personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding
these kinds of behaviors in assumed low-risk environments.
Witnesses and Vicarious Exposure
Direct victims of violence with visible injuries tend to receive more attention from
society (Blythe, 2002). However, those who experience violence by personally witnessing it,
such as those who witness a shooting without being the intended target and without being
physically hurt, also face the potential of incurring negative psychological effects.

60

“Employees who observe but are not themselves the targets of bullying have been
shown to experience negative health and employment effects” (Einarsen et al., 1994; Hauge,
Skogstad, & Einarsen, 2007, as cited in Fitzpatrick et al., 2011). Schat and Kelloway (2000)
also found that there are negative consequences for individuals and organizations from both
direct and vicarious WPV, and Aytaç and Dursun (2012) state that “Workplace violence
negatively affects not only the direct victims of such behavior, but also those who witness
such violence” (p. 3026).
Individuals who experience violence vicariously by hearing about it
secondhandedly—for example, by seeing repeated reports of the incident via news sources—
can also be traumatized. Blythe (2002) explains this, stating “after the bombing at the
Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City and the September 11, 2001 attacks, we all
learned that catastrophes can have huge, traumatic effects on people who are not physically
injured at all – or even at the scene” (p. 114). Despite this information, many organizations
still do not address the psychological concerns of employees regarding WPV or the potential
for WPV, especially in low-risk environments where safety is assumed, which addresses the
need for this project.
It is also noteworthy that vicarious exposure, as with witnessing, is not limited to
physical violence, but also refers to incidents of aggression in the workplace, such as
harassment or bullying, as previously discussed. Since witnesses of workplace aggression
typically outnumber direct victims (Dupré et al., 2014), it is important that individuals
dealing with vicarious exposure receive help, such as counseling, when needed. Aytaç and
Dursun (2012) explain that witnessing violence of any kind at work may cause concern to

61

workers that they themselves could face violence in the future. The following quote from
Dupré et al. (2014) further explains this:
Failure to understand the vicarious experience of workplace aggression ignores a
reality of the workplace for many. Given that employees who witness or hear about
such behavior at work would typically far outnumber those who experience the
aggression directly, the implications of findings related to the effect of indirect
exposure are far-reaching. (p. 2358)
Perception and Risk Potential
Assumedly, most adults within the United States have been exposed to some form of
WPV, even if it is through news sources or the media, which will be discussed further in this
section. This exposure can affect employees’ perceptions and heighten their concerns
regarding potential future violence (Aytaç & Dursun, 2012) and risk potential, especially if
they have also witnessed disconcerting behaviors in their own work environments.
Perception is defined as “awareness of the elements of environment through physical
sensation” (Merriam-Webster, 2017), and is a key aspect of this project. Many factors,
including personal experiences, the media, and the physical appearance of an area, contribute
to individuals’ perceptions of various environments, including their perceptions of safety.
Sussman, Szelely, Hajcak, and Mohanty (2016) explain that “the process of perception often
starts before an actual physical encounter with the sensory stimulus. Prior knowledge and
experience can create expectations about what is relevant or likely, helping us to rapidly and
accurately identify subsequent stimuli” (p. 321). These perceptions can then affect
individuals’ reactions. O’Brien and Wilson (2011) support this explaining that
“neighborhoods of a city vary in their level of safety, and it would be adaptive for an

62

individual to use environmental cues to inform his or her social predisposition, being vigilant
in a potentially dangerous neighborhood and relaxed otherwise” (p. 606).
The concept that perceptions can affect reactions is relevant to this project, as
employees in assumed low-risk environments may witness attitudes, behaviors, or incidents
perpetrated by clientele or co-workers which could potentially affect their perception of
safety in the workplace and heighten their safety concerns. As O’Brien and Wilson (2011)
suggest, these environmental cues could then affect how those employees react and behave at
work in relation to being vigilant versus being relaxed.
Media and perception. The perception of society regarding WPV and safe or unsafe
environments is largely formed by what and how the media reports. Solloway, Slater,
Chung, and Goodall (2013) refer to previous research which states that “news triggers
emotions, which in turn causes motivated processing and decision making” (p. 160).
Sensationalism, inaccurate reporting, and media bias can all contribute to society not
receiving statistical or factual information. Chappell and Di Martino (2006) explain that
media-conveyed images regarding WPV quickly spread around the globe, reaching areas
beyond their place of origin whereby further affecting both official and public perceptions of
violence. “Coverage can increase perceptions of issue prevalence and push certain issues
ahead of others with respect to public attention” (Iyengar & Kinder, 1987, as cited in
Solloway et. al, 2013, p. 161). Through this type of coverage, the media has the ability to
sway people’s beliefs regarding whether environments are more or less prone to violence,
which can in turn affect the perceptions and safety concerns of employees in assumed lowrisk environments, the focus of this project.

63

Despite cases of media-created perceptions being misleading and inaccurate, they are
still perceptions that can affect policies, responses, and the way people, including
government, think about the topic of violence in the workplace (Chappell & Di Martino,
2006). As society continues to change and previously assumed safe environments face
greater safety risks, the perception of employees in these environments may be affected and
safety concerns may increase. This project is based on that idea as it focuses on the
perceptions and safety concerns of workers in assumed low-risk environments.
Mental Health Effects from Violence Concerns
Whether perceptions and concerns stem from direct or indirect exposure to violence,
or are based on actual or potential violence, employees’ mental health can be affected by
their safety concerns. Dupré et al. (2014) state that “Direct and vicarious exposure to
customer aggression exert a similar pattern of findings; both affect perceived risk of future
occurrences of workplace aggression” (p. 2368). In turn, the authors explain, this influences
both organizational attachment, such as turnover intentions and lowered commitment, and
individual well-being, including diminished health, both physical and mental. The following
information addresses some of the specific ways employee mental health can be affected by
concerns regarding potential WPV.
Stress. Concern regarding WPV can be stressful for individuals and can affect their
overall view of the environment and how they function in it. Guillet, Hermand, and Mullet
(2010) explain that “The way workers conceptualize stress affects their perception of the
many events that happen at the workplace” (p. 65).
According to Taylor and Kluemper (2012), organizations are concerned about the
connection between stress in the workplace and dysfunctional employee behavior. Employee

64

stress that leads to emotions such as anger can negatively affect the work environment and
can potentially lead to additional incidents of violence. When the original source of stress is
concern about WPV, this can create a potential cycle revolving around the issue of WPV.
Chang et al. (2011) explain that “employees are unsure how to distribute their energy so that
they can achieve the performance level that they desire, as well as successfully cope with
stressors” (p. 662). This dilemma of not knowing how to deal with stress can in turn create
even more stress for workers.
Jain et al. (2012) state that stress can lead to health problems for employees. The
authors explain that being exposed to bullying, harassment, and other forms of violence at
work are significant social stressors that can result in various symptoms of self-reported illhealth and stress.
Individuals who feel supported not only by the leadership in their organization, but
also by their peers may experience stress at a lower level. “Social support was found to be,
by far, the most important factor for judging the stressfulness of work situations” (Guillet et
al., 2010, p. 65)
Anxiety, rumination, depression, and anger. Individuals who are concerned about
the potential for violence occurring in their workplace may deal with feelings of anxiety.
Barlow (2002) states that “Anxiety is future oriented, usually perceptual, and intended to
maintain vigilance for danger” (as cited in Weiner & Craighead, 2010, p. 653). An important
characteristic of anxiety, according to Sussman et al. (2016), is the anticipation of aversive
events occurring in the future (p. 320). Anticipation of potential WPV incidents could
therefore cause anxiety in employees who are dealing with safety concerns.

65

Anxiety regarding potential WPV can lead to additional mental health issues such as
ruminative thinking. Rumination involves abstract, passive negative thoughts, and is a form
of self-focused thinking (Niven et al., 2013). Individuals can ruminate when they are
concerned about any real or potential situation, past, current, or future. In regard to this
project, rumination over safety concerns could occur when an individual is worried about a
potential threat such as WPV, which could in turn affect their mental health as well as their
job performance. Following a stressful incident, ruminative thinking is maladaptive, and
according to research findings by Niven et al. (2013), may exacerbate the negative effects
that come from WPV. Beattie and Griffin (2014) explain that “The more severe an event is
perceived to be, the more likely it is to cause rumination” (p. 628).
Other effects that may exist for those concerned with issues of WPV are depression
and anger. Idris and Dollard (2011) found that employee engagement is negatively
influenced by depression and anger, both of which may reduce motivation. The authors
explain that depression requires more time and resources to deal with, taking away from
work motivation. According to Idris and Dollard (2011), this suggests depressed employees
are likely to be ineffective at their jobs, similar to those dealing with anger. Again, this
affects both the individual and the organization as a whole.
Fear. Mueller and Tschan (2011) found that the consequences of being in constant
fear of violent victimization in the workplace can be similar or worse than the consequences
from threats or actual exposure to violence. Historical research by Rogers and Kelloway
(1997) states that “the fear of victimization may be enough to precipitate several adverse
psychological, occupational, and physiological outcomes” (p. 64). Research collected by
Solloway et al. (2013) further support this in explaining that the way messages are processed

66

and remembered is influenced by emotions like fear and anger (p. 161). Spector et al. (2007)
state that “Individuals who work in an environment seen as having a poor violence climate
might experience psychological strains, whether or not they actually are assaulted” (pp. 125126).
Earlier research by Budd, Arvey, and Lawless (1996) showed that numerous
respondents to a study had indicated that they considered changing jobs due to mental or
physical distress caused by fear of violence, not actual victimization (as cited in Mueller &
Tschan, 2011). These findings again support the importance and need for organizations to
address employee safety concerns regarding potential WPV, as addressed in this project.
Other seminal research by Rogers and Kelloway (1997) found that “fear is a mediator
of the relationships between WPV and negative personal and organizational outcomes” (p.
69). According to the authors, “Fear of future violence mediates the relationships between
exposure to workplace violence and negative outcomes. Specifically, exposure to workplace
violence predicted fear of future violence that, in turn, predicted psychological well-being,
somatic symptoms, and intent to leave the organization” (Rogers & Kelloway, 1997, p. 63).
Schat and Kelloway (2000) later replicated the findings of Rogers and Kelloway with
comparable results, stating that the relationship between violence and somatic and emotional
well-being is mediated by the fear of future violence, and the relationship between fear and
somatic well-being is partially mediated by emotional well-being.
There is a correlation between fear and a sense of control, which will be discussed
further in the upcoming section. Schat and Kelloway (2000) state that “perceived control
was found to be associated with improved emotional well-being both directly and indirectly
through a reduction in the fear” (p. 400). The authors explain that these findings indicate that

67

training, which could enhance a sense of control, could help in lessening the negative
consequences of violence in the workplace. Furthermore, trainings could have a positive
impact on the mental health of employees by providing them with a sense of control in regard
to their safety concerns.
Employee Control
Feelings of control are important to employees when dealing with the potential of
WPV. In cases where an incident of WPV has already occurred, individuals who believe
they have more control over a stressful event happening again, maintain the perception that it
is less likely to occur in the future (Frazier et al., 2012). This perception can be beneficial to
the mental health of individuals, as it provides a positive coping mechanism when dealing
with traumatic events and potential incidents of WPV.
The importance of control is further explained in the concept of locus of control.
Joseph, Reddy, and Kashore Sharma (2013) define locus of control (LoC) as “The extent to
which an individual regards control over events to be under their own influence” (p. 9).
Wang, Bowling, and Eschleman (2010) found that LoC in the workplace was related to
numerous criterion variables, including employee well-being, job performance, withdrawal
intentions and behavior, interpersonal relationships at work, job attitudes, coping behavior,
and perceptions of the workplace (p. 764).
Individuals who believe they have control over the outcome of an event have an
internal locus of control, and those who attribute situational outcomes to external factors like
luck, chance, or the actions of others, maintain an external locus of control (Joseph et al.,
2013). Sprung and Jex (2012) explain that if employees feel they have no control over work

68

outcomes, or maintain a strong external LoC, they may feel helpless, believing they have no
way to change their situation.
An external LoC is likely to be connected to negative outcomes (Sprung & Jex,
2012). In relation to WPV and this project, these negative outcomes can have a detrimental
impact on employees, and therefore, the entire organization, through the aforementioned
criterion variables. If this happens, it may lead to counterproductive work behavior (CWB),
defined by Rotundo and Spector (2010) as “intentional behavior by employees that harms or
intends to harm organizations, organizational members, or both” (as cited in Sprung & Jex,
2012, p. 272). The authors’ research found that employees were more likely to engage in
CWB to the extent that they felt a lack of control, or external LoC, regarding work situations.
It is important to note that counterproductive work behavior has the potential to lead to
incidents of internal WPV, creating the possibility for employee concerns regarding potential
WPV to evolve into actual incidents of WPV.
When employees are given opportunities to share their concerns regarding violence in
the workplace, such as through this project, it gives them a voice (Tucker & Turner, 2014)
and allows them to feel heard regarding their environment, thereby potentially increasing
their internal LoC. When these kinds of opportunities are provided, it demonstrates a sense
of support for employees, a component of positive mental health in the workplace, which is
discussed in the following section.
Leadership Support
Employees’ safety perceptions of the workplace can be affected by whether or not
leadership is supportive or perceived to be supportive. According to Blythe (2002), visible
issues seem to demand our attention when an emergency occurs, but in the midst of chaos,

69

“too many crisis managers neglect those people left behind” (pp. 113-114). The author
explains that if individuals are not bleeding, they do not seem to have been significantly
affected. Blythe postulates that this could be due to more visible needs seeming more urgent
than those that are unseen. Additionally, Blythe (2002) states, “People’s invisible, internal
reactions may seem too nebulous for managers to get their arms around. What’s more, there
is a lingering prejudice toward psychological matters that’s hard to shake” (p.114). Based on
the previously discussed information regarding the effects of vicariously experienced
violence and the fear of potential violence occurring, these findings can also be applied to the
importance of leadership support when dealing with employees’ safety concerns regarding
potential WPV.
Research results by Schat and Kelloway (2003) demonstrate that organizational
support provided numerous buffering effects on the negative health consequences of WPV
(p. 117). The authors state that the major practical implication of their research is that “the
negative health-related consequences of workplace violence should be mitigated by
interventions that enhance the availability of instrumental or informational support for
employees experiencing workplace violence” (p. 121). Their research showed that
instrumental support, that which deals with direct assistance, moderated the effects of WPV
on areas such as somatic health and emotional well-being, whereas informational support,
which is more indirect and deals with providing resources, moderated the effects of WPV on
emotional well-being (p. 121).
O’Donnell, MacIntosh, and Wuest (2010) found that organizational support can
reduce the risk of sickness absence and declines in health in women who were targets of
workplace bullying, a form of WPV. In contrast, the study also showed that a lack of support

70

can be detrimental. An example of this kind of negative response is provide by Fredericksen
and McCorkle (2013) who state, “Employees who are harassed may be told to ‘grow up’ or
‘not be so sensitive’” (p. 231). The women in the O’Donnell et al. (2010) study reported a
consistent theme of being invalidated, which again points to one of the barriers related to
leadership in dealing with WPV. “Feeling invalidated diminished commitment to the
employer and influenced strategies to move forward, with a majority of the participants
ultimately quitting” (p. 449).
Lack of support from leadership, not only when dealing with existing issues of WPV,
but also in facing the general topic of potential violence happening in the workplace, can
increase employee stress and lead to negative outcomes, such as the previously discussed
counterproductive work behavior (CWB). Sprung and Jex (2012) explain that when
employees experience increased exposure to stressors at work, it can lead to negative
emotional reactions like frustration, anger, and fatigue. In turn, these negative emotions can
then influence behavior (p. 273-274). According to Fox and Spencer (1999), “People who
feel angry or perceive that they have been treated unfairly tend to sabotage their work or
become deliberately ineffective” (as cited in Idris & Dollard, 2011, p. 329).
Patterson (2004) further supports this in saying that if employees do not feel they are
being treated respectfully and fairly by management, that disconnect may be reflected in their
work through them providing less than stellar service. When employees perceive a
disinterest in their well-being, including poor treatment or discrimination, it can lead to
stress, escalating tension, and aggressive actions (Hoobler & Swanberg, 2006, p. 232).
Additionally, if an incident of WPV has occurred and employees do not receive
support from leadership, it can lead to further problems. Chang et al. (2012) explain, “It is

71

possible that victims of violence or aggression actually start a vicious cycle by withdrawing
their prevention behaviors, resulting in more incidents in the future” (p. 671). This again
suggests the potential cycle of WPV that can occur if employee safety concerns are not
addressed by leadership.
Leadership support shows a sense of caring toward employees, which can contribute
positively to employees’ mental health. Care felt, according to Vinarski-Peretz and Carmeli
(2011), is linked positively to psychological conditions (p. 43). The authors’ study showed
that “care felt facilitates the development of positive psychological conditions of
psychological safety, psychological meaningfulness, and psychological availability” (p. 51).
When employees do not feel cared about or supported by their organization, the risk
of betrayal exists, leading to negative effects on workers’ mental health and other potential
problems. “Lack of timely and suitable responses to address the aftermaths of violent and
aggressive incidents are likely to signal to employees a general setting that is tolerant to
violence and aggression” (Chang et al., 2011, p. 661).
Awareness
When WPV occurs, “It damages trust, community, and the sense of security every
worker has the right to feel while on the job” (Rugala & Isaacs, 2004, p. 15). Workplace
violence awareness is necessary if efforts and actions to address employees’ mental health
needs are going to occur. The data from this project can be used to help further this
awareness.
“In no other area of psychotraumatology is education, training, and prevention so
important in foreseeing and planning for emergencies as in the area of workplace violence”
(Miller, 1999, p. 160). This project provides data and insight pertaining to employees’

72

personal perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in currently
assumed low-risk work environments, information that has the potential to assist
organizations in addressing the issue of WPV. As Rugala and Isaacs (2004) explain,
everyone loses when incidents of WPV occur, and everyone has a stake in efforts to prevent
violence.
Section IV: Public Libraries
The specific assumed low-risk environment focused on in this project is public
libraries located throughout America. The first official public library in the United States is
historically-contested, but one commonly accepted answer is listed as The Library Company
of Philadelphia, founded by Benjamin Franklin in 1731 (American Library Association
[ALA], 2016). From the early beginnings of this member-supported subscription library, to
the current community anchors filled with computers and modern technology, public libraries
have had to face and adapt to the challenges of a changing society. Included in these
challenges are issues of safety and security.
Risk
As addressed previously, any location is at risk for potential WPV, but safety is often
taken for granted in some environments that are assumed to be low-risk for violence. Public
libraries are an example of this type of organization, as they are typically considered low-risk
by the general public. As Thenell (2004) states, “To much of the public, libraries – like
schools – are safe places, refuges from the world’s violence” (p. 2) but, the author continues,
“the reality is that a library’s very openness makes it vulnerable to crisis” (p. 2).
Understanding this vulnerability and potential risk may add to employee safety concerns, the
focus of this project.

73

Patron access. Shuman (2002) explains that libraries are potential targets for
criminal activity, due to the fact that they are public places. Since public libraries exist to
serve the general public there are few restrictions regarding patron usage, and low-level
monitoring as to who enters the premises.
While academic libraries also face issues regarding potential WPV, they are able to
control access to their buildings, unlike public libraries. Kean and McKoy-Johnson (2009)
explain that there is a greater barrier in accessing academic libraries compared to public
libraries, as they are not usually easily accessible and tend to be located on campuses.
Additionally, the authors point out that the typical clientele for academic libraries is not the
same as for public libraries, and therefore excludes entire categories of patrons who may be
potentially disruptive.
Based on their foundational purpose of providing information access to all, public
libraries face additional challenges and risk factors regarding safety. Kahn (2008) explains
that the intent of libraries is to attract people and have them utilize the available resources.
Unlike businesses, which can place stipulations on loitering or required purchasing, public
libraries typically do not place such limitations on their patrons. Since public libraries do not
limit who enters their buildings, they “may have homeless, mentally impaired, or itinerant
users amid the usual businesspeople, students, and other residents” of the community using
their facilities (Kahn, 2008, p. 69). Cromwell, Alexander, and Dotson (2008) further support
this in explaining that libraries are utilized by the homeless, street people, and mentally ill as
places of refuge.
Messina (2015), reporting on crimes occurring in public libraries located throughout
Toledo, Ohio, explained that a local homeless advocate “acknowledged that libraries

74

nationwide have been hit with the challenge of functioning almost like social service
agencies for homeless men and women during the day when shelters do not allow people
inside” (“Code of Conduct,” para. 3). In Minnesota, a homeless male was allegedly brushing
his teeth in the public library bathroom when he was gunned down in 2012; he was shot in
the back and is now paralyzed. According to police, the suspect in the case was also
homeless (WCCO, 2012).
The report from Messina (2015) explained that homeless people with mental illness
or drug-abuse issues sometimes become disruptive and even violent. These incidents are not,
however, limited to public libraries located only in the United States. In 2012 at a public
library in the United Kingdom, an individual diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia
committed an unprovoked assault on a 73-year-old male by striking him with a clenched fist,
causing a 1.5 cm laceration on his ear (“Paranoid Man,” 2012).
While Type II WPV, that which is conducted by past or present employees, can and
does occur in libraries, Hoobler and Swanberg (2006) state that “customers are more likely to
be perpetrators of violence and aggressive acts than are co-workers and supervisors” (p. 229).
According to Shuman (2002), “All sorts of people each day may freely walk, stroll, lurch,
stumble, or slither through the library’s front door, and once inside, they are free to exhibit
their behaviors or impulses as they see fit” (p. xv). This presents a significant challenge for
libraries striving to serve the general public while maintaining a safe environment for all
patrons and staff. Despite these challenges, public libraries are generally still assumed by the
public to be low-risk environments. This project provides insight as to whether employees’
safety concerns counter this assumption.

75

Crimes. “The public image of libraries as bastions of safe, quiet reflection and study
is far removed from reality” (Cromwell et al., 2008, p. 147). The authors explain that over
the past few decades, libraries have stopped being places of quiet reading, reflection, and
studying, and now must confront many of the same problems as other social institutions,
including assaults, vandalism, inappropriate use of library computers, and other types of
crime and incivilities. The following information demonstrates some of the criminal activity
and problems public libraries face and provides a foundation as to why a perception of
assumed safety by the general public may differ from the perception of public library
employees.
Theft. The general public may assume that crime in libraries refers to the theft of
books, and this is a legitimate correlation, as it is a definite problem in libraries. For
example, the Library of Congress was forced to close its stacks in 1992 after discovering
over 300,000 of its books were missing, and research showed that at one point,
approximately 250 books per year were stolen from 100 libraries, totaling 250,000 books (St.
Lifer (1994), Shuman (1999), and Lincoln & Lincoln (1987), as cited in Cromwell et al.,
2008). However, there are many other crimes being committed in libraries that are putting
human life at risk.
Cromell et al. (2008) state that coinciding with theft reports, “libraries are
experiencing a range of crimes and problem behaviours such as assault, sexual harassment,
indecent exposure, viewing pornography, panhandling, bizarre behaviour, personal hygiene
issues, sleeping in library, and both consensual and non-consensual sexual acts” (p. 148).
Stabbings. Stabbings are one type of crime occurring at public libraries. In 2015, a
75-year-old Army Veteran saved 16 children from a male in possession of two knives, who

76

was intent on carrying out an attack at an Illinois public library (Chasmar, 2015). A male
stabbed another male in 2014 at a public library in Florida, causing wounds to the victim’s
shoulder and neck (Johnson, 2014). In California, a man was stabbed in the face at a public
library following a fight over whose turn it was to read a newspaper (CBS SF, 2012), and in
2011, a man was stabbed—apparently with scissors—at a public library in Canada; he
received two stab wounds to the neck and chest (CBC News, 2011).
Robberies. In discussing library security over a decade ago, Shuman (2002) stated
that since “libraries do not handle or store large amounts of cash, thieves and burglars
overlook them in favor of restaurants and banks in making their robbery plans” (p. xv).
However, this is not necessarily true in current times. Cromwell et al. (2008) support this,
stating that the primary motive for crime is not always financial gain. “Excitement, thrills,
sexual release, revenge, and other motives may also play a role in the offender decision
process” (p. 149). Consequently, it is not realistic or advisable for public libraries to dismiss
their risk of violence based on the idea that they do not have large amounts of money
available and are therefore safe. Additionally, as Patterson (2004) states, “Some of the most
difficult patron interactions occur at the circulation desk, the department that collects fines”
(p. 43).
Even if offenders do not target the library itself for money, workers and patrons can
still be personally robbed and attacked, as was the case in Ohio. In 2011, suspects held
library patrons at gunpoint outside the library in two separate incidents and stole their
backpacks that contained laptops; in one case, the suspects hit the victim in the head with a
gun. In both incidents, the victims told the police that the offenders were inside the library
and then followed them outside before robbing them (Miller, 2011).

77

Children. Cromwell et al. (2008) refer to the problem of parents who use libraries as
free child care, leaving their children and youth unattended. While this presents numerous
problems, one in particular is the heightened risk of kidnapping and potential abuse or sexual
attacks, particularly in public library bathrooms.
Bathrooms. Bathrooms are a specific problem area for public libraries when it comes
to dealing with incidents of violence. In 2013, a 13-year-old male lured an eight-year-old
girl into a New York public library bathroom where he forced her to perform sexual acts on
him, then raped her (Parascandola, Paddock, Lestch, & Hutchinson, 2013). In Oregon, a
male brandished a realistic-looking BB gun at a man in a library restroom and demanded
money. The victim fled the bathroom and alerted security, and police arrested the suspect for
Second Degree Robbery after locating him inside one of the bathroom stalls (Boer, 2012). In
2011, a man was stabbed with an X-ACTO knife, which was initially left in him after the
attack, in the bathroom of a public library in Washington (McNerthney, 2011).
Computers. Another problem in public libraries is inappropriate computer use,
specifically individuals accessing pornography (Cromwell et al., 2008). Patrons, particularly
children, may be offended or traumatized by these types of images, and in some cases,
patrons or library employees may consider the accessing of these kinds of images to be a
form of sexual harassment (Cromwell et al., 2008). In 2012 at a public library in New York,
a 52-year-old male was stabbed in the torso by another male who accused the victim of
watching pornography on a computer terminal (Geberer, 2012).
Terrorism. In addition to the aforementioned types of crimes, public libraries are
also potential targets for acts of terrorism. Garcia (2001) explains that any facility maintains
records that malevolent adversaries might attack, stating “the threat may range from teenage

78

vandals up through sophisticated terrorists” (p. 25). Specific to terrorist threats, public
libraries in the United States may be at risk simply because they represent the freedom to
access information. In 2015, in the name of terrorism, ISIS (Islamic State in Iraq and Syria)
burned down the Mosul Public Library in Iraq, destroying over 8,000 rare old books and
manuscripts, some from the eighteenth century, and in 2014 ISIS burned down Mosul
University’s central library (Mohammed, 2015).
Considering the current increase in terrorist attacks in America, it is logical to
consider the possibility of American public libraries becoming targets of terrorism, not only
to destroy physical resources for information as well as historical collections, as was the case
in the aforementioned Mosul incidents, but as a general political statement against current
freedoms in America.
Danger overflow. Many problem-patrons also tend to be problematic in other
environments. Rubin (2011) supports this, stating “Most of the time, people who cause
trouble at the library cause trouble other places in town” (p. 107). Sometimes, that trouble
overflows to the library, potentially putting library workers and patrons at risk. For example,
in 2012, a suspect was taken into custody at a public library in Nebraska following a highspeed chase, during which the offender was involved in shooting a trooper’s cruiser (Kokesh,
2012). In 2015, a male raped a 16-year-old female in a New Zealand public library parking
lot after befriending her on Facebook while inside the library (Otago Daily Times, 2015).
Public Library Employees
Library workers fall into several of the previously discussed WPV risk categories,
including working alone, working late at night, handling cash, and working face-to-face with

79

the public. All of these potential risk factors can affect employees’ safety perceptions and
concerns, the focus of this project.
Cromwell et al. (2008) state that library workers are at greatest risk when working
alone late at night, and when leaving the building to walk to parking facilities at night.
However, while a heightened risk may be present when employees are alone, there is often a
false sense of security in numbers, meaning people feel safe when surrounded by others.
Scalora, O’Neil Washington, Casady, and Newell (2003) counter this belief in saying, “One
cannot always assume the intuitive notion of ‘safety in numbers’ when conceiving of
strategies to minimize the risk of assaultive violence” (p. 322). Furthermore, findings from
the authors’ study showed that “Regardless of the nature of the incident, the most intense
levels of violence surprisingly were demonstrated in the presence of witnesses” (Scalora et
al., 2003, p. 321). Graham (2012) suggests that awareness is key regarding self-protection in
any environment, including the workplace.
Cromwell et al. (2008) explain that the stacks (rows of books) in libraries have a high
potential for crime, due to the difficulty for natural surveillance in these areas. The authors
state that faraway, obscure nooks and crannies of the building are problematic. Kahn (2008)
further supports this saying, “Staff members who shelve books are the most vulnerable to
sexual advances, as are reference staff members who take patrons into the stacks to help them
find the materials they seek” (p. 71).
Frontline library workers must deal with patrons who at times become irate and
potentially violent. Cromwell et al. (2008) explain that physical attacks and verbal abuse
against library workers and patrons are increasingly being reported, and many libraries are
dealing with increased encounters with individuals who are disturbed and have the potential

80

to become violent. “Violent reactions by a customer or client are unpredictable, triggered by
an argument, anger at the quality of service or denial of service, delays, or some other
precipitating event” (Rugala & Isaacs, 2004, p. 14).
Patterson (2004) explains that in the library setting, frontline workers soothe
confused and angry patrons, and troubleshoot problems. “To be yelled at, disrespected, or
undervalued leads quickly to stress” (Patterson, 2004, p. 43). In research conducted by Kean
and McKoy-Johnson (2009), the authors found that the most prevalent type of aggressive
behaviour directed toward academic library staff was verbal abuse, which, as indicated
earlier, has the potential to lead to more serious incidents of WPV. “Over 50 per cent of the
respondents were concerned about the aggressive behaviour of library patrons” (p. 373).
Furthermore, Meadows (2007) states that “the definition of workplace violence should also
include psychological abuse at a workplace because such activities can lead to stress or
physical abuse” (p. 112).
Shuman (2002) provides a reminder that not all individuals who enter a library
building are there to utilize the services offered, and not all visitors are full of good will
toward others, as proven in the aforementioned stories of crimes occurring at public libraries.
The nature of librarianship, and thereby library workers, is to be helpful and nonjudgmental.
Sendaula (2015) quotes retired police officer and library security professional Steve Albrecht
as saying, “It’s easy to rationalize questionable or problematic behavior. We want to believe
the best in people, even when evidence shows us otherwise” (para. 2). While admirable, this
attitude can also be dangerous when dealing with potential incidents of WPV. Cromwell et
al. (2008) address this by stating that “there must be a balance between the rights of library
users and protecting the collection, the staff, and the patrons” (p. 152).

81

Cromwell et al. (2008) state that training staff in regard to problem-solving and
communication skills can be useful in defusing certain situations before they turn hostile.
However, the authors point out that most library workers receive little or no training in how
to deal with these types of behaviors (Shuman, 1999, as cited in Cromwell et al., 2008).
Research findings by Kean and McKoy-Johnson (2009) support this, showing that 60 percent
of the study’s participants said they had never been trained on dealing with an aggressive
patron.
Training efforts can be enhanced by valuing the input of employees and addressing
their safety concerns regarding violence in the workplace. As Patterson (2004) explains,
“Workers also want a say in the way their jobs are crafted. After all, who knows better what
is needed to improve a job than the people doing it?” (p. 43). The results of this project can
be used by organizations to further understand the safety concerns of employees and to
provide WPV trainings that address these concerns.
Summary
This chapter examined literature in the areas of criminology, organizational
leadership, and psychology, which all interconnect and relate to the topic of WPV. The
chapter also examined challenges faced by public libraries in regard to violence and crime.
The literature in this review suggests that incidents of WPV, including acts of terror,
will continue. Increases in violence such as lone-wolf attacks on smaller, less expected
targets indicate a need for assumed low-risk organizations to prepare for potential violence,
just as many larger organizations do. Vital to this preparation is organizations’
acknowledgment of employee perceptions and safety concerns in the workplace.

82

The purpose of this project was to examine employees’ personal perceptions and
safety concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in assumed low-risk environments, an
area of research that is lacking. Data for this project was obtained directly from employees
working in public libraries, which are representative of assumed low-risk environments. The
results from this project can potentially be used by similar organizations to address issues of
violence in the workplace, and to provide mental health support to employees dealing with
concerns regarding potential WPV in their places of employment. The results can also be
used to provide a foundation for further research in this area.
The following chapter details the methodology that was used for this project. The
chapter examines the population and sample chosen for this project, and also addresses the
ethical aspects of the project.

83

CHAPTER III: METHOD
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the research design and procedures that were
used for this project on the personal perceptions and safety concerns of workers in assumed
low-risk organizations in regard to potential workplace violence (WPV). The beginning of
the chapter introduces the research questions and the method and methodology that were
used and includes sections on the trustworthiness and ethical concerns of the project. The
middle section of the chapter explains the detailed procedures that were followed during the
project, and the end of the chapter includes a summary of key points.
Introduction of Research Questions
The general research problem for this project was that while issues regarding highrisk occupations have been identified and studied, there is a lack of knowledge regarding
risks in environments that are often considered low-risk for potential WPV incidents in the
United States. The project focused on these types of assumed low-risk organizations.
The specific research problem for this project was that employees’ personal
perceptions and safety concerns in regard to potential WPV in assumed low-risk
environments are largely unknown, which means that these types of organizations are
potentially not addressing their employees’ needs regarding safety. This could negatively
impact the professional and emotional well-being of employees, and in turn, the success of
the organizations as a whole.
This project examined these problems by gaining insight into the perspectives of
workers who were employed in a public library, an environment that is often considered lowrisk for potential incidents of WPV. Specifically, the target population for this project was

84

public library workers with the Dewey Public Library (DPL), located in the Midwest region
of the United States.
The project addressed the following four overarching questions: (1) What are the
personal perceptions of public library workers at Dewey Public Library regarding workplace
violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (2) What specific safety
concerns do public library workers at Dewey Public Library have regarding workplace
violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (3) How do public library
workers at Dewey Public Library feel their safety concerns affect them physically,
emotionally/mentally, and professionally? and (4) What kinds of trainings or other measures
would public library workers at Dewey Public Library like the library management to
implement in order to address their safety concerns?
The data collected from the project provided insight into DPL employees’ safety
perceptions, directly from the employees themselves. This information can be used by the
organization to create or improve WPV policies and procedures, as well as to address the
mental health needs of its employees regarding safety. The data is potentially generalizable,
making it beneficial for other similar assumed low-risk organizations. The project results
also provide a foundation for future research in this area.
Methods
The project used a qualitative method of inquiry. Qualitative research, according to
Leedy and Ormrod (2013), focuses on occurrences that take place in a natural setting, or “in
the real world,” and involves studying and capturing the complexity in those occurrences (p.
139). Qualitative research can also be used to reveal the multiple perspectives held by
individuals in these kinds of settings, focusing on complex human situations, such as

85

“people’s in-depth perspectives about a particular issue” (p. 95). The authors further explain
that “when little information exists on a topic, when variables are unknown, when a relevant
theory base is inadequate or missing, a qualitative study can help define what is important –
that is, what needs to be studied” (p. 139). Each of these attributes of qualitative research
made it an appropriate method for this project, which examined the personal perceptions and
safety concerns of DPL employees in regard to potential WPV occurring in their work
environment.
The specific research methods used for data collection for this project were an online
survey and personal semi-structured phone interviews. Both of these tools were beneficial in
collecting data for this project and will be described in further detail in the procedures section
of this chapter.
Methodology
This project was conducted using a case study design. While numerous designs can
be used to conduct research, each with their own advantages and disadvantages, in general,
the case study is preferred when “how” questions are being examined, and when a
contemporary phenomenon is the focus in a real-life context (Yin, 1994). The case study
was an appropriate methodology for this research since the purpose of this project was to
examine the personal perceptions of public library employees to find out how they feel about
potential WPV in their workplace.
Other qualitative methodologies would have been less effective than the case study
for use in this particular project because they do not share the same kind of opportunity to
gain direct insight into numerous participants’ perceptions within a more limited timeframe.
For example, in an ethnography, which is based more on observation, a researcher looks in

86

depth at the common culture of a group over a lengthy amount of time, sometimes years
(Leedy & Ormrod, 2013), which was not feasible due to time constraints for this project.
Additionally, content analysis does not focus on gathering data directly from participants, but
instead typically analyzes forms of communication such as books or videos (Leedy &
Ormrod, 2013).
The following sections include information on the project participants and explain the
detailed procedures that were used to conduct this project. The trustworthiness and ethical
concerns regarding the project are also discussed.
Participants
The general population for this project was workers in assumed low-risk
environments, and the target population was public library employees with Dewey Public
Library (DPL), located in the Midwest region of the United States. There were 19 employees
working at the library, and therefore eligible for potential participation in the project. An
attempt to gather data from a census, known as a complete count and defined as “a study of
every unit, everyone or everything, in a population” (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013),
of the target population of all DPL employees was made using an anonymous survey. Of the
19 employees invited to participate in the survey, 17 employees began the survey and 16
employees completed the survey, providing a 94% average completion rate. A purposive
sample of three employees participated in the semi-structured interviews.
As previously stated, public libraries represent an environment that is not typically
considered high-risk for potential WPV, making its workers an appropriate population to
examine for this project. Participation in the project was open to all 19 employees of DPL

87

who were 18 years of age or older, regardless of employment status (full-time/part-time) or
position held.
The researcher met personally with the DPL Library Director to explain the project
and propose the organization’s participation. The DPL Library Director agreed to the
organization’s overall participation in the project and served as the liaison to communicate
with the researcher regarding the project. Individual participants were further recruited
through interlibrary communications, with the assistance of the liaison. This is discussed
further in the data collection section.
Procedures
This section outlines the sequential steps that were followed while conducting this
project, including instrumentation, data collection, data analysis, and the documentation of
findings. The details provided allow for future replicability of the project.
Step 1: Instrumentation
The project specifically examined the personal perceptions and safety concerns of
public library workers at DPL in regard to potential WPV occurring at their assumed low-risk
organization. Two forms of instrumentation were used to collect data during this project,
including an online survey and semi-structured interviews. Additionally, the researcher was
also considered a form of instrumentation. While classified as qualitative research, the
project also generated quantitative descriptive data which will be discussed in the data
analysis section of this chapter.
An online survey was chosen as the most efficient and effective instrument to collect
the data for the first phase of this project. The use of an online survey allowed participants to
share their personal perceptions and safety concerns freely, based on anonymity. This was

88

important because if employees are not comfortable, they may not report concerns. This
underreporting, according to Arnetz et al. (2015), “hinders violence prevention efforts.”
Geoffrion et al. (2015) explain that “No matter how much an organization is perceived as
trying to counter violence, the majority of workers still fear the stigma generated by
complaining about workplace violence” (p. 210). Therefore, anonymity provides a way for
employees to share their concerns about WPV without fearing possible retribution. Keeney
et al. (2011) further explain that the idea of anonymity allows respondents the chance “to be
open and truthful about their views on certain issues, which in turn provides insightful data
for the researcher” (p. 9).
The ease-of-use of the online survey format made it an efficient tool for collecting
data in this project. SurveyMonkey is a convenient online survey system for both researchers
and participants regarding data collection via surveys and was therefore chosen as the data
collection system for this project. Details regarding how the survey was disseminated and
conducted are discussed in the upcoming section on data collection.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted utilizing a prepared interview script
which, along with the researcher as interviewer, could be considered additional instruments.
During semi-structured interviews, “the research may follow the standard questions with one
or more individually tailored questions to get clarification or probe a person’s reasoning”
(Leedy & Ormrod, 2013, p. 190). Further details regarding the interviews are included in the
upcoming section on data collection.
Additionally, as is typical in much qualitative research, the researcher was also
considered an instrument in this project in regard to data analysis and interpretation. The
researcher acknowledges that in this role, the potential for researcher bias in the analysis and

89

interpretation phases exists, as with any project or study. Therefore, the researcher was
vigilant in avoiding potential bias throughout the project, as discussed in the following
section.
Role of the researcher and measures to avoid potential bias. The role of the
researcher in this project was to prepare the online survey and semi-structured interview
questions for the participants, collect and analyze the data, and write the research report at
the conclusion of the project, which includes researcher recommendations based on the
project results.
As mentioned previously, the researcher was also considered an instrument in this
project, as is often the case in qualitative research. Leedy and Ormrod (2013) explain that
“the researcher’s ability to interpret and make sense of what he or she observes is critical for
understanding any phenomenon. In a sense, the researcher is an instrument,” (p. 139). Due
to this, awareness of the potential for researcher bias was particularly important throughout
the project.
According to Leedy and Ormrod (2013), bias is “any influence, condition, or set of
conditions that singly or in combination distort the data” (p. 217). As in any ethical study or
project, one of the main goals is to avoid bias as much as possible. In an effort to do this, the
potential for bias must first be acknowledged. Leedy and Ormrod (2013) state that
researchers should identify any values, beliefs, assumptions and biases that could influence
the collection and interpretation of data. The authors further explain that in a qualitative
study, “the interpretation of the data will inevitably be influenced by the researcher’s biases
and values to some extent, reflecting the notion of researcher as instrument” (p. 159).

90

Potential bias specific to this project was possible in the writing of the survey
questions, stemming from an assumption that safety concerns actually existed among
participants. In an effort to avoid this potential bias, questions included options for
participants to state, choose, or clarify that they did not have concerns about safety in their
workplace. Furthermore, the researcher made a concerted effort to seek out evidence in
participant answers that contradicted the idea that workers did have safety concerns.
In using an online survey system to deliver the research questions to participants for
the survey portion of the project, the researcher did not personally meet with the survey
participants, thereby avoiding another level of potential bias. Responses were completed and
submitted through the online survey system SurveyMonkey, providing anonymity for the
participants. This reduced possible researcher bias by allowing the researcher access to the
participants’ responses without personal contact and without knowing which specific
individual provided the answers. During the semi-structured interviews, the researcher again
made a concerted effort to be aware of and avoid any potential personal bias through the
wording of interview questions and in documenting participant responses.
Lastly, the researcher discloses a previous professional relationship with the project
site, Dewey Public Library. It is acknowledged that the researcher is familiar with the city
where the project site is located, and has prior professional knowledge of the project site.
The researcher is aware of the potential for bias due to this, and therefore made a conscious
and deliberate effort to avoid making assumptions during the research process or allowing
personal experience to influence data interpretation.

91

Step 2: Data Collection
This section discusses the procedures that were used to collect data for this project,
including obtaining organizational and individual consent and conducting the online survey
and personal phone interviews. Since the project used a qualitative method, a field test was
conducted for face validation, prior to its distribution to participants. Furthermore, the DPL
Library Director also reviewed the survey questions for face validation, prior to the survey
being conducted (Appendix A).
Informed consent. Prior to the collection of any data, informed consent was
obtained from project participants; this was done in three ways. First, an organizational
permission form explaining the project and demonstrating an overall consent of the
organization (DPL) to participate in the project was submitted to, and signed by, the Library
Director of the project site (Appendix C). This form was returned to the researcher prior to
the facilitation of any data collection from employees. An e-mail indicating receipt of the
signed form, as well as an attachment of the signed form, was sent to the Library Director,
and served as the organization’s copy of informed consent to participate in the project.
Secondly, at the beginning of the online survey, the opening computer screen
summarized the project and included a statement that clarified that participation in the survey
indicated informed consent (Appendix D). This provided anonymity for participants while
obtaining individual consent to participate in the survey.
Lastly, a separate interview consent form was e-mailed to those employees who
indicated interest in further participating in the interview portion of the project (Appendix E).
This form explained the project and clarified that signing the form and participation in the
interview process indicated consent. This form also explained that while participation in the

92

interviews was not anonymous between the participant and the researcher, the researcher
would strive to keep participant responses during the interview confidential. Employees
were required to return the signed informed consent forms to the researcher via e-mail prior
to the interviews.
Online survey. The first phase of data collection consisted of a 19-question online
survey (Appendix A). Since a qualitative method was used for this project, a field test was
conducted for face validation, prior to the survey’s distribution to participants. Furthermore,
the DPL Library Director also reviewed the survey questions for face validation, prior to the
survey being conducted.
The DPL Library Director gave permission for data to be collected for the project,
and the researcher worked with DPL regarding the process for distributing the survey to
participants’ work e-mail addresses (Appendix C). An initial e-mail explaining the project
and inviting employees to participate was written by the researcher and sent to the DPL
Library Director, who served as the liaison (Appendix F). The liaison then sent the e-mail to
the work e-mail addresses of all 19 employees at DPL. Utilizing the liaison to send these
communications allowed the researcher to not maintain a master list of potential participants,
thereby further ensuring participant anonymity. Two days after the initial e-mail was sent
out, another e-mail containing a direct link to the survey was e-mailed to the liaison who
forwarded it to the employees’ work e-mail addresses (Appendix G). Those employees who
chose to participate in the survey were able to click the link in the e-mail and be directed to
SurveyMonkey to participate in the project survey anonymously. IP addresses were not
collected during the online survey, further supporting the aspect of anonymity in this project.

93

The survey took respondents approximately 6 minutes to complete and included basic
demographic questions, followed by a series of questions to identify participants’ personal
perceptions and safety concerns regarding potential WPV occurring in their place of
employment at DPL.
The survey was originally open for three days, but was extended in an effort to
acquire additional participants. The anonymous participant survey responses were collected
and submitted directly to the researcher through the SurveyMonkey system. DPL did not
have access to individual participant survey responses.
A statement at the end of the survey invited employees to participate further in the
project through a personal phone interview with the researcher, as explained in the next
section. Those who were interested in participating in the interviews were asked to contact
the researcher via the researcher’s e-mail address, provided in the survey. The interviews
were the second phase of data collection for this project and are discussed further in the next
section.
Semi-structured interviews. The personal phone interviews were phase two of the
data collection process for this project and were conducted with three interested participants.
The E-Mail to Potential Participants (Appendix F) explained that the project would include
phone interviews and invited employees who were interested in participating to contact the
researcher by phone or e-mail.
The researcher scheduled interviews in the order in which the employees responded.
As previously mentioned, the last question of the survey (Appendix A) also invited
employees to contact the researcher via e-mail if they were interested in participating in the
interview process; this provided another opportunity for employees to contact the interviewer

94

if they were interested in participating in the interviews. At the conclusion of the survey, the
researcher sent out additional solicitations via the DPL liaison in an effort to retain five
interview participants; however, only four people responded and three participants completed
interviews.
The semi-structured interviews took approximately 35 minutes to complete and
included seven predetermined questions (Appendix B). The researcher wrote detailed notes
during each interview, including documenting direct quotes from participants, when
applicable. While interview participants’ identifications were known to the researcher,
efforts were made to keep interview responses confidential.
The following section describes the qualitative data analysis procedures that were
used to analyze the collected data from both the survey and interview responses.
Step 3: Data Analysis
Qualitative data analysis procedures were used to analyze the collected data from
both the survey and interviews. While this project is classified as qualitative research, both
qualitative and quantitative data were generated from participant responses.
SurveyMonkey was used to collect the data through the online survey, as previously
discussed, and was also used to assist in organizing and analyzing data from the survey
results.
The data analysis procedure for both the survey and the interview responses included
highlighting common themes and noteworthy information from the results, coding, and
categorizing the data. Once the data were categorized, the researcher searched for patterns
and connections within the categories, which were synthesized and interpreted in the final
research report.

95

Data analysis of survey responses. Once the survey closed, the researcher
conducted numerous read-throughs of the survey results, which were collected and submitted
directly to the researcher by the SurveyMonkey system. The researcher also read the survey
data analysis information generated by SurveyMonkey.
During these read-throughs, the researcher highlighted data and took notes regarding
keywords, phrases, and main ideas from participants’ responses, as appropriate. This
information was documented on index cards, coded, and then categorized. Once categorized,
the researcher analyzed the information by searching for connections within the common
themes and patterns. These connections are documented in Chapter IV.
Descriptive statistics were also used to report data regarding demographic
information. Discrepant cases, or responses that appeared as outliers or unlike other answers
were individually referenced in the findings, when applicable.
Data analysis of interviews. After all interviews were completed, the researcher
conducted numerous read-throughs of all interview notes to identify and highlight keywords,
phrases, and main ideas from participants’ responses.
The highlighted information was documented on index cards which were then coded
and categorized. Once categorized, the index cards were used to determine common themes
and patterns in the data. The researcher analyzed the information by searching for
connections within the common themes, which are documented in Chapter IV.
Step 4: Documentation of Findings
After all the project data were collected, organized and analyzed, as outlined in the
preceding sections, the research findings from the project were documented in a detailed
report, as found in Chapter IV. Qualitative research is often reported in narrative form,

96

including significant amounts of participant quotes, and uses a more personal writing style to
explain the particular phenomenon that was studied (Leedy & Ormrod, 2013). This approach
was used in reporting the findings of this project, particularly regarding open-ended survey
questions and personal interviews, where participants provided answers in their own words.
The project results were interpreted by the researcher and included in Chapter IV,
which also includes researcher recommendations and suggestions that can be used by DPL.
As noted in Chapter IV, the results of the project, as well as the researcher recommendations
and suggestions, have the potential to be generalized, and are therefore also beneficial to
similar assumed low-risk organizations throughout the United States.
Trustworthiness
Trustworthiness refers to research validity (Glesne, 2006), and includes the aspects of
credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability. The following section
addresses each of these areas in regard to this project.
Credibility
In qualitative research, the word “credibility” refers to the internal validity of the
study (Sorensen, n.d.). Data triangulation, a strategy which enhances credibility, includes
using multiple methods for data collection. Data triangulation was used in this project
through both an online survey and semi-structured interviews with library personnel.
Triangulation may also include using multiple kinds of data sources (Glesne, 2006).
While project participants were all library employees, their job positions and exposure to
patrons differed. This allowed for data to be collected from participants with different
perspectives due to variances in job descriptions.

97

Shenton (2004) explains that giving participants the opportunity to refuse
participation in the project is another form of triangulation. The organization as a whole and
individual participants in both the survey and the interviews were able to refuse participation
and were given the option to withdraw their consent to participate at any time during the
project.
Transferability
Transferability, in regard to qualitative research, refers to external validity or the
generalizability of the study (Leedy & Ormrod, 2013). The target population for this project
was public library employees with DPL. These employees were chosen as a representation
of the general population of workers in assumed low-risk environments. The results of this
project have the potential to be generalized not only to other public libraries, but to other
similar assumed low-risk environments, as well. Assumed low-risk, as defined in Chapter I,
refers to occupations, organizations, and environments that the general public typically
considers, or assumes to be, unlikely targets for criminal activity.
Dependability
In qualitative research dependability can be likened to reliability. The potential for
replicating this project demonstrates reliability/dependability in this research. While
participant answers or project results may not be similar in a replicated project, the survey
and interview questions would still be dependable in acquiring knowledge regarding the
personal perceptions and safety concerns of workers in assumed low-risk environments. The
potential for replication of this project and its detailed procedures exists, further enhancing its
external validity.

98

Confirmability
As previously discussed, measures were taken to ensure accuracy of the data results
and lessen the impact of researcher bias, therefore addressing the confirmability aspect of the
project. Measures included implementing triangulation for data collection to lessen the
potential for researcher bias and providing detailed procedures so the project may be
replicated (Shenton, 2004). Survey questions were written to avoid the assumption that
safety concerns regarding WPV exist among all participants, and the researcher made a
concerted effort to seek out data that contradicted any such assumption. The researcher also
acknowledged the potential for bias regarding the interpretation of results in a qualitative
project, and therefore took preventative measures against this, including utilizing direct
quotes from participant answers.
Ethical Concerns
Ethical considerations, with a specific focus on doing no harm to study or project
participants, are vital in any credible research. Specific to this project are ethical concerns
regarding participant anonymity and avoiding undue stress that may arise due to the research
topic of WPV. The following steps were taken throughout the project to address both of
these concerns.
In recognizing the importance of anonymity when addressing the issue of participants
sharing freely—without fear of negative repercussions for their input—the project was
conducted using SurveyMonkey, an anonymous online survey system, to collect participant
responses during the survey phase of the project. The anonymous participant survey
responses were collected and submitted directly to the researcher through the SurveyMonkey
system. DPL did not have access to individual participant survey responses, IP addresses

99

were not collected during the online survey, and no efforts were made by the researcher to
identify or match individual respondents to survey answers.
The second phase of data collection, the semi-structured interviews, included a
separate informed consent form that was e-mailed to those employees who chose to
participate in the phone interviews (Appendix E). This form explained, as previously
discussed, that while anonymity between the interview participants and the researcher could
not be guaranteed, the researcher would strive to keep participant responses throughout the
project confidential, and pseudonyms would be used, meaning no names or identifiers would
be used in project publications or during presentations.
Any results from the survey or interviews shared with DPL at the conclusion of the
project were anonymous and/or presented as a collective summary of responses.
Additionally, a pseudonym was used for the organization.
The well-being of participants is of paramount importance in research. The
psychological well-being of participants in this project was strongly considered, based on the
assumption that the topic of WPV could be potentially upsetting for some participants. In
consideration of the possibility that the term “workplace violence” itself could negatively
affect some participants, and in an effort to avoid undue distress to participants, the
terminology was discussed with the Library Director of DPL, who approved of its use. The
use of the term “workplace violence” in the survey and interviews, instead of an alternate
phrase, was vital to this project as it distinguished the focus of the research from other types
of safety concerns that may arise in the workplace, such as accidental slips or falls.
Participants were encouraged on the informed consent page of the online survey, as
well as during the phone interviews, to seek counseling if needed. The researcher also

100

provided the organization with pamphlets from the American Psychological Association
regarding how to choose a counselor/psychologist, should any participants seek such
information. Participants were made aware of the available pamphlets through both the
survey and interview consent forms, as well as during the interviews.
As with any ethical study or project, informed consent from participants must be
obtained. As previously discussed, an informed consent form regarding DPL’s agreement to
participate in the project as an organization was presented to, and signed by, the Library
Director (Appendix C). In order to maintain anonymity of individual participants, the
opening screen for the online survey summarized the project and included a statement
clarifying that participation in the project indicated informed consent. Those participants
also involved in the phone interviews received a separate informed consent form via e-mail,
which explained the project and confidentiality matters regarding the interview process.
Informed consent forms were completed and returned to the researcher prior to any data
collection.
Summary
This chapter discussed the research design and procedures that were used for this
project on the personal perceptions and safety concerns of DPL employees regarding
potential WPV occurring in their assumed low-risk work environment.
Points of discussion in this chapter included an introduction to the research questions
and an examination of qualitative research and case studies, as well as justification for their
use in this project. The chapter also included a closer examination of the project participants
and detailed procedures regarding how the research data were collected, analyzed, and
documented, and addressed trustworthiness and ethical concerns regarding the project. The

101

forthcoming chapter will focus on the documentation of findings, including the results of the
survey and semi-structured interviews.

102

CHAPTER IV: FINDINGS, EVALUATION OF FINDINGS, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The purpose of this final chapter is to present and discuss the results of the data that
were collected for this project. The following sections of this chapter include information on
the project participants, data collection process, and data results, including project themes
and findings. An evaluation of the project findings through analyses of each of the
overarching research questions is also included. The chapter ends with implications and
recommendations, and a summarized conclusion regarding the project.
Project Participants
The general population for this project was workers in assumed low-risk
environments, and the target population was the 19 public library workers employed with
Dewey Public Library (DPL), located in the Midwest region of the United States.
Participation in the project was open to all 19 employees of DPL who were 18 years
of age or older, regardless of employment status (full-time/part-time) or position held. An
attempt to gather data from a census of the target population of all 19 DPL employees was
made, using an anonymous survey. Of the 19 employees invited to participate in the survey,
17 employees began the survey and 16 employees completed the survey, providing a 94%
average completion rate.
All 19 DPL employees were also invited to participate in a confidential semistructured phone interview with the researcher, with a goal of obtaining a purposive sample
of approximately five employees. Throughout the data collection process, numerous
attempts were made through e-mails and notices to employees, in an effort to obtain at least
five interview participants. While four employees made contact and showed interest in
interviewing, three employees actually participated in and completed the interview process.

103

Participant Demographics
Participant age groups ranged between 18–29 and 66 or over; the majority of
respondents were within the 30–49 age group. Six of the 17 respondents were full-time
employees working at DPL 40 hours per week, and the remaining 11 respondents were parttime employees, working at DPL less than 40 hours per week. The majority of participants
indicated that they typically spend 25–50 % of their work time in direct contact with patrons.
In consideration of the smaller number of organizational employees invited to
participate in the research, and in an effort to further ensure anonymity of respondents,
questions did not include requests for gender information. For ease of reading, research
results are written using female pronouns in reference to respondent answers.
Data Collection
The following sections include details about the data collection process for this
project, including extenuating circumstances, limitations of the study, and information about
the pilot study and informed consent. Data were collected for the project through an online
survey and semi-structured, confidential phone interviews.
Extenuating Circumstances
A previous organization that had continuously agreed to participate in the project for
over two years, withdrew from the project one business day prior to the survey/interviews
being conducted. The main difference between the originally planned organization and the
participating organization (DPL), in regard to this study, was the number of participants. The
previous library system had seven participating branches within its district, with
approximately 125 potential participants. The actual participating organization, DPL, was a
single library branch with 19 employees.

104

While this was a large difference regarding participants, the project was designed as a
case study with an intended purpose of examining the perceptions and safety concerns of
employees within an assumed low-risk environment, namely public libraries. In surveying
and interviewing the employees of DPL, the data collected still fulfilled the purpose of the
project, and also provided a foundation for future research.
Limitations of Study
As mentioned above, the main limitation of this study was sample size, specifically in
regard to the interviews. Despite the smaller sample size, the study did produce pertinent
data that can be used for further research on employee perceptions and safety concerns in
regard to workplace violence potentially occurring in assumed low-risk environments.
Pilot Study
Since a qualitative method was used for this project, an informal field test was
conducted for face validation of the survey and interview questions, prior to their distribution
to participants. The DPL Director also reviewed the survey and interview questions for face
validation, prior to the survey being conducted.
The pilot study consisted of two participants, including both a current and a past
public library employee. As previously stated, the participating organization in this project
changed suddenly and unexpectedly. Therefore, the pilot study, which was conducted prior
to the change in organizations, included a DPL employee; it is not believed that this inclusion
significantly affected any part of the project.
Informed Consent
Prior to the collection of any data, consent was obtained from both DPL as an
organization, as well as from individual project participants in both the survey and interview

105

processes. An organizational permission form (Appendix C) was signed by the Library
Director, giving overall consent for the organization to participate in the project.
Specifically, the consent form gave permission to interview subjects on the property, solicit
subjects through the organization, and collect data through the organization, whether in
person, by phone, or electronically. The consent form also gave permission to use the name
of the organization; however, in an additional effort to provide anonymity for the library and
the participants, a pseudonym was used for the project.
The opening screen of the online survey provided participants with a summary of the
project and a statement which clarified that participation in the survey indicated informed
consent (Appendix D). Acknowledgment of this information was required prior to accessing
the survey. A separate informed consent form (Appendix E) was e-mailed to those
employees who indicated interest in participating in the interview process. Employees were
required to return the signed informed consent forms to the researcher via e-mail prior to the
interviews being conducted.
Online Survey
An e-mail (Appendix G) with the direct link to the online survey was sent by the
researcher to the Library Director, who served as the liaison between DPL and the
researcher; this allowed the master list of potential participants to remain anonymous to the
researcher throughout the project. The liaison forwarded the e-mail, as well as all subsequent
e-mails regarding the project, to all 19 DPL employees’ work e-mail addresses.
The online survey (Appendix A) consisted of 19 questions. Survey responses were
collected and submitted directly to the researcher through the SurveyMonkey system. IP

106

addresses were not collected during the online survey and DPL did not have access to
individual participant survey responses.
Semi-structured Interviews
Employees were invited to participate in the personal phone interviews via e-mail
(Appendix F), as well as through an invitation that was included at the end of the online
survey. In an effort to recruit additional interview participants, additional e-mails were sent
to employees via the DPL liaison when the survey concluded. This provided numerous
opportunities for interested employees to contact the interviewer. Three participants
completed the confidential phone interviews, which included seven predetermined questions
(Appendix B). Interviews took approximately 35 minutes each to complete.
Data Results
This section focuses on the results of the data collected for this project. Interview
responses have been integrated into the overall results of the research project’s common
themes. Direct quotes were provided from the results of the open-ended survey questions or
from interviews; as an additional effort to provide anonymity to interview participants, the
specific mode of data collection between the two has not been identified in the research
results.
A discussion of the three themes that emerged from the data are provided in the
following sections, followed by information regarding each of the four overarching research
questions for the project.

107

Project Themes and Findings
Three main themes emerged from the data that were collected for this project. The
three themes are discussed in the following sections and include: (1) awareness of potential
workplace violence, (2) defiant youth, and (3) management support.
Awareness of potential workplace violence. Throughout the data collection
process, most participants demonstrated an overall awareness regarding potential workplace
violence. This awareness can be considered beneficial to employees, since it is a vital aspect
of self-protection in any environment, including at work (Graham, 2012).
Some participant responses did suggest higher levels of concern, but most participants
generally did not indicate feeling overly concerned about workplace violence potentially
occurring in their work environment. Many participants did, however, emphasize very
specific concerns regarding patron behaviors.
Survey responses indicated that most employees are at least slightly concerned
overall about workplace violence potentially occurring at DPL (Figure 1), indicating an
awareness of the potential for workplace violence. Nine of the 17 participants indicated they
were slightly concerned, five were moderately concerned, and two were very concerned.
One participant was not at all concerned, and no respondents chose “extremely concerned”
for this question.
While most survey participants indicated only slight concern for potential workplace
violence, an overall synthesis of the research results suggests that many participants are
concerned with certain patron behaviors.

108

Figure 1. Overall concern regarding potential workplace violence
Throughout the research, respondents mentioned very specific patron behaviors that
they found disconcerting. These behaviors included patrons approaching the desk and acting
odd / “off” and patrons invading the personal space of employees at the desk. These are
understandable and justified concerns, since the circulation desk is where some of the most
difficult interactions with patrons take place (Patterson, 2004). Furthermore, these types of
patron behaviors could be classified as acts of aggression (Fredericksen & McCorkle, 2013;
Lieber, 2011), especially if perceived as such by employees.
Other disconcerting behaviors mentioned by participants included swearing, running
in to the building, leaving the building and coming back in, making a covert verbal threat,
and refusing to listen to or follow directives from employees regarding disruptive behaviors.
One respondent cited patron drug use as a concern, referencing a patron who the respondent
said had drug issues and would leave the library to smoke pot outside and then re-enter the
library.

109

Some of the patron behaviors mentioned by participants throughout the research
could be considered precursory indicators of workplace violence. For example, the issue of
patrons disregarding employees’ directions was mentioned several times throughout the
research. This lack of respect toward employees leads to stress quickly (Patterson, 2004).
Work-related stress is a widely recognized challenge regarding occupational health and
safety (Jain et al., 2012), and can affect workers’ perceptions of safety in the workplace.
One participant stated, “Over the past years it has become more of an issue; by adults
and young adults, teens and even children 15 and under. Not following the rules and
expectations of the library.” If patrons do not follow directives or respect library rules and
staff, it is feasible that disruptive behavior and misconduct will continue and potentially
escalate, leading to acts of violence. Employees’ concerns over patrons’ disregard for rules
and expectations indicate an awareness of potential future problems, as supported by
Sussman et al. (2016), who state that “the process of perception often starts before an actual
physical encounter with the sensory stimulus. Prior knowledge and experience can create
expectations about what is relevant or likely, helping us to rapidly and accurately identify
subsequent stimuli” (p. 321).
Furthermore, in reference to having to address repeated misconduct issues with an
adult patron, one participant stated, “I never really know how he’s going to react.” This
response indicates an awareness regarding the potential for an incident of workplace violence
to occur. It also suggests a sense of uneasiness or anxiety about not knowing what might
happen, which can affect employees in a variety of ways, including professionally,
mentally/emotionally, and physically. Sussman et al. (2016) explain that a characteristic of

110

anxiety is anticipation of aversive events taking place in the future, as indicated by the
previous participant quote.
Participants also expressed concern regarding fights occurring in the library. One
respondent mentioned being worried about the possibility of having to break up a fight, and
another referenced a fight that had actually occurred while she was on duty. Other
participant comments indicated concern over specific groups of youths potentially fighting in
the library, as mentioned in the following section on defiant youth.
Respondents also indicated concern for non-offending patrons when incidents occur.
One participant stated that she worries about little kids being around if a fight breaks out, and
another participant referenced a worried patron who returned to the library at a later time to
inquire about an incident that had occurred previously. Additional participant comments
regarding non-offending patrons included references to patrons complaining about a
disruptive patron. These examples support another respondent’s statement that issues
regarding misconduct or disruptive patron behaviors are not just an issue for staff, but also
for the other patrons.
Survey results indicated that 11 out of 16 respondents believed that it was at least
moderately likely that one or more incidents of workplace violence will occur at DPL within
the next year (Figure 2). The importance of this finding is reflected in a statement by
Howard (2011) that was mentioned in Chapter II: “Employees know the specific issues that
they face, and this influences their perceptions of acts and perpetrators of WPV” (p.1049).
Six of the 16 respondents believed it was moderately likely that one or more incidents
of workplace violence will occur at DPL within the next year, 3 of the 16 believed it was
very likely, and 2 believed it was extremely likely (Figure 2). Four participants believed it

111

was slightly likely and one believed it was not at all likely. One participant stated, “I feel
that before I leave the DPL – I will see some kind of weapon displayed.”
Furthermore, another respondent summarized her perception of potential violence
occurring at DPL, stating, “People come in and blow off steam at us. [We] hope [it] doesn’t
go much past that.”

Figure 2. Employee perception of WPV occurring within the next year
Defiant youth. Another theme that emerged throughout the data was defiant youth.
Respondents referred to issues regarding youth misconduct and defiance, specifically a
refusal to follow directions and library rules. The terms “kids under 18,” “kids 12–15,”
“young adults,” “teens,” and “youth” were used by participants to refer to this group of
patrons.
Overall, the participant responses regarding youth defiance and its connection to
potential workplace violence in the library suggest a sense of worry and concern among DPL
employees regarding youth behavior, and where those behaviors may lead. These concerns
apply not only to issues within the library, but also extend outside the library building.
112

Considering the very serious incidents that have occurred in public schools in recent
history—such as mass shootings carried out by youth, as discussed in Chapter II—these
concerns are extremely relevant and well-founded.
Some participants expressed concerns about how to manage incidents that involve
disruptive and defiant youth in the library. One respondent specifically stated that she was
concerned about “control of situations regarding defiant youth,” and another stated, “kids
aren’t scared of the police.” One participant cited “constant problems” and referred to
incidents where the police had to be called on a group of teens, and a mother came in to the
library swearing and yelling. The participant stated that while she was not working when
these incidents occurred, she was made aware of them. She explained that these kinds of
incidents cause her to feel concerned about what might happen during her shift, stating, “This
all went down last night – what’s going to happen tonight?” These kinds of concerns and
ponderings about potentially adverse future events suggest levels of employee anxiety
(Sussman et al., 2016), as discussed previously.
Fights among youth were mentioned numerous times throughout the research results.
One participant commented on two groups of teens, who she referred to as “really rough
kids,” who “Have started – haven’t come to blows, but have postured like they’re going to
fight.” According to Chappell and Di Martino (2006), aggressive posturing is categorized as
workplace violence.
As previously mentioned, one participant explained that she worries about little kids
being around if a fight were to break out in the library. These kinds of responses again point
to employee concerns about potential workplace violence occurring, and the possible
repercussions it may cause. In one response, a participant combined both the potential for

113

fights with the issue of youth not following directions, stating she is specifically concerned
over “kids under 18 getting into fight[s] with other kids, and not listening to us when we tell
[them] they must leave.”
One response referred to concerns about personal property and retribution from
youth. The participant stated, “I worry if they [teens] get mad at me they will damage my car
[in the staff parking lot].” In some instances, concerns regarding youth behaviors at the
library also affect employees’ personal actions while at work. For example, one respondent
shared how her concerns about youth behavior extended beyond the inside of the building
and included potential problems outside the library. “On breaks I used to take walks [outside
the building]. I don’t do that anymore.” She explained that the walking path she used to take
is near an area by the library where teenagers hang out. “I worry about being caught by them
alone.” Employee concerns like this further support other participant responses throughout
the research, such as the desire to receive more training that specifically focuses on the issue
of violence against staff.
Management support. A third theme regarding workplace violence issues, which
emerged from the data collected during this project, was the subject of management support.
According to the survey results, most participants felt that DPL leadership
(management/administration) is at least moderately aware of their safety concerns (Figure 3).
Five of the 16 respondents felt leadership is moderately aware of their concerns, another 5
felt leadership is very aware, and one participant felt leadership is extremely aware. Four of
the 16 participants felt leadership is slightly aware of their safety concerns. One participant
stated she does not have any safety concerns, and no participants chose “not at all” in
response to this question.”

114

Figure 3. Leadership awareness regarding employee safety concerns
While the survey results showed participants felt leadership is aware of their
concerns, overall research results indicated that employees desire more support from
management regarding workplace violence issues, specifically in regard to incident protocol
and follow-up. For example, one respondent stated, “We need to have a meeting on what to
do when [an] incidence [sic] occurs so we are all on the same page.” Employees’ desire for
additional support from management speaks to the aforementioned safety climate, which
involves employees’ perceptions of how much the organization values safety in comparison
to other objectives (as cited in Phipps, Malley, & Ashcroft, 2012), and creates a frame of
reference for employee behavior in regard to safety (as cited in McGonagle et al., 2014).
Suggestions regarding how leadership can provide further support for employees
were mentioned by participants throughout the research results and were often intertwined
with management responsibilities. Specifically, respondents stated a desire for leadership to
be responsible for the necessary actions that follow incidents. One participant explained,
“When an incident is happening, staff is able to handle it – but management should do the

115

follow-up.” Respondents mentioned specific examples they would like management to be
responsible for, including following up on police reports and being responsible for
dispensing disciplinary actions, such as banning patrons. “I feel they [management] should
be responsible for handing out punishment to wrongdoers. They need to take that next step.”
In addition to tangible actions, respondents also mentioned emotional support issues.
One participant stated she would like management to provide “support” and a way of
“knowing you did the right thing in a situation.” Other comments throughout the research
included participants’ desires for leadership to “back them [staff] up in any situation,” and to
realize how incidents affect the people who actually deal with them. The desire for these
kinds of actions regarding emotional support from leadership reflects the issue of “care felt,”
as discussed in Chapter II, which refers to the extent to which employees feel others in the
organization care for them (Vinarski-Peretz & Carmeli, 2011).
Another topic that was mentioned in regard to support, was employees’ desire for
security and “more support from local law enforcement.” One participant mentioned being
concerned that employees do not call the police soon enough, if at all. “I think the biggest
concern is that people are not quick to call the police.” She explained, “When a patron starts
acting out rather than giving them the warning and then calling the police there seems to be
lots of chances given, which I think is excessive.” The respondent further explained that she
thinks if staff has asked a patron to leave and the patron does not leave, staff should call
police. “You don’t follow them around convincing them to leave, you just call the police and
let them handle it.” She added, “Rather than letting the police handle it THEY [staff] handle
it.”

116

Some participants also cited the topic of communication in regard to leadership
support. One participant mentioned the importance of getting feedback from employees,
asking them how they are feeling, if they feel safe or threatened, communicating as much as
possible, and asking what else they need. Another respondent expressed a desire for
leadership to take the issue of workplace violence incidents seriously, stating, “I think
management is responsible for taking the incidents seriously.” The participant further stated
that management should “take seriously the issue,” and not say things like “it’ll get better,”
or “these things happen.” “Just take it seriously,” the participant reiterated. Literature from
Lieber (2011), as mentioned in Chapter II, refers to this subject, discussing the issue of
leadership not taking reports from concerned employees seriously, and failing to implement
extra precautions. If employees perceive that management is not taking issues seriously, this
can lead to the employees feeling that there has been a breach in their psychological contract,
defined as “the beliefs of individuals about reciprocal employer and employee safety
obligations inferred from implicit or explicit promises” (Walker, 2013).
Throughout the research, participants mentioned additional ways leadership can
further support employees in regard to potential workplace violence issues. Ideas offered by
participants included conducting bi-monthly meetings and updates, bringing up issues
regularly, doing checks to make sure the emergency call button is functioning properly and
that employees understand its purpose, making sure employees feel prepared, keeping staff
adequately equipped to handle situations, providing training, and being aware of what
happens on a daily basis.

117

Evaluation of Findings
This section includes an evaluation of the research findings by providing analyses of
each of the following four overarching research questions for the project: (1) What are the
personal perceptions of public library workers at Dewey Public Library regarding workplace
violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (2) What specific safety
concerns do public library workers at Dewey Public Library have regarding workplace
violence potentially occurring in their place of employment? (3) How do public library
workers at Dewey Public Library feel their safety concerns affect them physically,
emotionally/mentally, and professionally? and (4) What kinds of trainings or other measures
would public library workers at Dewey Public Library like the library management to
implement in order to address their safety concerns?
Personal Perceptions
The first overarching question addressed the personal perceptions of public library
workers at Dewey Public Library regarding workplace violence potentially occurring in their
place of employment.
According to the survey results, all participants feel either moderately safe or very
safe in regard to violence in their work environment. Nine of the 17 participants indicated
they feel moderately safe in their work environment at DPL, while the remaining 8
participants indicated feeling very safe. An overall synthesis of the research results suggests,
however, that some employees are cognizant of certain issues that seemingly affect their
personal perceptions regarding potential workplace violence. Most of these issues reflect an
awareness of how the environment is changing.

118

For example, some respondents compared their current work environment at DPL to
what is was like in the past. These comparisons indicate that over time, there has been a
possible change in perception regarding how employees view safety and potential violence in
their assumed low-risk work environment. These kinds of comparisons are supported in the
literature by Bruce and Nowlin (2011), who explain that places that were previously
considered safe, are experiencing increases in workplace violence, and Chappell and Di
Martino (2006), who state that workplace violence is progressively affecting work
environments that have traditionally been relatively immune from violence.
One respondent stated she was “not sure if it’s worse now, or if it just feels that way.”
As mentioned previously, another participant explained that over the past few years, patrons
of all ages not following the library’s rules and expectations has become more of an issue.
Other reflections included respondents wondering if they would have reacted the same way
ten years ago, wondering how easily it (the library) could not be safe any longer, and
considerations regarding how long it takes law enforcement to arrive.
Some respondents made connections between libraries and schools. One respondent
stated she was not sure if people are “weirder/crazier” now than ten years ago – or if she is
scared of them and what they can do now because of all the things that have happened, such
as incidents of school violence. One participant stated, “Ten years ago I wouldn’t have
thought about someone walking in and all the things they could do before the cops get there.
Now I see it all the time – because of other things [e.g. school shootings] happening.” These
connections between current incidents of violence in schools and potential violence in the
library setting and other assumed low-risk environments, are supported in the literature from

119

Chapter II, including quotes from Chappell and Di Martino (2006) and Ruffini (2006), who
compare violence in schools over time.
Another participant discussed her perception of a change in the type of library user
over time. She stated, “When I began my employment, [this was] not much of a concern.”
She explained that patrons were coming to the library to seek information/resources [they]
needed, but now it seems that the focus is patrons coming in to use the internet. She said that
there is still the lovely patron who brings in a note that says “I love the library”—things like
that. But, she explained, the portion of patrons who came in for a reason—that has changed.
“That portion has been replaced by the internet user.” In connection to the varying types of
library users, and as mentioned in Chapter II, Shuman (2002) warns that all library visitors
are not full of good will toward others, and not all of them are there to use the services
offered by the library.
The idea of libraries being perceived as a “safe place” was directly mentioned or
alluded to several times, including one participant’s comment that we “try to keep the library
as a safe space.” A respondent explained that in some ways you want to think of the library
as a “safe space”—but patrons sometimes seem to feel they “can take stuff out on us” that
they wouldn’t somewhere where they need something [from the staff, e.g. at a medical
center]. She further explained that patrons don’t need library workers to be happy because
there is nothing for them (patrons) to risk or lose at a library. As mentioned in Chapter II,
Thenell (2004) discusses the theory of libraries as safe places, explaining that much of the
public views libraries as refuges from violence, or safe places, although the reality is they are
vulnerable to crisis, due to their openness.

120

Another respondent stated that not just at this library (DPL), but in general in public
places, people are expecting something [to happen]. “It’s something I think about,” she said.
Acknowledging changes regarding violence is important, as Fischoff et al. (2012) point out,
explaining that as experience accumulates, people need to update their beliefs and choices.
In regard to the potential for workplace violence occurring at DPL, the perception of
another respondent was that the chances are slim that something will happen, but she also
emphasized the importance of awareness.
Safety Concerns
The second overarching question addressed the specific safety concerns of public
library workers at Dewey Public Library, in regard to workplace violence potentially
occurring in their place of employment.
Participants mentioned a variety of specific safety concerns throughout the project.
Examples of those safety concerns included issues such as fights, drug use, youth
misconduct, and having to work alone and be in charge at night. As discussed in Chapter II,
working alone at night is one of the times library workers are at greatest risk (Cromwell et
al., 2008).
Survey results indicated that most respondents felt slightly to moderately concerned
about specific types of violence, with some participant answers varying from extremely
concerned to not at all concerned, depending on the type of violence referenced (Figure 4).
Chappell and Di Martino (2006) state that during their careers, most librarians are very likely
to experience an act of violence or aggression from the public.
Potential verbal abuse appeared to be the specific safety issue which indicated the
highest levels of concern for most respondents, with 13 of the 17 participants indicating

121

moderate to extreme levels of concern (Figure 4). These findings parallel research
conducted by Kean and McKoy-Johnson (2009), which found verbal abuse to be the most
prevalent kind of aggressive behavior directed toward library staff in the academic setting.
While academic and public libraries have different environments and do not typically serve
the same patron demographic, the similarity in findings is noteworthy. As explained
previously, frontline library workers troubleshoot problems and deal with angry patrons, and
being yelled at leads to stress quickly (Patterson, 2004).
Additional survey results (Figure 4) show 10 of the 17 respondents felt moderately
concerned about potential verbal abuse from a patron, one respondent indicated feeling very
concerned, and two respondents indicated feeling extremely concerned in this category. In
regard to potential physical abuse by a patron, 13 out of 17 respondents reported feeling
slightly concerned.

Figure 4. Levels of concern regarding specific types of violence

122

As shown in Figure 4, 9 of the 17 respondents felt slightly concerned about potential
bullying by a patron. Nine of the 17 also felt slightly concerned about potential stalking by a
patron, and one respondent indicated feeling extremely concerned about potential stalking by
a patron.
Furthermore, 9 of the 17 participants felt slightly concerned about a potential
shooting, stabbing, or other attack with a weapon, perpetrated by a patron. One respondent
indicated moderate concern in the “other” category, specifying potential damage to her car
caused by a disgruntled patron (Figure 4). In this same realm, one of the times library
workers are at the greatest risk is when they are walking from the building to the parking
facilities at night (Cromwell et al., 2008), as discussed in Chapter II.
Twelve out of 16 participants have experienced a patron making a covert
(subtle/veiled) verbal or physical threat toward them personally, another person, or the
library in general, and 14 out of 16 have experienced a patron making an overt
(obvious/direct/specific) verbal or physical threat toward them, another person, or the library
in general. Additionally, when asked if they had ever been concerned about a patron’s
behavior escalating to the point of physical violence, 13 of the 16 respondents answered yes
(Figure 5).
Nine out of 16 participants stated that they have been a direct victim of an incident of
workplace violence while working; 8 of these incidents were initiated by a patron, and one
was initiated by a fellow employee.

123

Figure 5. Concern regarding patron behavior escalating to physical violence
While the effects of workplace violence are stronger for direct targets (Dupré et al.,
2014), those who witness violence are also negatively affected (Aytaç & Dursun, 2012).
Eleven out of 15 participants indicated that they have personally witnessed an incident of
workplace violence at DPL while they were working. As discussed in Chapter II, direct and
vicarious WPV both create negative consequences for individuals and organizations (Schat &
Kelloway, 2000).
Effects of Safety Concerns
The third overarching question addressed how public library workers at Dewey
Public Library feel their safety concerns affect them physically, emotionally/mentally, and
professionally.
Physical effects. Most participants felt that their safety concerns do not affect them
physically; however, some participants mentioned reactions that could lead to, or coexist
with, physical effects. For example, participants used terms like “dread,” inner alarm,” and
“inkling,” when explaining how they felt safety concerns affect them physically. Some
respondents referred to a “need to tread lightly” with certain patrons, having an “inner voice”

124

go off in regard to certain situations, and feeling apprehensive when working alone. Seminal
work, as discussed in Chapter II, has shown an association between perceived risk of future
aggression, e.g., feeling apprehensive, as mentioned above, and decreased physical wellbeing (as cited in Dupré et al., 2014).
It is possible that participants may not be aware of their physical responses, and
therefore believe they are not affected physically by their safety concerns. Furthermore, it is
also possible that they may not recognize physical reactions or ailments as manifestations of
safety concerns, especially if symptoms do not appear immediately, but instead develop over
time, e.g., ulcers or gastrointestinal disturbances (Probst et al., 2008).
Some participants stated that their safety concerns presented as less of a physical
effect, and more of an awareness. Furthermore, some of the reported responses and reactions
participants mentioned while discussing physical effects, such as “it’s always in the back of
my mind,” could potentially be classified as, or overlap with, emotional or mental effects, as
discussed in the next section.
Emotional and mental effects. Emotional and mental effects that were mentioned
by participants throughout the research included feeling apprehensive, having a “dread
feeling,” and having a “what’s going to happen tonight” feeling. One participant explained
that during a specific incident she didn’t feel threatened, but instead felt responsible for
others. Additional words used by respondents throughout the research included “worry,”
“intimidated,” and “unsettling.” One participant stated that she is “not comfortable” having
to constantly confront a patron about certain behaviors.
Another respondent discussed how, in the past, she had created scenarios in her mind
to determine what her options would be and what she would do in certain situations. She

125

explained that she would get herself worked up, not because of an actual situation, but
because she was thinking through potential scenarios. This example demonstrates the impact
potential workplace violence can have on mental health issues and well-being, specifically in
regard to anxiety, even though this participant was not in direct danger, was intentionally
choosing to think about these scenarios, and was doing so with a positive purpose to prepare
herself for a potential incident. Although she did not specifically state that she felt anxious,
she referred to getting herself worked up by thinking through potential scenarios; as
previously mentioned, anticipation of aversive events happening in the future is a
characteristic of anxiety (Sussman et al., 2016).
One participant mentioned thinking about “how easy [it would be for someone] to
walk in with a bomb…or a gun.” Another participant stated that she has it in the back of her
mind that this [a potential incident] could occur, so she is a bit wary of certain situations.
While most participant responses indicated awareness or passing thoughts regarding potential
workplace violence, it is possible that some participants may demonstrate occasional
episodes of ruminative thinking, which includes abstract, passive negative thoughts (Niven et
al., 2013), and is more likely to occur the more severe an individual perceives an event to be
(Beattie & Griffin, 2014).
According to the survey results, 8 of the 16 respondents think about or consider their
personal safety regarding potential workplace violence slightly often, 5 of the 16 consider it
moderately often, one considers it very often, and the two remaining respondents selected
“not at all often.”

126

After reflecting on a specific incident with a threatening patron, which had happened
in the past, one participant explained, “That’s the one incident I remember—now it’s a
commonplace thing. I don’t even remember the altercations that I have.”
Professional effects. Participants’ responses regarding how they feel safety concerns
affect them professionally were mixed. A specific area that participants mentioned, and
which they felt was affected by their safety concerns, was patron assistance. One participant
shared that an incident that happened years ago, where a patron made a direct verbal threat
toward her, may still affect her now. She stated “I’m not as open as I could be with our
patrons,” and speculated that it could be because of that previous incident. She further
clarified stating, “I mean, I assume something in my mind when I wait on people, you know,
it affects me in that way.” This is an understandable reaction and long-term effect of being
the direct victim of a threat or threatening behavior. “Violent reactions by a customer or
client are unpredictable” (Rugala & Isaacs, 2004, p. 14), and being yelled at or disrespected
can lead to stress (Patterson, 2004), which can have an impact on service quality (Jain et al.,
2012).
Another respondent stated that she felt her concerns do not affect her professionally,
but then explained that she does feel it affects her when she has to deal with disruptive
incidents from patrons who are there more to cause problems than to legitimately use the
library. She stated that when she has to deal with those incidents, “I can’t help those who are
there for a real reason.”
Other responses to this question involved actions such as observing what other
libraries are doing, asking what DPL should be doing, and maintaining an awareness of other
places. One participant mentioned that other libraries are conducting trainings on issues like

127

opioids and Narcan (naloxone), and she stated that she felt relieved that DPL does not have
to worry about that. It is important to note that while DPL may not currently be dealing with
these particular kinds of drug issues, the fact that other libraries are providing trainings for
such issues may indicate that DPL might inevitably be challenged with these kinds of
problems, too. As discussed throughout this project, observing trends and using that
knowledge to proactively prepare for potential problems can be helpful to both individual
employees and organizations as a whole. For example, in this case, it may be beneficial for
DPL employees to learn basic information and warning signs regarding opioids and
Narcan—even through a pamphlet or online tutorial—as an anticipatory approach to dealing
with potential workplace violence that could stem from such drug use.
Seminal research from Budd, Arvey, and Lawless (1996) showed that many study
participants had considered changing jobs, not due to actual victimization, but because of
mental or physical distress caused by fear of violence (as cited in Mueller & Tschan, 2011).
In regard to how participants from this project feel about safety concerns affecting them
professionally, one respondent did state that if she could find another comparable job, she
would consider leaving. This response could reflect the participant’s level of emotional
attachment toward the organization (Dupré et al., 2014), in relation to her perception of
workplace violence issues.
Trainings
The fourth overarching question addressed what kinds of trainings or other measures
public library workers at Dewey Public Library would like the library management to
implement in order to address their safety concerns.

128

Pfeffer and Salancik (2003) state that the environment of an organization is not a
given reality, but instead is created through attention and interpretation. Additionally,
Ruffini (2006) explains that criminals and terrorists both attack where they perceive
weakness, and where targets are ill-prepared, unaware, and uninformed. This information
reiterates the importance of conducting organizational trainings on workplace violence
issues.
Furthermore, utilizing employee input in regard to what is included in trainings can
be beneficial. Patterson (2004) addresses the idea that the people who are doing the job are
the ones who know what is needed to improve it. Throughout the data collection process for
this project, participants mentioned training issues, including their perceptions of previous
trainings and their desires for future trainings.
According to survey results, seven of the 16 participants felt moderately confident
that the library as a whole is adequately prepared for a potential workplace violence incident.
The remaining respondents were evenly split with three participants feeling very confident,
three feeling slightly confident, and three feeling not at all confident that the library is
adequately prepared. No participants selected “extremely confident” in response to this
question.
Project participants’ views of previously conducted training varied considerably. In
regard to trainings that have already taken place, responses included statements that
employees have had training, have done a little training, and have not really had any training.
One respondent stated, “We talk about what to do—but I wouldn’t really call that training.”
In contrast, other responses included comments such as, “I think it’s [training] helpful and I
refer to it,” and “I think we’re adequately equipped.” One participant stated that the amount

129

of training is probably more than will ever be used, e.g., evacuating the building. Completed
trainings that were mentioned throughout the research included active shooter training with
the police, building evacuation, and training regarding the book Black Belt Librarian by
author Warren Graham.
In specific reference to the active shooter training, respondents commented that the
training was helpful, it was good in some ways, it may have scared some staff, and it brought
awareness to how scary practices can be and how that type of training affects others. The
topic of awareness was mentioned, or alluded to, numerous times throughout the research
results. For example, one participant expressed the desire for people to be aware, versus
being scared or anxious, in regard to training outcomes. One respondent mentioned that she
was surprised that her first instinct was to hide during the active shooter training, suggesting
that the training produced self-awareness related to possible personal reactions during a
crisis, which could be helpful knowledge in regard to preparedness.
In contrast to the previous comment on the active shooter training, one participant
stated, “If we had an active shooter we would not know what to do. Not that we want to
assume it will happen, but mass shootings do occur, and it would be nice to be fully trained
on emergency situations.” This seeming contradiction in statements regarding active shooter
training could indicate a gap in training among employees currently working in the library.
This could be due to a variety of reasons such as hiring dates, missed trainings, or differences
in training attendance between part-time and full-time employees.
Survey results indicated that most respondents felt moderately confident that they, as
individuals, are personally adequately prepared for a potential workplace violence incident at
the library. Ten of the 16 respondents indicated they were moderately confident, three were

130

slightly confident, and one was not at all confident. Two respondents were very confident,
and no respondents selected “extremely confident” in response to this question.
Both organizational and individual preparedness contribute to employees’ views
regarding their locus of control (LoC), defined as “the extent to which an individual regards
control over events to be under their own influence” (Joseph et al., 2013, p. 9). If employees
have a strong external LoC at work, believing they have no control of outcomes and no way
to change their situation, they may feel helpless (Sprung & Jex, 2012). However, Schat and
Kelloway (2000) found associations between perceived control and improved emotional
well-being, indicating that workplace violence training could be beneficial by enhancing
employees’ sense of control.
In regard to future trainings or additional measures participants would like DPL
management to implement, responses varied from participants feeling no other trainings were
necessary and stating the library is adequately equipped in regard to training, to suggestions
for specific trainings and regular reminders, such as repeating annual trainings. One
participant explained, “We have received training in the past in how to respond to patrons
(and coworkers), where we feel there is any potential for violence. I feel we should repeat
this training annual[ly], to stay confident and to assure that new employees receive the
training.” In reference to having a plan for certain emergency situations, one participant felt
there may be a difference in training between full-time and part-time employees: “Maybe full
time staff has more of a plan, but as a part time clerk/page I do not go to big staff meetings.”
One participant stated, “One thing that is mentioned, but no training is provided is what
happens if someone were to physically assault someone. Some staff know about the call

131

button that exists to call police, but it doesn’t seem consistent.” This comment again points
to a possible gap in training, as previously discussed.
Other comments and suggestions for further training included having speakers,
making new employees aware of the book Black Belt Librarian, providing steps to take if
employees do feel threatened, such as offering help or someone to talk to, training on how to
defuse a potential situation, and anger de-escalation techniques. In regard to these types of
trainings, Spector et al. (2007) state that employees will perceive a good violence climate
when the control and elimination of verbal aggression and violence are emphasized by
management.
One respondent suggested “more training on violence against the staff,” and another
suggested a “what if” type of training, as well as training on “how to deal with difficult
patrons.” As discussed in the literature, Cromwell et al. (2008) explain that while most
library staff are provided with little or no training on how to handle problematic behaviors
(Shuman, 1999, as cited in Cromwell et al., 2008), training staff in communication and
problem-solving skills can help defuse situations before they become hostile (Cromwell et
al., 2008).
Implications and Recommendations
This section explains the implications of this project, including contributions and
practical application for practitioners, management, and employees, as well as the project’s
potential impact on future research. Recommendations based on the research findings from
this project are also included in this section.

132

Implications
Contribution and practical application to practitioners. The findings from this
project contribute to the body of knowledge in the fields of psychology, organizational
leadership, and criminology, as well as library science. Practitioners working in these fields
may find the project results helpful when dealing with any of the areas involved in this
research, including assumed low-risk environments, personal perceptions and safety concerns
of employees in these kinds of environments, and potential workplace violence.
Furthermore, the research results may assist psychologists and therapists in better
understanding individuals’ needs and concerns when working with clients who are employed
in these kinds of environments.
Management. Public library management, as well as leadership in similar assumed
low-risk environments, may find the results of this research helpful in better understanding
the personal perceptions, safety concerns, and mental health needs of their employees. The
findings from this project may also be used by leadership to assist in creating organizational
programs, policies and procedures, trainings, and guidelines, which specifically address the
safety concerns of employees regarding their work environment.
Employees. The findings from this project provide insight into public library
employees’ personal perceptions and safety concerns within their work environment, in
regard to potential workplace violence. The results from this research may be used to assist
employees in public libraries and other similar environments in addressing leadership about
their safety concerns. This may lead to opportunities for employees, management, and
organizations to be pro-active in providing solutions regarding areas of concern within their

133

work environments, thereby making efforts to better ensure the safety of all employees and
patrons.
Future research. This project provides a foundation for future research on the
subject of personal perceptions and safety concerns of employees in assumed low-risk
environments in regard to potential workplace violence. While the research results of this
project produced findings that can be generalized to employees in public libraries besides
DPL, as well as other similar assumed low-risk environments throughout the country, further
research with larger sample sizes would be beneficial.
Recommendations
The following recommendations for Dewey Public Library are based on the research
findings and data analysis conducted during this project. The researcher is unaware of
current DPL policies, procedures, or programs that were not discussed in the data, but may
already be in place at DPL. Therefore, recommendations can be adjusted accordingly to fit
DPL’s current processes. While the following recommendations address DPL specifically,
they can also be generalized to other public libraries facing similar issues, as well as other
types of assumed low-risk environments, as applicable.
Recommendations Regarding Potential Workplace Violence
Workplace violence handbook. It is recommended that DPL create a workplace
violence handbook that is made available to employees in a common area, such as an
employee lounge or breakroom. The handbook should contain detailed instructions specific
to DPL regarding procedural guidelines and protocol for both potential and actual incidents.
In addition, the handbook should also include basic professional information on mental

134

health issues in relation to workplace violence, such as stress and signs of post-traumatic
stress (PTS), and should include contact information for mental health professionals.
The handbook would be a tangible resource for employees to use if they have
questions, and it would also serve as an immediate training tool for new employees, prior to
the next available in-person training. This would provide a way for all employees to access
and receive the same information and directives.
The handbook should be thoroughly reviewed by leadership annually and updated as
needed. It is also recommended that an anonymous process, such as a suggestion box or
online survey, be created for employees to provide input. This input can then be
incorporated into the handbook, for example, in a “frequently asked questions” section, in an
effort to address specific employee concerns and needs.
Incident log. It is recommended that DPL create an incident log where employees
can document and track incidents and potential issues of concern. An incident log would
allow all employees to be aware of incidents and issues occurring during other shifts and
would provide a way for situations to be monitored. Additionally, the log can be used as a
reference during meetings and updates regarding safety issues. The incident logs should
follow protocol regarding patron confidentiality and should be stored in a secure, employeesonly area. Leadership should make sure all staff is aware of the log and its purpose and
proper use, including when and how to document and review information in the incident log.
Leadership should also monitor the log regularly and take responsibility for appropriately
addressing documented issues and concerns.
Trainings. It is recommended that DPL continue to conduct trainings regarding
potential and actual workplace violence; these trainings should be mandatory for all

135

employees, regardless of full-time or part-time status. It is further recommended that DPL
create an annual workplace violence training schedule, if one does not already exist.
Scheduling trainings at least one year in advance, and making the training schedule available
to employees, helps to ensure employee attendance.
It is inadvisable for employees to miss trainings; however, if an employee is unable to
attend a training, DPL should provide the employee with some form of training materials and
require proof of understanding through a written test or other measure deemed appropriate by
leadership. This helps to ensure that all employees are aware of the training information and
are prepared. Furthermore, information from each training should also be included in the
aforementioned workplace violence handbook.
Based on participant responses during the project research, it is further recommended
that DPL conduct trainings focused on de-escalation techniques, specifically regarding
volatile patrons and threats against workers. Trainings may also include “refresher courses”
on previously conducted trainings, in order to provide updated and current information.
Recommendations Regarding Defiant Youth
School resource officer. In regard to the issue of addressing youth defiance and
misconduct in the library, it is recommended that DPL enlist the assistance of a school
resource officer (SRO), if feasible, who would be willing to conduct random walk-thrus of
the library. This provides a law enforcement presence in the library, specifically among—
and directed toward— youth. If law enforcement already provides walk-thrus of the library,
it is recommended that the SRO walk-thrus be conducted in addition to those, if and when
possible, due to the already recognized and established relationship between the SRO and
youth from the school setting.

136

In order to be most effective, SRO walk-thrus should be done randomly, if possible,
but during times when youth disruptions are most prevalent. DPL can work with local law
enforcement to create strict guidelines for the library regarding “tolerated” versus
“disruptive” behaviors so all employees are clear and consistent regarding expectations and
protocol, and feel comfortable and confident calling the police when necessary.
Designated staff member. If feasible, it is recommended that DPL designate a
specific employee, ideally a youth or children’s librarian, to deal with any deviant youth
behavior and incidents throughout the library. All staff should maintain authority in dealing
with incidents, especially those requiring immediate attention or action, but when possible,
the designated employee would be the main contact person responsible for speaking with
disruptive youth, building relationships and making connections with them, and clarifying
library rules and expectations. Follow-up regarding disciplinary actions, such as banning,
would be addressed by management, as discussed in the forthcoming section on employee
support.
Be pro-active. It is recommended that DPL employees take a proactive approach to
dealing with disruptive or potentially disruptive youth. This can be done by asking questions
(e.g., “what can I help you look for today”), and acknowledging them immediately, as
opposed to avoiding or ignoring them, or waiting to address them until a problem exists.
This proactive approach can be taken with individual patrons or groups. Doing this
establishes a connection with the youth and demonstrates employee presence, awareness, and
authority, and also sets the tone that there should be a legitimate purpose for the patron’s
visit. Furthermore, in regard to being pro-active, it is recommended that DPL deal with

137

disruptive behaviors immediately when they occur, as waiting to warn can potentially lead to
escalation of unwanted behaviors.
Additionally, while the issue of defiant youth was one of the main themes mentioned
throughout the research, defiant patrons in general, including adults, were also mentioned as
a concern. It is recommended that DPL create a clear and consistent process for handling all
disciplinary issues, including consequences for patron misconduct. This process should be
explained in detail to all employees and followed consistently at all times.
Recommendations Regarding Employee Support
Regular updates on current issues. It is recommended that DPL conduct meetings
on a regular basis (or designate time during other regularly scheduled meetings) to provide
updates on current issues regarding disruptive patrons, current safety issues and incidents,
and employee safety concerns. Reviewing information from the aforementioned incident log
during this time, as well as addressing submissions from the suggestion box, may also be
beneficial.
This time can also be used for debriefings on incidents that occurred since the last
meeting, and to discuss feedback regarding what has been working well and what needs
improvement, in relation to safety issues in the library.
Consistency in disciplinary action plan. It is recommended that DPL create a clear
and consistent disciplinary action plan, including protocol for banning procedures, so all staff
follow the same process. Management should clarify staff authority and responsibility in
regard to such incidents, so all employees understand their roles when implementing
disciplinary actions.

138

A simple and clear protocol should be utilized so all patrons receive the same
treatment. For example, a 1-2-3 protocol could be implemented: (1) give patron one verbal
warning clearly stating the disruptive behavior and notifying them that if the behavior does
not stop immediately, they will be asked to leave; (2) tell patron to leave immediately and
warn them that if they do not leave, the police will be called; and (3) call police.
Management should also emphasize that staff is to forego any warning process and
call police immediately in the case of an emergency. All employees should be made aware
that they have the authority to call law enforcement in an emergency—or potential
emergency—situation.
Suggestion box. As previously mentioned, it is recommended that DPL make an
anonymous suggestion box, or other kind of anonymous process for voicing concerns and
suggestions, available to employees. This provides the opportunity for employees who are
not comfortable discussing issues overtly with leadership, to share their concerns or make
suggestions known. Leadership should review and address submitted concerns and
suggestions on a regular basis.
Designate follow-up person. Based on participant suggestions from the research
results, it is recommended that DPL considers creating a policy which states that
management is responsible for follow-up actions regarding consequences for patron
misconduct. Such actions include following up on police reports and banning of patrons. If
it is not feasible for management to do this, it is recommended that management designates
one staff person to be responsible for these specific actions, in an effort to provide
consistency in the disciplinary process. Additionally, if these duties are designated to a staff
person, it is important that the designated employee feels comfortable in this role and is

139

willing to follow through with the necessary actions, in order for this recommendation to be
effective.
Conclusion
This chapter presented and discussed the research results from this Applied Doctoral
Project, including evaluation and analyses of the data. The chapter also included
implications and recommendations for Dewey Public Library (DPL), based on the research
findings.
Three main themes emerged from the data: (1) awareness of potential workplace
violence, (2) defiant youth, and (3) management support. Overall, the research showed that
while most participants generally did not indicate feeling overly concerned about workplace
violence potentially occurring at DPL, some participant responses did indicate higher levels
of concern, and most respondents demonstrated an overall awareness of the issue. Many
participants referenced very specific concerns regarding disconcerting patron behaviors,
including patrons invading the personal space of employees, refusal to follow directives, and
fights inside the library.
The issue of youth defiance was also cited as a concern throughout the data.
Participants referred to defiant behavior, such as refusal to follow directions and library rules,
and also expressed concerns regarding how to manage incidents involving youth misconduct.
Employee and patron safety in regard to youth misconduct, such as fights, was also
mentioned.
Furthermore, participants indicated a desire for additional support from management
in regard to safety issues. Specifically, respondents would like management to be
responsible for follow-up actions after incidents occur. Respondents also expressed the

140

desire for additional training regarding workplace violence issues, such as how to defuse
situations and anger de-escalation techniques.
The findings from this project provide foundational information about workers in
assumed low-risk environments, in regard to potential workplace violence. The research
contributes to the body of knowledge in the fields of criminology, organizational leadership,
psychology, and library science, by providing direct insight into the personal perceptions and
safety concerns of employees in assumed low-risk environments, information previously
underrepresented in the literature.
Practitioners and those in leadership positions can use the findings from this project
to further efforts in improving issues surrounding WPV, specifically in assumed low-risk
environments. The findings can be used to create or improve training opportunities, policies
and procedures, and organizational protocol regarding WPV. Additionally, organizations can
use the data from the project to create programs or workshops that specifically address the
concerns and mental health needs of employees as they face issues regarding violence in the
workplace.
While further research is needed regarding assumed low-risk environments, this
Applied Doctoral Project provides a foundation for future studies to build upon. The project
brings awareness to challenges faced by assumed low-risk environments, specifically public
libraries, and provides insight into the personal perceptions and safety concerns of
individuals who work in these environments.