 

 

" Vol. I Nos. 3 8i 4 March—April I98I

 

Second Training Course in Indexing

The Second Training Course in
Indexing was held at DMRL,
Hyderabad from 29 Dec I980 to 8
Jan 1981. The Course was intended
for information personnel of the
DRDO Lablestts located in and
around Hyderabad. Twelve trainees
drawn from Technical Information
Centres of DMRL. DRDL. DLRL.
RTO (Dte of Aero), and NSTL.
participated in the Course.

The Training Course was inaug-
urated by Shri N.T. George.
Director II. DMRL. In his address.
Shri George stressed the need for
such courses and expressed the hope
that the training Would bring about
uniform practice in indexing and
help in better utilization of library
resources in the Technical Informa-
tion Centres, .

Earlier. addressing the parti-
cipants, Shri S.S. Murthy. Director.
DESIDOC emphasised the import-
ance of indexing and described it as
a basic operation for all the
information activities. He hoped
that the participants would acquire
the necessary skill and have exposure
to the new techniques to achieve
consistency and uniformity in
indexing. This course would also
help them to provide the standardi-
sed input for the computer-based
Defence Science Information System
(DESIS) when it comes into
operation.

 

Simpliﬁed Procedures for

 

 

Dr. V.S. Arunachalam. Director.
DMRL delivered the valedictory
address. He referred to the vital
role played by information in the
advancement of R&D activity. He
stressed the need of keeping the
libraries and information centres
clean. tidy and quiet and described
them as workshops for intellectual
pursuit.

The syllabus of the trainingr
course covered the following topics :
i) Indexing techniques.

ii) Content
documents.

analysis of

iii) Indexing languages and use
of thesaurus.

iv) Precnnrdinate and post-
coordinate indexing.

v) Keyword-based
IKWIC. KWOC).

vi) Searching techniques.

vii) Indexing for computer-aided
systems.

indexes

viii) International indexing
systems (INIS. AGRIS).

ix) Evaluation of
systems.

it) Planning and management
of indexing systems.

practical

indexing

The

assignments
included :

i) Content analysis and stand-

ardisation of keywords using
thesaurus.

ii) Subject classiﬁcation—
assignment of class numbers
by UDC.

iii) Construction of coordinate
index ﬁle.

iv) Construction of chain index
and KWIC index.

v) Literature searching on
problems pertaining to
metallurgy. electronics and
missile technology by using
published indexes .

The faculty comprised Sarva Shri
V.K. Rangra. Scientist ‘D’ and U.R.
Sharma. Scientist ‘B’ of DESIDOC.
and Prof. T.N. Rajan and Prof.
B. Guha of INSDOC. Shri'V.K.
Rangra acted as the
Coordinator.

Course

Course material in the form of
lecture notes Covering the above
topics was given to the trainees for
basic reading. Besides lectures.
audiovisual demonstration on
Science Citation Index was arranged
through MIS Allied Publishers.
Visits to Information Centres at
BI-IEL Corp. R&D Divn. and Small
Industry Extension Training '(SIET)
Institute. Hyderabad were arranged
to familiarise the trainees with the
techniques adopted by these centres.
The trainees were awarded
certiﬁcates after completion of the
course requirements.

The next course will be held at
LRDE, Bangalore from 6 to 16

 

May 1981.

TRANSLATIONS

L‘b'ar'es I. BOOKS‘AR’I‘ICLES TRANSLATED
A subcommittee comprising Tide/Author hidemi'rig Page:
Shri S.N. Mehta, Scientist ‘D’, Um, hangar“
Shri Ram Kishore, Scientist “C' of GERM-t N
DESIPOC {‘“d‘Sh” P-K- Si‘f‘r'mL . |. Modulation. encoding. security of com- LRDE. Bangalore 5
Smem'St ‘B' 0' SSPL‘ Pen“ Wasi munication and trunking scheme of
formed .at the 2nd Meeting of the t mobile radio service (NTZ. 31(1978). 3).

Oﬁicers-m-Charge of DRDO ; ._, Sr _ I. v ﬁ b_ _kl‘ h d .r . _ A _ ,4
Libraries/TICK held at DESIDOC _. )slcmso gear ts. at. its . eyldtions to ..
7 and tolerances of teeth thickness,

on 2-3 December, 1980 to study the -
u . . . . general basrs (DIN 3967. Aug I978).
administrative and technical proce- . I _
dures in the Libraries/“CS. and 3. Modern Vlogisucs—an‘ important cum- SA to CAS. 2
draft a working manual ofsimbiiﬁed ponent oI system planning (MBH—Aktuell New Delhi
procedures for libraries. I No‘ '0' 0C! 80‘ pp' 3/4)
4. The Federal Institute for snow and SASE 54
The committee held two meetings avalanche research at Weissfluhlech in
on 2 and 27 February, 1981 andL Davos (Brochure published by the
ﬁnalized a questionnaire in its ﬁrst institute: 1980 edition).
meeting which was sent to all the
DRDO Lablestts for completion RUSSIA}? . _ , _
and return The completed 5. Solution 01 two-dimensional inverse SASE IO
questionnaire has been received problem of radio echo surveys of ICC‘
from 26 Lablestm thickness and subglacral topography of
mountain glaciers by means 01 computers.
6. Determination of ice volumes of moun- do- I3
Bibliogmphies PM}Jamil and SHPPIit-‘d tain glaciers according to the data of
During January, 198] radio echo sounding from a helicopter.
7. Method ol‘determiningthe characteristics -do- Ill
TON? T" of snow-cover for territories. uhich have
I. Reconnaissance not yet been studied.
Aircraft and sensors DNRD 8. Determination of probabilities of ul‘ter- SA to CAS. 5
2. Nuclear,‘Biological.' effects of the aircraft system failure New Delhi
Chemical Warfare INMAS when estimating the safety level of ﬂights.

 

 

27th All India Library Conference |

and 1

Sarvshri V.K. Rangra ‘
S.N. Mehta, Scientists ‘D' and ;
U.R. Sharma, Scientist ‘B’ of l

DESIDOC attended the 27th All
India Library Conference held at'
Hyderabad during 9-12 January.
1981. The Conference

was
inaugurated by Shri Bhattam)
Srirama Murthy. Minister for‘

Libraries. Andhra Pradesh.

In his inaugural address, Shri
Murthy called for allocation for
library services in proportion to the
budget on education, to ensure
accelerated development of the

' conference were
following topics:

The working sessions of the:
devoted to the.

(i) A second look at the library l
legislation in India.

(ii) Stock veriﬁcation of reading {
material in libraries: its l
concept, rationale. methods l
and practices. 1

SN. Mehta. I

Shri described |

Union Catalogue of Periodicals
The compilation of the Union

Catalogue of Periodical Holdings of
f the Defence R&D Labs/Estts is in

 

(Could. rm page 3 /

Lablestts have supplied the infor-
mation upto the year shown against
each:

SAG. Delhi (1979); ABEU.
Bangalore (I978) DMSRDE-
Kanpur (1979) and RDE (E). Pune
(1979).

‘Information about 1750 perio—
dicals received in Defence Science
Library has been compiled on the

ibrieﬂy the stock-taking procedure formsi
I adopted at Defence Science Library. I

2nd ISIS User Seminar

Sarvshri V.K. Rangra, ScientISt
TD” and Ambrish Kumar. Scientist
‘B’ of DESIDOC attended the 2nd
ISIS User Seminar held at Vishva
Yuvak Kendra. New Delhi on

 

 

 

 

library movement in the country. progress. The following DR DO ' 5 March 1981_
3
Information Disseminated 5. MiSSile TCChHOIOEY 1 
During January, 1981 6. Naval Problems 2 1
7. Nuclear Warfare 1  Cash Awards for Best
. Nos. 8' Radar 1 ! DS] Papers
1' Indexed Items 9. Science Policy and. i t _
DESIDOC List 114 Planning l 1 In order to encourage scren-
1 Defence Reports 77. m. Armament 1 2  tists toh contribute ahtdgh Epistliicta);
Abstracts .. 2 researc papers n
Patents Abstracts 64 11' Energy Rasourccs l reviews to DEFENCE SCIENCE
7 '. I f. at' l . , jOURNAL (DSJ), an AWARD of
_ Neitdlfiiper H mm '0! Information as Bag": Input for 5 Rs. 500/- each will be made for
Indian Press on DRDO 10 Development ' the best two papers (either
. . . .. l
S or News on China; A 7 research papers or critics
Pikistan 25 Shri S-S- Murihlh Direcmr' Sh“ 1 reviews) published in each issue
I f - Q C ies V-K‘ Rangra and Shri S-N- M611”? J of the journal. Communications
3' “ﬁrmatmg 128:1) HQ 3 SClentiStS ‘D’ M DESIDOC ' pan" % in all disciplines of science having
nswere — cipated in the panel discussmn on 1 a bearing on Defence Probmms
SDI Bulletins Prepared and Supplied qnformation as BaSiC Input for  are published in the journal.
D . J a 1981 Development” organised by the E papers of applied nature Wm be
"ring an“ ry' [Indian Association of Spec1a1; preferred. The review papers
l- Materials l ‘ Libraries and Information Centres  shou‘d cover the stated—art in
2. Military Aircraft 3 (IASLIC) atlndian National Seience the subject. areas of Defence
3. Military Electronics 2 Academy, New Delhi on 1'." Feb.  interest.
4_ Military organisa- 1981 to celebrate the Silver Jubilee n The Award is open to the
“on and warfare 4 year Of IASUC‘ scientists/technologists of DRDO.
i and other organisations as well.
JAPANESE ' Contributions for publication
9. Buckling of cylindrical sandwich shells ADE. Bangalore 5 be sent to :
wiEh ilgsed ends under uniform The Chief Editor
ex erna ressure. .
. . Defence Scuence Journal
l0. Analysis of the ﬂow In laser cavity. IRDE, Dehradun 6 Defence Scientiﬂclnformation &
11. A study on pressure waves caused by TBRL, Chandigarh 7 Documentation Centre
underwater borehole blasting, (2) (DESIDOC).
pressure wave caused by carter blasting. Metcaife House.
12. On the countermeasure of the elec- Explosives Safety 7 DELHLHOOS‘L
trostatic charge in the explosive Group
manufacturing process. I
13. The ignition of fuse head of the E.B. -do— 4
cap by electrical spark. . _ I
- Re ro ra hic Actmt
14. Burning rate regime of solid propellants. ERDL. Punt: 10 p  p . y
15. XE l SPC international telephone LRDE. Bangalore l9 RCPI‘OCOPIBS and Slides number-
switching system. ing 2805 and 12 respectively were
FRENCH prepared and supplied during
' I l . . 1 h.
16. Hydrodynamic theory of shaped TBRL, Chandigarh 35 January 1981 Bald: phowirap. 1“:
charges and of jet penetration. coverage was pro?) efd to tse'vmt
-. -, _ I . 9 of dignitaries to eence oience
l7. (geigtsering process of the optical sur IRDE Dehiadun Library.- and the gopenmg
- Ceremony’ of the. building
11. ABSTRACTS PREPARED

A total number of 20 articles {Russian 14. German 6) were
abstracted from scientiﬁc periodicals received. _ ~
Centre Library for publication in the quarterly bulletin 'SCience Abstracts

from Foreign Language Journals.’

in the Defence Scien

DEFENCE SCIENCE jOURNAL

 

 

 

Delhi. The

 

CE

I New Delhi.

The Defence Science Journal is a quarterly publication issued in the months of
January. April, July and October.

The Journal publishes

research papers in the various

disciplines of science and

technology which by and large lead to tangible results for direct Defence applications.
Review papers which cover topics clearly bringing out the interactions of science and
technology with Defence are also included. Short Communications or Research Notes are
also accepted for publication in the Journal.

Communications and

Subscription and Sales

Editorials
Contributions for publication in Copies can
the Defence Science Journal

should be addressed to :

THE CHIEF EDITOR
DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNAL,
METCALFE House,
DELHI-110054.

Annual
(From 1 April to 31 March;

Single copy

subscription

be had on payment of
in advance by crossed

cheque or MD. from :

THE DIRECTOR

DEFENCE SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION &
DOCUMENTATION CENTRE (DESIDOC),
METCALFE HOUSE. DELHI-I 10054.

Subscription Rates

Inland Foreign
Rs. 800 £ 0'93
$ 2'88

Rs. 200 £ 0'23
72 cents

 

POPULAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

*An illustrated half-yearly popular journal that conveys information on scientiﬁc
and technological developments in a simple language.

*Presentation is concise and comprehensive.

*lnterestiog colour pictures are given to clarify scientiﬁc ideas.

Issues Available :

(I) The Story of Projectiles
(2) Food for our Sentinels
{3) Nurture Your Body—Gift of Nature

(4)

(5) Man in the Sea
(6)

(7) Laser

(8) Aeronautics

Electronics Shapes Tomorrow

Plastics—The Miracles from Molecules

Copies and other information can be had from .-

The Director

Defence Scientiﬁc Information and

Documentation Centre

Metcalfe House. Delhi-I10054.

(DESIDOC).

Price : Re. I/' per copy

"Subscription to be remitted by crossed postal order or cheque in favour of Director,
DESIDOC, Popular Science and Technology.“

 

Defence Institute of Fire Research,
slide Projection was
also arranged at SA’s Secretariat.

