 

Vol I

jUNE I9B|

 

 

 

 

Third Indexing Course 3. Keyword based indexes IAT, Pllﬂe
The third training course in 4' POPSI CREMA)’ Pune
‘Indexing’, organised by DESIDOC. 5. Searching technique CRElAil'Cl'am, Bangalore
If.“ “$303515?”"i‘Slﬁilis'ffnaJEl‘ 6- PRECIS DFRL’ Wm
Bangalore from 6 to 16. May [9.8L 7' Evaluation Of indexing Efforts were continued to obtain
f0! lhe beneﬁt .Of Informatm“ “Stem the data from the remaining Labs]
again“? wgrgmg- m 2511303131354 8. Principles ofindexing Ems; The (“Fries raised by
oca '3 m n . mu“ . certaln laboratorles were clariﬁed.

Bangalore. The Course wasmaugu- 9. Pro—coordinate and post-co- _
rated by Dr. M. Krishnamurthi, ordinate indexin S' ‘ '
Chief Controller, Research & 10 I d . l g d e I lmphﬁed Library Procedure
DeveIOpment. Dr. Ramdas P. ' “ exmg anguages 3" “S The Committee formed to suggest
Shenoy, Director, LRDE also 0f thesaurus simpliﬁed procedures for various
addressed the participants on the 11_ International indexing libfﬂfy Operationsiin DRDO, hyld
occasion. ShrlS.S.Murthy,Dlrector, Systems qu1te a few meetlngs for working
DESIDOC, in his address explained I I I out the necessary details. It also dis-
the aims and objectives of the 12- SCI tape demonStratlon cussed the response to the question-
Course. 13. Fast access information naire 0sent by it, receiver: from 16

. - DRD LabsIEstts and aso consi-

BeSIdes the lectures and practical Telrleval (FAIR) ‘ ' . , -

assignments,audio-visual demonstra- 14. Indexing for computer aided ‘ Sﬁrqdfomﬁ- altegnauveﬁe to 0min“
tion of ‘Science Citation Index’ was System ‘ LaeblsIlETiigd Ion mm t remain-mg
arranged to familiarize the partici- I ‘ ‘ '
pants with this important informa- 15- Management and Planning

The Committee members visited

tion tool. Visits to information ofindexing system. the libraries of NPL INSDOC
Ce“th of LRDE and NAL 3‘ h c f d f lb IARI, New Delhi and also the
Bangalore were also arranged. : T e Purse W35 0"“ “96 U Y National Medical Library and
- the partwmam-S as seen by the studied the rocedures bein

The faculty was prowded by feedback prOVlded by them In p g

DESIDOC and comprised SIShri‘

V.K. Rangra, Scientist ‘D’ and
U.R. Sharma, Scientist ‘B’. Special
lectures were delivered by Shri M.N.
Seetharaman. Oﬂicer-in-Charge,
Information Centre for Aeronautics,
NAL, Dr. G. Bhattacharyya,
Prof & Head, DRTC, Prof. M.A.
Gopinath and Shri FJ. Devadason
also of DRTC, Bangalore.

The Course covered the follow- ’

ing topics :

I. Indexing techhiques

writing, at the end of the Course.
Certiﬁcates were awarded to the
I participants after successfully com-
‘ pleting the Course.

Shri V.K. Rangra
I Course Director.

was the

Union Catalogue of Periodical
Holdings

The information for compilation
f Union Catalogue of Periodical
I oldings of the DRDO LahsIEstts
lwas obtained from the following
more Estts :

followed by them.

Information Dissemination Service

* Periodical literature was scanned

for selection of latest developments
on science and technology in China
and Pakistan. Twenty such items
were disseminated to the scientists
concerned through our publications
‘Spot News on China’ and ‘Science
& Technology in Pakistan‘.

* Newspaper clippings numbering
214. reporting Indian Press on
DRDO. Defence, and Science &

 

2. Contents analysis of docu-. Technology were brought to the
ments and layout of index DMRL, Hyderabad notice of top management at
entry NCML, Bombay DRDO HQ.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

l/

* Reprints ofan article ‘Scientiﬁc TRANSLATION ACTIVITIES DURING APRIL & MAY I98|

PeriOdicals and other Problems BooksIArticles Translated

and future prospects’ by SfShrl S.N. _

Mehta and Satyapal Gupta of Sl. No. T irleIAuthor Indentmg Pages

DESIDOC were supplied to infc'pr— Um-t Translafed

mation scientists in Telco, Ins oc ,

trainees, etc on request. RUS 5714]) ‘

3; About 20 articles were abstracted I. GOST 17023-74 Instruments for ampll- DTD&P(AIR) 29

from Russian and Japanese sc‘enti- tilde'frfque“cy response inves‘tlgatl'on;

tic periodicals receivedinthe Defence Types and basic parameters. technical

Science Library and disseminatcld requirements_ -

to users through the quartery . _ _ _ ‘

bulletin iScience Abstracts from 2. GOST—l3605-75 VHF, -UHF and micro d0 13

Foreign Languages.’ wave wattmeters: Technical requirements.

test methods.
Information Quarries Answered 3. Physical metallography of titanium by DMRL,

* f . th followiw B.A. Kolachev; Chapter lI—Defects of Hyderabad 42

subgcgnaiglocgngged :nd suppliIeEj crystal structure of titanium and its alloys.

to the Lablestts on their request: 4. New ﬁndings on production of composite NCML, Bombay 9
1. Torpedoes materials based on elastomers by V.F.

2. Sonars Evstratov and others; Vyssokomolekuly-
3_ oceanography arnye Soedineniya, 21 1979, 2415-2423.
4. New ﬁghters 5. Phase diagram of polymer macromolecule NCML, Bombay 5
5. Science & Technology in containing mesogenic groups by A. Yu.
Argentina. Grasberg; Vyssokomolekulyarnye Soedi-

* A list of secondary source “en‘ya= 22’ 1980’ 100'104'

materials at“ “anglations giving 6. Radio echo sounding of spitsbergen Snow & Avalan- 44"

delta 0" holdings Of gegncfoscgelﬁﬁ glaciers from helicopter by Yu. J. che Study Estt

 oriviilieirll'lezvlie; Macheret & A.B. Zhuravlev. (SASE)

* INSDOC was provided with the

information on additionsldeletiOns GERMAN I

in the “St 0f PerlOdlcalS SUbSCfllE'ed 1. Pulse method for the measurement of NPOL, Cochin 13

by Dafence Selena: Library dunng reﬂection of absorbers for watereborne

1979 and 1980' sounds in tubes by W. Kahl & others.
New Acquisitions 2. The chassis of Leopard 2. CVRDE, Madras 8
Fifty—four books and 415 reports, 3. - Combat tank—its future. -do- 5

paltlenﬁsnetcéf wegefggggd gigs}: 4. Flow transfers and landing distances in SASE 12

co cc

Library (DESIDOC) during April respect of avalanches.

and May 1981' 5. Technical possibilities of mobility in Dte of Engg. 12

water ‘ '

Publications Loan Faculty New ﬁre extinguishing vehicles. SA to CAS 7
Megill‘geSI-Iotuhs: C2333: this;1 Dig: A paper on the etching of GaAs by H. SPL, Delhi 3
in the DRDO HQ and’also the Neels& R- Muller-

I-.“1bsll:‘stt5. were loﬁned thgsgubhgil: 8. Development of a turbocharged Dtto VRDE, Ahmed— 6

Eltftlfdnrsetlzldrlheigrifsln;  bookspu2915 engine for use in road vehicles With a nagar

journals and 39 reports were loaned speciﬁc volumetric-efﬁcnency of 73.5 kW]

during April and May 1981. Some litre by F. Indra. ,

0f .Fhe Labs/Estt: d1” egl‘gﬁEa‘f I 9. Hardening of face-centered cubic (FCC) TBRL. Chandi- 9

gslﬂty waER%%w gangalore FEE metals and alloys with low stacking fault garh

Balasore, SA td CAS and DLRL; power through ' shockwave effect by
Hyderabad. H. Richter.
2

JAPANESE

1. Recent topics in polymer chemistry by S. DSC. Delhi 8
Nagai & H. lnoue. Cash Awards for Best

2. PrepratiOn of polyamide-imide from phose DSC, Delhi 7 95] papers
phorus—containing bis-imide anhydridc
and aromatic diamines by Seita, e! of. In order to encourage scien-

3. Recent methods for characterization of DSC, Delhi 4 “5'5 T0 Cﬁnlrlbule high quality
thermosetting resin polymers (Selected research papers and critical
portions only). reviews to DEFENCE SCIENCE

4. Some approximate method for estimating SA to CAS 8 IOURNAL (08]), an AWARD of
the interior noise of aircraft by R. Sasaki, Rs. 500,’- each will be made for
9‘ a" the best two papers (either

5. Application of fourier transformation to Res. Tech. Engr., 6 reséarCh Papers or critical
the lifting surface theories by S. Audo & Bangalore rewewsl PUbllShEd in eath issue
A,1chikawa, of the Journal. Communications

6. Analysis of swirling flow in atube with -do- 6 m a” d_'5C'pl'nes of meme haVing
non—unifoI-m cross_sections (Pt. II) by a bearing‘on Defence problems
Y. Nakamura & S. Uchide. are PUb'IShed_ In the Journals

7_ Advances in Computer architecture b LRDE B Papers of applied nature Wlll be
H Izuka ' y ' “galore ll preferred. The review papers

' ‘ EDP Cell should cover the’state—of—art in

. 1RDEt Dehradun the subject areas of Defence

8. Effect of mineral salts on the growth of DRDE. Gwalior 11 interest,

Oniomelania Nosophors Eggs by H, Nijjma .
& D. Katemine_ .The Award is open to the
scientists/technologists of DRDO,

FRENCH and other organisations as Well.

1. Evaluation of the gyroﬁex KEARFOTT DRDL. Hyderabad 40 contributions {0’ pUbl’Catio"
type, model II; Report No. 209-NT No ' be Sent T0=
USIE. The Chief Editor

2. Evaluation of the aircraft design with CRE, Nasik 4 Dafence SCIEHCEJOUFnal
auto—control, Defence Scientiﬁc Information &

3. Radar echo determination on boa d th Documentation centre
aircraft. r e DLRL’ Hydmbad 9 (DESIDOC).

4. Action of twist on static moveme t. Mental“? House

" SA to CA3 “ DELHI-I l0054
Bibliography 43 Slides were Prepared for SPL,

A bibliography on ‘Counting
and Sizing Measurements of Particle
Size’ has been compiled by Shri S.
Parthasarthy and Miss M.S. Tatke
of ERDL, Pune. It contains 60
referencos ou the subject.

Reprographic Activity

6589 repro-copies were made
during April and May 198! on
demand from the scientists in the
Metcalfc House Complex and also
from the Other DRDO LabsIEstts.

 

DSC and CCR&D Audio-visual‘

facility was provided four times for I
SA to RM.

Printing Activity

Printing facility was provided to
the DRDO HQ, including Dte of'
Planning and Resources Manage-.
ment. DSE and to the Divisions of
DESIDOC. Twenty-four printing
jobs involving about 16640 impres-

.School for Technical

 

sions were completed during April
and May I98].

 

 

 

Professional Activities

Shri M.C. Bandyopadhyay.
Scientist ‘A’ attended the Summer
Translators
(Russian) organised jointly by the
Foreign Language Section of the
Indian Institute of Science and
Translation Unit of the National
Aeronautical Laboratory, Bangalore

, from 6 to 2! May 198].

DEFENCE SCIENCE jOURNAL

The Defence Science Journal is a quarterly publication issued in the months of
January, April, July and October.

The Journal publishes research papers in the various disciplines of science and
technology which by and large lead to tangible results for direct Defence applications.
Review papers which cover topics clearly bringing out the interactions of science and
technology with Defence are also included. Short Communications or Research Notes are
also accepted for publication in the Journal. '

Communications and Subscription and Sales

Editorials
Contributions for publication in Copies can be had on payment of
the Defence Science Journal subscription in advance by crossed

should be addressed to : cheque or MD. from :

THE CHIEF EDITOR
DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNAL,
METCALFE HOUSE,
DELHI-110054.

THE DIRECTOR.

DEFENCE SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION &
DOCUMENTATION CENTRE (DESIDOC),
METCALFE HOUSE, DELHI-110054.

Subscription Rates

 

 

Inland Foreign
Annual Rs. 8'00 £ 0'93
(From 1 April to 31 March) 3 2'88
Single copy Rs. 200 £ 0'23
72 cents
POPULAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
*An illustrated half-yearly popular journal that conveys information on scientiﬁc

and technological developments in a simple language.
*Presentation is concise and comprehensive.
*Interesting colour pictures are given to clarify scientiﬁc ideas.
Issues Available:
(I)
(2)

The Story of Projectiles
Food for our Sentinels

(3) Nurture Your Body—Gift of Nature
(4) Electronics Shapes Tomorrow

(5) Man in the Sea

(6) Plastics—The Miracles from Molecules
(7) Laser

Aeronautics

(8)
Copies and other information can be had from :

The Director

Defence Scientiﬁc Information and

Documentation Centre (DESIDOC),

Metcalfe House. Delhi—I IOOS4. Price: Re. I/— per copy

"Subscription to be remitted by crossed postal order or cheque In favour of Director,
DESIDOC. Popular Science and Technology."

 

