O

 

Vol I

Nos. 118: 12

NOV-DEC |98|

Third Meieting bf

 

 Library

Information Oﬂicers

The Third Meeting of the
Oﬁicers-in-Charge of Libraries and
Technical Information Centres ofl
DRDO Labs‘Estts was held in
DESIDOC on 5-6 November. 1981
to take stock of the progress made
in the implementation of the recom-
mendations made at the earlier
meetings and to discuss further steps
to be taken for providing better
information services to the scientists
in DRDO. The Meeting was
inaugurated by Prof M Krishna—
murthi, CC R&D. 47 oﬂicers
attended the meeting. Dr AK
Sreedhar, Director DSC, Dr IJ
Kumar, Director SAG and Capt
.IJ Baxi, Director WESO also
attended the inaugural session.

The Meeting covered the f ollow-
ing four technical sessions :

(a) Resource sharing in DRDO

Libraries/Tle

 

 

made by the concerned to ensure
speedy implementation of
recommendations made at the
previous meetings and also the

. present meeting.

Earlier. welcoming the guests
and the delegates. Shri SS Murthy. l
Director DESIDOC thanked Profi
M Krishnamurthi for the keen'
interest and encouragement given
by him for the various activities of ‘
DESIDOC and observed that the
adoption of standard practices by
all libraries/’1‘le in processing in- 1
formation required due attention to
facilitate computerization and also 
for sharing the information. He
said that areas like compilation
of union catalogues needed urgent _
attention. A departmental working |
manual of simpliﬁed procedures for
Libraries/TICS had been drafted
and would be discussed in the ensu-

 

the 

INFORMATION SEARCH

Information on the following
subjectsltopics was collected from
the literature available in the
Defence Science Library and sup-
plied to the identors :

1. Measurement
of Rockets

T—22 tanks

Bullet Cartridge

Cruise missile

Naval-craft

Salyut-6 experiments

Chemical & Biological Warfare

Balancing technology of tur-
bine engines

of trajectories

“2-4999?!”

9. Strategic materials.

SDI SERVICE
SDI Bulletins on the following

' subjects were prepared and supplied

to the concerned Directorates in
the DRDO HQ.

 

(b) Augmentation of informa- 1 mg IBChnica' SBSSlonS- I Topic No.
tion services and manpower In the technical sessions. pro- ‘ Armament ]
. aspects 1 gress made on the recommendations Laser 3
f (c) Admin procedures for Libra- 0f _ the earlier Meatings was Materials 1
l rieslTle, and reviewed and. a number of fresh Nuclear weapons 2
(d) Information network for recommendanons were mfjde for Science Policy and
DRDO' the overall development of informa- Planning 1
. . , tion services in DRDO. The follow- . -
Inauguratlng the meeting. Prof . h . d . Armoured Fighting
Krishnamurthi advised that libraries ' (13:: I: "hi/[attfecfm1men among Vehicle 3
should be so organised to attract - ‘ e 6 mg' - Military Organiza-
scientists to make better use of the '- Lam/EST“ comcmplatmg 10 tion & Warfare 2
library collections. He suggested organise a computerised data- Missile Technology 5
that adequate efforts should he (C‘omd. on Page 3) Naval Problems 3
PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES TRANSLATION ACTIVITIES
1_ Lectures Delivered I. Books/articles Translated
. . . . ‘ ' P
(a) Shrl SK Taneja, Selentlst B, 5' Na‘ True/Author Indgzzliing Tragsglged
DESIDOC delivered a lecture on
‘Integrated Approach to the Intro- RUSSIA N
dlflctionl 0f ’MicmﬁChe “1 the 1. Physical metallography of Titanium by DRML, 39
lerary/TICS on 30 September. B.A. Kolachev. Chapter 3-Plastic de— Hyderabad
1981' formation of titanium and its alloys.
(b) D]. HB Kundu of DIWS’ 2. System of programmes for the calculation CRE, Sunabeda l9
Mussoorie delivered a talk on of jet engine characteristics by V.I.
Ergonomics: on 9 November, 1931_ Yankin. Chapter Z-characteristics of
the procedural system.
2. Participation in Courses 3. Synthesis and study of polyesterimides DSC,Delhi 4
_ , , obtained from aromatic tetracarboxylic
(a) Sh“ VK Rangra: Smentls‘t P’ acid dianhydrides containing ester group
attended a course on Productlwty by N_A_ Adrova e, d
Selence (PS-12)’ from 20 October to
4November, 1981, organised by GERMAN
DIWSa MUSSOOFIC- . 1. Experiment on avalanche control SASE, 56 APO 13
   Nigam’ Scientist structure 011 Dorfber Davos.
‘B’ and RK Srivastava, SSA attended 2. An indirect evidence of tin. DRL, Tezpur l
DRTC Refresher Seminar-l3 (1981) 3. 0n the development of hollow charge. TBRL, Chandigarh 24
from 149017 Oct 1931 conducted 4. Optimization of stability of ballistic ARDE, Pune 4
by the Documentation Research and rocket5_
Tram'ng Centre (DRTC)’Bangal°re' 5. Poured explosive charges on 2,4,6- TBRL, Chandigarh -23
(C) Shri 0P Gupta! A0, parti_ trinitrotoluol base, fundamentals of
cipated in the training programme semng'
on ‘Manpower and Employment 6. Method for preparing pressed explosives TBRL, Chandigarh 14
Planning at the National and state for ammunition or large calibre explosive
Levels’ conducted by the Institute Charges-
of Applied ManpOWer Research, 7. Method for preparing pressed, parti- TBRL, Chandigarh 11
New Delhi from 18 to 25 cularly large calibre explosive charges.
November, 1981.
FRENCH
Library Activities 1. Simulation method for turbojet engines. GTRE, Bangalore 69
677 publications consisting of 2. Complete detection system for coast DNRD, New Delhi 7
287 books and 353 periodicals and guard a‘rmﬁs'
32 reports literature were loaned ‘ 3. Infra—red cameras, principles etc. SA to CAS 1]
during October and November 1981. New Delhi
within and outside the Defence ‘1 4. Research in the ﬁeld of rocket engines ERDL, Pune 29
R&D Organisation. Interlibrary With SOIid PTOPBI‘SOI-
loan facility was availed by the SA I 5. Wind tunnel study for courses of separa- RTO. Dte of Aero 15
to CAS, ISSA, DRDE, DIPASJ tion of airborne loads. Nasik
CVRDE,DSCandEME. l
. JAPANESE
75 books, 225 reports literature 1. The optimal regulator for anticipated ADE, Bangalore 9

 

were acquired and accessioned by ‘
the Library during October and l,
November 1981. l
2

disturbance and its application to air-
craft gust alleviation system by
Miyazawa M er al.

The oxidation of 1, 2. 4, S—tetramethyl-
benzene under the pressure of oxygen
with two or three transition metal
salts-bromide catalysts in acetic acid by

DSC, Delhi

8 (Contd. from Page 1)

base of scientiﬁc information
should consult sister Lablestts

Nakayara T et a].

Fukuma D 8! al.
4. Failure process

repeated extension
M et a1.

CFRP and Epoxyresin.

mobile accidents.

* 8. Small (LS) computer
Kobayashi A et al.

11. Abstracts Prepared

Twenty-one articles were
received in Defence
quarterly bulletin ‘Science Abstracts

3. Development of HTPB propellant by

of composite
propellants fracture energy by multiply
test by Shimizu

5. A note of lifting line theory on wings
with high aspect ratio in ground effect.

6. Thermal expansion coefﬁcients of uni-
directional ﬁbre reinforced composites
Part II—Experiments on unidirectional

7. Basic metal azides for generating N2 gas
to inﬂate airbags ill the case of auto-

system

9. Computer in the future by Aizo H.

abstracted from
Science Library for dissemination through the

ARDE, Pune 10

solid ARDE, Pune 6

ADE, Bangalore 7

ADE, Bangalore 7
DMSRDE, Kanpur

ERDL, Pune 4

by LRDE, Bangalore 8
EDP Cell

IRDE, Dehradun
LRDE, Bangalore 6

EDP Cell
TRUE, Dehradun

scientiﬁc periodicals

from Foreign Language Journals.’

of the same discipline in order
to avoid duplication.

2. Preparation of Union Cata-
logue of Speciﬁcations and
Patents should be taken up.

3. Details of technical reports
acquired by TICs should be
intimated t0 DESIDOC ina
standard format.

4. Training should be imparted
by DESIDOC for input prepa-
ration for DESIS and allied
areas. IAT, DESIDOC and
ARDE should discuss the
means for achieving uniformity
in input preparation and
output.

5. Library and information staff
should be exposed to short
term training courses in com—
puter programming.

6. Heads of Lablestts should be
authorised to make advance
payment for back volumes of
periodicals against bank gua-
rantee by dealers.

7. Furniture for Libraries/TICS
should be treated as special
furniture and Heads Of Labs!

 

Union Catalogue of Periodicals

Data for compilation of Union
Catalogue of periodicals has been
obtained from ten more DRDO
Labststts. This data covers the
holdings upto 1980.

Information about the periodi—
cals subscribed for the year 1981
has been obtained from 22 DRDO
Directorates/Labststts.

Current Awareness Service

Information on scientiﬁc deve-
lopments in China (11 items) and
on science and technology in
Pakistan (17 items) were dissemi-
nated through the two publications,

 

viz., ‘Spot News on China’ and
‘Science and Technology in
Pakistan.’

Information on ‘DRDO’,

‘Defence’ and ‘Science and Techno-
logy’ reported in daily newspapers
was scanned and 1046 selected
items were brought to the notice of
top management in DRDO.

Printing Activity

ference on ‘Clothing and General
Stores’ held at Kaulalampur, the
report of the Chairman of the

(Could. on Page 4)

 

14 technical papers (173 pages) :
for presentation at the CD80 con- ‘

Estts should be authorised to
procure directly under normal
purchase procedure.

8. Powers of Heads of Labs/Estts
to write off losses of Library
publications should be raised
to Rs 5,000/-.

The total allocation of funds
for LibrarieslTICs should be
made by June each year to
facilitate placement of supply
orders.

Reprographic Activity
7800 reprocopies of scientiﬁcl
technical matters were made and
supplied on request to the users.
»Some of the Labs/Estts which
3

 

from Foreign Language Journals’

availed of this facility are, TBRL
Chandigarh, DSC Delhi, CRE
Sunabeda, SPL Delhi, DRL Tezpur,
SA to CAS and SA to COAS.

Forty-nine slides were prepared

Computer '1‘ and ‘GI/GO’ were
screened on 6 November, 1981 for
the beneﬁt of participants in the
meeting of Oﬁicers—in-Charge of
TICleibraries and DESIDOC staff.

 

for SPL and DSC. Audiovisual and
photographic facilities were pro—
vided 12 times.

Technical Films

(Comd. from Page 3)

Commonwealth Standing Com-
mittee on Clothing and Equipment
Design (20 pages), ‘Patent Informa-

(138 pages) and circular letters (42
pages) were printed on the Offset
Machine.

‘R&D Newdetter,‘ ‘R&D Digest’
and some jobs received from
CC R&D, Fire Adviser and CASSA
were printed on letterpress. About
58 pages involving 521020 impres-
sions were printed during October-

TWo technical ﬁlms ‘What is tion Alerts’ and ‘Science Abstracts November, 1981.

 

 

 

 

DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNAL

 

The DefenCe Science Journal is a quarterly publication issued in the months of
January, April, July and October.

The Journal publishes research papers in the various disciplines of science and
technology which by and large lead to tangible results for direct Defence applications.
Review papers which cover topics clearly bringing out the interactions of science and
technology with Defence are also included. Short Communications or Research Notes are
also accepted for publication in the Journal.

Communications and Subscription and Sales

Editorials
Contributions for publication in Copies can be had on payment of
the Defencc Science Journal subscription in advance by crossed

should be addressed to : cheque or MD. from :

THE CONTROLLER or PUBLICATIONS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA.
DEPARTMENT or PUBLICATIONS.
Clv1L LINES, DELHI-110054.

THE CHIEF EDITOR
DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNAL.
METCALFE HOUSE,
DELHI-l 10054.

Subscription Rates

Inland Foreign

Annual Rs. 800 £ 0'93
$ 2'88

Single copy Rs. 2'00 £ 0'23
72 cents

 

 

Printed by Defence Scientiﬁc Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC)
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054 at the Polygraphy Division

