 

Vol 2

Fourth Indexing Course

The fourth training course in
‘Indexing‘ was organised by
DESIDOC at Metcalfe House, Delhi
from 24 Feb to 6 Mar 1982. The
course was intended for information
personnel of DRDO Labs/Estts
loaated in the north zone. The
curriculum covered various aspects
of indexing techniques and systems
including computer processing.
Besides the lectures and practical
assignments. audiovisual demons-
tration on NTIS services was also
screened. Visits to DRDO Computer
Centre to familiarise the participants
with the working of the computer,
and lNSDOC/National Science
Library were also arranged.

The faculty members drawn
mainly from DESIDOC were supple-
mented by experts from INSDOC
and Dept of Library Science,
University of Delhi.

Delivering the valedictory
address, Prof M. Krishnamurthi,
CCR&D(K), advised the trainees to
put into practice the knowledge
gained by them in the course for
improving the efﬁciency in Libllnf
Services. He hoped that the course
would help in achieving the unifor-
mity in the indexing practices in
DRDO LibrarieslTICs and would
lead to better input prepara-
tion for computerisation of the
information. Earlier addressing the
participants, Shri S.S. Murthy,

and every descriptor, all the
document titles for which it
was used during the input

statements).
Si.

Nos. 3 8: 4

MARCH—APRIL I982

 

Director, DESIDOC. said that the
main objectives of this training
course were to acquaint the partici-
pants with the recent developments
in the ﬁeld and to promote unifor-
mity in the indexing in the TICs of
DRDO.

Shri V.K. Rangra. Scientist ‘D'.
was the Course Director. The next
course will be conducted in Delhi.

Computerisation of Information.

Since the last reporting on the
subject (DESIDOC Bulletin, Vol 1,
No 1), substantial progress has

 

been made in the information system
design and the software develop- 1
ment. For processing bibliographic l
data for each document one data l
input sheet which has the following i
data elements is prepared : ‘

 

1 Document number
2. Report/patent/class number I
3. Subject category (COSATI) 
4 Language of the document l
5 Physical format of the I
document ,
6. Availability of the document -
(Acc. No. and Name of the l
DRDO Estt) i
7. Personal author (two only) 
8. Corporate author/Issuing l
agency ;
9. Document type i
10. Imprinthitation
11. Title

12. Descriptors (upto nine)

13. Abstract

Total = Upto 1280 characters.

Software package written in
structured COBOL, which operates
on the above data, was compiled,
debugged, executed at UNIVAC—
1100 Computer available at BHEL.
Delhi. The same has been imple-
mented on PRIME—750 Computer.
From a single input, the system
provides the following outputs :

OUTPUTS

1. Subject Bibliography of Input
Records
This is sorted on three keys,
i.e. (i) COSATI numeric
subject code, (ii) Alphabetical
equivalent of numeric code,
(iii) Title of the document
(ﬁrst 40 characters) printed
in double columns.

Personal Author Index
Author index is printed in
double format. An entry
contains the name of the
author and the corresponding
document number.

Corporate Author Index
Corporate author index is
printed in two columns.
Entry contains name of the
corporate author and the
document number.
Descriptor with Truncated
TitIe Index ( D WTT)
Descriptors are
alphabetically.

sorted
For each

The COBOL program package has eleven modules (a total of 2000+

Module Name

Function of each module is listed below :

Function

phase together with their No.
document numbers. are in- l. SORT-ROUTINE Sorts input data in the ascending sequence
dent printed in double of document number.
column format. F 2. CARD-TAPE— Reads sorted card format data and transfers

5. Document Type Index ‘ TRANSFER it on to tape/disc in ﬁxed format.
This facilitates searching of 3. SORT- Sort records on COSATI subject ﬁelds;
information depending on BIBLIOGRAPHY allots document number and creates‘
documents category, such as Master File for further processing.
report, book. patent. etc. 4. ASDI i) Adds Interest Proﬁles to an existing
Entry contains three data interest proﬁle ﬁle.
elements : (i) Reporthatent/ ii) Matches user interest proﬁles with
Callnumber,etc..(ii) Corres- document proﬁles in the master ﬁle.
ponding document number, for comprehensive literature search.
and (iii) The document code. 5. SDI Matches the existing proﬁles with document
(In fact, it is a composite proﬁles.
document index). 6. BIBL Prints bibliography and indexes.

6. Selective Dissemination of 7. NEW MAST Creates/Adds Master New File as an indexed
Information (SDI) CREATE sequential ﬁle.
The system matches the user 8. CREATE Creates the descriptor database (Inverted ﬁle)
interest proﬁles (descriptors as indexed sequential ﬁle.
connected by Boolean opera- 9. FULL Prints bibliography. indexes and SDI (Combi—
tors) and the document pro- nation of BIBL+SDI).
ﬁles. It prints out for each 10. DES Outputs descriptor with truncated title index.
interest proﬁle, the relevant 1], QUERY Performs query searcl‘ online/offline on

documents in two parts:

database.

\

\.

 

(i) User copy, (ii) Feedback
copy. The feedback copy is
to be returned to the system
for reﬁning the interest pro-
ﬁles, if necessary. Data
elements contain :

(vii) Master ﬁle for retrospec-
tive searches and des—
criptor database on disc
for online query search.

TRAINING

In house training to DESTDOC
staff was imparted for the input
preparation for the system.

Updating of Translations Index

(i) Proﬁle number of the

ONLINE QUERY SEARCH
The programme accepts the user‘s

Cooperation of Defence R&D

user.

(ii) Name and address of the
user.

(iii) Search parameters and
search expresston.

(iv) Document number, title,
availability code, langu-
age and physical format.

In feedback copy each
document entry has a
comment line “IS THIS
DOCUMENT RELE-
VANT TO YOU? YES/

A

(V)

keyed (himself)
from a single

not
run during a single run.

results are printed on both VDU
and printer as desired.

queries

maximum of 99 queries

DA TA PROCESSING

ranging
descriptor to nine
descriptors connected by Boolean
operators “AND” & “OR”
greater than 45 descriptors.
are
The search

but

NOICAN'T SAY."
(vi)

PLEASE."

source :

Language :

Reference :

Translation No :

Translated by :

This information will help. in
avoiding duplication in translation
effort and quick location of elustlng
translations in DRDO.

In case of zero number
of hits, a message IS prin-
ted “NO DOCUMENTS

Technical report data received
from GTRE Bangalore was proces-
sed and the output sent to them.
DESIDOC Translation Division
data (translations held
DESIDOC) has also been processed.

 

Technology‘, reported in daily
newspapers, was scanned and 1445
selected items were brought to the
notice of top management in
DRDO. _
Information Search
1nformation on the following
subjects'topics was collected from

 

sz

Laboratories{Establishments is soli-
cited to update the index of transla-
tions maintained in the Translation
Bank at DESIDOC. The present
holding of translations runs into
over 2000. The information on
each translated document is arranged
aCCording to source. author and
subject.

The Defence R&D LnbsiEstts
have been requested to forward the
bibliographic details of translations
available with them. which were got
done through other agencies to-tlate.

ill the format shown below :
Author(s) :

Title of translation and name of

 

‘Library and Information
science education in India’—
Prof K.A. Issac, Professor of
Library Science, University of
Kerala (3] Mar 1982).

Library Activities

89 books, 242 reports literature
were acquired and accessioned by

 

 

 

SDI Bulletins the literature available in the the Library during Feb& March
Defence Science Library and 1932.
Eight bulletins were brought out supplied to the indemors 1 677 publications consisting of
on “meets 0f Dafepce.‘nterﬂt.:_ . 1. Blue Green Laser 250 books, 386 periodicals and
-l' Armomd Fab-mg VEhwios' 2. Development of Aerial Mast 65 reports literature were loaned
This bunetm highlights various 3. War Gaming during this period within and out—
MBTS wider devewpmem m various 4. Composite Solid Propellant side the Defence R&D Organisation.
:oumnes and also- reports the 5. Vehicle Technology Inter-library loan facility was
“movements made m APC and 6. Ship Propulsion and Small availed by the SA to CAS, SA to
M'zi" USA' Craft iCNS, osc, DLRL. DTRL and
2. Energy Resources Thfe 7. Tecwnics System DEAL.
main article ‘Alternative aircrat _ _ . _ .

i - '- . f Seminar Lectures Participation in Conference ‘
31:31:65 bfhgigbiophh‘Entud‘ECEEZrnZ— 1. ‘Application of quantitative Shri S.N. Mehta, Selentllst ‘D.,
tive fuels for aircraft and also methods to information attended DRTC Annua Selml-
discusses the viability of hydrogen, sciences’—Shrl K.C. Garg nar (19) 1982 held at Banga ore
alcohol, etc, as fuels. (9 F613 1982) from 1 to 5 March, ‘1982 and

3. Corrosion prevention _- This 2. ‘NATIS with reference to presented the paper 113503;?
contains twoq ides, viz. (i) The NISSAT programme’I—Prof Sharing Cooperattlv‘: Rita”;
control of hot cﬁwmion in marine P-B- Mang13~ UHIVBFSHY 0f “9U 01: DOCEUITiEIai: ’Y He also
gas turbines, and (in A systematic Delhi (3 Mar V982)- _ lefal'éesthmt nhniéal sessmns
approach to corrosion prevention. 3- ‘Compmel’ SYStem lﬂtrOduC- Chaim :3 6° _ 1 I

- - . - tion’——Lt Col R.K. Sharma, ’7 8t. 8 on Collection Delve op
b liltinlﬁfggﬁgoznﬁingi 013:: OIC, DRDO Computer Centre ment and Document Circula-
u _ ’
role of special libraries in the (4Mar1982)' “on'
emerging national network, and Forthcoming Conference b
(m sma" libraries: keeping the SNo Conference Date Details available from
pmfessmnal {305mm prOfesswnaL 1. 7th International Conference 12—16 Sept Secretary, ICCG-‘l Kresta‘l-

The tacma‘ ﬁghteI-‘s devel-OE- on Crystal Growth in Stutt- 1932 labor PhySIkallsches Insti-
mackaligoxﬁxattﬁgﬁ-gﬁhtarise: gart, German Fed Rep. 21:6 delrd Unrversrgt 505‘:
sur ’ ' enwa nlng
{beefibihiiiirii‘iigob‘iﬁlginie subjeﬂs 0f 2. 4lst Conference and Con- 12-16 Sept Polytechnic Iflbl'alflla'll

‘ gress of Federation for 1982 Hong Kong, Po ytec mc
current Awareness gem“ Documentation : The chal- Library, Hung Hom Kow-

Information 0“ “lemme lenge of information tech- 10011. Hong Kong-
developments in China. (42 items) nology in Hong Kong I
biting, iiieiiihsigeigcgiggglng 3. 2nd International Conference 20-23 Sept British Compilictler 52:18“:
ted through the two publications, on Databases (ICOD-Z) 1982 13 Mansﬁe ree ,
viz.,"‘Spot News on China’, and London, w1M 031: UK:
satin“, and Tecmomgy m 4. 7th International Biotechno- Nov-Dec Biochemical Engineering
[Dari-ammo" on sDRDO’ logy symposium in New 1982 Research ' Centre, IIT,

loading? and ‘Scicnce and Delhi New Delhi-“0029.

 

 

   
 

Communications and Editorials

Contributions for publication in the Defence
Science Journal should be addressed to 1

THE CHIEF EDITOR

DEFENCE SCIENCE Jounmr
DELHI-I 10054

METCALFE House.

The

and techno]

draft, crosse

Defence
Meicalfe

Subscription R

For Libraries
Govt Deptls

lions, etc
Individuals

Single Copy

Research lnstilu-

Journal publls hes rescu rch

papers in almost all branches of science

ogy related to Defence.

Sales and Subscription

Copies can be had on payment of bank

d cheque or MQ from :

The Director

Scientiﬁc information and

Documentation Centre (DESI DOC).

House, Delhi-110054

ates

Inland Foreign

Rs 50.00 t 

Rs 25.00
Rs [5.00

is SIZ
£3 5 6

 

 

In?“LAIIL
50"“. .
nghnnlﬂl‘l

     

language.

ideas.
Issues Available
Food for our
Plastics—The
Aeronautics
From
The Director

Price : Re ll- per copy

POPULAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

‘An illustrated popular journal that conveys information
on scientiﬁc .und technological developments in a simple

*1nteresting colour pictures are given to clarify scientiﬁc

Defence Scientiﬁc Information and
Documentation Centre (DESIDOC),
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054

Sentinels
Miracles from Molecules

 

 

“Subscription to be remitted by crossed postal order or cheque in favour of Director, DESIDOC"

 

 

Published and Printed by DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054

