 

 

O

   

    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
  

 1

 urination Dissemination

Information on following
was collected and supplied to
entors:

Camouﬂage
Remote Sensing
Ahborne Radar

(Rocket Trajectories Mana-
;,_gement
Underwater Laser Communi-
"ication

I tent Information Alerts‘
3 information on 55 patents
interest were circulated
eientists concerned.

"nety-nine abstracts of
reports were disseminated
‘ the published Defence
Abstracts}

(small

. information on Defence.

nd Science & Technology
nod from the daily news-
brought to the notice of
ement of DRDO.

intimation on the ‘Develop-
China’ and ‘Science and
11 Pakistan’ was circula-

In
merits

 

Twenty-nine bulletins on Defence
topics were brought out.
covered in some of the bulletins are
as follows :

Missile Technology

This bulletin gives information
on the development of air-to-air
missiles for the I990s, new air inter-
cept missiles for the French Air
Force, missiles launching system for
Aegis Cruisers and the future MLR.

Naval Problems

Four bulletins on Naval problems
containing
submarine warfare, torpedo, deve-
lopment of new underwater vehicles

submarine
defence were issued.

Military Electronics

Armoured Fighting Vehicles

weapons. AFVs of the future and

N as.

 

s a a MAY—JUNE I982

 

SDI Bulletins Other SDI bulletins deal with
information sciences, laser, mate-
rials, military and naval aircraft,
military organisation and warfare,

nuclear weapon and radar.

The topics

Improvements in ‘Defence Science
Journal’

Defence Science Journal. the
research periodical of the DRDO
has recently undergone signiﬁcant
improvements in the contents and
the get-up. The inﬂow of contri-
butions from the scientists of DRDO
and other institutions, has also gone
up. These improvements have
received appreciation from many
sources. Some of the appreciative
comments received by DESIDOC
are reproduced below:

information on anti-

craft) and developments in

‘Compliment on on the ﬁne ualit
detection and their y q y

being maintained of the Journal.’

S. Sampath
Director
Indian Institute of Technology

 

This contains an article on
computer techniques for off-shore Kanpur
corrosion protection of Naval ships.

J

l

l ‘Vast improvement in the presenta-

l tion.’

: Vivek R. Sinha
CCR&D(V)

_ _ Sena Bhavan, New Delhi
in ‘

this series current develop-
in the Defence R&D

‘Thc Journal is found to be very

 

 

i‘entists through the two ‘ Defence equipment newjy 5mm- interesting and informative.‘
h» ‘SPOt News 0" Chm?" duced in Services or about to be AK. De
lance 3‘ Teclmmogy I“ introduced were reported. Latest ' Director
 These'mmamed 33 and development of Soviet Union's new  Indian Institute of Technology
“SPBCUVL’W- T-80 MBT was also given. ‘ Bombay
_"I'he new format and printing T R A N S L A T I 0 N S
burlgs 't on Par “M11 the be“ selenti' The following books/articles were translated :
ﬁc journal printed in India. and this
will help the journal to project the ‘
. . Ind r Page:
Image Of DRDO appropriately.” S” Na' ﬁne—Author [glitng Translated
NS. Venkatesan
Director RUSSIAN
Arma t R . 81. I) E. -
men eq . W m 1. Physical Metallography of titanium by DMRL. Hyderabad 41
Armament Post. Pune - r . .
BA. Kolachev. Chapter IV—Dlslntegra-
‘...Pleuscd with the printing and {ion or titanium and its alloys“
set-up of the Journal.’ 2. Exterior ballistics by Ya. M. Shapir. IAT. Pune 34
S. Ramaseshan Chapter IV'
Director 3. ‘Salyut-ﬁ’ : Problems of increasing the SA to CAS 2

Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore

‘The quality of printing has
improved considerably.’

Y.R. Chadha

Chief Editor

Publications & Information Dte 5-

eﬁcctiveliess of observations. .4 vialsiva r'

Kosmonavtika. 3. 198]. 42-43.

Study of the properties of Polydime- DMSRDE. Kanpur 7

thylorganosiI-Sequioxanes by I.M.
Khandna-Suvili and others. lifrssoko-
molelculyamie Socdinenim. 22 (6). l980.

I4I3-1419.

Hot hydrostatic pressure forging of the DMRL. Hyderabad 4

  

granules of heat-resistant nickel base
alloys by A.F. Belov and others. Doklady

CSIR. New Delhi

 

Akodemii Nook SSSR. 247 (1). I979.
Publications 90'93-
6. Study of the rate absorption of protium DSC. Delhi 3
* A book entitled ‘International and deuterium in activated LaNi 5-com—
Dictionary of Acronyms in Data pound by B.M. Andreev and others. Zli.
Processing. Library 8!. Information Fi:. Kilimii, 5. 1980. 1195-1197.
Slatems‘ by V-K- Range“ selentm 7. New heterochain polymers on the base DSC. Delhi 21
‘D’OfDESIDOC hasbeen Published of cyclic imides of fatty acids by LA.
by Citation PUbliSherS‘ New Dalhl' Arkhipova and others. Uspeklii Klil'nn‘i.
It contains over 4000 terms covering .47 (4), 19739 705.733
insunltions‘ assomatmns' processes' 8. Acoustic properties and structural trans- DSC. Delhi 3
tec‘mlques' .SyStemS Etc' The bOOk formations in polyamidoimide ﬁlms by
has bee.“ highly commended by . E.L Uchostnika and others. Vl'ssokomo-
“perm!” the ﬁeld'  lekulrrlmie Socdineniya. Ser. B. 1976.
* A _[ f _ ; 697-699.
- paper on :1 Urmauon 9. Synthesis and study of polymers obtained DSC. Delhi 4
Services of DESIDOC by 8.8. 1 , _ .
- from N, N-bis-(3. 4-dlcarboxybenzoyll-
Murthy. Director and V.K. Rangra. N Ng-d. h I— _ h 16“ dilimhe diam
Scientist 'D’ has been published in ‘ 1p any n p my C ‘ 1

hydride by A.V. Trezvov and others. -
Klissokomolekull'ornin Seedl’neniya. Scr. B.
1976. 7005103.

the book ‘Perspectivcs in Librarv and
Information Science.’ The book has
been issued as Festchrift. volume in

honour of Prof. CG. Viswanathan. 10. The processes occurring in polvimides DSC. Delhi 5
The book also contains papers during prolonged heating by NO.
by experts from other countries. Annenkova and others. Vl’Sﬁ'thl'UHUlP/{lt-
(Could on Page 4.‘ I lvamie Soadiuenil'n. Ser. B. 1971. 201-205,
2
' ' ' DESIDOC Transindex
11. Nuclear magnetic resonance in p01}; DSC. Delhi 4
yromellitimide by Ya. G. Urman an ‘ ‘ -
Idthers. Vyssokomolekulyarnie Soedinemya, An Index of 13551909 “3mm
59’ B 1971 912‘915' tions done in the year 1980;;5332
1' i ' - ' 45 ublished under the tltle D I
12. Semi-conductor diodes oflselected types . DTDSLP (Air) tékANSINDEX 1980‘ It contains
specml mammal spemﬁcatmns' I43 translated items from Russian.
13. Classiﬁed documents. SA to CA8 92 French, German and Japanese_ It
also contains source. author and
' ' facilitating
H subject indexes for '
FRENC ' CA5 23 information search from various
1. Summery of nine articles on UFO. SA to approaches.
2. Flight test programmes on the electro- SA to CAS ll
magnetic effects of lightening. ‘ I -
3. Experiments study on detonation in gas TBRL.Chandlgarh 42 Translation Bank
role of chemical kinetics. Parts I 8: I1. 1 I d c
4. Physiological stress factors in space ﬂights. SA. to CAS l8 Forty-four new tglral; 1213313 £36
5 S eciﬁcation NP L-54-1258 Type 5 Electri- CRE. Nasik 2| at or arranged by I I I
I pl t indexed. Bibliographic information
ca connec ors. I Iations
' on 115 unpublished trans
6. Synthesis of copolyester diodes. ERDL,Pune 33 available with Other Indian trans.
7' Infra-red cameras SA to CAS 2‘ Iation agencies Were collected andI
classiﬁed on index cards for future
JAPANESE reference.
I. Piezo-gauge holder for the measurement ERDL. Pune o N Additions
of underwater detonation of small charge ew .
bv S. Oinuma ct al. I 04 ts
‘ l‘ ' r ‘ ' a; 9 Sixty-three books andﬁ repor
2. Device technologies by Y. Onlshl et al.  i‘ll;’.:z\3.wngs13(1):: were added to the Defence sewn“
’ ‘ 7 Library during the period. The books
3. Technology of input and output devlces -do- covered various subject areas “kc
by A. watembe' Library Science. Military Science.
4. Fabrication of Hanoi-timer by Nishimura. IRDE, Dehradun 4 Astronomy Mathematics. Chemls_

try. Meteorology. Ecology. Mecha-
nical and Electrical Engineering.
Electronics. Chemical Technology.
Rubber & Plastics. Computer. Data

5. Mutual transformation for S-parameters ’DLRL. Hyderabad 3
by K. Nishio et al.

6. Inter—satellite communication
by Nakashima N.

technology IRDE, Dehradun 2

7. Thermal reactivities of nitro-compounds XI ERDL, Pune 7 Processing ‘MFChaI‘IlCS and Typo-
comparison of isomers of mono and di- graphy & Printing.
nitro toluene by Hara Y. et a1. ‘

8. Combustion of Nickel added double base ERDL, Pune 6 Reprographlc Activity

1 . al.
propellants by Kubola N et let-408 repm_copies were made

during April-May 1982 on demand
from Scientists in Melcalfe House
Complex and from the other DRDO
6 Lablestts. 48 slides were prepared
for SA to CAS. Defence Terrain
Research Laboratory and Directo-

GERMAN

l. The 120 mm smooth barrel gun of
Leopard-2 Weapon & Ammunition by
Raimund Germieshauser.

CVRDE, Avadi.

 

 

2~ combat tank Leopard'z within the. frame‘ {10- 2 rate of Scientiﬁc Evaluation. Audio—
work of international cooperation by (Coma, on Page 4)
Michael Ibama von Sternberg. ' I
O ‘I x
3. Development of Logistic capabilities of CVRDE, Audi 4 (Could from Page 3) is
giganrﬂk Leopardrz by Volker - visual facility was provided'on four
4 _ - A I ‘ occasions and photographic coverage
. Anti-radar missdes for naval aircraft. SA to CAS 3 was provided to Solidstate Physics
5. Computatlon and measurement of piezo- SP1... Delhi l 1 Laboratory, Defence Terrain
resistive coeﬂicients in silicon by B.M. ‘ ReSearch Laboratory, Computer
Helm & D. Schubert. I Centre, Defence Science Centre and
6. Piezo-resistive miniature pressure recorder die; I for the Dr- RamakTiShna Memorial
for use in medicine by R. Wertcrschutzky. Lecture-
7. Resistive and piezo—resistive coefﬁcients -do- 2
of integrated semi-conductor resistances 3 '-
by D. Schubert. Printing Adm”
8. The ﬁre control unit of Leopard—2 by CVRDE, Avadi 4 F n - - . - - - -
Jurgen Neumann. ‘ aha“?  prlntlng jobs Involving
9- T _ __. _ - impressmns were
Jzinilg of armoured crew of combat do 4 completed. The jobs were received
eopard-Z. - f A - -
. I I mm the Selentlfic Adwser to
10. The training equipment concept for combat -do- 8 Defence Minister, Chief Controller
tank Leopard-2 by Armin Simburger. Research & Development (A), Chief
11. Structure and magnetic properties of DMRL. Hyderabad 10 Controller Research& Development
Aluminium-Manganese alloys having (K). Dtc. of Materials &Agricul-
more than 25% Mn. . turaI Sciences, Defence Institute of
12. Recombination in thyristors and rectiﬁers SPL, Delhi 29 PhYSiOIOSY and Allied seiemesv
made of silicon: their inﬂuence on the Inmmte of NIH-3163’ Madicme and
forward characteristic and dynamic Allied SCiences and Defence SCiencc.
behaviour by F. Daunhauser & J. Krausse. _ centre»
13. Avalanche science instruction manual SASE Clo 56 APO 124
55.330_ One ' issue of ‘Abstracts from -
14. Torsion of commercial vehicle frames VRDE, Ahmednagar 5 Forelgn Language Bulletins’consist'
with open and closed cross-sections by - mg of 92 pages was printed by "
HJI Beermann' _ oﬂ'set process. In addition. 82 pages
15. Optimum tail plane design for artiﬁcially CRE, Nasik 10 0: vailous bunetins’reports .werc
stabilized aircraft by G. Sachs, Zeil Far as" pnmed'
Flugwissenscllaft and Weltraumporschung,
2 (I), 1978' (Contdfrom Page 2)
16. Ecology and methods of mosquito con- DRDE, Gwalior 5 I. A Paper entitled-1A Study 0“
no] by Lugram Igliscl-L the loss in transit of journals sub-
17. T Turret of Leopard-2 by Kurt Heinz CVRDE, Avadi 4 scribed ‘hmugh a Vendc’" by W" .
Kratzenberg Soldat & Technik 10/1980. Rang“! and 13- Mathur (Retd) pf
D . . _
18. Combat tank Leopard-2, a challenge for -do- 2 jogfigqﬁ:::lffgl {ithZShegg the
tshedarmoured corps by Helmut Fischer and Documentation vol 2; N‘s”?
D t , r 1 - s t s
a & Techruk 6}]981. March 1982.'

 

 

Printed atDel‘ence Scientiﬁc Information 8: Documentation Centre (DESIDOC)
Metcalfe House. Delhi-11mg

