ll). Prevalence of Dengue infec- DESIDOC on deputation for two WP with regard to type
tions in India. years. faces and sizes. column
5
width. space between the performing functions or at] workload is going to in-
lines. paragraphing. etc. and or them in armction or crease considerably. you
the manuscript is typed on time with [‘31- less [abour may have to go fora WP
the keyboard. For getting and considerably less usage unit with common logic
the facility of types of vari- or consumables, (where more than one WP
ous sizes and styles. the WP are hooked to a single logic
is normally attached to a How to Choose a System or typesetting or printing
phOtOll’Pesellel-V A copy or The following suggestions should “Hill-
the galley PFOUHS Obtained be useful in selecting an appropriate (vii) If you haVe a- computer—
from the print unitor the Systcm: System accessible to your
phomtypesetter' “‘ISP‘WSP (i) Acquaint yourself with the omce- the WP ChOSCIIShOUid
ble to hook'up one or more possiblﬁ applications of the be compatible to the main
WP to a Single, phototype- word Processing Equip compute]. System. Discuss
setter for achievtng high mam. with the computer centre
Speed in composmg' A --) P . 1- f - b b manager on the compati-
dummv of the pages is then (u mpale a m 0 30 5 m 5 him , t.

, ' done in your office or estab— . y “Spec 5' ,
plepaf’ed from corremed nshmem that could be done (viii) If you are planning getting
proo‘s'. Phomgraphs (blaCk by a WP access to external databases
and white or colour) are also  I ‘I d I you may have to use the WP
pasted up on the dummy (1“) Ublllg a dllchlory Gillie  System as an (“Mine temm
wherever necessary. The lf5!ill-Pmﬁllllsyhtﬁms bllCllfib nals SO an equipment sum
entire matter of these pages Gmde 10 word PTOLCSSlng lb] t“ hook u will
is transferred to offset plates System81 Prepare a Short A e to b 1  p
through photographic pm- list of such Systems that are have 10 e L Osen'
cess (using colour ﬁlters for exPEN-Mm ‘0 meet Your To Sum Up ’
colour printing) and then rcqllllements- GCt the Electronic ofﬁce equipment have
they are printed on offset “WISHING” them “(With come to stay. Typewriters and
machines. Multicolour oﬁ'» concerned mantlfacmm'i 0" Word Processors. Photocopiers.
set printingjobs can be done dealers alonnglh a “51 0f Video Disc Recording Services and '
using this process. If the those Who are already USIUS many other ofﬁce equipment are
matter to be printed does‘ the SYSlem during lhe Past increasingly becoming electronics .
not have pictures. it is possi- one year or molt based. The libraries/technical in—
ble with some WP to type (iv) In addition to studying the formation centres can take advant-
the matter directly on offset trade literature of the age Of these deVelOPmemS~ Partl-
masters which can be used systems in the short-list. try cularly in the Wm ' Processors. to
straightaway for printing. to see their working in the improve the effectiveness of their
The storage discs on which ofﬁces where they are 211. information services in speed as
the matter is recorded can ready in operation. Try to well as coverage. However. ill
be preserved for future reuse get the comments of those choosing the equipment or systems. ’
orcan beerased by recording users on the servicing. decisions are to be made after all
some other matter. maintenance and back up the relevant aspects and future plans
_ ‘ ‘ services for the equipment. are adequater considered.

“1.6 xemlxywoq‘eiémomfi (v) Study the quoted prices Defence Science Journal Editorial
pummg Byuem h lePOi—ic carefully for the hidden Board Meeting

to be an advanced version

ofthe Word Processorhased cosis' Ensure to gm the The meeting or the Editorial
printing system. It could ﬁgulpmem or those' Whose Board of Defence Science Journal
replace several items of COmPOne‘?“ meal Standard is scheduled to be held on 2Nov
printing equipment such as spec‘ﬁcatmns‘ 1982 at Metcalfe House. Delhi
the phototypesetter. plate (Vi) Consider your long term under the chairmanship of Dr VS
maker and processor. print- requirements. say at least Arunachalam. SA to RM and
ing machine and collator. ﬁve years ahead. If the DG R&D.

 

Vol. 2

Nos. 7—9

turf-Star 1982

 

 

~ Word. Processors
for Libraries
and

 

information Centres

 

 

 

 

 

 

When you receive a neatly typed

letter that looks like print. you
would like to go through it.
Similarly. when you receive a

technical report from a country like
USA or UK. you are particularly
impressed by its neat printing: the
matter looks like a typed one but
also like a printed one because letter
types of various styles and sizes are
You
would also sometimes observe that
repeated circularletters have certain

used for headings. text. etc.

portions of the text in common.

Now it is possible for you also
to produce similar reports or corres—
pondence using Word Processors
Word Processors have come
to India and we give below a brief
account of their application to the
work of libraries‘technical informa-

(WP).

The video screen varies in size with
different equipment with display
from a single line to about A3 size
accommodating tw0 full pages of
text. One can see the matter while
it is keyed in and correct mistakes. if
any. As the inputting is in progress,
only the last portion of the matter
upto the size of the screen can be
seen on it. Even after the matter is
recorded in the memory or the
storage unit. it is possible to call
back and carry out modifications.
Any additional matter could be
inserted in between the portions of
the text; one can storea standard
text and also record separately the
additional texts or addresses (of
individuals or organisations) and
incorporate them at desired places
for getting the ﬁnal copy in the
desired form. In addition. if a
word or phrase repeats frequently in
the text. a code can be used to
record it so that by keeping the code
in. the entire phrase is recorded.
For ofﬁce communications the out-
put can be obtained on standard
forms.

A ‘stand alone’ WP is a self-
contained system and it can also
work as a terminal for an on-line
computer facility. In a ‘shared
resources system”, several keyboards
are connected to a hard disk and to
the output devices like the print
unit to achieve high speed in the
output.

Applications

Word Processors are commonly
used for the following purposes :

(i) to issue letters of repetitive
text with certain portions
modiﬁed, added or deleted
for certain addresses.

(ii) to make agreements or con-

tracts with names and

addresses of the concerned
parties and any special
clauses incorporated at

 

desired places.

[\J

7. Stability of vibrations of a rotating

 

tion centres ('fle) as well as their
use in ofﬁces. They can be econo-
mically used in ofﬁces for corres-
pondence. for making contracts or
agreements. supply orders including
the terms and conditions for the
supplies and a host of other com—
munications where certain matter or
text is to be repetitively used with
no or minor changes.
What is a Word Processor ‘2

It is an electronic equipment
used for formatting and editing
texts or matter for storage in the
memory of the equipment or on an
external Storage facility like ﬂoppy
disks. for obtaining outputs repea-
tedly with desired changes. It can
also be used for typing on oﬁ‘sct
masters for printing by using a
suitable print tinit.

 

Components of a Word Processor

The main components of a Word
Processor are :

(i) a keyboard for inputting
the desired text or informa-
tion.
on internal memory unit for
storing the software neces-
sary for operating the system
or any other information.

a microprocessor-based logic
unit for using the software.
an external storage unit for
storing information and also
software when necessary,
(v) a video screen that displays
the matter being keyed in.
and
(vi) a print unit for giving prints
of the matter that is keyed
in.

(ii)

(iii)

no

 

In Libraries & Technical Information
Centres

area are :
cations,
(iii) Circulation control. (iv) Tech-
nical processing.
tion of Information Service Bulle-
tins. and for printing jobs.

(iii) to make and update mailing
lists,

(iv) to compose
offset printing, and

matter for

(v) as a terminal for an on-line
computer system.

The common applications in this
(i) Acquisition of publi-
(ii) Budgetary control,

and (v) Produc-

(i‘) Acquisition of Publications
The correspondence of
repetitive nature, like plac-
ing supply orders, follow-up
of these orders. listing of
unfulﬁlled orders. cancella—
tion of such orders. releasing
payments to the suppliers,
and other similar jobs can
be effectively dOne using the
Word Processors. Standard
letters can be stored on the
floppy disk and details like
titles of publications, their
prices. due dates for sup—
plies, etc. can be incorpora-

 

ted in the appropriate letters
and issued to the concerned
parties. Similarly details of
issues of the journal expeo
ted to be received at certain
intervals of time can be
maintained in the disc and
non-receipts can be followed
up.

(if) Budgetary Control
Details of ﬁnances allocated
for the acquisition of vari—‘
ous publications’informa-
tion products or services
can be stored in the system,
and expenses incurred. com—
mitted, etc. can be regularly
input into the system and
prints-out of uptodate
ﬁgures of expenditure under
various heads vis—a-vis
budget allocations cart be
obtained when desired.

(iii) Circulation Control
When the publications are
loaned the relevant details
like the borrower’s name
and address. title of the
publication, accession No.
and call No. of the publica-
tion, etc. are recorded on

(Could. on Page 6 Cal. 3)

 

 

 

 

 

DRDL. Hyderabad 7

cylinder made of linear elastic material I

by R. K urktschiev.
I975.

JAPANESE

1. Complex salts of lead picrate (II):

Ing. Arch. 44.

ERDL, Pune 7

the possibility of practical use as a

priming charge. J.
Japan 40, l979, 16—22.

2. The shock sensitivity of slurry explo-
card-gap test by S.

sives the

by

Ind. Exp. Soc.

-do— 5

Matsudorira et at J. Ind. Exp. Soc.

Japan 40, 1979. 81-85.

 

DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNiL

Contents of October 1982 Issue :

I. Hydromagnetic unsteady ﬂow
of a dusty viscous ﬂuid bet—
ween a ﬂat wall anda long
wavy wall.

2. Recovery ventilation and
oxygen debt; A mathematical
model for a the prediction of
recovery ventilation.

3. Hall Effects on MHD ﬂow
through a porous straight
channel.

4. Synthesis of cyclotetramethy-
lene Tetraanitramine by three-
stage method. ‘

3. Mixed ligand complexes of
N-G-methyl benzothiazol-2-YI-
salicylaldimine and 2-methyl
benzimidazole.

6. Dusty viscous ﬂow between
conventric spheres performing
longitudinal oscillations.

7. Calculation method for three
dimensional turbulent boundry

layers.

8. New techniques for separating
simultaneously produced
scintillation and cerenkov
radiation.

9. On underwater explosions——
A comparative study.

 

 

Appreciation of DESIDOC’S Work

“Information on ............  .... ..
has been found Very useful by
Deputy Chief of Air Staff”.

S. K. SAHIAR
SA TO CAS

R&D DigestVSpecial Issue

A Special issue of R&D Digest
on 'Semiconducwr Devices’ is ex-
pected to be published in Oct. 82.
It will cover brieﬂy the proceedings
of international workshop on
“Physics of Semiconductor Devices‘
organised by the Solidstate Physics
Laboratory under the auspices of
Committee on Science and Techno-
logy of Developing Countries
(COSTED) and DRDO from 23 to
28 Nov 1981.

 

Personnel News

Appointments

Shri BD Joshi JSA II
Prtmmtimts
Shri R Kohli. SSA JSO
._. RK Dua. SSA JSO

,. Karam Chand. UDC OS (DSC)

 

,_. TC Sud. UDC OS
,, GL Gupta. LDC UDC
Damnation

Shri TN Banerjee, AMT, Govt.
of India Press. Howrah has joined

 

SDI Bulletins TRANSLATIONS ACTIVITIES
SDI Bulletins on the following Books/articles translated

topics have been issued :

Topics N0- of SI. N0. Tirle,-’Aullmr Indenfiﬂg _Pagﬂ
Bill/Elli]: U17” Translated

Aeronautics I 7

"Armoured Fighting Vehicles 2 RUSSIAN

Jnformation Science 1 I. Linear polydimethyl cat-bosiloxanes DMSRDE. Kanpur 7

Laser 1 with carbolic groups in the side

Materials 1 radical by AA Zhdonov and others 22.

Military & Naval Aircraft 4 1980. 1551-1557-

Military Electronics 3 2. Comparative evaluation of methods DRL. Tezpur 6

Military Organization & for capture of blood sucking mos-

Warfare 2 quitoes. Report. l—Species composition

Mimic T331110ng 1 and ratio of mosquito species captured

NUCIGM Weapons 1 by different methods by TM Masalkinu.

.Radar 1 Meditsinskaya Parazitologiya I Paazi-

science POHCY & P131“ 1 tornuie Bolezni. No. 3, 1979.47-52.

D 3. Methods of constructing liquid crystal IRDE. Dehradun 20
mformano" Seard‘ non-linear space modulators of light
Information on the following with internal feedback by IE Konapa-
subjects/topics was collected and nets and others PN Lebedev Institute
supplied to the mdentors ._ of Physics. Academy of Sciences.
(i) Falkland war USSR . _ .
(in Chinese satellites 4. Exterior _Balltsti_cs by YaM Shapiro IAT. Pune 45
(iii) Video Cassette recorders Chapter'a' Ill—135‘
(iv) Fibre optics 5. Fixed space Sesistors TBO—Q. 25-60. DTD&P (Air) 34
(v) Air sitipsfiBlinypg Technical Speciﬁcation MPT Y-ll
(vi) Reconnaissance satellites 6. Study of thermal condensation of DMSRDE. Kanpur 10
{’vii) Laser glazing organocyclic silazanes with alpha.
omega dichlorodiorgnOsiloxanes by
D-Ya Zhinkin and others. Vyssoko~
Meeting/Lecture molekulyarnine soedineniya. 22. 1980,
Shti ss Murthy. Director, 15414550-

DESIDOC represented DRDO in the FRENCH

meeting at National Aeronautical 1. Speciﬁcation AIR 7303-«General CRE, Nasik 20

LilboratOI'l/i Ballgaioms 0“ 33 Aug Technical conditions for the accep-

1982 to discuss on the establishment tance of electronic materiatg

of terminals for the on-line. informa- 2. Speciﬁcation [MR 7251I|tcﬁpr0tection -d0_ 27

60” "Ct'work 0f the European against corrosion of aircraft and

Space Agency. other aeronautic materials.

Dr SK Goel. SSA delivered a 3. Air regulation document OACI -do- 4

lecture on ‘Process of Learning‘ on annexure2 dt. 27-11-81.

16 June 1982 at. DESIDOC. 4. Certiﬁcate of navigability OACI -do— 2

annexure 8 dt. 27-11-81.
translations Bank 5. Patent No. 7604239—Molded explosives TBRL, Chandigarh 8
compounds with high cracking power.
Twelve translations available in 6, Behaviour of various condensed —do— 22

DRDO Labs/Estts h'dVC been explosives subjects to shock—waves

indexed add SiOFEd in Bank for calibrated in intensity and induration,

quick retrieval Translation Bank. Report C021l/75.

3

7. Development of special coating for -do— 21 Library Activities
hollow charges applied to the perfora- 59 books and 555 reports were
tion of the probs in petroleum industry acquired for Defence Science
by .l. Delac0vr Rev. de L‘ Ins Franeaise Library during the period The
d“ parole NO' {2 Dec' 1950 8‘ NO' H' books covered subjects areas like
>10“ 1939: Library,Information Science. Mili-

8. ‘Paple‘a high-level language for e'lec- CRE,Pune 6 “my Science= Lag“ Mathematics,
trontc swnching'systents programming. AnalytiCal & Physical Chemistry.

9. External ballistics. automated-calcula- -do— 120 Engineering & Eiectmnicsg Pattern
“0” programme or the movement of 3 Recognition and Computers. etc.
projectile with six degrees of freedom.

10. Comparison of tests in wind—tunnel -do- 24 AbOUI 840 Publicatmns were
and in-ﬁight for an executive aircraft issued 0“ loan to the SClemiSlS and
by j. J, Maestrau, Tech. Report DRDO Labs-'Estts and Technical
N0_75-]4_ Directorates. Some of the estab-

11. Electronic scanning antenas. LRDE, Bangalore 52 llSthHlS \VlliCh ﬁvillled Of this

12. Adaptive Kalman ﬁltering application -do- 41 faculty are INMAS- SPL DSEi Md
for tracking of manoeuvring targets by DSC- '25 ICChIliCﬂl queries were
Dr. Perriot. Rev. Tech. Thomson— also atlﬁnded-

CSF 12. 1980. 133-183.

13. Lymnaea species animals, their preda- DRDE, Gwalior 7 Printing Activmes
tion.

14. Evaluation of the viral charge in water -do- 7 Printmg and binding lObS
at a Bed pumping station by B. Hugues received from the Ofﬁce Of the SA
er al Water Research l3, 1117-1123. to CAS- CCR&D~ TCClmlcal Dime“

15. Deﬁnition of a new set of proﬁls for SA to CAS 7 tonnes at HQ were “‘36”th in addi'
helicopter blades by J. J. Thibert. tion to the normal jObS 0f
L’ Aeronautique at L' Astronautiqne. DESlDOC- 1“ 3” abm” 4‘ Pages
81, 1980, 13.19 involving 18,441 impressions were

rinied.

GERMAN p _ _

1. Material support for combat tank CVRDE, Madras 5 Regen Of the ScmncéAdwsory
Leopard 2 by Roland Koster Solaat. committee {.0 cabmet (41 pages)
Technik 6, 1930, 316-20. and other JOE’S (.31 Pages) “if”

2. Uptake of latex particles and micro— DRDE. Gwalior l4 compgsw and printed on 0mm

. . maChines.
encapsulated larvrcrdes by larwal
stages of by P. Wenk & J. Dinkel. .1
Zeit fur angewandte entomologie 9i. Reprographic Activity
[981} 17949?“ I 7273 repro—copies and micro—

3. Radiofrequency electromagnetic pulses CRE (AA), Pune 44 ﬁlms of the scientiﬁc and technical
gallblath by demnatmg chemlca! ex" matters were made and supplied on
PIOSWCS chargeﬁ by 3' Koch' BMVg' request to the scientists of the
F‘BWT‘M'P‘ _ , _ establishments in the Metcalfe

4. Combat airlIeIds tor the |Alr l-orce SA to CAS 7 “museum! also of lNMAS‘ SPL‘ so
(Installations structure, equipment and to SA‘ SA to CNS‘ DPRM_ {RD}; _
pl'OtCCthll)   TCW'CS \‘Vei'll'leChnlk   and  Jodhpur-

_ 1“ ’931’42‘48' , Besides preparing 29 slides. the

5. Optimisation of free ﬂight measure- CRE(AA).Pune 67 Division also provided projection
ments on missiles by L. Sticklorus. faciliiics 0“ two occasions to SA‘S

6. Water as a vector for viral infection : DRDE, Gwalior 8 ofﬁce and photographic coverage to
Viruses in the water. Zbl. Bakt. l-lyg. DTRL. DRDO Computer Centre
I. Abt. Orig-B. 172. 1980. 237-254. and DMRL. Hyderabad.

(Could. from Page 2)

and call No. of the publica-
tion. etc. are recorded on
the disc. Lists of defaul-
ters, dcpartmentwise or
those of publications out-
standing with the borrowers

subjectwise. duerdatewise.
etc, can be obtained as a

routine. Standard reminder
letters could be printed by
the WP and issued to the
concerned.
(iv) Technical Processing
Instructions on the format
for card catalogue are keyed
into system and the
relevant details of publica—
tions are also recorded at
the time of accessioning.
By using appropriate hard
paper with perforations as
the output medium, card
catalogues could be produc-
ed in multiple entries for
ﬁling by author, subject and
so on. By distributing these
cards to other libraries/TICS
in the department. Union
Catalogues also could be
maintained. Using the de-
tails stored for the catalogu-
ing purpose. bulletins like
Lists of Additions to the
Library. Subject Bibliogra-
phies and Abstracting/Index-
ing Services can also be
issued. Use of this equip-
ment for SDI work depends
on the availability of suit—
able software.

v

(v Priming Job

Word Processors are also
used for composing work by
the printing ﬁrms. The
text and headings are suit-
ably formatted through

necessary instructions to the

 

 

Printed at Defence Scientiﬁc Information) dz Documentation Centre (DESIDOC)
Metcztlfe House, Delhi-lIOOSd

