 

    

Vol. 4

DESIDOC CELEBRATES DRDO
SILVER JUBILEE

DESIDOC celebrated DRDO Silver Jubilee on

30 March 1984 with great enthusiasm. The function was

graced by the presence of the three Chief Controllers

of Research and Development. lnaugurating the function

Shri Vivek R Sinha, CCR&D said that DESIDOC was the

nerve centre of DRDO. He congratulated DESIDOC for

_ having succeeded in becoming a full fledged self-
accounting unit, which is serving its users.

A souvenir named ‘DESIDOC — A Central
Resource for Scientific Information‘ was released by
Dr M Krishnamurthi, CCR&D. This souvenir brought
to light some of the fields and multi-phasic activities
of DESIDOC.

    

MARCH — MAY 1984

It is a pleasure to note that a good number of
the staff of DESIDOC were honoured with awards for
sports events and Hindi competition, which were presen-
ted by Vice Admiral BG Mudholkar, CCR&D.

Welcoming the guests, Shri SS Murthy, Director,
DESIDOC said that DESIDOC has always strived hard to
provide scientific information services to the users since
its inception. With the revised charter of duties of
DESIDOC, there is enhanced scope to cover additional
activities like training, computerization, research in
documentation, and scientific and technical translations,
etc. a

The highlight of the day was an Exposition
which aimed at projecting products and services render-

ed by DESIDOC over the years. It was an occasion 1for
Contd on page 3

o'eeewvvlllll1;» ; - ;

 

Looking through the content: of souvenir are (from left) : Vice Adm BG Mudholkar, AVSM',
Dr M Krishnamurdri and Shri Vivek R Sinha, Chief Convener: 3&0; and Shri SS Manny,
Director; DESIDOC

PARTICIPATION IN CONVENTION/
SEMINAR

0 Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC attended
19th Argﬁual Convention of the Computer

Society of India at Hyderabad on 14-17 March
1984.

0 Shri VK, Rangra, Sci 'D', Ambrish Kumar and
RK Srivastava, Sci '8‘ attended the Seminar
organised by Centre for Development of
Instructional Technology ICENDIT) on 2 May
1984 at New Delhi.

SPECIAL ISSUE OF DSJ

A special issue of Defence Science Journal on
'Defence Food Research‘ will be published in April
1984. The papers invited for publication in this issue
give a comprehensive view of the various developments
in area of food research. Most of the papers are contri-
buted by the scientists from Defence Food Research
Laboratory (DFRLI, Mysore, Central Food Technologi-
cal Research Institute lCFTRII, Mysore and Agricultural
Research Unit (ARUI, Almora.

Shri CP Natarajan, former Director, CFTRI
and Dr TR Sharma, Director, DFRL, Mysore are the
'Guest Editors‘ for this special issue.

LIBRARY ACTIVITIES

112 books and 230 reports in the field of Infor—
mation Science, Electronics, Chemical Engineering,
Naval Science, Military Science, Satellite Communi-
cation, Spectroscopy, Computers, Polymers, Remote
Sensing, Material Science and Aerodynamics etc. were
received and accessioned.

About 514 books, 341 periodicals and 40 reports
were issued on loan to R&D HOrs and Labs/Estts.
4837 photo copies of documents were also supplied to
different Labs/Estts.

PRINTING ACTIVITIES

Besides routine printing and binding jobs of
Defence R&D HQrs and Metcalfe House Complex
25,000 impressions were taken out by offset process.
Multicolour brochures on the occasion of Silver Jubilee
Celebrations were also printed.

2

small, inclined, horizontal or vertical. Letter sizes vary
from 1 mm to 30 mm in increments of 0.1 mm. Differ-
ent cassettes can be used covering different types of
letters and symbols.

Contd from page 1

the workers to exhibit their good work in various fields.
The expOsition included display of hardware, such as,

Computer Terminal, Word Processor, Electronic
Typewriters {Network machines), IBM Composing
Machine, Microfilm/Microfische Reader, Automatic

High-Speed Copier, Rotring NC-Scriber, and some dis-
play charts. A demonstration of computer-based infor-
mation system developed by DESIDOC was displayed on
the computer terminal, which was witnessed by officers
from Defence R&D HOrs; Dept. of Library 8: Infor-
mation Science, Delhi University; INSDOC; members of
the Govt. of India Librarians Association; Indian Library
Assomation, and Delhi Library Association.

The evening was devoted to a cultural pro-
gramme which presented a high class concert of music
and dance and was witnessed by over 300 guests. It
featured devotional songs, ghazals, flute recital, vocal
and classical music and Kuchipudi dance by celebrated
artists.

/ /

   

""P‘UulllJFH-‘I

n av
.1 -
Km ' Ramse Krishnamurthi‘ {guest artist) performing

kuchi'pudr' dance.

Dr M Krishnamurthi, CCRSiD complimented
DESIDOC for arranging such a good show, which was

first of its kind so far held in the Metcalfe House
Complex.

Sports

Various indoor and outdoor competitive events
in which workers of DESIDOC took part with zeal and
enthusiasm were arranged. The events were:

* Volley-ball championship (Team event)

Carrom doubles championship (Team event)
Carrom singles championship
Chess championship

Musical chair (for ladies)

+

Ball and spoon race (for ladies)

Thirty prizes for the winners of the various events were
distributed.

DESIDOC also participated in the inter-
establishments Volley-ball championship organised by
INMAS, and Carrom singles and doubles championship
organised by SPL.

The officers and staff were entertained with
packed lunch as a part of festivity, which was apprecia~
ted by all. The workers were also presented with a steel

lunch box as momento.

HONOURS

On completion of 25 years of service in DRDO
the following officers and staff were honoured with
salvers on the occasion of DRDO Silver Jubilee
Celebrations:

1. Shri RK-Paul, Sci 'D’
" VK Rangra, Sci ‘D'
SN Mehta, Sci ‘D'

5‘9"!"

" BS Sharma, Sci ‘D'

” Ram Kishore, Sci 'D'
” RL Mukhi, Sci ‘0'

" ML Kakar, Sci ‘8'
DS Negi, JSO

” 0P Paliwal, VTO

camcorders“

.4

" Jagpal Singh, UDC

APPR ECIATIONS FOR DESIDOC

Maj Gen RS Chawla, Director, Dte. of Combat
Vehicles, in his letter dated 31 March 1984 writes,
" . on the occasion of Silver Jubilee Celebrations
......... .. The function marked and reconfirmed to all
of us the able leadership which the DESIDOC has and in
which the organisation has advanced tremendously .... 

In his another letter dated 16 April 1984,
Maj Gen RS Chawla writes, “ ...... .. the efficiency by
which the task has been done, is really stimulating.....".

BOOK PUBLISHED

A book entitled "Mental Retardation and

Learning" has been written by Dr SK Goel, JSO of
DESIDOC.

The book aims at making complete psychological
assessment of mental
standard psychological tests
conditions, and facilitating the learning capacity of
mental retardates by using isolation and programming

devices.

retardates by administering

suitable for lndian

The book has been published by National
Psychological Corporation, Agra.

AWARD OF Ph D DEGREE

Shri SP Rawal, JSO of DESIDOC has been
awarded the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy by the
University of Delhi in the annual convocation held in
March 1984. The topic of the dissertation is, “Participa-
tive Science in the People's Republic of China: A study
of open-door scientific research".

Our hearty congratulations to Dr SP Rawal on
the honour conferred on him.

NEW EQUIPMENT PROCURED

DESIDOC has acquired a new machine for. use
by the draughtsman called Rotring NC-Scriber. It is a
programme-controlled lettering and drawing machine
which reduces 80 percent of the time of the draughts-
man from tedious routine work. NC-Scriber offers
lettering, numbering, dimensioning, symbols, etc with
provision of spacing with absolute precision and in

'exact proportion. The lettering could be in capital or

 

A section of the audience at Silver Jubilee Celebrations.

DESIDOC also organised a series of programmes
from Dec—1983 to Mar-1984 for the occasion which was
for all of us to rejoice and take pride of.

Special Lectures

A number of lectures were delivered by the
specialists from various institutions in the area of
Library and Information Science to acouaint DESlDOC
officers and staff with the latest developments in the
field.

Hindi Workshop

For encouraging the use of official language in
day-to-day work, a Hindi Workshop was organised from
27 Feb — 15 March 1984. In all 25 trainees, both from
Hindi and non-Hindi speaking regions and working in
five Establishments viz. DESIDOC, DSC, DTRL, ISSA
and SAG, located in the Metcalfe House complex, parti»
cipated in the Workshop.

The faculty comprised: Dr Pandu Ranga Rao,
Director (Hindi), UPSC. S/Shri Narayana Kumar, Hindi
Officer, Ministry of External Affairs; VK Jaiswal, Senior
Hindi Officer, Deptt. of Atomic Energy: Hari Babu
Kansal, Retd. Hindi Officer, 88 Sharma, Editor, Vigyan
Pragati, PID, CSIR; Turshan Pal Pathak, Edimr, Bharat
Ki Sampada, PID, CSIR.‘ Sachida Nand Sharma, Asst.
Director, Official Language, Ministry of Defence; MML
Sharma. Chief Translation Officer, Army HOrs.

During the course of study emphasis was laid on
Hindi letter writing, noting, drafting, scientific vocabu-
lary and technical reporting, etc. Special lectures were
also delivered on topiCS of general interest. Competitions
were also arranged for essay writing, noting, drafting,
declamation and poetry recitation. Evaluation was made
by a panel of iudges comprising mosrly outside experts.

3

ﬁg. PERSONNEL NEWS

\ . .I' .
Apments ‘3

Shri 8C Sharma — Store Officer wef 15.9.83
Smt Shashi Tyagi -— Sci. '8‘ wet 9.2.84
Shri Devraj Sharma — Civ MT Driver wef 15.3.84
Shri Devinder Singh — Civ MT Driver wef 31.3.84
Miss Rita Sukla A Sci. '8‘ wef 26.4.84
Miss Chandra Kala — LDC wef 7.4.84
Miss Rita Nagpal —' LDC wef 9.4.84
Miss Vanita Suri — LDC wef 9.4.84
DESIDOC extends them a warm welcome.
Promotions

from to
Shri K Sukul Sci '8' Sci 'C' 1.7.83
Shri BK Nigam Sci '8’ Sci ‘C' 1.7.83
Smt KK Mittal Sci 'A' Sci ‘8' 1.7.83
Shri SK Tyagi JSA SSA 21.3.84
Hearty Congratulations to them.
Transfers

from to ‘
Shri OP Uppal, Ste‘no DESIDOC SSPL 27.2.84
Shri SC Singhal, SSA DESIDOC ISSA 3.4.84
Shri Dal Chand, JSA DESIDOC SAG 16.5.84

DESIDOC wishes them success in the new establish-
ments.

VISITS
Maj Gen C Sundaram, Retd. DGI, Min_0f
Defence on 25 April 1984.

Shri M Gopal Rao, Director, SSPL on 25 April
1984.

 

 

Editor : UR Sharma.

Printed and Published by DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi—110054

