 

Vol 4

SEP —- OCT 1984

N05

DEFENCE SCIENCE JOURNAL AWARDS TO SCIENTISTS

 

Dr VS Amnachalam, SA to RM addressing the winning scientists at 03.1 A wards function

Forty-four scientists from DRDO and other civil
institutions were given awards for the best papers,
published in the Defence Science Journal (DSJ) during
the last three years (1981-83). The 'Awards Presentation
Function' was held at the Metcalfe House Complex,
Delhi on 24 Sept, 1984.

The Defence Science Journal is a research periodical
of the Defence R&D Organisation, brought out by the
Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre
(DESIDOC), Delhi. It publishes original research papers
and review articles in various disciplines of science, such
as Aeronautics, Armaments, Electronics,
Naval Sciences, Food Technology, Natural
etc with orientation to Defence needs.

Explosives,
Sciences,

Dr VS Arunachaiam, Scientific Adviser to Raksha
Mantri and Secretary Defence Research, addressed the
scientists before the award presentation function. He said
that communication of the results of research is of atmost
importance in this rapidly developing world of science.
He also emphasised the need for patronising Indian
Scientific Journals and to do away with the tendency for

publishing papers only in foreign journals.

Dr M Krishnamurthi, Chief Controller Research at
Development gave away the awards to the scientists.
Vice Admiral BG Mudholkar, IN AVSM, Chief Controller
Research 8! Development presided over the function.
Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC in his welcome
address briefly referred to the scope and growth of the
Journal and efforts made to improve the contents of the
Journal during the last 2-3 years.

The occasion provided a forum for close interaction,
between the scientists of various institutions and Defence
scientists for promoting Defence Science in the country.

lASLIC SPECIAL INTEREST GROUP
MEETING

The IASLIC Special Interest Group meeting was held
at DESIDOC, Delhi on 8 August 1984 in which about 25
Information Officers/Librarians of Delhi participated
notable among those were Shri Girija Kumar, Librarian

 

IASI. 10 Special Interest Group meeting in progress

JNU 8: President ILA; Prof AP Srivastava, Librarian
Delhi University; Shri B Guha of INSDOC; Dr N
Vijayaditya of NIC and Lt Col SK Malhotra, Officer-in-
Charge, DRDO Computer Centre. The meeting was
presided over by Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC.
Prof M Krishnamurthi, Chief Controller Research 81
Development was the Chief Guest.

The Convener of the Group Shri VK Rangra, Sci ‘D'
delivered the welcome address. He explained that the
objectives of the Group are to promote activities regarding
the exchange of experience in the design and development
of computerised library and information system,-and to
provide services and create conditions conducive to
computer applications in library and information work.
He solicited suggestions, assistance and cooperation from
the participants on the proposed SIG (CA) project named
‘Compilation of a Directory of Computerised Systems
Introduced in the Library and Information Field in
India'.

Prof M Krishnamurthi in his address emphasized the
importance of computerisation, especially in the wake of
information explosion. He stressed the need for co-
operation and collaboration among libraries, in data base
creation and resource sharing to avoid duplication of
effort. He mentioned that some institutions like National
Informatics Centre, INSDOC, BARC and DESIDOC, have
introduced computerisation in library and information
work and are developing it further, but much remains to
be done in the country. In this context the role of this
Special Interest Group assumes importance and he hoped
that the group will make significant contributions.

In his presidential address, Shri SS Murthy stressed
the need of the computerisation in library and infor-
mation work not only to modernise the system but also
to increase efficiency in services in any organisation. He
pointed out the lack of co-operation and co-ordination
among professional groups, in developing software and

2

shop. A feed back on prescribed proforma was submitted

by the participants, in which they rated the workshop
as ‘very useful'.

Shri VK Rangra acted as the Workshop Director.

CONVENTION/COURSES ATTENDED

S/Shri SS Murthy, Director. DESIDOC and NK
Sehdev, Artist-cum-Photographer attended the ’First
National Convention and Exposition on Micrographics'
organised by Micrographic Congress of India from 19-21
Sept 1984 at Ashoka Hotel, New Delhi.

Shri BK Nigam, Sci. '0' attended the course on
’ "Techniques of Financial Management' organised by

National Aeronautical Laboratory, Bangalore on 13-14
Sept 1984.

Shri BC Sharrna, Stores Officer attended the course
on ‘Material Management' organised by DIWS, Mussoorie
i from 3-10 Sept 1984.

i Shri Anil Kumar Sharma, SSA attended a course on
‘COBOL .Programming‘ organised by DRDO Computer
Centre Delhi, from 27-29 Sept 1984.

-' PERSONNEL news
Appointmmt

,* Shri R Sudershan, Sci. '8' wef 25.9.84

DESIDOC extends him a warm welcome

\Promotions (Ad-hoe)

_ From To Wef
Spit. Surjit Kaur Steno Gde Ill Steno Gde II 24.8.84

I." Parkash Wati LDC uoc 1.4.84

Hearty congratulations to them

 

    

’ransfer

g Shri Net Ram, JSO to Dte of Personnel, Defence
V &D HOrs wef 31.8.84

7, perannuations
Shri ML Kakar, Sci. ‘3’ wef 30.9.84
" Ram Kishan, Civ Mt. Driver Wef 31.8.84

We pray for their good health and longevity

o Controllable noise maker

0 Carbon fibres

sharing of know-how which wastes time, labour and
money. He said that considerable experience has been
gained in the computerisation system developed by
DESIDOC for SDI, on-Iine search, in—house data base
creation and profile construction. He offered necessary
help and guidance to any institutiOn, interested in com-
puterising their information services.

S/Shri Ambrish Kumar and RK Srivastava gave a
demonstration of the DRDO-IRS developed at DESIDOC.

The system uses COBOL and is operated on
PRIME-750. The system provides the outputs as Subject
Bibliography of Input Records, Personal Author Index,
Corporate Author Index, Descriptor with Truncated
Title Index, Document Type Index and SDI. The system
was demonstrated on computer terminal installed in
DESIDOC Library. Some of the participants operated the
terminal and processed short queries. The participants
were also taken around DRDO Computer Centre.

The participants expressed their appreciation and
assured to extend their cooperation in the future activi-
ties of the Group.

WORKSHOP ON UDC

A workshop on Universal Decimal Classification
(UDC) was held at the Naval Physical & Oceanographic
Laboratory, Cochin during 27 Aug — 3 Sep 1984.
Thirteen participants from R810 Labs/Estts of southern/
western zone participated in this second workshop on
UDC, organised by DESIDOC under its 'Users’ Education
Sr Training Programme'. The curriculum included back-
ground lectures on theory of library classification and
detailed lectures on UDC with emphasis on practical
aSsignments. The titles of the documents selected for
classification covered books, journals, articles, technical
reports, patents and standards.

S/Shri VK Rangra and SN Mehta, Sci ‘D' of
DESIDOC constituted the core faculty of this workshop.
Prof KA Isaac and Shri CV Rajan Pillai of Department
of Library and Information Science, University of Kerala
delivered the background lectures. A visit for the
participants was arranged to the Library, University of
Cochin which practices UDC, and also to the INS Brahma-
putra for familiarising the participants, with the problems
of Naval Science 8: Technology.

The workshop was inaugurated by Dr KK Verma,
Dy Director, NPOL. The valedictory address was delivered
by Dr VK Aatre, Director, NPOL. Shri SS Murthy,
Director, DESIDOC, gave away the certificates at the
conclusion of the workshop. Shri Murthy also discussed
with the participants about their reaction to this work-

BOOKS WORTH READING

0 The abc of BASIC: An introduction to pro-
gramming for libraries by Eric J Huntor, London,
Clive Binglay, 1982.

o ‘ Abstracting and indexing by Jennifer E Rowley,
London, Clive Bingley, 1982.

o Author's guide to journals in library and infor-
mation science by Norman D Stevens and Nora
8 Stevens. New York, The Haworth Press, 1982.

o The challenge of information technology by

KR Brown. Amsterdam, North Holland, 1983.
0 Mrs Gandhi, by Dom Moraes, New Delhi, Vikas,

1980.
o Newswriting and reporting by James M Neal and
Suzanne S Brown. Delhi, Surjeet Publication, 1976.

o Press and advertisers‘ year book. New Delhi, INFA
Publications, 1983.

0 Proceedings of the 14th IASLIC conference held at
INSDOC, New Delhi, 26—29 Dec 1983. Calcutta,
IASLIC, 1983.

0 Studies in the application of free text package
systems for information storage and retrieval in
libraries and related information centres, by John
H Ashford and Dark 1 Matkin. London, The Library
Association, 1982.

LIBRARY SERVICES

New Acquisitions

132 books and 592 reports literature were received
and accessioned in Defence Science Library during the
period. The subjects covered by these books and reports

included Aerodynamics, Chemical Engineering,
Computers, Electronics, Information Science, Lasers,
and Sonar.

Publications Loaned

839 books/periodicals and 40 reports were loaned
to R&D HQrs Directorates and Labs/Estts.

INFORMATION DISSEMINATION

Information on the following topics was collected
from the literature available in Defence ScienceLibrary
and supplied to the indentors:

F— 575 Snow and Avalanche, 1983, 32, 51-62.

F— 576

0 Electronic warfare

o Camouflage materials and techniques
0 Airland battle in 2000 AD

0 Naval sensor system

0 Towed array sonars

0 Signal processing techniques

0 Satellite technology

0 lndia's achievements in space science

Information was also disseminated through 'Spot
News on China' and ‘Science 8: Technology in Pakistan'.

390 items of information were afso collected from
daily newspapers on relevant topics and brought to the
notice of top management of DRDO.

TRANSLATION ACTIVITIES

DESIDOC TRANSINDEX —- 1983, an index of
translations done at or procured by DESIDOC during the
year 1983 has been published. It contains 174 titles of
English translations from French, German, Japanese,
Russian and Swedish languages. It also contains source,
author, subject and translation number indexes for facili—
tating information search from various approaches.

Photocopies of five translations comprising 107
pages were supplied to DSC.and IDL Chemicals Limited,
Hyderabad on request.

Bibliographic information on translations announced
in IASLIC Bulletin was collected and index cards were
filed according to source, subject and authors.

The following new translations done at the Centre
during the period were indexed and classified.

FRENCH

F“ 570 Signal treatment problem: Research on even-
tual unity whose value are not known before-
hand by L Gerardin. Rev. Technique Thomson-
CSF,1983,15(2),415~435.

F— 571 Development and present position of the
antennas for Air Defence Radars byS
Drabowich. Rev. Tech. ThomsonCSF 1983,

15(2l.469-494.

F— 573 Snow and Avalanche, 1983, 31.

Study of the silicon deposit process in gasous
phase by JP Duchemin. Rev. Tech. Thomson-
CSF,1977.19(1).-

F— 577 Kinetic study of the incorporation of impurities
during the epitaxial growth of silicon by JP

Duchemim Rev-Tech. Thomson-CSF 1977,9(2).

F— 579 Relation between the electronic structure and
the shock sensitiveness of the secondary exploi-
sives by A Dulpeuch and J Cherville. Propel-

Iants and Explosives, 1978, 8.

JAPAN ESE

J— 196 Synthesis of trimellitic anhydride and Pyrome—
llitic anhydride by T Yoshida et al. SEKIYU
CAKKALSHI,1973, 16(1120-24.

J— 218 System evaluation technique by A Sekino et al.
DENSHI TSUSHIN GAKKAISHI, 1979, 62(11)
1269-74.

J— 297 Electric spark sensitivities of explosives by Y
Mizushima KOGYO KAYAKU KYOKAISHI
1978, 39(3) 124-28.

J— 220 Data base machine architecture by S Uemura.
DENSHI TSUSHIN GAKKAISHI,19?9, 62(11)
1289-98.

GERMAN

6—1123 Principles of wire-strain guages-techniques, the
wire strain guages, an universal aid for experi-
mental stress analysis by Obering K Haffman.

6—1132 Operation manual for temperaturerdevices

G—1141 Characteristization of corrosion inhibitors for
iron metals in acids by impedance measure-
ments by Reinhard, KOT and Konrad thn.

Chem Tech. 32 (6)319-314.
RUSSIAN

R— 530 Constitution and properties of binary metallic
alloys by A Evol. Fiziko Matematicheskiei
Literaturir Moscow 1962.

R— 533 Handwritten pages on chemical and defarring

agents.

R— 537 W-Zr system~some change of physical proper-

ties in W-Zr system.

R— 538 Preface & contents of the book r 'waves and
radiation of upper atmosphere’ by Avokyan

et aI.

 

 

Editor : UR Sharma _

Printed and Published by Director, DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi — 110054.

