 

5.

Vol 4

HEADS OF DRDO LIBRARIES MEET

The fourth meeting of the Heads of Libraries/TICs of
the DRDO was held at DESlDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi
on 29 and 30 Oct, 1984. Shri Vivek R Sinha, Chief
Controller Research & Development, inaugurated the
meeting. The technical sessions of the meeting were
presided over by Shri SS Murthy, Director DESlDOC.
Thirty-six participants representing 28 Labs/Estts. of
DRDO attended the meeting.

lnaugu ral Session

lnaugurating the meet, Shri Vivek R Sinha CCR&D
emphasised the role of information in R&D project
activities and decision making. He said that all R&D
activities start from libraries or information centres
and depend heavily on information support for their
success. The libraries and Tle, therefore, should be
well equipped to function effectively.

Shri Sinha mentioned that in the present infor-
mation age, information is treated as a resource. There-
fore, information processing, management and its transfer
to designated persons has assumed greater importance.
DRDO should not lag behind in this regard. Shri Sinha
was happy to note that significant progress made in the
Computerisation of information at DESlDOC and IAT
and also the training programmes conducted by DESlDOC
would help in improving the efficiency of the libraries/
Tle.

Shri SS Murthy in his welcome address thanked
Shri Vivek R Sinha for sparing his valuable time to be with
the delegates and to inaugurate the meeting. Shri Murthy
traced the background of the meeting and stressed the
need for holding such meetings periodically. He stated
that these meetings helped the Heads of Libraries/“I'le
of DRDO Labs/Estts in sorting out some problems,
suggesting procedures and in finding means of improving
the library/information services. The earlier meetings
were helpful in identifying problems relating to classifi—

The second technical session dealt with the staffing

norms for Libraries/Tle in DRDO Labs/Estts. The 'dis-
cussion was based on a paper on this subject, prepared by
Shri GJ Narayana and others of IAT as per the recommen-
dations of the previous meeting in 1981. Shri VK Rangra,
Scientist D gave a presentation on the subject, covering
the comments received from the Libraries/"I'le on the
paper.

In the discussion, the staff required for a standard

Library Unit and a standard Reprographic Unit was
finalised. The formulae to calculate manpower for index-
ing, abstracting, computer input and translation; formula
to convert work into manpower and minimum manpower
for a new library were also accepted.

The third technical session discussed the suggestions

from the participants for improving the library and
information services and for better coordination among
the Libraries/TICs of DRDO.

INFORMATION DISSEMINATION

Information on the following topics was collected

from the literature available in Defence Science Library
and supplied to the indentors on request;

* Science policy in India

* Tank armament

* Electronicswsurveying-use
Aircraft training

Cost effectiveness in aircraft/missiles
Radar absorbing materials
Fiber—optics

Optical communications
Microprocessors

Parachutes

NBC protection

Mine countermeasures

* Fractography

A new current awareness service, ‘Defence R&D

Alerts', has been started since October 1984. it is brought
out in different series, each covering a specific subject area
of Defence interest. About 110 items of information
have been disseminated during Nov-Dec 1984.

In addition, about 350 items of information were

also collected from daily newspapers on relevant topics
and brought to the notice of top management of DRDO.

2

NOV-DEC 1984

N06

 

Meeting of the heads of 0300 Libraries in pragress

cation, cataloguing, procurement of publications, and in
streamlining some of the administrative procedures.
Shri Murthy mentioned some of the solutions achieved
in the areas such as purchase of books from LP grant
and writing off losses. This was possible because concerted
efforts were made in following up the recommendations
made in the earlier meetings and in obtaining approval
of the RSID HQrs. He outlined the work done by
DESlDOC in computerisation of information, develop-
ment of software, and holding of training courses in
various branches of information science. He also touched
upon the computerisation activities at IAT and some
other Labs/Estts. He informed that a project for on-line
searching of data bases has been sanctioned and DESlDOC
would shortly be in a position to search foreign data-bases
and provide world-wide information to users. He sought
the co—operation of DRDO Libraries/T105 for implemen-
tation of the information network of DRDO (called the
DRDO~|RSII.

Technical Sessions

The first technical session was devoted to the pro-
gress made on the recommendations of the previous
meeting. Shri SS Murthy read out the recommendations
and explained the position on the progress.

SEMINAR/WORKSHOP ATTENDED

Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESlDOC attended the
XI IASLIC National Seminar from 26 to 29 Nov 1984 at
Hyderabad. Shri SN Singh, JSA also attended the seminar.

S/Shri A Chakraborty, Sci C and R Sudarsan, Sci B
attended the ‘National Workshop in French Translation
under the auspices of Indian Scientific 8: Technical
Translation Association from 3 to 7 Dec 1984. It was
held at Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi.

Papers Published

The following papers were presented at Eleventh National
Seminar of

IASLIC held at Osmania University,
Hyderabad from 26—29 Nov 1984 and published in
IASLIC Special Publication No 24.

0 meta, SN

Translation needs of Indian scientists for Serbo-
croatian scientific and technical documents.

6 Chakraborty, A and Saxena, SC

DESlDOC Translation Bank and its services.

0 Singh, SN and Due, Fi’K

Ethical responsibilities of special librarians/informa-
tion scientists with special reference to R810
libraries/information centres in India.

LECTURE DELIVERED

Shri Anil Kumar Sharma, SSA delivered a lecture

on Word Processors and their Application in Library’
to the officers and staff of DESlDOC on 17 Nov 1984.

LIBRARY SERVICES

One hundred books and 498 reports including

Defence standards were acquired, accessioned and brought
to the notice of the users by Library.The subjects covered
were: Chemical Industries, Computer Science, Education,
Electrical
Information Science, Material Science, Military Science
and Polymer Science.

Engineering, Electronics, Lasers, Library &

Over 950 books, periodical and reports were issued

on loan. Besides interlibrary loan, reference and other
library services, xeroxing facility was also provided to
the users. About 11,000 xerox copies were supplied to
DRDO and other Labs/Estt.

