Printing techsaorogy has been advaqcing
since the invention of movable types by
G u t e n k r g but a
ir took a new dimension
with the a d v e ~ tof photoefpesening. %P:S
erectronie tech.8oloags 2s ~ Q . W repiacing the
conve~tionai h o t me%el techno'ogy sf cornposing rypes &=use of its enormous typesetting capabilities by way of type size a n a
type style. This twhnslogy mupled with
computer has rwoiutionised the field o f
pdbBishing. The phototywsatters coma
in e variety of electronic sephlsticatios3
imaging speed and versatility in typography.
Rr is now possible t o produce full pages s?.:
composed ma%tsr in the desired formal
on the display. The final image from t h e display screen is transferred t o a photosensitive surface from which f i d ~ h e fcopies aa5
printed,

Photovpeset$ing &hich is scme times
eraoqesuslv referred ro as coid type ,n eonbrast to hot rype in metal t y p e ~ t t i s s g~nvofves
~
sertiog tyoes by photographic method.
4w this method, a copv is compesed one
character at a time, and the image of character
is focussed on s p ~ o l o g s p h i cpaper or filmsj.
Because of the opztml promss rnuolved, a n y
vpe size can be produma from B single
masaer image by edarglng or reducing the
image threebgh Icnses. Various at-bstic effects
:n q p ~ g r a p ~ y , s u eash expansion and cocdepsation of Bet-ten, o~eriagaprnsg, slanting and
distortion of characte: images can now be
n r a a ~ w d wne: P U C ~ ease, b e t ~ e r quafwii
a-d Drgk speed. iFd,"atie ebe actual arscess
cf typesettang 1s- Q X ~ O Q the
I ~ ~ co~stlggosed

t e x t o n t o photosensitive surface; photocomposition covers the process sf design,
composition, typeseeing, layout, farmaKing
and reproduction, ar.d is a n Evtermediate
phase in the printing cycl.,
The input to the phototypesetter is given
through a key board. The computer stores the
input information and codes for various
instructions, and performs functions like
addition, deletloisb, justification of iines,
hyphenation and formaEing, The instructions
from the keyboard through the computer
are carried o u t in the photounit. Here desired
character for the text are exposed on t o
photopapar or photosensitive piate through
an optico-mechanicel prr;cess. A visual display
terminal (VDTj is assuaily a s a c h e d t o t h e
keyhard an which the input information
is displayed for editing, correcting and organising into desired format. This final information may be stored into computer memory,
on fioppgr disc or other magnetic medikirn,
or can be directly transmitted to the photounit. These units vary in complexity with t h e
syslern and may be separated o r combined
into one master unit.

BasicaiBy photaiypesextingsystem consists
of three units .- a keyboard, a computer
and a photoidnit.

T h e keybsatrd, in addition tr: keys sf
an ordinary typewriter has opecia? k e y s
Pss formatting and editing irrstructons. it
has keys far spacing between iettars, wagcis

and lines; for .type s i a ; for column kngxh
and o:her similar funetiohs. Keyboards with
Devnagari script, Greek letters and mathematicallspecial symbols are also avaiiable.
in some types sf keyboards the operator
has to make decision about hyphenation
and -a@ustEngthe line length fcr justification
and for this, the operaasr i s informed a few
spaces before t h e end of line by an audible
or light signal. in other type of keyboards
this function of hyphenation and line justification is performed by computer thus Increasing the speed of keyboarding since the
operator can type continuously. The unjustified input i s 6s311ed as 'idiot' copy and
after the typesetting commands are given,
the copy is s e t into desired type faces and size
variazioos,

-r-he

keyboard i s t s m e d as online or
direct input type and off-iine or indirect
input type. The former is an integrai part of
the typesetter and the text i s directly projected in the photo unit as final output.
in the latter, input information i s first recorded
cn a storage medium and ",era the output
plate is produced when required. Eariiei,
paper tape was used to record this information in the farm sf coded perforations.
Later systems used magnetic tape, and now
magnetic disc and floppy disc are popular
for their high recording density and raodorn
access.

Video Display Termifiei
Video Display Terrninai is an important
accessory ztfached to t h e keyboard and has

been responsible for the success of photori/pesetting. I t consists of a C R T (Cathode
Ray Tube) screen which displays the input
information. Tlie operator can see the input
and make corrections. Even later the operator
can recall the input from the computer
zernory and editlproofi-ead .the finai copy on
the screen itself.

The unit receives information either from

the computer .memory or directly from the
oniine keyboard. The earlier phototypesetters
used a revolving font master and a number sf
different film fonts. A font i s a particular type
style such as Spartan, Bodoni, Goths, Woman,
Times and others. From these fontss, any
type size can be projected on t o photosensitive piate through lenses by enlargernenf
or reduction. The character-image from the
fiim is projected on the output film by a
high intensity flash lamp vie one o f the lenses
and a rotating mirror. Choice of the lens i s
determined by the point size required while
the rotating mirror/prism scans each line to
set characters side by side. Modern systems
emplcy electronic bearnhaser ins:ead sf Bight.

completely satisfied, he can send the final
version online to a photo~ypeset-ter.9: saves
c o s t a n d time of proofreading. Even the
desired blocks of characters from the storeii
t e x t can be edited "L alter, include or deiele
certain portions.

Since c'srnpoter cac precess i ~ f o r m a r i o ~
many times the human speed, it ;emains
idle most of the time whiie input is give-: or
editing is done. To m a k e better use of its
processing povder and to increase speed,
a number of VDTs can be conneckd iio 2
central computer, which can also be connected
t o a number of input devices.

For large amount of informatioli in such
cluster systems, a random access memory
element, such as disc and slaitable sofware
i s needed. Among the storage media, floppi4
disc can store more than 300 pages of info:mation or 60,0508 characters. Rigid or hard
disc can store severai millions of characters
and have faster access. Bubble memories
can store ten times the i ~ f s r , m a t : ~ai.
n disc
in the same S D C P . ~ ~

Page Maksui3
Software packages are now z;lai:abl~
Rapid changes i n technn?ogy have made
iriihich eliminate "she need for c o n v e ~ i i ~ n a i
iVDT afi imporrani too! from mere ari editinh;
page rnekeup process of cueeing 2nd pasting.
device. Not on?ythe editor can edit a prekeyin fact two trends in the deveiopment 3-F
boarded (stored) copy but also do page
modern typeset'ring are
(i 1 er;abiir~g *%!Inqake up directly on the screen before the
oage makeup with grsphies inciildir.g halfcopy is s e t in type:-.The editor car, add various
tone and drawings, and (ii) replacing chernicai
commands like change in eolwnn width,
processing 6;F the exposed piaie by Sry
type size, headlines and by lines. From VDP
output. k the computer assisted makeup
scrwn he can also obtainthe length of the text
{CArb?) one can see on i h e screen the posirequired for laying
a page and re\view
tions of rhe image elemenrs, i:ypeFacei p3l-i::
' 3 e asj:ified copy complete abrt/i.?h
i~de;rtatisns, size, i n e iength, specinz, scr: as required
bold face indicstors, 5ypheration ooiats
in '{he fine' prir?:.
21-e i ~ u 3?:,?fS
^i{
,
, ..,.:
pssice ~ 7 5il:;e:~~~/~,:e. "The 'sr,~~.=!a r d 3t1.e- copy ed;;/ng requi-em~pts.0 ~ 2,."&hi;
~
.
~

ScAs,matic diagram of a Phstowpesemr~TBe Photo Un!8 consists 09 either CW7 or Laser Printer, fnput
device to the machine coudd be Paper Tape*Fdagnetjc Tape* Magnetic Disc or Extemal Cwnrnpunw

ohow only ROW information will be set In
rypes according to the commands. The
interactive CAM allot~~st h e operator ta
#make changes in the wpographic format
on the screen enabling him -to sea how change
will appear on the page.

Phototypesetting systems have gone a
long way since the first machine designed

in 9854. The first generation were called
automatic tljpesetters with some automation
over machine typesening. Yn the second
generation, these machines differed from
mete! using typesetters in function as well
as is; operation end were termed functional
phototypesetters. Go~-cp%aters
were employed
in these machines in 4866 leading :s their
widespread adoptioo.

Digltisd Typmaees

-.1 nird

generation units are fully electronic phstotypesefiers. Vies& utilise CWT and
!aser technology and are called
digitised
typesetters. Were characters are produced on
s h ~ g hresolut~on68% screesi by a series of
rnisa~~te
Sines or dots. The resultant image is
then transferred t o a photographic surface.
lo the more advanced alphanumeric photocomposition system characters are stored
not as master images but as digital information. This is conver.ted into d o t line images
on the CWT screen. For this, patterns of
required characters are called out 05 memory
and produced in CRT sw the correct size
on their precise locations in the page, This
fiweiised cornpositloo i s t h e n beamed from
the C R T t o the osatpu~device. These soiid
~.
appearing imai-,esa afizr imaging and printing

are actually patterns of characters consisting
of adjoining scan lines just like the images
on TV screen. The typographic quality of
the imaged characters i s determined by the
resolution (i.e. scan lines per inch). More
the resolution of screen, more smoother the
characters will appear to the eye. The movement of electronic beam in such machines
is fast enough to generate a page of text in
about 15 seconds.
In a laser printer, laser beam takes the
place of electron beam. The laser beam
modulated with the electronic signals from
the computer, scans horizontally across the
entire page a t once and generates a pattern
of charge on the printing plate or drum.
When direct paper output is required, toner is
applied to drum which sticks to the charged
regions and is ironed out onto paper by
heat. For bulk printing, however, printing

plates are produced and used in conventional
printing system.

The technology is advancing so fast
that it is not possible to call any machine
as latest. Further efforts to minimize the
mechanical parts has been leading to greater
speed and accuracy. The latest digital typesetters can create new letter forms with the
flexibility of speeds upto 15,000 characters
per second. The use of Optical Character
Recognition and other reading devices have
made possible the inclusion of graphic information like photographs and illustrations
on a base alongwith the text. The editor can
edit, do page makeup and correct proof
on the screen reducing the time considerably,
and enabling him to make the printed copies
ready from the manuscript within a short
time.

A human being is not, in any proper sense,
a human being ti//he is educated

-

Horace Mann

Learning makes a man fit company for
oneself

-

German Proverb

