China, the
inventor of paper and
printing has been famous for i t s Imperial
Libraries. According to archival research,
even before 1600 BC there existed at least
one 'library' consisting of bone-and-shell
inscriptions. However, according to the
recorded history the first official library
was set up during the sixth century BC
and Lao Zi, the great philosopher was i t s
custodian Subsequently, each smalt royal
state of China started i t s own library.
Simultaneously, every school of scholars
began to store their own private collections.
Paper was not invented by then. Therefore,
all these 'collections', royal or private,
were mostly engravings on bamboo or
wooden strips, or writings on expensive
silk.
These ancient libraries suffered a setback in 221 BC. The Emperor of the newly
unified China thought that the writings
and inscriptions would confuse the people's
mind, and therefore, ordered the burning
of all these (except those on agriculture,
medicine and divinity). But' some of these
collections survived as people resisted the
move and the Emperor himself was deposed
soon after.

Libraries in Feudal Period
Emperor Wu (140-87 BC) of the Han
dynasty established the first well organised
Imperial Library. It was not meant for the

general public, but served the royal family,
ministers, high officials and noted scholars.
At a slightly later stage, at the behest of the
Emperor, the 'Librarian' Liu Xiang started
to compile 'Qi Lue' and 'Bie Lu', which
were completed by his son Liu Xing. While
Qi Lue or 'Summary for Seven Classics'
was the first bibliography to be compiled
in China. Bie Lu or 'The Other Register'
was the first collection of abstracts.
Work on compilation of bibliographies
progressed. During the period of Jin
(265-316 AD), 'New Library Catalogue',
was compiled by Xun Xu. The invention
of paper (1st century AD), printing
technique (5th century AD) and blockmaking art (9th century AD) by China
made book production easier, and books
were cheaper and easily available. Libraries,
especially the private ones, started growing
up. Emphasis was also given on compilation
and indexing jobs. In 1408 AD a comprehensive encyclopaedia, 'Yong Le Da Dian'
was completed. I t consisted of 22,877
volumes of text and 60 volumes of index.
The National Bibliography, 'Si Ku Quan
Shu' (in 36,275 volumes) was completed
in 1782.
The librarians/compilers of this period
used their own classification systems. In
"Qi Lue", Liu Xing classified the collections
into six categories. Xun Xu in his 'New
Library Catalogue', classified the books

into four divisions using his 'Four Division
Classification Method'. Later scholars started
further classifying the books into 12
divisions. From 18th century upto the
beginning of this century another scheme
followed in which four divisions and 44
categorres were recommended for classification of books.

Library Service of the Ministry of Culture
coordinates different library systems in the
whole country. Inter-library loan service
is widely used and accepted throughout
China.

National & Public Libraries:
It i s
interesting to note that there are two
national library network centres in China.
One national centre is in Beijing and the
other one is in Shanghai. Nine regional
library network centres function at Tianjin,
Liaoning, Heilongjiang, Shaanxi, Gansu,
Si Chuan, Hubei, Guangdong and Jiangshu.
All these libraries function under the control
of Ministry of Culture.

Birth of Modern Libraries
Libraries in the modern sense started
in China by the end, of 19th century under
the influence of the West. In 1896 AD,
Emperor Guang Xu proclaimed an order
for establishing public libraries. In 1903 AD
the first public library was founded in
Wuhan. Other provinces soon followed
the step. Dewey's Decimal Classification
was adopted in 1904 as a national scheme.
In 1910, Beijing Municipality Library was
transformed into the National Beijing
Library. China Association of Libraries
was formed in 1925. By 1930 there were
2935 libraries of various kinds in China.
Further development in the library rnovement started only after the founding of
the People's Republic of China in 1949.

Present Day Libraries
In China, a t present there are more
than 200,000 libraries, including one
National Library, about 1800 public libraries, 700 higher education libraries, 1000
scientific & research libraries and 110,000
trade union libraries.
Different types of libraries are under the
administrative control of different authorities. But the Administrative Bureau of

,

The National Library of China (Beijing)
i s the largest comprehensive library in China
with the richest collection of books, periodicals,
newspapers, maps, photographs,
carvings & inscriptions, manuscripts, microfilms and tape recordings. I t s present hold 7g
is about 12 million items, of which 60 p-r
cent are in Chinese and the remaining patt
in 140 different foreign languages. It ha
55,100 titles of periodicals and 3,600 titles
of newspapers. More than two million
volumes of its holdings are considered rare.
I t s rich holdings can be traced to the Government regulations that require every publisher
in China to deposit three copies of each
new title with the National Library. With
a staff of about 1000, the library has the
following departments: Personnel, Security,
Administration,
Capital
Construction,
Acquisition, Cataloguing, Periodicals, Newspapers & other Publications, Rare Books &
Special Collections, Reference & Research,
Library Science &
Bibliography and
Document Press.

Amongst the public libraries, the
Sanghai Municipal Library is the largest in
China. It has more than seven million

Scientific & Research Libraries: In this
category there are about 150 libraries of
the Chinese Academy of Sciences and a
large number of libraries attached to
research institutes of various ministries.

volumes in its holdings, 850,000 of which
are in foreign languages. I t has compiled
numerous important bibliographic catalogues including 'Catalogue of Chinese
Collectanea' and the 'National Index of
Newspapers & Periodicals'. It employs a
staff of about 550 and is organised into
six major departments: Acquisition &
Cataloguing, Stacks & Readers, Reference
& Circulation, Childern's Books, Bibliography and Administration.

The academy of Science Library in
Beijing with a staff ot about 400 persons
i s mainly engaged in the acquisition of pure
and applied science publications. A large
number of foreign publications, including
periodicals, are received in exchange with
the publications of Chinese Academy of
Science. The Academy library offers microfilming and plain paper photo-copying
service.

Educational Libraries:
Librar ies of
higher education include university, college
and school libraries. These are under the
authority of the Ministry of Education
and funded by the institutions concerned.
At present,there are about 700 university
and college libraries accounting for 200
million volumes of acquisition.

The Institute of Scientific & Technological Information of China (ISTIC)
functions under the administrative control
of the State Commission for Science &
Technology. It houses the largest collection
of technical literature, such as patents,
standards and reports from home and
abroad. ISTIC has i t s headquarters at Beijing
and a branch office at Chongqing. I t s activities include coordination and production
of secondary and tertiary publications.

Beijing University Library i s one of the
best university libraries in China. It has
about four million volumes, one-fourth of
which are in different foreign languages.
The library (employs a staff of about 300
members and it consists of the following
five major departments: Ordering & Cataloguing, Reference & Circulation, Serials,
Binding & Preservation and Editorial &
Translation. The other large university
libraries are at Nanjing, Wuhan and Fudan.

The school libraries mainly collect
text books, popular science materials,
literature, reference and childern's books.

,

Trade Union Libraries: There are a
large number of factory libraries organised
by the trade unions within the factories.
Almost all factories have their own trade
union libraries.

Towards Automation
The automation of library and information processes still remains far behind
the western standards. This i s mainly
because of historical, political and economic
reasons. Some progress in this field was

made in early sixties, but the same was
undone during the Cultural Revolution.
However, from mid-seventies new stress
is being laid in this field. In 1975, the
Ministry of Machine Building experimented with machine retrieval of 500
papers on metallurgy. The same Ministry
also sucessfully conducted online retrieval
experiments in 1977. All these were done
on indigenous computers.

In recent years, the National Library
of China has taken the lead in library automation activities. An American specialist
was invited in 1981 for consultation. As a
result, the National Library commenced
cataloguing work in MARC on a trial basis
for western language periodicals.
ISTIC has achieved moderate success
in the field of computerization. i n collaboration with major libraries, ISTIC has also
launched an ambitious 15-year plan, to
be completed in three stages, for introduction of online information retrieval and
automatic production of secondary publications. The first stage envisaged creation

of data-files for foreign and domestic
scientific articles, patents & standards and
compilation of a subject thesaurus in
Chinese. The work is supposed to be completed in 1986, when the next stage to systematize and revise the database will be taken up.
In the proposed third stage (1991-96).
online information retrieval network on
national level will be estadished. This will
then be linked up with international database networks.
One more point worth mentioning is
that the main collections in all the major
libraries are in Chinese language. The
peculiar pictographic nature of Chinese
written language appears to be a major
hurdle for many important computer
applications. Therefore, the automation of
library services cannot be realized unless the
ability of computers to process Chinese
characters is increased. It is, of course,
heartening to note that the Chinese Government is giving high priority to overcome
this difficulty. We, therefore, hope to see
China on the library and information services
map of the World as a prominent figure
before the end of this century.

