OPTICAL DATA STORAGE :
A NEW FRONTIER
Ashok Kumar
The impact of technology on information began the day catalogue card was
devised to store the bibliographic details
of a book. Initially, the size of a catalogue
card used to be 5x3 in. i t was increased to
6x4 in. as need .was felt to record more
information. With rapid increase in the
volume of scientific literature, microform
replaced paper for storing information.
With the advent of computers, it appeared
that the problem of data storage and
retrieval of information had been solved,
but soon it was realized that even magnetic medium used for storing information
was not sufficient, and floppy disc and
hard disk offet'ing higher capacity and fast
retrieval were developed. But the race
between the volume of information generated and the medium for its storage did not
end there. Thus, a versatile medium of
mass storage in the form of optical disc was
found.

I

Optical Storage Technology
Therd are two principal types of optical
storage media-read-only and read-write. The
read-only type is an optical videodisc, which
uses standard video format, and the readwrite type is an optical digital disc, which
is used for computer mass storage. The
read-write type, also called optical disc or
digital optical recording (DOR) disc, is at
present non-erasable, but erasable discs are
expected to be available soon. These may
use magneto-optic or phase-change property
material for disc where the recording effect
is reversible.
In optical discs, information is usually
coded as microscopic pits on the disc
surface. Laser is used for recording as well
as reading. Laser being a coherent beam of
light is focussed accurately on a minute
area where local heating results in the formation of pits. On the disc, the pits are
arranged in circular tracks and the disc is
then coated with a protective layer.

Optical data storage is a promising
technology offering the advantages of high
density of' data, low storage cost, random
access, and excellent archival quality of
stability. It can handle all forms of data
ranging from text, image, sound to computer
systems, with the possibility of introducing
new types of systems as well. The technology has potential use in areas ranging from
public information services, museums, libraries, offices, hospitals, educational and
training institutions, to large information
network and databases.

,

Reading of information from the disc
is done using a lowpowered laser, which
does not damage the disc recording. The
pattern of pits is detected by the difference
in the reflectivity. Pits and the reflective
surface in natural light give a 'rainbow
effect' to the disc, which looks like a silver
coloured phonogram record.
Optical data storage technology has
several advantages over magnetic media.

Since it uses laser and noncontact
mechanism to read and record information,
it is safe from damage by dust or wear and
tear. Thus, it has longer life more than
10 years against four years for magnetic
media. As the size of a micropit is much
smaller than that of a magnetic crystal, more
information can be recorded in the same
space. Besides having a high storage density,
optical discs are cheaper.

Optical Videodisc
Optical videodisc can record both
analogue and digital information, and has
been put to entertainment and education1
training applications. Since it is a read-only
medium, the user can read the information,
but cannot record his own information.
Videodisc is produced by a mastering
and replication process. The material is first

MODULATION
SIGNAL

1

LASER

PLAYBACK

recorded on a 2-in helical videotape. Master
videodisc is then made by exposing the
photosensitive surface of a glass disc to a
laser beam modulated by the signal output
from the videotape. Laser burns micropits
on the surface of the disc.
This disc is then electroplated to form a
nickel metal disc for embossing and stamping out replicate copies. Two of these
reflective optical videodiscs are joined
together to form a two-sided videodisc.
The vinyl disc is then coated with a protective layer of acrylic. This process requires
sophisticated equipment and* controlled
clean room environment.
The reading laser beam can be moved
across the spinning videodisc at various
speeds and directions without damaging
the disc information. When the movement
of the beam is properly synchronized with

RAlDlAL
TRACKING

the rotation of the disc, it produces a
stable image on the TV screen. The playback
facility also offers features like freeze-frame
and slow or fast motion.

Optical Digital Disc

.

Although both videodisc and optical
disc are of interest to information professionals, optical digital disc offers greater
opportunity for development and use in
information systems involving storage,
retrieval and other management situations.
Optical disc is considered as a digital storage
device to store three forms of informationdata, document and image. It uses directread-after-write (DRAW) technology, which
allows machine-readable data to be recorded
and played back with the user's own
equipment.

Micropits are formed on a thin film of
tellurium metal in the optical disc by a highpowered laser, The disc substrate is made of
piexiglass having qualities of microscopic,
flatness, uniform thickness, strength and
superior optical properties. A 1-mm thick
cover protects the disc from scratches,
dust and fingerprints during handling. The
finished product consists of two discs
separated by annular spacers and sealed
to make an air-tight construction.

Storage Capacity
A 12-in videodisc stores 54,000 frames
of information, while an 8-in disc can store
18,000 frames of information on single
side. One frame may be occupied by a
picture, or a page of a document. Another

type of optical' videodisc called constant
linear velocity (CLV) can hold up to 108,000
frames (pages) of information, which is
equivalent to 28 million bits of information.
The first optical disc with DRAW
capability was demonstrated in 1978. One
such disc can hold as much as one gigabyte
(10,000 million characters) of information.
If the superfluous white space on a typical
page of a document is avoided, one 12-in
disc can hold 40,000 pages without losing a
single detail when reproduced. Sixty-four
such DRAW discs can store 2.5 million
pages and each stored document can be
located in less than 5 sec.
DRAW d$c allows random recording of
information to any of the addressable
sectors. The disc has the equivalent of
45,000 valuable tracks and is divided into
128 sectors. For making corrections in these
write-once discs, new corrected data is
written in a new sector on the disc; while
the faulty sector remains, i t s address is
removed from the computer memory.

Applications
Laser-read videodiscs have achieved a
measure of success in educational and promotional applications. Videodisc is useful
as an educational resource. Teachers kould
store enormous slide banks on videodisc
and display their lessons. The videodisc can
be controlled by a computer and programmed to display the slides in a set sequance.
Videodisc has possible use in libraries
and museums. In libraries, manuscripts
can be stored on videodisc whose resolution
is as good as that of the original. Collection

,

of pictures, illustrations and engineering
drawings is also possible. Mkrsgcaphics
is likely t a be replaced by this technology,
which has superior density characteristics,
integration and ease in use, without the need
for format, film processing and reading
1 inconvenience. In museums, rare manuscripts and three-dimensional exhibits,
archieves of old slides, film clips and news
reels can be stored on videodisc. An intelligent videodisc system connected to an
external computer (interactive video) can be
used by pubfic information services to locate
public places, such as libraries and tourist
centres, and to provide information on local
amenities, social security benefits, job
opportunities, etc.
Interactive video also holds great.
promise for i t s role in education, training
and information display systems. For example, in an engineering training concern,
videodisc systems could be designed to train
the staff on all aspects of the technologyquality control, financial planning and
other training aspects. Intelligent videodhc
systems are expected to use fiber optics,
touch sensitive screens, and mini
and
microcomputer technology to create an
information system about the various
activities and functions of the organization it
serves.

-

Videodisc has a future in publishing
too. The Bri5sh Broadcasting Corporation
intends to publish a record of life in Britain
in the late twentieth century on videodisc.
They will be putting two million pages of
text on two videodisc with 30,000 $till
images, interactive graphics and maps.
One disc will contain national statistical
data, maps, etc. and the other one will

contain 'Peopk's Database' produced by
collating data collected by 10,000 schools.

Image
Storage
Storing images of documents, photographs and graphics requires large bit capacities in digkal storage. ltnage storage
requires up to 200 times the bits required
for text storage. One 2.5 sq in photo with a
resolution of 200 bits per inch requires
as much storage space as 5,000 digitally
encoded words. Such information can be
economically stored on videodisc which
stores page image as analogue information.
DOR disc, on the other hand, is useful
for storing digital data, such as text and
information, which need constant updating.
Since it permits home recording, it is prefered for business and home, but data
stored is unprotected unlike in videodisc
which are read-only.
Digital optical recording discs are ideal
for meeting the total information needs of
offices with a large amount of information
in various forms like logos, signatures, handwritten material, forms, correspondence,
drawings and also voice messages which can
be stored as digital voice. Data compression
techniques are available with which the
document can be compressed 10 times,
eliminating the storage of extra white space
on a page. They can be utilized in electronic
filing cabinet or central file system in an
automated off ice.
Currently, digital optical recording disc,
is the preferred storage medium for scientific
and technical publishers for electronic
document and image delivery systems
Contd on page 14

can lead to the development of individual theories and practices of editing.

Contd from page 11

*

13. Sussman, David
Composing photographs for technical
journals

R-543

Electroslag ball-bearing steel in
welding and special electrometallurgy by E 0 Paton. Institute

IEEE Tr Prof Commun 28(1), 1985,

of Electro-metal alloys. Chap IV.
1

3-12.
R-544
Photography is a two dlmentional
visual illusion of a three-dimensional
world. The paper describes how with
any two-dimentional media, art fundamentals
and graphic control
can be
effectively applied, which can help to
enhance a visual statement and make
a image visually more appealing.

Electroslag sheet steel. In welding
and special electrometallurgy by
E 0 Paton. Institute of Electrometal allbys. Chap VI.

R-546

Instructions for calculations of
avalanche loads for
designing.

structuralB

/

Swedish
Contd from page 4
for providing access to full text documents
in stores. Videodisc is expected to be
competitive with the online services for
retrieval of machine-readable databases and
graphics. The optical disk will be attractive
to users, because besides reducing online
storage costs, it facilitates creation of
distributed mini-computer-based systems.
The archival quality of optical discs
combined with their ability to store page
images and to permit' hard copy printing,
makes disc technology an ideal medium
for library and information systems. In
future, we may see paperless information
storage and retrieval dominated by videodisc and digital optical disc.

SW4033Airforce chief's regulations for
investigations of operational
failure during military flying.
Swedish Airforce Report No. FFS
1984-42,28 pp.

Tramlation Bank
Seventeen new translations from different foreign languages into English were
completed by this Centre and were added
to the Translation Bank. These were indexed,
classified and filed to facilitate retrieval
through author, source and subject index.
About 338 photocopies of 16 tramlations were supplied by the translation
bank to the indentors.

Printed and published by the Director, DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054.

