ONLINE ACCESS TO

- FOREIGN/INTERNATIONAL DATA BASES
rr

SS Murthy*

introduction
The tremendous growth of \iterature in various fields of knowledge and the
lver.increasing costs of publications have
forced the libraries1 information centres to
curtail the acquisitibn of publications.
Inflation adds to fhe gravity of this problem,
resulting in reduced purchasing power of
the library budgets. Therefore, libraries
have to find alternative ways to provide
access to publications/documents. Libraries1
technical information centres (TICS) are
adopting mainly two methods to ensure
access for their users: (i) inter-library cooperation and (ii) providing access to wellknown databases. While cooperation among
the libraries in the form of inter-library
loan of documents and avoiding duplication
of purchase of costly publications i s an ageold practice, providing access to the databases is a recent development. Libraries1
TICS are able to improve their services
in respect of coverage and quality with the
help of the databases despite the increasing
costs of publications and also the high
charges for database searches.

Databases
A number .of information processing
agencies store t h e information processed
by them in t h e form of computer memory,
and the computer software used by them

enables fast retrieval of the required information. For example, the Chemical
Abstracts Service, which covers about
12,000 journals relating to Chemistry and
allied subjects foritheir abstracting periodical
a
Chemical AbsGacts, stores all the information covered in the periodical in computer
memory. The databases organised with this
information include CA Condensates, CA
Search, etc.
The term database refers t o the collection of information stored in a suitable
form, from which' specific information
can be retrieved when required. A bibliographic database is one which contains
bibliographic details (citationslabstracts or
even full texts of documents).
Some of the databases organised by
various scientific/professional agencies are
listed in Table 1.

Databases fall into two categories:
i.. Reference Databases : These databases contain bibliographic details like the
references of the journal articles, reports,
patents, books, dissertations, etc., and
sometimes carry their abstracts or even
full texts. These databases. are also called
bib\iographic databases. Databases of directories are also included in this category.

Director, DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054
1

Table 1. Some important databases

Name of the
Database

Approx No.
of Records
fin mifjion)

Organising Agency

INSPEC

Inf. Service in Physics, ElectroTechnology Computers & Control,
UK

2.4

COMPENDEX

Engg. Index Inc. USA

1.3

CA Search

Chemical Abs. Services, USA

6.4

Amer. Soc. for Metals, USA

5.6

NTlS

National Tech. Inf. Service, USA

1.1

SCI Search

Inst. of Scientific Inf. USA

5.6

METADEX

-

'

ii. Databanks : These contain statistical information like experimental data
for certain materials, compounds, etc.,
physical constants, economic or demographic data, etc. The data available in such.
databases can be manipulated to obtain
answer to a specific query.

Online Databases
Most of the well-known databases
function 'online'. The term 'online' jmplies
that the searcher is in direct communication
(online) with the database he wishes to
interrogate and the computer on
the data is loaded. The search is conducted
as a two-way conversation between the
searcher and the system (computer). For
this reason, the online system is frequently
referred to as 'interactive' or 'conversational'.
This is a very flexible mode of search,
offering the user the option to modify his
query a t any point during the search.

Online access to remote databases
is possible only when suitable communication links between the terminal (used for
searching) and the databases are auailable.
In fact, data communication networks,
such as Tymnet and Telenet, connecting
various databases and user terminals in
USA, WK and some other countrtes are
already in use.

Advantages of ,OnlineSearching
over

Online searching offers many advantages
the printed information sources.
of these advantagesare :

i. Speed - Online searching is much
faster than manual searching.
ii. Comprehensiveness - The user can
cover a wide range of databases
promptly, which i s not possible
with the traditional li.brary systerr

iii. Currentness

-

AccessingISearching Databases

The facility of
frequent updating of the databases makes them more current
compared to printed publications.

For meeting the urgent requirements
of academiclresearch organisations and also
for conducting high precision searches,
online searching is desirable because of the
interactive nature of the search.

iv. Flexibility - The user can alter
or modify his query at any point
of search to make the best possible
use of the available information.

v. Convenience - The user, operating

The search process (Fig. 1) involves
a terminal connected via a modem to the

v i Cost-effectiveness - Through sav-

telephone, which is used to access the
required system. The query entered through
the terminal gets converted to the analogue
mode; travels through the telecommunication lines and reaches the computer
system on which the database is loaded.

ings in man-hours needed in manual
search of printed sources. in-depth
online search has the potential
to be relatitely cheaper.

The database is searched, and again, the
signal i s convertod from digital to analogue
mode and the search result appears on the
display unit of the terminal. All
this

on a terminal i s able to overcome
geographical barriers and can have
access to any amount of information.

roo-

NETWORK

'7-----I

LP

MODEM

I

TELEPHONE 1

I
I

I
I

TERMINAL
PRINTER

'33
\--I

<i

DISC STORES

PRINTER

@
-

Fig. 1 OVERALL ONLINE SEARCHING PROCESS

happens in a few seconds and the searcher
feels that all this i s happening instantaneously. The telephone tine may be linked either
directly t o the computer system or to a
node of the telecommunication network,
which may be connected to the computer
centre. The computer system is typically
a large time-sharing installation, which
might enable access by tens or even
hundreds of terminals at the same time.
The network node i s a microcomputer
which i s able to handle communications
traffic. It carries out preliminary checks
and organises exchange of messages between
the searchers and the computer.
When the computer centre is nearby,
there i s no need for a network; it can be
dialled directly. However, when the system
through which the database i s to be searched
i s far away, telephone lines or the data
communication channels are to be used to
enter the network from the terminal.

Communication Networks
In advanced countries like USA, some
companies organise telecommunication networks and make them available to users
for data communication against subscription. They often, take telecommunication
lines on lease from the telecommunication
departments or companies, form a communication network by installing nodes and
other necessary message switching systems
and make the network available to the
subscribers. A large number of online
databases are searchable through these
networks. The user telephones to the nearest
network node and enters the password
assigned to him by the database organisers

and conducts the search. After verifying
the password, the unit translates all subsequent user entries into a processing code
that queues the user entries with those of
other users to be transmitted in turn to the
computer processing unit.
Well known telecommunications networks like Tymnet and Telenet have over
200 nodes in USA, Europe and some other
parts of the world, into which the searcher
can dial and have access to nearly all the
American online databases.

Speeds of Transmission : The most
common data transmission speeds are the
telegraphic channel speeds of 45, 50, 75 and
150 bits per second, and speeds derived
from voice lines of 600, 1200, 2400,4800,
7200 and 9600 bits per second.
Analogue and digital signals are interchangeable. Computer data -at 4800 bps
can be converted into analogue form to
travgl over telephone channels. On the other
hand, telephone signals can be digitalized
and represented by a stream of 56,000 bps.
Transmission by digital mode gives better
transmission speeds and quality than
analogue transmission.

Packet Switching : For high-speed
data transmission, a technique called packet
switching is used. Here, the data items are
stored a t switching nodes. These nodes are
mini-computer which receive the data
bursts, store them in their memory, and
then forward them to the next part of the
network. There is no physical switching
of lines; the lines are permanently connected
and the switching computer selects the line
over which it sends the data. The data are

transmitted in blocks, which are called
packets. Each packet contains a header
giving routine instructions which each
switching computer examines, like post
offices examining the addresses on the mail.
The packets cannot exceed a certain size.
If a long message is to be sent, it is broken
into multiple packets, each with its own
header. The switching computers pass the
packets onward as quickly as they can.
Different segments of a message may travel
along different routes and get reassembled
at the computy at the destination to form
the complete message. Figure 2 gives an idea
of transmission of messages by packet
switching.

Database Vendors
These are specialised agencies which
act as intermediaries between the database
producers and the database users. They
purchase or license databases from producers
and convert the data on the tapes to a
uniform format with standardised bibliographic element names, so that the same
basic commands and search techniques
apply across all the databases. Besides,
providing access to - numerous databases,
they provide several services. For example,
they publish user manuals for individual
databases and l i s t additional search aids,
available from the producers. Vendors

mKf COF1QUTER
(DATABASE)

Fig. 2 TRANSWSSKtN Cf MESSAGES PACKET SWITCHING

to the gateway exchanges at the Overseas
Communication Services (OCS) at Bombay,
New Delhi and Madras for transmitting/
accessing
data
internationally.
The
Computer Maintenance Corporation has also
got sanction from the government for
establishing a network for data transmission,
covering important cities in India.
Commercial organisations like banks. airlines, railways, stock exchanges and the
press can use the network for online
communication of business messages by
becoming i t s subscribers. Apart from these
efforts, NAL, Bangalore, has recently
entered into an agreement with the
~uropean Space Agency (ESA) (through
ISRO) for accessing the databases covered
by the ESA lnformation Retrieval Service
(ESA-IRS). This is expected to become
operational in lndia by early 1986.

also offer special services like SDI. The fee
quoted ($ 5 to $ 10 monthly) generally
covers a profile of 15 or fewer descriptors
and indudes a maximum of 25 items in the
print-out. Each additional descriptor increases the monthly cost by about 50 cents.
Some database producers offer search
services also, so that the user can directly
conduct the searches of such databases.
However, some database like NTIS, have
to be accessed only through database
vendors. It is, therefore, important for the
database users to be acquainted with the
services offered by the. database vendors
also. In addition to the database producers,
SDC Search Service, USA; Bibliographic
Retrieval Services Inc. (BRC), USA; and
European Space Agency Inf. Retrieval
Service, Italy are among the other major
commercial database vendors.

Cost Factors
The charges of searching different
databases through different vendors or
directly vary considerably. For example,
the public utility databases like the one of
National Library of Medicine (USA) cost
less than databases operated by private
organisations like the Institute of Scientific
Information, USA.

Developments in lndia
The Department of Telecommunications (Government of India) is understood t o have submitted a proposal to the
government for the procurement of packet
switching equipment for establishing a data
transmission network covering various cities
in India. This network will be connected

.

Meanwhile DESIDOC has entered into
an agreement with the DIALOG lnformation
Service, USA for accessing about 200
databases currently
covered by the
DIALOG service. A t the moment,
DESIDOC has online access to these databases through telex and it has already
conducted some online searches through
DIALOG. Since the transmission speed
through telex is rather low, efforts are being
made to install a modem and a terminal for
public switched telephone network (PSTN)
system.
Similar efforts are being made by
some other organisations in the country
for achieving online access to foreign1
international databases. In a few years
Contd on page 16

J Amer Soc Inform Sci. 36(5), 1985;

331-38.
The paper discusses some of the concepts of database systems and presents
an instructional database used by students
in the course.
ConM from page

Smt.
Anuradha
Ravi, Scientists,
DESIDOC, in the preparation of this
paper.

References
1.

Henry, WM and others. Online
Searching : An introduction. 1980,
Butterwonhs, London.

2.

Martin, James. Future develop.
ments in telecommunications,
1977. 2nd Ed. Prentice-Hall, Mw
Jersey.

3.

Hoover, Ryan E (Ed). Library and
information manager's guide to
online services. 1980. Knowledge
Industry, New York.

4.

Meadow, CT and Chochrane,
Pauline. Basics of online searching.
1981. John-Wiley, New York.

6

from now, significant developments can be
expected in the field of data communications in India bringing in vast improvements which would enable the information1
documentation scientists to provide much
better services to the scienttfic community.

Acknowledgement
The author thankfully acknowledges the assistance and suggestion
given by Kum. Rita Shukla and

1

Printed and ~ub1ished.b~DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054

