Saalk?d from I to r an? :Shri VK Rangm, Convener, Shri SS Murtl,~,Dimtor, DESIDOC,
Dr VS Amnachalam. SA to RM, Dr K Subrahmanyam, Director, IDSA and ShriSL BBnsal,
CCR&D at the imguretlon of NACSlD

NATlONAL CONFERENCE ON
SClENTlFlC lNFORMATlON
FOR DEFENCE
This national conference was organised
by Defence Scientific lnformation & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi on 25 & 26
February 1986 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi.
The conference was co-sponsored by Aeronautical Research & Development Board, Bharat
Electronics Limited, Bharat Heavy Electrical
Limited, Department of Electronics, Department of Scientific & lndustrial Research,
and Oil & Natural Gas Commission. The twoday conference was attended by about 175
delegates representing DRDO Labs/Estts,
defence departments. CSIR laboratories, public
& private sector undertakings, universities,
llTs and other scientific institutions. About
60 papers were presented in six technical

sessions including theme papers read by
renowned specialists namely Air Vice Marshal
S Krishnaswamy, Air HQn, New Delhi;
Gp Capt R Gopalaswami, VSM, Office of the
SA to RM, New Delhi; Shri TS Rajagopalan,
Scientist-in-Charge, INSDOC, New Delhi;
Shri R Thiagarajan.Jt Adviser, Dept of Science
&
Technology, New Delhi; Prof S

Parthasarathy, Institute of lnformation Studies,
Madras; and Shri SS Murthy, Director,
DESIDOC, Delhi.
Dr VS Arunachalam, Scientific Adviser to
Raksha Mantri and Secretary, Department
of Defence Research & Development, inaugurated the conference and called upon the infor-

mation scientists to link up the information
in various disciplines as this was the critical
need of the hour. He also opened an exhibition
on information products and information
services, which was arranged specially on the
occasion. Dr K Subrahmanyam, Director,
Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses,
presided over the inaugural session. Shri SL
Bansal, Chief Controller, Research & Development addressed the information scientists
and spoke about the increasing demand of
information and its role in defence. Earlier,
Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC, and the
Chairman of the organising committee
expressed the need and objective of the
conference and the role played by DESIDOC.

Thi? was the first national 'conference
on scientific information for defence in which
the specialists from three work environments the Defence Services, the R&D and other
technical institutions and the information
profession - met to discuss the common
problems of handling, processing and utilizing
the information , and to know their views on
improving
and
modernising
scientific
information in the subject field of defence
interest.
A cultural programme was also arranged
on 25 February 1986 in which celebrated
artists gave their performance at Mavalankar
Auditorium, New Delhi.

Shri Satish B8bber e renowned singer end a view of the audience on the eve of the
Confemnce at Mavalenker Hdl

INAUGURAL ADDRESS*
We always talk about information, as it
may be when we deal with weapons and
explosion. But while talking about explosion
of information as power, we are recognising
the fact that the information is going t o be
the raw material for the present industrial
revolution, as mechanical power had been the
base for the first industrial revolution. All
information is not knowledge, some may have

a large amount of information, sifting becomes
inevitable and instead of literature we should
learn t o transfer information, which should be
brief, concise and should not be misleading.
Thanks to Prof SR Ranganathan and his
colleagues, who did some classic and original
work in this direction overwhelmed by the
kind of information explosion we are witnessing. Perhaps what we can do is to use some of
the facilities provided by the latest technology.
One accepts that cross fertilization of the
interests is the key note of science. This
actually underlines the major difficulty that
how do we use information and how do we ask
for
keywords and how do we have it
disseminated properly?
The interaction between a research
scientist and an information scientist is a must.
We know that science moves fast and the
scientist has a big job but it is also a fact that
information scientist has a big role to play. He
has to continuously update himself. This is a
game where computers can help him. There. is
human system working as an interpreter. It
i s possible that we might be turning atleast

Or VS Arunechalm

t o be sifted, some may have to be processed,
some of it abandoned, if .knowledge has to
progress. This is a job easier said than done.
But we also know of stories that even geniuses
fike Ramanujam were having difficulties without proper information. If we have t o handle

fastest information as knowledge. But there
are some unique, I should say peculiar features
which make the job of an information scientist
somewhat more difficult.
Most of this information is interedisciplinary in character and is dispersed in a number
of subject areas. Often scientific journals are

*Excerpted from the Inaugursl Address given by Dr VS Arunachalam SA to RM and Secretary
Dept. of DR&D at the National Conference on Scientific Information for Defence on 25 Feb '85
at Vigyan Bhaven.

littered with abandoned projects. Unless we
learnt t o link up, we would not be able t o say
which is feasible and which are the things that
have been abandoned. The moment some thing
appears in print, we think i t is real but it might
be one that was abandoned years back and
they may be covering their losses by publishing
some papers. We have another problem in very
critical area where there are no publications
available at all. It is in this context that the
documentation has a major role t o play in
defence science. t just see that scientific

information for defence provides unique
opportunity and challenges. More than that it
can benefit enormously by interacting with a
scientific information group in other areas.
What is avai-labletoday in civilian field can have
greater implication in defence.

I think a constant interaction and an
awareness i s essential and I expect that National
Conference of this kind would provide such an
opportunity.

