Prime MinistBr looking at the DR DO's Products Catalogue. Talking to him are
Dr VS Arunachalam, SA to RM and Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC

A GUIDE TO DRDO's PRODUCTS,
PROCESSES AND TECHNOLOGIES
DESIOOC brought out a guide,
"Defence Research and Development-Products, Processes and Technologies" on
the occasion of the Joint Services
Commander's Conference held during 26-31
October 1986. An exposition of these
at Pragati
products wa.s also organised
Maidan, New Delhi.
The guide covers products, technologies, facilities and systems on a wide range
of subjects resulted from the researches

conducted by DRDO in recent years. Various
items of information in the guide . have
been arranged into 12 ' broad subjects'
namely - eeronautics. , armaments, combat
vehicles, computer aHd systems studies,
electronics,
engineering,
life sciences,
materials technology, national test facilities,
naval systems, rockets and missiles, and
training and information. Information
about each item included in the gUide
gives a brief description accompanied
by suitable photographs and performance

.........
A riew of th. DRDO Expc./don pallilion.t ~d ItMidan, New Deihl

feat ure s. The guide depi cts adequately
the present status of capabilities of the
Department of Defence Research and
Developme nt and the focus of its engi·
neering and technology programme s.
Dr VS Arunachalam. Scientific Adviser
to Raksha Mantri. talking to newsmen at
the exposition site . affirmed that by 1995
all critical items of equipment required
by the country's armed forces would be
developed and would be under production.
Foreign tech nology fo r the light combat
aircraft. a state-of-the-art aircraft for the
nineties, would be obtained only on OUr
ter ms. It will fly with th e engine to be made
in India by the mid nineties . He mentioned
about the breakthrough achieved in develop ing e ngines.
A matter of satisfact ion, according to
Dr Arunachalam. is that a large number of
technologies resulti ng from defence research
are being offered to private and public

2

sector industries for use in the production
of ite ms of daily use .
The products displayed at the expos ition covered diverse fields from light snow
shoes. pressurized clo thes for high alti tude
and dry food of various types to soph isti ~
cated low level radar.
Prime Min ister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, who
also holds the Defence portfolio. spe nt
about three hours at the exposition and
showed keen interest in the vario us ex hibits.
The other dignitaries who visited the exposition included Stu l R. Venkataraman. Vice
President; Shri Arun S;ngh. Minister of State
for Defence Research ; Shri VP Singh.
Finance Minister; Shri P Chidambaram ;
Minister of State for Home Affa irs and
Personnel. Public Grievances & Pensions;
Shri Shivraj V Patel, Minister for State for
Defence Production; the three Service Ol iefs
and a host of Senior Commanders of Army,
Navy and Air Force.

TRAINING COURSE O N
SCIENTI FIC PHOTOGRAPHY

VISITS T O DESIDOC

The third training course on 'Scientific
Photography' was organised at DESIUOC,
Metcalfe House, Delhi during 6-17 October
1986. This course, attended by 16 trainees
from DRDO EsttsiLabs and public undertakings under the Ministry of Defence,
was inaugurated by Shri SS Murthy. Director
DESIDOC. In his address. Shri
Murthy
emphasized the importance of photography
in information processing, storage and
dissemination.

Prof BS Kesavan adoyen among Library
& Information Scientists i n the country,
visited DESIDOC on 8 Aug 1986. He was
introduced t o various heads of divisions
and was shown various publications, current
awareness bulletins and manuals. Prof
Kesavan showed keen interest i n the cornputerised
library
services rendered
by
DESIDOC, viz accession lists, acquisition
of serials and circulation control system,
etc. H e also witnessed a demonstration
of online searching of DRDO-IRS database,
created on the basis of literature received
i n Defence Science Library. A demonstration on searching of other international
databases through DIALOG was also given.,

The course was at an advanced level
and the participants were professionals
and experienced photographers. The curriculum included topics concerning blackand-white,
and
colour
photography,
portraiture, processing of colour films,
pitfalls i n processing, lighting equipment;
Agfa colour materials and equipment, etc.
Special lectures on reprography, microform
and industrial photography were arranged.
The faculty comprised five well known
experts i n photography, viz.. Sarvashri
T Kasinath. OP Sharma, K Ponnuswamy,
PT Bhopale. RK Bose besides some
DESIDOC officers.
In his valedictory address, Shri Vivek R
Sinha,
Additional
Secretary,
Defence
Research, ' appreciated the efforts of
DESIDOC i n organising such a course. He
emphasised the need for a manual on preparation of slides, so that uniformity could
be maintained in the slides which the DRDO
Directors have t o often use t o make presentations a t the HQrs or elsewhere. The
programme ended with a vote of thanks
proposed by Shri V K Rangra, Scientist-inCharge-Training.
Shri PV Rao; Scientist-in-Charge Reprography was the Course Coordinator.

Prof BS Kssavan going through an information
seerch wrput. Explaining to him are Shri SS
Murthy,
Director, DESIDOC (centre) end
Shri RKSN'vastava, Scientist of DESlOOC

Prof Kesavan was very happy w ~ t h
DESIDOC's overall performance and apprec~atedthe team spirit preva~l~ng
i n Centre
and the progress it has made under the
able gu~danceof its present Director.
I n his words "I had v~sitedDESIDOC
qulte sometlme back. During t h ~ sv ~ s f tI

find t h a t a sea-change has taken place.
It has achieved a sophistication and rnodernity which augurs well for the future. More
than the gadgetry. what impressed me was
the alertness and quality of the personnel
who are making a little a long way. Shri
Murthy; Director, DESIDOC has achieved a
fraternity of workers whose knowledge and
readiness. to keep abreast with the latesf
developments is worthy of praise. They have
a long way to go and are awaiting a shift to
the new location t o carry out their plans. I
spent a joyful and educative three hours
with this fine statf".

