INFORMATION NET WORKS
PG Krishnarnurty

I. Prologue
Doctors and biomedical researchers in
information on
USA are able to access
16,000 biomedical journals through their desk
top microcomputers. Nuclear scientists in
India can have access to literature available
in more than 100 countries. Demographers
and social scientists can obtain information
from more than 100 institutions spread around
the world. Two thousand libraries in USA and
outside are connected through onHne terminals
for cooperative cataloguing, acquisition of
documents and related information activities.
The philosophy behind such developments
i s sharing resources and working together
for the common goal, namely improving access
to information.

2, Information Networks Defined
Let us spend a few minutes on the meaning
of the two terms. The first one 'Information'
is familiar to all of us. However, to be explicit,
it refers to the bibliographical/documented
information. The other term i s 'Network'.
According to Webester's dictionary, network
means "in interconnected or interrelated
chain, group or system"
In the context of bibliographtcal information the term network was defined by many.
However, the following definition of Broadbent
is comprehensive and appropriate.

"An
information network is a system
that integrates institutions
libraries, documentation centres, information centres and
analysis centres - into a coordinated whole,
to provide a community of users with relevant
input data, irrespective of its origin, format
and physical location".

-

3. Do We Need Networks ?
The answer to this question, needs a probe
into the growth of information and i t s availability to the user. It i s an accepted fact that
there has been an exponential increase of
scientific literature since the beginning of the
century. The output of scientific and technical
articles in* periodicals alone was 19,85,000
during 1960. And by 1980 it was estimated
to be 53.00,000 approximately. Whereas in
the availability of this information there are
many barriers. They are:(ij inadequate foreign
currency, (ii) different languages in which
the documents are published, (iiij limited
number of copies of documents produced
(this i s particularly true for Govt documents),
and (iv) lack of knowledge about the contents
of the documents. Substantial information is
gathered in the processes of administrative
activities of the Government but it never
reaches the main stream of book se\\ing activity. Even though there are solutions for each
of these problems, the flow of information
is still hindered.

4. What are the Fruits?

6. Organisational Structures

The fruits of information networks are the
array of benefits which can be summarised
as follows: (i) Maximum availability of information to the user (researcher, planner, administrator, policy maker, etc.). (ii) Improved
access to documents like working papers,
background papers, unpublished reports, conference documents which have a very limited
circulation, ( i i i ) Access to Govt. publications
with small print runs, (iv) Augmenting the
availability of resources. without increase in
budget, (v) Avoiding unwanted duplication of
activities leading to information services, (iv)
Comprehensive control of bibliographical
output. lnspite of these benefits networking
cannot be viewed as the only panacea for all the
problems in the flow of information. However,
i t is one of the best approach as for the remedy.

The information networks operate wi%
different type of organisational Structure
All such structures can be generaiised inl
three patterns. They are: (i) Directed ,(
centralised) networks, (ii) Non-directed (M
distributed) networks and (iii) H i e r a r ~ h i ~
networks. There are both advantages aM
disadvantages of each of these basic pattern$
Many a time, nerworks function with arranCe.
ments combining these basic patterns.

5. Networks can be Classified
The information networks formed world
over can be classified on the basis of several
criteria, of which the following are important:

7.

or mat ion of Networks

Information networks cannot be establish
ed without involvement of people managin(
the libraries, documentation centres, informa.
tion analysis centres, users of informatio"
and administrators of the parent institutions'
Therefore, their willingness and commitmen;
for participation in the network i s a primaq
requisite. Once it is assured, the followin!
elements help in building the network ant,
operating it for achieving set objectives:
i)

Geographical Area - networks covering
specific geographical areas. They are
either global, regional,
su b-regional,
national or local,

Clearly defined scope and objective?
of the network,

ii)

Subject - networks covering specific disciplines/subjects like population, nuclear
science, agriculture,

Clear understanding of the role of
coordination and participation in
discharging various responsibilities,

iii)

Established staildards and methods
of working,

Acriviry - networks restricted to specific
information activity like control of serials,
cataloguing, and

Promotors - networks covering governments, international agencies, political
groups and commercial agencies. The networks are also formed normally in combination of the above criteria.

iv) Management of the networks,
v)

Use of common technologies for
communication and computerisation

vil Training for input preparation anr
use of outputs generated,
vii) Agreement on products to be genera
ted in the network,

viii) A detailed workplan indicating the
steps/phases in development, operation and evatuation, and
ix) Budget on continuous basis

8. Global Networks
Among the global information networks,

AGRIS, DEVSIS, and POPIN have been described below:
AGRIS, information network system in
,gricu\ture was promoted by Food and Agricultural Organisation of United Nations. It
started functioning since 1975. It i s a centralised network for the purpose of processing
the information and decentralised for distribution and dissemination of information. The
network has a coordinating centre in F A 0
with national input centres located in the
member countries. AGRlS was proposed
mainly to overcome the inadequate coverage
by major indexes, the agricultural documents
produced in developing countries.
AGRIS coordination activity includes
information handling tool like "Guidelines
for Bibliographic Description, Classification
Scheme". Training and audio-visual programmes were also organised for use of AGRIS
products. AGRINDEX, AGRlS monthly magnetic tapes, SO1 services are some of the
products.
The success of AGRlS was due t o the
initiatives taken by the respective governments,
standardisation of procedures, training for
input preparation and use of outputs.
DEVSIS, Development Science Information System was started as an experimental
global information network during 1975.
It was supported by UNESCO, ILO and
IDRC.

DEVSIS system supports the concept
of decentralised input, centralised processing
and decentralised dissemination. The objectives of DEVSIS are maximising resources
at the country level. The emphasis placed on
documents in DEVSIS i s non-conventional
literature. The products of DEVSIS include
'Devindex' and machine readable database.
POPIN, United Nations Population Information Network is relatively a new development of global networks promoted by UN.
POPlN is a decentratised network for the
coordination of population information activities at global level. POPIN has a membership
of 100 institutions involved in population
activities. The POPIN coordination. unit unlike
AGRlS has no role of consolidating information. The coordinating unit has made considrable progress in producing documents for
networking. They include: Population Multilingual Thesaurus; manual for networking,
computerisation and classification. Regional
networks of POPlN are 'in the process of
development. The most progressive one among
them is POPlN ESCAP located in Population
Division of UN-Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.
Sub-region'al network like ASEAN POPlN
covering ASEAN countries has already been
initiated. There are initiatives for the development SAARC POPlN also.

9. Regional Networks
Among the regional information networks
HELLIS and APlNESS have been described.

HELLIS. Heatth Literature Library and
Information Services, a regional network of
health science libraries promoted by World
Health Organisation, Regional Office for South
East Asia (WHO-SEAROI came into existence
during 1979. HELLIS covers all 1 1 member-

countries of WHO and Regional office for
South East Asia. The overall objectives of
HELLIS network are to make better use of
existing resources in each country, in other
countries of the region and in other regions of
WHO. The structure of the network consists of
national network with a national focal point
and regional non-directed network linking
the national focal points. The WHO-SEAR0
coordinates the national focal points. The
products of the network include directories
of national network libraries and cooperatively
produced index of medical literature (ie INDEX
MEDICUS-SEARO, WHO). Two national focal
points were designated as source centres for
supply of photocopies to all 11 membercountries. The network funding is mainly
provided by WHO but national governments
do not seem to have allocated any funds. This
will be a hinderance for continuation of network activities when WHO funding ceases.
There are other networks promoted by WHOSEAR0 like Primary Health Care (PHC)
lnformation Network and Health Service
Research (HSR) lnformation Network which
are still in their infancy.
APINESS, Asia-Pacific lnformation Network in Social Sciences launched in 1986
has been promoted by UNESCO and Asian
Social Sciences Research Council. The immediate objective of APINESS is to link up the
existing major social science libraries and
documentation centres in the region (AsiaPacific of UN) to facilitate exchange of knowledge. APlNESS proposes to support the activities related to development of new information centres, production of indexes, abstracting
services, directories and inventories.

cant role in the development of regional and
global networks. Among them OCLC a d
NISSAT are described.
OCLC (Online Computer Library Centre)
has emerged in 1981 from Ohio College Library
Centre, a cooperative computerised regional
network of 54 colleges libraries in Ohio, USA,
OCLC consists of bibliographic computer and
telecommunication system for sharing
library resources. I t s services are available to a
wide range of libraries in USA and outside,
Nearly 6000 libraries use OCLC. 2000 have the
online terminals. The overall objective of OCLC
system is to reduce the cost of input per unit
(document) and increase the availability of
information and documents to its users. The
online Union Catalogue of OCLC is developed
in a cooperative way by the regular input of
participating libraries, retaining individuality
of each library collection a t the same time.
Inter-library loan requests are operated online.
The OCLC system i s used for book cataloguing, serial control, acquisition, monitoring
etc. The network has a Board of Trustees
of
16 members to guide on policy and
budget. The OCLC has 21 regional networks.
NISSAT, National lnformation System for
Science and Technology in India was established in 1977. NISSAT, a decentralised network
consists of sectoral centres, regional centres
and local information units. The coordination
i s done by NISSAT coordination unit in the
Ministry of Science and Technology. NISSAT
aims to promote and support the development
of information centres. Integration and linking
of sectoral centres is s t i l l awaited.

11. Activity Oriented Networks
10. National lnformation Networks
National information networks play signifi-

Activity oriented networks like PHILSOM,
(an acronym of schools of medicine) i s an
activity based network to control serials in the

area of medicine. The data-base was essentially
promoted by the Washington University School
of Medicine 'Library i n St. Louis in the year
1962, It became a network by 1968 for periadiholdings in libraries, The network functions
a distributed system. The products of
p ~ l l S 0 Mare computer generared desk copy
of fie holdings. Individual network members
an also produce subject list. The centrat
cobrdinating unit annuafiy brings out a Keyword Out-of-Cantext list. The system can be
used not only for inventory of ho\dings hut also
for control of receipts, reminders, etc.

12. Epilogue
Computerlelectronic
technology has
haught in significant improvements in information networks during 197Us. Manualty operated
information resources and their inventories
'

have been mechanised. -1ne pum~snmgworm
also added their share by introducing computers into productran of journals. MEDLARS
(Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval
System) gave the lead as the first computerbased bibtiographical system covering, the
entire gamut of bio-medical science. The other
development like INSPEC, DIALOG, ORBIT,
EAS/ RECON, BLAISE, EURONET have made
their impact on online information systems
covering several disciplines in science and
technofogy. However, most of these services do
not have adequate arrangement for document
supply. With the introduction af electronic
imaging and videa-text technologies, the future
of information networks i s promising. T h e
developmenb that can be anticipated are not
only in improved online availability of records
Isurrogater) of information, but also suppty
of documents (full texts) online,

REFERENCES
1.

Broadbent, KP, Management of lnformation Centres in China. 1984. IDRC,
Ottawa.

2.

Burkett 3. Library and information Networks in

UK. 1979. Aslib,

London.

3. Guide to Networking for Population Information Centres: Manual No. 3.
1966. United Nations, Dept. of Internal Economic and Social Affairs,
New York.

5.

fhiagarajan, R. National l?formation System for Science and Technology:
Some Problems and Perspe,ctives, ln AggarwaJ, SN. and others Ed. Perspective
in Library and Information Science, Vol 1.

