 

 

 

Shri Vivek R Sinha, Add! Secy, Dept of Defence Research, inaugurating the Seminar on Defence
Science information Network. Others seen in the picture are (from left}: Shri SS Murthy, Director,
DESIDOC, Delhi; Prof SG Pitroda, Adviser, C - DOT, New Delhi; and Shri ﬁll Mehra, Convener

SEMINAR ON DEFENCE SCIENCE INFORMATION NETWORK

A two-day Seminar on Defence Science
Information Network (DESINET) was
organized by DESIDOC on 17 8:18 February
1987 at Metcalfe House, Delhi. The Seminar
was a follow-up action on one of the
recommendations of the National Con-
ference on Scientific Information for
Defence held in February 1936. The objec-

Adviser, Centre for Development of Tele-
matics, New Delhi,delivered the keynote
address.

About 70 participants from Dept of
Defence Research St Development, Dept
of Defence Production 8: Supplies, Ordnance
Factories, Military Technical Institutions
and Military Colleges, Defence Public Sector
Undertakings and other Defence Agencies,
participated in the deliberations of the
Seminar.

While inaugurating the Seminar, Shri
Vivek R Sinha emphasised the importance of
information in decision making, research and
development, industrial production, and
other sectors which contribute to the
national development. He urged the informa-
tion scientists to take stock of available
information to identify gaps, and to use the
requisite technologies for collection and
processing of relevant information. He
said that the networks would be a solution
to cope up with the shrinking budgets of
libraries and information centres.

Prof SG Pitroda, while highlighting the
importance of information in his keynote
address pointed out that the key to informa-
tion is not just collecting it but its processing
and communicating to the ultimate users is
also vital. He emphasised that the telecom—
munication technologies would play a vital
role in information dissemination in future.
He opined that about 75 per cent work of
our executives in future would involve
communication aspects.

Welcoming the delegates, Shri SS Murthy,
Director, DESlDOC spelled out the purpose

Shri Ambrish Kumar
DESIDOC, Delhi

Technical Session II :System Design and
Analysis, Computer
Configuration, Soft-
ware Development
etc.

Chairman : Shri BS Murthy
Director, Telecom-
munication Research

Centre, New Delhi

Rapporteurs : Shri Mohinder Singh

DLR L, Hyderabad

Shri RK Srivastava
DESIDOC, Delhi

Technical Session III: Resource Sharing,
Distribmed Data
Processing, Links
with other National
and International
Networks

alairman :Prof S Parthasarthy
Director, Institute of
Information Studies,

Madras

Rapporteur: : Shri PG KrishnamUrty

DESIDOC, Delhi

Shri SK Bhatia
DTD 8t PlAirl,
New Delhi

tives of the Seminar were to workout the
action plan for the establishment of the
information network linking all the libraries
and technical information centres under the
Ministry of Defence. The Seminar was
inaugurated by Shri Vivek Fl Sinha, Add!
Secretary, Dept of Defence Research and
Development. Prof Satyendra G Pitroda,

of the Seminar. He said that in addition to
working out the details of the information
network linking the large number of libraries
and information centres in the Ministry of
Defence, the Seminar will discuss the pro-
blems related to computerised information,
online cataloguing, searching of in-house
and international databases.

Shri SS Murthy. Director, DESIDOC and
Prof MV Gopinath, Documentation
Research and Training Centre, Bangalore,
were nominated as Chairman and Rapporteur
General of the Seminar respectively.

Discussions went round the following
topics remanated from 36 papers presented
in the Seminar: lil global and local area
networks, resource sharing, storage and
access to information, (ii) structure and
types of network, liiil security aspects,
decentralised input and centralised output,
hardware St software, updation of infor—
mation, role of central, regional and partici-
pating units in the network, etc.

The proceedings were spread over the
following technical sessions.

Technical Sessionl :Network Configura-
tion St Structure ano

Aspects of Policy,

Management.
Chairman : Prof 5 Sam path

Chairman, RAC,

New Delhi
Rapperteurs : Shri RK Biswas

SAG, New Delhi

Technical Session IV: Manpower Develop-
ment, New Delhi

mailman : AVM FIK Mehra
Director, DTSH,
New Delhi

Repporteurs . : Shri Lakhan Singh

lNMAS, Delhi

Shri Al. Moorthy
DESIDOC, Delhi

Concluding Session :

: Dr VA Kamath
Chairman, Library
Committee, Nehru
Centre, Bombay

: Shri UR Sharrna
DESIDOC, Delhi

Chairman

Rapporteurs

Smt KK Mittal
DESIDOC, Delhi

Shri Yogender Singh
IAT, Pune

Shri SN Mehta. Scientist E proposed the
vote of thanks.

Shri Vivek R Sinha also opened an
exhibition on computer and information
products arranged on this occasion.

A cultural programme was organized
on the evening of 17 February 1987 for the
benefit of the participants.

EXCERPTS FROM THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS“

The scientific information has a decisive
role in research and industrial production
which contribute to the national develop
ment. in Defence, information assumes
great importance. Since information is
power, many of those who collect informa-
tion do not like to part with it. We often
make frantic efforts in searching information
which is already available and hidden some-
where within the organlzation. Therefore,
it is necessary to preperly organize the
available information and monitor
the rapidly growing new information.
Advanced information technologies have to
be used for acquiring and organizing the
scientific information which could even-
tually result in change of role of those
involved in information work from that of
traditional librarian to information manager.

With the shrinking budgets of informa-
tion centres, there appears to be a need for
adopting new strategies for coping with
information explosion. Suitable networks
could be established by linking various
libraries and information centres in the
country. While doing this. proper steps

should be taken for standardisation of
activities and training of personnel.

In establishing a Defence science Infor-
mation Network (DESINET) there is a
challenge as well as an opportunity. The
challenge is the establishment of such a
network linking all the libraries and infor-
mation centres of the Ministry of Defence
across the country by using sophisticated
information and telecommunication techno—
logies. The opportunity is to prove that
the information science is not just acquir-
ing documents: it also involves a gamut Of
advanced technologies,- and the contribution
of information scientists is as important
as others in our organization.

With the determination and perseverance,
the goal of forming the Defence science
Information Network can be achieved. The
DESINET should cater not only to informa-
tion dissemination but also to provide the
base documents. Its services should also be
made available to the civilian sector,
wherever possible.

 

' The inaugural Address was delivered by Shri Viva-k R Sinha, Additional Secretary,

Dept of Defence Research and Development.

EXCERPTS FROM THE WELCOME ADDRESS“

The Seminar on Defence Science Infor-
mation Network is _a follow-up action on
one of the major recommendations of the
National Conference on Scientific Infor-
mation for Defence organized by DESI DOC
in February 1986. In this Seminar, it is
expected that the various aspects of planning
and implementation of the network will
be discussed. This requires the support of

not only information personnel but also-

of top management in the Ministry of
Defence. In this context, DESIDOC is fortu-
nate to receive such support from various
authorities in the Ministry of Bohemia.

With this support, DESIDOC is able to
make substantial progress in computeri-
zation of major scientific information
activities and reach the users of this
information online.

The proposed DESINET will be coopera-
tive in nature with equal opportunity to
every network member. The presence of
Shri Vivek R Sinha, Addl Secretary, Defence
Research and Development and the chief
guest, Prof SG Pitroda, Adviser to the Dept
of Telecommunications at the inauguration
of the Seminar, has provided the network the
necessary managerial and technical support.

 

“ The Welcome Address was given by Shri SS Murthy, Director, DESIDOC.

EXCERPTS FROM THE VALEDICTOHY lADDl-TESS‘”F

India is taking a leap forward from a
passive type of Defence research and deve-
lopment activities to providing meaningful
scientific and technological support to
Armed Forces. We can no longer continue
with the arrangement of licensed production.
Without technological freedom, political
and economic freedom do not serve their
purpose. Unlike the fight for political free-
dom, the enemy is often unknown for
technological freedom. Over the years the
experiments conducted by India towards
self—reliance in technological production
have made us strong. We are now talking
about such technologies and projects in
which we aim to provide major hardware
for Defence Services. Thus we are slowly
building a kind of supportive relationship
with the Services to meet their specific
requirements.

To keep this tempo we need to get into
technologies with a great future and which
are appropriate to our needs. Although it is
not possible to develop all such technologies
within the country, we can achieve them

through collaborative efforts and pooling
our resources and capabilities. We need to
link cur R&D laboratories with the pro-
duction agencies on one hand and the user
inspection agencies on the other into a
"mammoth national team".

Knowledge or information is one of the
important ingredients in this process. Infor-
mation either positive or negative has
relevance. The information systems and
networks have become increasingly relevant
in the present collaborative phase of our
Defence R&D.

In the context of information dissemi-
nation, keywords are becoming extremely
relevant. Information should be available
to every scientist working in any laboratory.
The role of libraries and librarians has
changed. The technologies of computer,
xerox machines and the use of satellite in
transmisﬁon of information have enor-
mously changed the information handling
practices. The libraries and technical infor-
mation centres should form a national

 

" The Valedictary Address was delivered by Dr VS Arunachaiam, Scientific Adviser

to Raksha Mantri.

information grid to provide information
not only to research laboratories but also
to military teaching institutions. More than
that information is to be provided to the
military itself for developing tactics based
on technology. Information activity can
no longer be considered as secondary. In
fact. as we progress in technology, informa-
tion is getting tightly controlled. Techno-

logies are being locked up in advanced
countries for no meaningful purpose. Even
the information is getting locked up. The
need of the day is to search methods for
digging out these technologies and informa-
tion. Information along with other systems
inputs leads to building self—reliance in
science and technology specially related to
Defence.

