MACHINE TRANSLATION

- PROSPECTS AND PROBLEMS

DefenceScientific Informath & Documentation Centre, De/hi- 1 10054.

About 25 years ago. Hugo Gernrback, editortp&ief,
'Radio Electronics' predicted that
by the dawn of the coming century, language
barriers will have vanished. His predicti~nhas
almost come true although we are still 13 years
way from the next century. Electronic
machines, particularly computers have made
inroads into the translation activity. Will they
replace the human translators? Such a situation
may not arise in the near future, since fully
automatic, high quality machine transfation
seems nexr to impossible. In spite of this, efforts
towards achieving machine translation have not
stopped. Significant progress has been made in
the area of
machine translation. Machine
translation is a compbx process of man-machine
interaction.

2. METHODS OF TRANSLATtON
For the purpose of understanding the concept
of machine transtation, it is desirable to examine
M~~QUS
methods of transtation. They are as
follows :
if Human translation

ii) Machine-aidedtranslation (MAT)
iii) Human-aided machine translation
iv) Machine translation {MT)

2.1 Human Translation
Human translation is as otd as mankind 3131.5
the most widely used method. It is atso the mast

mliahfe method. The other three are consicfered

to be synonymous. and are labe(ied as NIT. Some
draw a distinction between MAT (also called
computer assisted translation) and MT. In MAT,
the role of the machine i s t o assist the human
trans\ator, as is obuious. Whereas, in the humanaided machine translation, the machine, bsides
assisting, does the trandation as well. The MT,
on the other hand, is the idea\ case that falls
in the 'domain a?artificial intelligence.

2.2 Machineaided Translation (MAT)
In the MAT, the machine used is the most
comrnorily used tool of office automation
the word processing computer. It works as a
persona) secretary to the translator. Used as
a factotum, It alleviates much of the drudgery
of the translator's work. It can detect mast of
the typograi3hical and speling errors with the
help of dictionaries and spelling checking programs. It edirs and proof-reads before giving a
camera-ready copy. The most important use of
a ward processor for a translator is in the form of
a terminoiagy base. Every professional translator,
normally, has his own gjossary of terms he
comes access. But this glossary is maintained
in a haphazard manner. A lot of time is wasted
in culling out the meanings of the terms from
such manual tools for various subjects. {n MAT,
a dictionary of definitions and possibte choice
of specific terms can be produced for use when
translating one or more documents on the same
topic. Glossaries can also be prepared on a
computer simultaneously with the typing of a
document.

-

Thg ana(y$i$ phase inqoives parsinq Q , ~
other words, picking apart a sentence to dw
In human-aided machine .rrans\ation, the
micle whal each word and u19irnately ta
machine, while transtating, shoutd ensure that
antwice metino. Both syntactic and sernna
the contents af the texts in the source language
parsing are done. "Te tormet concerns parb a
and the target iangusge are the same or raugh{y
s p m h , and woi'! orr;)er, the latter the rneahtw
the same. To achieve this, the machine shoufd
or the sense. A pat$er user grammaticat zu)& arl
haw the qualities of the human translator
we/! as ather sources of know(edgtt .to determi,
Wi)? into it. Wumn transistor has (ing~isfi~
the role each word pkys in the Sentence and hob
knowledge, common sense, cap~cityto perceive
these words are retate6 to one another.
cause-effect relatianship and ather such human
traits. So endow&, the human trand+%ork abfe
In the transfer &as@, transfer d i ~ t i o n ~ ~ i d
to perform semantic and contextual ahalysis witk
are used ta Find the corres~ondingwords in %
ease. So that it can simulate the human
target language. Context& dictionaries 8,
tfansiation process, a machine has to b simiiarly
used to remove ambigujtj~.Finally, the targR
'endowed' by having these quafities, at least
words chosen are fed into the synthetic routj~e~,
partly, built into it.
(n the synthesis phase, a~Propriatvendings are

added and vvords ate rearranged accord\ng to
he rules of syntax of the target language,

2.4 Machine Tramktion
2.4.1 Role of Machine
me process of M f involves mainly three
phases viz. anslyr;is, transfer and synthw~s.

Saurce Language
ANALY 3 3 ,

Conceptud
transfer

Semantics

Word retwion

-t==r--l

tuIi?s
Bilingual/
Contextual
dictionaties

Target Languaw

The raie of human translator in MT i s c h a q ~
to that of a preedjtor ~ n da post-&;tar. ge
works as a linguist. Since i t is not passible to
incorporate a({ ltuman krtowledge and uocabu\ary
info .the machine, it is necessary to modify t h ~
source text into a machine ~Mferstacldablefarm.
,The pfe-editor cootrak the ingut by rewrititq
the text TQ be translated in c~nformiti/with the
contents of the dictionary storad in tbt
computer and according to the rules eszab\i$h&
especially for it. Pre-editing \go1on)y improves
the wurce.text but ehables better translation.
It is atso a st@ usad to update the dictionary.
Although the computer autM is a translation
that is halbdone, it has pe&~rm@d
the unp\essant
part of the translairan job-the tedious and
monotonous job of trandaf,ng the same wards
and expressions several tines jn the same text.
The transhzor, p\ayaying 'the fo\e d the Weditor, has onty to see h ~ w
those words are
connetted and make khe output gram ma ti calf^
carrect and tecb,nicaW preci*. {t L on syntilx,
word ordw and semantic congruity that the
eamputet $tclmb\es most often. The job of rhe
trans\ator is entithe6 because he has to analyze
the text, ac\d iaenti.fy the areas h a t need
@equant ~orrection.We can thus ifiprove the
system linguisticatty This reduces the frostfation

.

of the post-editor and augments the quJity and
of future computer outputs.

In betwm the pre-editor and the post-editor
@ere is the dictionary coder who builds the
Sermino\~gy
base, which includes parts of speech,
hDmographs and conflicting entries in the
dj~tionary. Based on the subject knowledge
andthe work done by the pre-editor, decisions
,ill have to be taken as to what expressions
shauld be entered into the terminology base.
mere may be two coders, one for the source
(angoage and the other for the target language.
00th must have an excellent command over the
languages, mainly at three levels : morphology,
syntax and semantics.

3. MACHINE TRANSLATION SYSTEMS
, The technology of
machine translation has
made rapid progress during the last three

decades. Several machine translation systems

German. The German language has an infinitely
large capacity to produce compound nouns,
making it difficutt to create a comprehensive
German to English system. Systran has an
amazing speed bf 3,00,000wordslhour.

3.3 Meteo
The English to French Meteo system developed by the Montreal University, Canada,
has been highly successful. I t s success is obvious
from its application in rnetearoloqy. In this
field, there i s no ambiguity of words, sentences
are short, verbs and nouns are repefitive. More.
over, rules of grammar and syntax are very
simple, VtGth a vocabularv of 2000 words and
expressions, the M E T E 0 system has been
providing forecasts in traoslation for the public
and mariners in Canada faur times daily since
1977. I t translates over nine million words
annually but not without revision by the human
translator.

were developed and used. Some of the most

significant machine translation .systems in use
and being developed are described below :

3.4 Eurotra

3.1 Logos
Developed by Dr. Peter Toma in the late

19605, it was operationalised by the European
Commission in Luxembourg. It is a word.
processor based system which transtates between
English and German. It has a speed of 1500
wordslh'o ur.

3 2 Systran
(t is a comprehensive translation systm

which canbe grouped under the human-assisted
machine translation. It takes care of multiple
meanings and makes a choice during the translation process. Initially, it was designed to
translate between Engtisb and French because
the target country was Canada. Now, the Systran
is available for translation from English YO

Eurotra i s another ambitious project being
developed by the European Commission. I t will
be a mulrilingual system, translating between
at1 European Community languages. I t will
be portable from one make of computer to
another. it will aka permit addition of new
languages and subjects. Its estimated cost is
$22mil(ion.

4. OTHER AIDS fN TRANSLATION
h e development of online terrninoiogv is
an area which promises to be very useful to the
professionat translator. Glossaries anddictionaries
become out-dated .because of the delays in
publishing and the rapid advances made by
science and technology. A cleating-how for
sharing terminology files at nomioal cost can be
developed,

5. COST FACTORS
According to a study, a workload of translation of a minimum of one million words per
year i s required to justify the acquisition of a
MAT system. Private translation agencies and
publicity
departments
of
multinational
companies can use these systems. But, what

about a non-profit government organiza~
9
like INSOOC and DESIDO(;? The articles Irary,
lated, for example, in DESIOOC are divmpa
in nature. Articles in subjects like aeronalltlq
medical science, chemistry, ballistics, to memiah
only a few,are translated. These are translated
from four languages into English. I t is difficoq
to contemplate a system which wi\\ cater to
multifarious fields.

REFERENCES
1. Cancel, A.C. Over Byte of the translator. Paper presented at American Translators
Association Conference, 1984.

2. Caron, A. The Meteo system and the translation. Paper presented at American
Translators Association Conference, 1984.

3. Cohen, P.M. information technology and the translator. Aslib Information, 13(4), 1985.
4. Mauro, P.D. and Russo, M.J. Computer'assisted translation a t Xerox Corporation,
Paper presented a t American Translators Association Conference, 1984.

