TRAINING FOR COMPUTER ISATION OF LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVlCES
VK Rangra
Defence Scientjfic Jnformation& Documentation Centre, Qelhi- l lclO54

1. TRAINING, EfiUCAf\ON AND
DEVELOPMENT
The dictionary meaning of training is to bring a
person to desired state or standard of efficiency
by instructions and practice'. The main aim of
training is to impart a specific skill which the
recipient is expected to practice. Education, on
the orher hand, seeks to bring out and develop
the innate qualities of a person or to enhance his
general reasoning powet. W\dhereas t v a i ~ i n ~
facuses anention to meet the present job requirements of the indjviduat education prepares him
for a future ,but not for a defined job. Training
cannot be taken as an isolated activity but is considered as a development process by which a
person applies his training skills for improving his
job performance a& increasing organisationat
effectiveness2.

tages i s ideally suited for information processing
and to meet the challenge posed by information
explosion.
With the increasing use of sophisticated
technolo~v {ta be precise, information
technology} in the library and information
system, it is essentiaf that the staff with
necessary ski\\ and pprliciency is 'auailabk to
perform the jobs. For this purpase, the options
are : either to recruit the new staff and deckare
some of the present staff as surplus or to train
the present staff for ttSe new jab. Although a
judicious mix of the two alternatives may appear
to be more reasonable, the importance of the
second alternative, i.e., training of the present
staff is nof minimized. Dowlin feels that the
librarians functioning in an e\ectronic age need
three kinds of preparGion3.

2. REQUlREMENt OF NEW SKILL
The debate on whether to use computer for
Iibrary and information system is already over.
The question now is when and how to start. The
computer. because at its characteristics of speed,
accuracy, s.torage, versatility and ather advan-

( i ) Technical knowledge re\ated to computers and cornmunicatiorrs devices,

( i i ) Readiness to introduce organisadona\
hanges necessitated by technological
inrtovation. They should be able to

plan, develop and implement new
systems and procedures and train staff
in their use, and
(iii) Ability to deal with a wide range of
people outside the library : people
who supply hardware and those who
supply software and with organisations that supply services either
commercially or share the library
resources.

3.COVERAGE OF COMPUTERISATION IN LIS COURSES IN INDIA
Although much care has been taken to include
the above aspects in the library and information
science curriculum of the academic institutions
in developed countries, the progress has been
rather slow in the developing countries. In India,
almost all the 38 universities which are conducting the Master of Library & Information Science
course4 have included computerisation in their
syllabi but hardly any of these does justice to it
due to lack of qualified faculty for teaching the
subject and computer facilities for hands-on
experience. However, exceptions to this are the
training programmes of INSDOC and DRTC,
where more coverage and emphasis is given to
information technology and related aspects.

bases, and information transmission
through
telecommunication
networks.

4.1 Thrust Areas for Training
The thrust areas required to be covered for
training in computerisation are : data input preparation, basics of hardware, use of software,
knowledge of communication technology for
information transmission, utilization of online
databases available, etc.

4.1.1 Input Preparation
This comprises content analysis of document,
identification of the bibliographic elements,
preparation of the abstracts, assignments of the
descriptors for subjects presentation and their
validation with a thesaurus. All this information
is to be recorded in the input sheet as per
prescribed instructions.

4.1.2 Use of Hardware
This require* knowledge of the computer
system in general. The microprocessor-based
systems like personal computers (PCs) which are
available a t within-the-reach cost, are in use for
library and information work as dedicated
systems. Hands-on experience about their operation, particularly of data entry and retrieval, is
necessary.

The training programme proposed in t h i s
paper is a short-term one. It i s desirable to
arrange it inwhouseby inviting suiiabie faczlty
required to impart training. For the purpose of
designing and organising a suitable in-house
training programme for corrrputerisation, various
functions in the libraries and information services
can be grouped as under :
(i) Library Operations-ordering, cataloguing,
serials control,
budget
control, and
(ii) lnformation Services-query search,
SDI, online search of external data-

4.7.3 Use of Software
Software is an important element in
computerisation. It may be developed in-house
or may be acquired as packages from commercial
and professional institutions. In-house developed
software has advantage over the commercially
available packages but the former is more time
consuming and costly. Parthasarathy in his
paper gives the essential features, steps f y
evaluation and sources of software packages
Ted in her book gives details of a number of well
known software package for various library and
information applications .

.

6

A new package called Mini Micro CDSIISIS
copyrighted by the UNESCO Library, Archives &
Documentation Services is considered useful for
library & information work. It can function on
any IBM compatible personal computer and is
available in India through NISSAT.
Some software packages which are very
popular are available alongwith the personal
computers. The software dBase III is a database
management system for microcomputers and
provides wordprocessing,
LOTUS 1-2-3
graphics and spreadsheet functions. These
.software functions are also necessary to be
learnt. A package called WORDSTAR for word
processing functions is very useful for preparation of textual matter, often required for current
awareness services and office work.

4.1.4

Information Transmission

This involves the study of the tslecommunication systems such as multiplexing,
optical fibre communication packet switched
networks, cable TV and telecommunication
services, such as videotex and teletex, electronic
mail, electronic journal, facsimile.

4.2.2 Course Material
It should contain basic material on the
subject, not necessarily written by the faculty
members. The course material should cover
all major topics and should serve as a reference
source. The course material may be supplemented with the write-ups of the lectures or any
other information material given by the faculty
members.

4.2.3 TrainingAids
In such a training programmes, apart from the
conver~tionaltraining aids including the blackboard, one can introduce a variety of other aids
namely transparencies and slides ffar auerhead
projections, films, computer-aided instructions,
etc. In this context instruction module like the
computer-aided learning (CAL) designed by the
College of Wales (UK) to study the DIALOG
commands will be of great value8. The lectures
sometimes are supplemented with case studies
which can best be explained with the he:p of
video films.

4.2.4 Computer Facility
Online access to international databases for
bibliographical information is an important
activity to provide comprehensive, exhaustive
and up-to-date information. Knowledge about
databases, commercial service agencieslvendors,
search process is, therefore, essential. The training aspects have been discussed by this author in
his paper 'Users' training for online bibliographic
search system7 .

4.2 Inputs for the Training Programme
4.2 1 Faculty
The faculty should comprise library and
information scientists with good knowledge and
working experience in computerisation and
computer specialists with sufficient exposure to
library and information work. This calls for
reorientation of library & information science
teachers in cornputerisation activit), Besides
subject expertise, the faculty members should
have necessary teaching skill and aptitude.

Adequate computer facilities should be
available to provide hands-on experience to each
participant for about one hour a day.

4.3 Eligibility Criteria
Criteria for selection of suitable personnel
from a library or a documentation centre for this
type of training programme requires careful
consideration. watsong enumerates the following
requirements and qualities which a trainee
should possess. The trainees for such programmes
should be selected from different levels in a
library and documentation centre, They can be
grouped into those a t supervisory, operational
and managerial level. Some of these may be :
i)

~d"cationi1background,

ii)

Level within the organisation,

iii)

Work experience,

iv)

Absorption ability,

v)

Openness to new ideas, and

vi)

Perceived need for self improvement.

Of these the first two categories are important.

4.4 Training Curriculum

for the benefit of the personnel working in the
libraries & technical information centres attached
to the DRDO labslestts. The training programmes conducted on this subject so far by
DESIDOC are as under :

It may include lectures, practicals in the form
of as one word experience, group discussions,
tutorials and visits to institutions where the computerisation is in operation. Al least one hour per
day may be provided for hands-on experience on
the computer system. The distribution of these
components in the curriculum may be lectures
(40%), practicals (40%), tutorials (10%) and
visits (10%).

4.6 Evaluation
According to Watson the concept of evaluation seeks to answer essentially the following
questions :
i)

Did the training achieve what it was
supposed to achieve?

ii)

Could the training be done more effectively and efficiently, and

iii)

What has been the overall significance
and value of the training?

Feedback from the participants in the form of
a questionnaire should be obtained and analysed.
This will help in improving the future programmes and make them more effective. Followup studies should also be made to ascertain that
the training imparted is being properly utilised.

DESIDOC has been conducting training
programmes in information science & technology

ii)

Application of microcomputers to
library & information services,
. Input

preparation for computerised
information system,

iv)

Application of computer to library
and information work, and

V)

Use of mini micro CDSIISIS software
package.

One of the programmes (ii) was conducted by
Prof FD Anderson of the RG Institute of Technology, Aberdeen (UK). The programme (iv) was
conducted for Govt. of India Librarians Association. The programme (v) was organised in
collaboration with NISSAT. One of the programmes (iii) on CCF (Common Communication
Format) was held on 28-29 September 1987.
DESIDOC is planning a three-month programme on Information Technology in which a
more comprehensive account of the computer
application in library and information services
is covered.

Acknowledgement
The author is grateful to Shri SS Murthy,
~irector, DESIDOC for his encouragement to
write this paper.

REFERENCES
1.

The qoncise Oxford Dictionary. 7th edn.
Oxford University Press, 1982; p 1136.

5. TRAINING PROGRAMMES OF
DESIDOC

Use of microprocessors for information processing,

iii)

4.5 Duration and Capacity
Two-week programmes with a schedule of six
hours a day will be necessary to provide an overall view and some practical experience on the
subject. The number of trainees can be restricted
to ten for providing individual attention to the
participants and also for the computer facility
for hand-on experience.

i)

2.

Virmani BR and Seth, Premila. Evaluation
management training

and development.

Vision Books. 1985; pp 6-22.

3. Dowlin, DE. Education for the electronic
library.

Drexel Libr Qly

7.

17(4), 1981;

graphic search systems. lASLlC special publication No. 21, 1981;pp 179-89.

pp 77-90.

4.

Kumar,

Rangra, VK. User's training for online biblio-

PSG, Research in library and

information science

in

India. Concept

8.

Armstrong, CJ. Design and implementation
of a micro-computer teaching packages for

Publishing House, Delhi, 1987; p 8.

online bibliographic searching. Educ Inform

5.

Parthasarathy, S. Guidelines for choosing a

2(1), 1984; pp 35-42,

system. Libr Sci 23131,1986; pp 162-75.

6.

Tedd, LA. An introduction to computerbased library systems. John Willey, 1984,
pp 199-204.

-

9.

Watson,

CE.

Management development

through training. Addison-Wesley, 1979,
pp 1 18-19, p 265.

Learning is finding out what you already know.
Doing is demonstrating that you know it.
Teaching i s reminding others -that they know just as well as you.
You are all learners doers and teachers.

Richard Bach

