COMPACT DISK: A nEvowrtONAnY STORAGE MEDIUM
AjithPM Ind Rajeev Vij

Defence Scientiﬁc quonnalion J: Documentation Centre. Delhi _ 110 054

Compact Disk Read-only-Memory (CD-
ROM). is one of the laser-based mass data storage
devices that came into being as a contender for an
altemative to magnetic tape, which runs into mites
for the same quantity of data tecorded. Tremen-
dous strides in ﬁnding applications for laser made
CD—ROM a versatile medium for storage of large
mass of infomation. CD-ROM technology which
uses laser. rather than electromagnetic methods
for recording and/or playback, is generally known
by its generic name, optical storage media.

 

" Compact Disk Player

2. OPTICAL STORAGE MEDIA
2.1 Inception and Development

The genesis of the optical storage media
(OSM) goes back to 1925, when John Logic Biard
tried to record video signals on a disc and to
reproduce them. He was not successful in record-
ing and reproducing the data due to the lack of

appropriate technology. Recording and reproduc-
tion became possible with the invention of laser
during 1960. By the middle of 19703. intensive
investigations on digital mass storage techniques
were initiated. However. it was only by the year
1984 that the technique could be perfected.

2.2 Kinds of Optical Storage Media

Optical storage media can be categorised into

the following four groups:

(a) Compact Disk (CD)
0)) Video Dtsk (VD)
(0)- Digital Optical Disk (DOD)
(d) L356! Card (LC)
3. COMPACT msx PRODUCTS

Currently, there are three established produc ts
of Compact 'Zisk CD-Audio (CDA), CD-Read-
Only-Memcry (CD-ROM) and CD-Interactive
(CD1).

CDA is mainly used for recording sound. CD‘
ROM. as the name indicates. can store data in the
form of text, graphs, maps and images. 0n the
other hand. CD1 can be used for storing sound, data
a; well as images in an integrated fonn. Further
unlike CDA and CD-ROM‘ CD1 is an interactive
system. The entire disk consists of four layers. The
reﬂecting and recording layers are sandwiched

between protective lnyets. Recording is done on
the recording layer. The reflective layer helps in
reading the recorded information.

Presently, CD-ROM cannotbe used as a mass
storage medium for volatile data on stock' ex-
change rates, weather data etc.. because after
recording data on the disk it can neitherbe updated
nor erased. Hectic R & D work is going on all over
the world for designing a mags data storage me-
dium thategnbeupdatedorerased Wedescn'be
here some promment feauues of CD-ROM.

3.] PhystcafFama! of CD—ROM

Comﬁaet Disk ts‘Ia circulaten cm diameter
disk made up of plastic resins, on which optically
readable information tracks are provided. The
optically readable information bits are fonn'et‘lon
the disk by exposing it to modulated laser light.

 

7Compacl Disk

The storage capacity of an optical disk is
enormous. A 12 inch video disk can storeas much
as 60.000 frames of information on a single side.
One frame may be occupied by apicture. ora page
of a conventional document A Constant Linear
Velocity (CLV) optical video disc can store as

. much as 30 million hits of infomation.

3.2 Making ofCD-ROM
Storing of information of master disk is tech-

nically known as "Mastering". Mastering of CD is
a complex process involving enormous expendi-

ture. For example, manning facility at 3M
Company (USA) cost about 15 million dollars.
Establishing such mastering facilities is beyond
the ﬁnancial capabilities of most of the small]
medium users.Utilizingmastetingfacilityoffei-ed
by other establishments is the only option left to
many users.

The text. graph. map or other material to be
tecmdedonaCDisscanned byascennerandthe
digital signals site recorded on a half-inch 9 track
magnetic tape fomatted according to the speciﬁ-
cations given by the edthpaiiy. After the eornpany
receives the formattedupc enpr correction codes

are added to;it ant; then the thpe is sent fer
mastering.

_ Themasterdiskgenerally consistsofaglass
mateiial on which digital data mm the tape is
ginsfen-edthroughm alasenecordingsygte‘ Once

master disk' is te are I
out of it. The replica' is ”mcalwor plasﬂgrentpeesain
material. The process of ihnltingplastic féplic’a is
much simpler than making a master disk. Master-
mgas40MBcompactdiskoostsUS$5000
whaeas preparing its replica costs 9nly US_ 3 5.
The scanner used‘ in mastering is a fax-like ma-
chine which scans data at 200-400 dpi (dots per
inch). The seanher gives a digital output which is
fed; to the recorder Inside the iecording unit
incoming data in life foim of Zeros and ones
actuate: the laser recording head which, in mm.
bums the surface of the disk accordingly. The
mcorded data can be checked for errors and if any
correction has to be incorporated the only possible
way is to record the corrected data on the remain-
ing space on the disk.

4. WHY OPTICAL STORAGE MEDIA?

This question is relevant. particularly when
storage media like paper. microfomis and mag-
netic tapes are in co-existence. The choice of
optical storage media in preference to all others is
justiﬁed when we see the range of beneﬁts offered
by them.

4.! Advantages

The degree and nature of beneﬁts of 08M
vary with the application. Prominent among the
potential beneﬁts are:

i) CD has the capacity to retain the informa-
tion stored on it for longer duration com-
pared to conventional storage media;

ii) CD can store text, sound, images and graph-

 

... y '3)“

 

The 'stoijage capacny (TD
compar'éd to that of tithe} media 'tln’iis

 

iii)

iv) The use of laser orotepts CD from dust and

mechanical reading head
4.2 Disiiliihlniiiii‘iés"
m oatisitgtemskm‘ebea‘emsame

The technoloey'is, yet to be standardised
and

iii)

iv)
of magnetic media, sueh,a_s Winchester
type record disk.

5. HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE DEVEL-
OPMENT

5.] Hardware

The playback system of CD-ROM essentially
includes a disk drive interfaced with a microcom-
puter through standard interfaces, such as Small
Computer System Interface (SCSI) or RS 232 C.
choice of which varies with the model. Most of the
disk drives now in the market can be connected to
IBM—compatibles. Retrieval commands are given
to the drive system through the computers. The
disk drive interfaces and workstations available
are listed in Table l.

I Very high

Data accessspeea is less coriipared to that

Table l-CD~ROM Drives with Interface Boards

Model

mu Interface Computer
1. Hindii CDR- 15025 8 bitpenllel [BMPQ MS-DOS
2. Hitachi 8 bit parallel IBMPC.MS-DOS
3. LMSI CM-201 Propneury bu: IBM PCMS-DOS
Apple 11C
4. LMSI CM-zot Proprietary but IBM PCIXTIAT
5. Sony CDU-too wptnscnybu [BMPC MS—DOS
6. Sony CDU—sooz wy'mSo-iy bu: BMPC. MSQOS
7. Sony couvzoo‘ SKS] lBMl’C in with
‘ , SASI
compeu‘bility
htrtyi‘ronhib; XM-zooo SASl; “muggy; with;
"'SASI‘ .i , t
' compatibility
J):- wwwm SCSMSO; mwrcnmw
ﬁeZi-Somase.‘

Ll ?‘w: Most of the software nmow in use‘with com-
‘paet disk player for search and retrieval has origi-
nated from microcomputer environmenL'The user
will obviously feel ﬁ'ustrated when he comes to

:lmow that the software he uses for one machine
7 will not work on a machine manufactured by

another company To overdome the expendimte
involved in developing the software as well as to
prbblem of incompatibility, a QD- -ROM standar—
.disation gmup called 'l-Iigh Sierra Committed

~2.formulated standards based on the Sony and Phil—

ips CD-ROM disk player/disk system. If their
standards are accepted by the manufacturers all
over the world, the problem of disk player incom-
patibility will be solved.

6. PUBLICATIONS IN CD-ROM FORMATS

As a new papyrus, the compact disk has
become a new publishing medium for a large
number of publishers. Groliers Academic Ency‘
clopedia is an example of a widely marketed CD-
ROM product. Some of the publications on com
pact disk available in the market are listed in Table
2.

Table Z-Nblicntionl Available on CD-IOM

ILNo. Misho- Ouhh and Wu Del W loud

1. Met 20 volume. 30,1130 mid: IBM PC
Encyclopedia knowledge retrieval Iahwue 256 K RAM

2. Bookl-in- Tti-nu (05) IBM PC
Pn'm Plus

3. Uldch'e Txi-em (06) IBM PC
Plus

4. USA snm‘pma mu PC

5. Diumlim TMS Ioﬁm IBM PC

Abnnet

7. APPLICATIONS OF OPTICAL DISK

7.1 For Education and T raining Purposes

Optical disk caught the attention of educa-
tionists and managers due to its interactive nature.
As a training tool, optical disk system has much
more to offer than what a conventional medium
like overhead project or slide projection and video
recorder could do.

Laser video disk and compact disk interactive
media are two important training tools widely used
now.

The computer controlled video disk system
has many advantages in creating new capabilities
for education and training functions.

7.2 For Information Centres

The tremendous storage capacity of an optical
disk has been established beyond doubt Accord-
ing to the data available. a 12 cm CD—ROM disk
can replace 2,75,000 A4 size pages This will rid
the librarians of their constant worry aboutthe ever
increasing volumes they have to accommodate in

the available space. If multi-volume 'Books in
Print', dictionaries. handbooks and encyclopedias
become available on handy CD-ROM disks. there
would be plenty of space left in the reference
section. The entire concept of a conventional
library will thus change with the use of compact
disks.

The electronic library is round the comet. The
library user need not go to library to search for the
needed material. Instead he can browse on his
terminal at home, which will be linked to the main
storage system of the library. When the user gets
the desired part of the infomation. he can get a
copy on the printer attached to his terminal. The
main advantage accming to the user can be meas-
ured in terms of the time saved, a precious entity
for a scientist engaged in R & D activities.

8. FUTURE TRENDS

In the immediate future, new formats of opti-
cal disk technology may appear that will be the
read-onl y versions of high-performance alterable
optical disk formats. Within the next few years,
CD-l. CD-IV. CD-X. laser cards and erasable

' optical disks will provide higher data rate, faster

access and finer addressibility compared to CD-
ROM.

It is not clear whether any of the alterable
media currently under development can provide a
direct functional {ac ility equivalent to the conven-
tional magnetic media.

It is likely that Magneto—Optic (M0) medium
drives will be introduced soon, probably in 5 1/4
inch format. MO drives can be much of the work
now done by Winchesters, if their data transfer
rates and access times are comparable. Their high
capacity and smooth media removability will add
to the advantages of these devices.

FURTHER READING

l. Ashck Kama: Optical data Storage: 3 new 5. HenhenN-K- QDRQM technology: Anew
frontietDESl’DOCBuh‘etin,5(516},£935; l- em {or information storage and retrieval.
5. Onttngﬁmﬂt 1985; 1728.

2. Cale, 1.0., Brownitxg,E.B. and Lynch. CA. 6. Laub, Leonard. The evolution of mass slot—
The impact of optical media on infannation age, Byte, 11(6). K986; 161—72.
pubiish‘mg‘ Bull Amer See Inform Sci. 12(6),
1986; 12-14. ’5. Ozenfr. The Compact Disk ROM: applica-
. tion Software. IEEE Spectrum 23(4). 3936;
3. Chem P P S. The CD-ROM: how it Works? 4964‘
{EEE Spectrum/EW}, 1986‘. 4449.
‘ ' y 8‘ Zoellick, Bait. cn.aom software develop-
&\ Hendley.Toag. AninttodgctiontoCDrROM. meat. Eyre. 12(6), 1986;177-8ii‘
Inﬁtrm Media Techﬂbl, 1.9(3);1935,3D3-06. ' ' '

Language and the faculty of speech is ﬁle_immediate gift of God.

«Webster

S peeeh is the representation of the mind, and writing is the teetesentation of speech

«Arismta’e

