 

POPULARIZING SCIENCEVAND TECHNOLOGY
Anuradhu Ravi and DS Bedi

Defence Sm'entiﬁc Infamarion and Documentation Centre
Delhi—54

1. POPULARIZING SCIENCE

The twentieth century has seen many scienti-
ﬁc discoveries and inventions. The speed of
scientific advancements has been tremendous and
has resulted information explosion.
However, the knowledge about these important
developments is confined to a small group of the
society. The majority, especially in a developing
country like India, do not have access to the vast
information available. This is because of lack of
proper communication. In the electronic age,
newer communication technologies are available.
Information is also increasingly being
computerised. However, there is still a crying
need to communicate the results of the vast
amount of R&D work being done in the world
of science &technologv (S&T), in an objective
and clear manner so that maximum number of
people get to know of them. This. need for
bringing this information to the general masses
demands popularization of science and
technology, i.e., presenting the developments in a
manner comprehensible to all sections of the
society.

in an

 

2. WHY POPULARIZE SCIENCE?

Science and scientific research are based on
the spirit of impartial enquiry. Knowledge of
science and fostering of scientific temper help to
think rationally and get rid of dogmas. This is
important not only for the society but for the
very growth of science itself. Also, popular
science provides people with the information
which helps them to understand the immediate
significance of new scientific developments. By
presenting the positive and negative aspects
of an invention, popular science helps people
from allwalks of life———-— students, teachers,
workers———— to estimate its effect on
economy, future, prospects, and Social life. It
provides the background material for discussions
and debates on controversial issues thereby
ensuring the involvement of a larger segment of
the society in the decision-making process.

3. SCIENCE IN THE SERVICE OF
MANKIND

Of late, science is becoming a decisive factor
for the whole future of humanity. On one hand,

it has endowed mankind with greatly increased
productive capacities, and on the other, it has
given individual nations an immense capacity for
destruction. In view of these developments,
science popularization has the function of
helping nations to appreciate the dangers which
science has created for the very survival of the
human race on the earth and to understand what
science can do to end hunger, poverty and much
of the diseases now widespread on the earth. It is
vital that mankind should understand the
destructive and the constructive capacity of
science. This alone can permit adaptation of our
social structure to the new habitat created by
science, and to the new conditions of human
existence which science continues to change
from day to day. For example, appfication of
elementary hygiene and medicine to childbirth
and child-rearing practices has greatly increased
life expectancy. In developing countries, this has
resulted in a desperate race to accelerate
agricultural productivity to keep pace with
popuiation explosion. In developed countries,
this has brought in the social problem of
rehabilitating old people and providing for their
care. Developments in nuclear science has given
mankind an aiternative source of energy to
depleting fossil fuel. The same deveIOpment has
also equipped some nations with powerful
weapons capable of destroying the whole world.

4. COMMUNICATING SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY

What is to be done in the face of these
challenges? Who can help and how? What
mankind needs now is the spread of objective,
scientific attitudes to permit an effective
approach to the solutions of the problems
created by science. This is now the main task of
science popularization: to educate mankind for
living in the new world created by the scientific
revolution. Science cannot be satisfied now only
with explaining to the layman the structures of
the nuclear reactor or the working of a wonder
drug. Understanding of science is now needed for
a more crucial purpose than intellectual

enjoyment, i.e., to teach nations how to adapt
their ways of life to the inescapable requirements
of the scientific age, This cannot be a short-term,
emergency operation. This is what science popu-
larization will have to be about for a long time to
come.

4.1 Some lmpediments

This task of popularlzing science, however, is
not easy. The rapid advancements in science have
resulted in a new ‘scientific Ianguage’. It is so full
of jargon that even fellow scientists from other
disciplines find it difficult to understand,

Scientists, generally, are too busy in their
R&D efforts to devote time to other work like
dissemination of information. Some scientists
consider popularization of science as dilution and
degradation of scientific knowledge. Even if the
scientists were to find time and energy for the
task. they may not do so with the same
perfection, In the words of Sir Lawrence Bragg,
"they (scientists) are singularly inept in explain-
ing to non-scientists what they are doing". In
many cases, if the work is of classified nature,
scientists may need prior permission and
clearance from competent authority before
talking about their work in public. In some uses.
the scientists do not want to part with the
information for the fear that their work may not
find any place in a good research journal
thereafter.

How then to overcome these barriers? One
way would be to develop the breed of science
communicators——peop|e with a flair for
communications, strong social values, general
awareness and further an above average
knowledge of science. They can act as a bridge
between the rarefied realm of science and scienti-
fic research and the masses.

4.2 Means of Communication

In the dissemination of scientific knowledge
and information, many dimensions of science
need immediate projection/attention, They are

 
   
    
    
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
  
   

{ﬁlm issues relating to the investment in R&D and
major areas of thrust, problems connected with
development and use of technology, impact on
jﬁﬁouroes and manner of their utilization, gains
from science and technology and problems
dealing with ethical and other related issues
engineered by the growth of science.

Several communication facilities can be
employed for educating the masses and
promoting public debate on these major issues of
science.

4.2. 1 Print Media

The traditional print medium can be a very
powerful tool in popuiarization efforts. Periodi-
eals and newspapers have become part and
parcel of the life of the literate people
Specialized popular science periodicals and
special features on science & technology in the
newspapers can be very effective in communi-
cating the ideas to the people. Popular S&T
books, story books, picture-cum—story books are
I also other means of popularizing S&T among

literate persons.

4.4.2 Broadcast Media

Use of these media is more effective as they
overcome the barrier of literacy and cover a
latger audience. The effectiveness of these media
depends upon some factors such as the propor-
tion of programmes broadcast which have an
appreciable S&T content; the proportion of
TV/Hadio owners who actually watch/listen to
these programmes; and the effectiveness of the
‘S&T programmes in putting their messages across
to their audience.

4.2.3 Film and other Audio-visual Media

Films shown in public cinema houses have
been the most important source of entertainment
for the common masses. Time between two
shows can be exploited for S&T popularization
and good S&T films can be shown to audience.
Film libraries could be established wherefrom
schools, colleges or other societies could borrow

S&T films for exhibition which can help enrich,
supplement and complement the formal S&T
education.

4.2.4 Participatory and In teractive
Activities

Activities in science parks, activities of science
clubs, contests and quiz programmes, science
seminars, science fairs, etc. are some of the
activities which can be exploited to spread the
message of S&T among people.

4.2.5 Formal S&T Education Programme

With specially oriented teaching, students of
S&T subjects, apart from gaining knowledge
themselves, can also be instrumental in conveying
the basic concepts of S&T to their fellow
students in other disciplines.

These days science communication is taught
only at postgraduate level by some universities
and institutes while conducting mass communica-
tion and journalism courses. But if we have to
make an impact on wider section of population,
its study has to be introduced at all universities
at undergraduate level.

5. THE INDIAN SCENE

As per the Directive Principles of our Consti‘
tution it is the duty of all citizens "to develop
the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of
inquiry and reform". That the popularizing
science and technology and inculcating a scienti-
fic and technological temper wouid remove a
major hurdle from the country's path to all
round development, was a prime observation in
the Scientific Policy Resolution passed by the
Indian Parliament in March 1958.

Various activities and programmes aimed at
popularizing science and technology, and inculca-
ting scientific and technological temper among
people have been initiated at both official and
non-official levels.

5.1 Official Agencies

Various government ministries/depts or
agencies have been making efforts to popularize
science and technology. They employ most of
the means of communication noted earlier like
publishing poputar science literature, arranging
popular lectures, exhibitions, films and video
shows,etc.

But, in most of these activities, particular
audience or target group is not defined. If they
do, they rarely consider actual needs concerning
the anxieties, aspirations and ambitions of the
people they are able to reach or do not employ
the language or the medium most suited to them.
Also the subjects popularized through the mass
media are the most modern of S&T marvels :
the satellites, electronic, gadgets, computers,
organ transplants, etc. All this leaves the
common people dazed and mystified about
S&T. Rarely is S&T projected in terms the
common people would readily relate to the
things and happenings around their daily lives
and living routine at home and at work.

5.2 Non-official agencies

Besides official agencies. there are a large
number of voluntary agencies which have been
engaged in S&T popularization and related
activities. Most of these emanate from the
dedication of individuals motivated by
missionary zeal. Such groups are scattered
throughout the country. Each group has a
selected geographical area and a well-defined
target group for its activities and operations.
In such cases, the activities are achieving well-
defined objectives. These objectives generally
suggest themselves in relation to some pressing
need, problem or concern of the target group.
Very often, the individuals establish personal
communication and active rapport with members
of the target group, which contribute to the
success of their activity and achievement of
objectives. It has been observed that because of
the very nature of their make up and the level of
commitment of those involved in their work,
efforts of voluntary agencies have yielded better
results and have proven relatively more effective.

5.3 Coordination of efforts

However, the proportion of the population
touched by these activities and efforts is rather
small so that the overall effect has only been
marginal. There is need for co-ordination of
S&T popularization efforts of various agencies,
which will help in adding up their yields to make
a significant impact on the overall national
scene. Though co-ordination is very difficult
in case of voluntary agencies, some effort has
been done to co—ordinate the popularization
activities of the official agencies to optimise
their impact on the target audience. The govern-
ment has set up a nodal agency at the national
level, Nationai Council for Science and
Technology Communication (NCSTC) for this
purpose.

The Indian National Science Academy (INSA)
has instituted an award, the Indira Gandhi
Medal, to be awarded annually for outstanding
work in science popularization. The Kalinga
Foundation in India has founded the Kalinga
Prize for the same purpose to be awarded
through UN ESCO.

Recently an innovative method was adopted
by NCSTC and voluntary agencies to bring
S&T to the masses. This unique nation wide
science communication enterprise was called
"Bharat Jan Vigyan Jatha”. Four thousand
scientists, teachers and other voluntary activists
took part in this venture. They started walking
from five different places in the country on
October 2, 1987 and converged at Bhopal
on November 6, coinciding with the birth
centenary of Sir CV Raman. On the way (they
travelled 25000 km), the groups propagated
the message of science through street plays,
poster exhibition, songs, toys and models.

Birth anniversaries and centenaries of famous
Indian Scientists will be the right step in
popularising science and to create scientific
temper.

6. POPULARIZING DEFENCE
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

In India all aspects of the Defence including

 

‘the preparation for Defence and other related

Works is the responsibility of the Ministry of
Defence. This is achieved by the combined
efforts of the Armed Forces of the Union,
the Dept. of Defence Production and the Dept.
of Defence Research and Development along
:with some other agencies. The Dept. of Defence
Research and Development administers the
Defence a Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO). It builds up a base of
progressive research into and the design and
development of sophisticated equipment
required by the Services. The S&T activities of
.DRDO cover wide range of disciplines such as
aeronautics, armaments, electronics and instru-
mentation. combat vehicles, engineering, naval,
computer sciences, materials, food and agricul-
ture, medical and behavioural sciences.

Popularizing Defence science and technology
has assumed considerable importance in the
wake of recent developments. These develop
ments have reached such amplitude only because
the common man does not have enough infor—
mation as to assess the situation in a proper
perspective. There is an urgent need for
promoting public debate on the issues related
to Defence R&D applications, which is possible
only when the participants including the decision
makers are well-informed.

The projection of the Defence R&D results
would go a long way in reinforcing the confi-
dence of the Services that the R&D projects
of DRDO are current and capable of meeting
the ever-increasing requirements of seif—reliant
armed forces. Also, the projection of R&D
achievements will help people appreciate the
resources that are utilized for the Defence
R&D.

Some of the technologies/facilities developed
as a result of Defence R&D efforts over the
years have potential application in the civil
sector. Thus, awareness among the entrepreneurs
about these advanced technologies would help
in their optimal utiiization and prevent duplica-
tion at the same time.

The popularization activities in this area
have remained at a low ebb mainly because of

the 'secret‘ label attached to almost every
document emanating from Defence Labs/Estts.
Though recently, the veil has been lifted from
Defence R&D developments. their popularization
has been restricted to a limited, specific
audience. This is evident from the reporting
in daily newspapers, especially since 1984,
when DRDO celebrated its Silver Jubilee.

Role of DESIDOC

DESIDOC, being the central information
agency of DRDO, is entrusted with the task
of popularizing Defence Science and Technology.
Several publications are being brought out
regularly. A journal, 'Popular Science 8: Techno-
logy' is being published half-yearly to create
awareness and to promote interest in the applica-
tions of S&T in Defence among jawans. students
and general public. Topics of current interest and
wide applications like satellites, computers,
toxicology & pollution etc. are covered in the
issues of 'Popuiar Science 8: Technology'. Care is
taken to ensure that the presentation is simple,
non-technical and supported by illustrations.

DESIDOC is taking steps to enhance its activi-
ties in the area of science popularization. Apart
from books, other publications like pamphlets
on specific topics are proposed to be brought
out in the near future. Audio-visual material
highlighting the work of DRDO Labs/Estts
and their impact on general public are also
proposed to be prepared for mass circulation.

FOR FURTHER READING

1. Bhagwan Singh and Sudarshan R. Some
impediments in the Popularization of Science
and the Need to Change the Scenatic. Inter-
national Conference on Science, Technology
and Development, New Delhi, 20—25 March,
1987.

2. Popularization of Science and Technology :
A Brief Overview ot Existing Activities and
Efforts. Department of Science and Technology,
New Delhi, 1986.

3. Sundararaian, Mohan. Popular Science in
Mass Media. Allied Publishers, New Delhi, 1985,

