 

DESIDOC ACTIVITIES

 

ONLINE CATALOGUE
DEMONSTRATION

A demonstration at online catalogue was
organized by DESIDOC at its new building at
Metcatte House, Delhi, on 8 March 1988.
Some of the prominent tntormation scientists
of Delhi attended the demonstration. Among
those who witnessed the demonstration were:
Shri SC Biswas. Director Central Secretariat
Library; Smt SL Chinnappa, Coordinator, NiC-
tCMR Centre tor Biomedicals; Shri PC Bose,
Information Systems Ofﬁcer, ICAR; Shri VB
Manda, Librarian JNU ; Shri AS Wahid.
National Institute of Science Technology &
Development Studies(CStR); and Shri HK
Kaut. Librarian, India International Centre.

The project. development of online cata-
togue, was taken up to beneﬁt the users of
Defence Science Library in easy location of
required documents from its collection. The
data conversion done tor this machine-read’
able catatouge would also help in creation of
adatabase. The project plans to operate also
the library services like acquisition control,
accession list. circulation control and inter-
tibrary loan service from the database. initially
the Defence Science Library (DESIDOC) cot-
tectionwitl be‘covered and subsequently the
collection at other DRDO libraries wilt be in—
cluded.

The software forthe project has been devel-
oped by DESIDOC . It is written in COBOL
tanguage and is based on common communi-
cation format (CCF) with variable ﬁeld and
variabte record conforming to tSO—2709. tn the
demonstration one main terminal, called
'Server’ and otherterminals called ‘Searchers'
were linked to each other. The data was

downloaded into the system stored in a ﬂoppy.
The software consisted of tour modules viz.
thedata entry module, the search module, the
reports module and the maintenance modute.

POPULARIZING DRDO
PUBLICATIONS

In an effort to popularize Detence science
and technology and to promote awareness
about the DRDO publications. brought out by
DESIDOC among the scientific community,
DESIDOC has been participating in the vari—
ous technical seminars, symposia, and work-
shops. The DFtDO pubtications are displayed
and the relevant information is communicated
to the delegates through the brochures and
information leaflets prepared tor this purpose.

The various publications of DESIDOC dis—
played during such occasions received good
response from the participants in terms of
subscription to various journats/periodtcats.

EIGHTH WORLD BOOK FAIR

DESIDOC participated in the Eighth World
Book Fair organised by the National Book
Trust. tndia at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi,
from 5 to 15 February 1988. DRDO and
DESIDOC pubtications were displayed and
sale counter was arranged for the sale of
copies of Popular Science & Technology
(PST).Three current booklets under PST se-
ries viz., Night Vision Devices, Battle with
Barnacles and Computers and Defence Appli-
cations were sold to general public and stu-
dents. Visitors to the stall showed much inter-
est inthe special issue of the Detence Science
Journal on Toxicology.

