TOWARDS A STANDARD STYLE FOR BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

A. Lakshmana Moonhy

Defence Scientiﬁc Information and Documentation Centre. Delhi—54

1. INTRODUCTION

Journals represem the most important
single source of information for the scientific
community. Usually joumais ditter from one
another in many ways—physical format. style
ot’presentation. typography, cover-page de-
sign, etc. However. there are certain aspects
in respect at which standardization can bring
uniformity, beneﬁting the journals as well as
authors and users. This paper discusses the
need for a standard style tor bibliographic ret-
erenoes (BFts) or citations given usuaily at
the end of a journal article or a chapter of a
book. It also suggests to authors. editors and
publishers some ways in which standardiza-
tion in the preparation of BFis can be
achieved.

According‘to Bureau of Indian Standards a
bibliographic reference (BB) is 'a sequence
at items of intormation needed tor enabling a
reader of a work to identify, locate and ascer-
tain the relevance of a document referred to'
(1'). International Standards Organisation
(ISO) defines it as 'a set of data sufﬁciently
precise and detailed to enable a publimtion
or a part of a publication to be identitied“(2).
British Standards Institution deﬁnes it as 'a

set of data describing a document or a part of
a document, and sutﬁcientiy precise and de-
tailed to idemify and locate it“(3).

The main purpose in providing a BR is to
enable identification and location of the origi-
nal source. It also helps in ascertaining
whether it is relevant for further study. There-
tore. care should be taken that a BR comains
all elements needed for easy retrieval of a
cited document.

BFts are different from a bibliography, pro-
vided in some cases at the end of an article.
For example, in an encyclopedia , bibliogra-
phy is a reading list provided for tunher study
of the subject. References included in a bibli-
ography may not necessarily be cited in the
articie/document.

2. NEED FOR BIBLIOGRAPHIC
REFERENCES

A research paper builds its base upon ear-
lier scholarly work. This is done by linking the
reporting paper to related work in the same
subject area or ﬁeld 01 research reported ear-
lier. This linking is usually done through BRs
which ‘... operate within a jointly cognitive

3

and moral framework. In their cognitive as-
pect . they are designed to provide historical
lineage of knowledge and to guide readers of
new wericte sources they may want to check
or draw upon tor themselves. in their moral
aspect. they are designed to repay intellec—
tuai debts in the only term In which this can
be done :threugh open acknowledgement at
them” (4). Thus. citations serve important
iunctiens. since authors reier to previous ma-
terial to suppozt. illustrate cr elaborate on a
particular point. They may also be referred to
for contradicting or negating the conclusions
or ﬁndings of a reported articte. The basic
idea in referring is to highlight the relevance
and use of the cited item. Many other rea-
sons have been spelt out by Weinstock {5).

An important paper is cited more and
more. while a less important or a low quality
paper is rarely cited. Thus. "the irequency ot
citations is a clear measure at the relative im-
portance or quality at a work. tor. those of
high quality and importance are bound to be
cited again and again" (6).

BFts play an important role in the life at a
research paper. They enable readers to un-
derstand and decide whether they should
consult the originai publication which is re-
ferred to .ll the users want to consult It. the
BR should enable them to have easy access
with minimum effort. Hence, BFis ought to be
suificientty compiete. ie ail the elements at
the cited document 'rnust be given.

Though the importance oi ER; is felt by
editors and publishers of scientific and re-
search journals, there is no consensus on a
universal tonnat or style tor their presenta-
tion. There are many variations in style. Jour-
nals In the same subject ﬁeld or those
brought out by the same parent organization
or professional body. vary widely in this re-
spect. This chaotic scene is the result of the
difference of opinion or subjectivity from pub-
lisher to publisher and trom author to author
over the Inclusion oi difierent elements oi
BFis. viz. author(s). title, atiiliation. volume,
number. date. momn and year. pagination.

4

etc., their sequence at occurrence and type-
graphical representation. Often. even in a
particular publication and in the same issue.
variations can be seen. Difierent styles of
punctuation adopted to separate the ele-
ments of a BR and diﬂerent types at docu-
meMs being referred to make the problem
still more complex. Many types of documents
are cited, i.e. journal articles. conference pro-
ceedings. monographs. boeks—simple and
composite. letters, dissertations. theses. re-
ports. standards. catalogues. etc. All of them
do not have the same elements.

These variations pose a big problem for
users in literature searches and to: authors
when they contribute to more than one jour-
nal. as they have to change the style of pres-
entation oi BRs as per the requirements at
the ieumal.

3. CITING OF BBS IN THE TEXT

There are diiterent practices for citing Bits
in the text. Some ioumals give author's name
and yearwithin brackets. 9.9. (Gartield.1980i.
The year is given In brackets only when the
author's name is a part at the sentence .
Mausam, Pramana—Joumsi of Physics. Opti-
cal Engineering, etc. are some at the joumals
tollowing this practice. Journal of Documenta-
tion. IASLIC Bulietin. etc. use number as su-
perscript over the name(s) of the author(s) or
in parentheses within the text as per the prac-
tice oi the Joumei of the American Society for
Intonation Science. Some other ioumals use
first ietters oi the name(s) of the author(s). as
in the case of Pacific Joumai of Mathematics.
When cited by author's name or the ﬁrst let-
ters ot author’s name , two or more cited
documems published by the same author in
the same year are diﬂerentiated with numeri-
cal or alphabetical suffixes. 9.9. Price 19803.
Price 1980b or P1, P2.etc.

4. LISTING OF BBS

The manner in which BFts are listed at the
end oi the main text is normally based on the
method used for citing them in the text. They

 

 

 

‘ are either arranged alphabeticaliy by author's
name or in the order oi their occurrence in
the text. Harvard system is a variant of the
tormer method. Here the year of publication
follows the author‘s name. In the alphabetical
and sequential systems the year at publica-
tion comes after the name of the [ournal or
publisher. The alphabetical method needs a
bit of manipulation for bringing all reierenoes
into alphabetical order. In the case of a re-
view article this needs more time because of
the large number 01 references cited . The
sequential numbering method enables loca-
tion of the cited reference with ease. The
style manuals in the ﬁeld do not recommend
or unitorm pattern. Some journals like The
Journal of the Chemical Society and Chemi-
cal Abstracts have their own style manuals
. tor manuscript preparation. which Include
‘ guidelines for the preparation of Bits. These
‘ style manuals also differ from one another.
* For example, initialisation or full ionn oi iirst
1 and middle names and their placement in the
natural way or inverted form, etc. are dealt
with In different ways In different .style manu-
ale.

5. STANDARDS ON 385

The available standards on BRs suggest
two types of references. international Stan-
l datd suggests abridged reterence and ex-
panded reference. while British Standards In-
stltution recommends minimum reterence
and expanded reference. American National
Standard (ANSI) suggests abbreviated retar-
ence and comprehensive reference. The rele-
vant indian standards identities two types oi
elements-—-essential and supplementary and
leaves the choice to the user. it recommends
the use of any catalogue code tor punctua-
tion. The ISO, BSI and ANSI standards are
not specific, but recommend examples given
5y them to be followed. British Standard pro-
vides the following examples in the case of a
composite book : -

Minimum reference

RAMSBOTTOM, JOHNt Fungi pathogenic
to maan: Med‘Fies.Councii. A system of
bacteriology in relation to medicine. vol.8.
1931. pp.11-70.

Expanded reference

RAMSBOTTOM. JOHN. Fungi pathogenic
to man.in: Medical Research Council. A sys-
tem of bacteriology in relation to medicine.
voi.8. London: HMSO, 1931. pp.11-70.

As regards typography tor a BFI. ANSI rec-
ommends the use ot single type tace for the
sake ot simpiicity and convenience. However.
the user is free to use any typography de-
sired . such as placing titles in italics or giving
volume number in bold tacei7). iS recom-
mends differentiation ot the various items at
information and highlighting of the essential
items in an entry. However. it advises that a
uniionn practice should be iollowed in the
same publication. BS and ISO standards are
silent on this aspect. While ANSI prefers the
use oi author‘s name(s) in ordinary upper!
lower case, IS. BS and ISO recommend their
Capitalization. ANSI limits the maximum num-
ber ot authors at a multiauthored work to two,
while ISO and BS limit it to three. All the four
standards recommend this at joumai article to
be Included in the BR. ANSI recommends full
name 0! the iournal, while others suggest use
oi abbreviated titles using as per related stan-
dards. All standards recommend the use oi
inclusive pages. But the placement of year
dillers.

BS and 180 standards do not provide ex-
ampibs oi papers pertaining to conference/
symposia proceedingsJS and ANSI recom-
mend the use of the title at the paper/chapter
of a conference proceedings or a composite
book. BS prefers citation of a standard by the
organization responsible for bringing out the
standards, while IS prefers citation of stan-
dard number.

ISO limits its coverage to three types of
documents—-book or separately issued publi-
cation; periodical or serial publication . and
contributed article. Proceedings oi conter-
enoes/symposia. reports. patems. theses. etc
are not covered. 83 too does not cover con-
ference proceedings. The indian Standard
gives an example at citation pertaining to
conference proceedings. but no example is
given in respect of technical report. Only
ANSI covers exhaustively all types of docu-
ments. including computer outputs. music
disks.etc.

6.GUIDELINES FOR 3R5

6.1 Sources of Information for the
Preparation of Bﬁs

The main sources of information for au-
thors on the prepration oi BFis are the guide-
iines or instructions to authors [contributors
included In most of the journals. A few supply
them on request as a separate booklet. But
such guidelines differ lrom one another in
coverage with respect to their own require-
ments. Some journals follow existing stan-
dards. Others give full examples oi diiterent
types at am for different documents. such as
a monograph. a book. a chapter trorn a book.
a ioumel article. a paper lrom proceedings of
a conference or symposium. a report. a the-
sis. etc. A few journals like Science advise
authors to consult the latest issue tor the pat-
tern of ER to be adopted.

6.1.1. Indian Scene

None of the Indian ioumals explicitly tol-
lows the national standard, or provides luil
details regarding the preparation at 8R5. ln-
dian Journal a! Technology (IJT) provides
more details than many other journal on the
preparation ol BRs. It is imatesting to note
that ioumals brought out by the same organi-
zation lack uniformity in providing examples.
Journals like ILA Bulletin and IASLIC Bullshit
give very little lniorrnation in their guidelines.
Many oi the Indian joumats pay little attention

6

to providing adequate examples at different
tonne of HRS. Many journals do not provide
examples for rendering BRs oi papers eon-
trlbuted to conferences Isymposla Iserninars.
which are as Important as journal iitetature
for research work.

6.2 Rendering the Name(s) of
Author(s)

In the arrangement of authors' names. ma-
jority of joumais follow natural way of upper!
lower case letters. Some ot the'important li-
brary and information science (L&lSc) jour-
nals preter capitalization. many tournals In-
vert author’s name in listing 3R3.

6.3 Title

L a lSc ioumals include title 01 the cited
document while most science a. technology
(S&T )ioumals do not. Out of 200 ioumals
surveyed by Dutta & Rajgopatan. only 98 pro-
vided the title. In general, among the physical
sciences journals only 23 °/. 01 the sample
provided the title (8).

6.4 Name of the Journal

While citing the name at the loumal most
at the toumals recommend italicization ol the
title at the journal tor distinguishing it trom
other elements. For abbreviations ol the jour-
nal titles. standard guides. such as
Butterworth's World List oi Selentitic Periodi-
cals. International Serials Catalogue of the
iCSU-AB. are followed. However. some in-
consistencies ln abbreviations are seen quite
often. The loliowing examples show vari-
ations:

Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion is abbreviated as JAMA : J. Am. Med
Assoc.;and JI. Amer. Med. Ass.

Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences is abbreviated as Ann. NY. Acad.
Sci. and Ann. New York Acad. Sci.

8.5 Volume,Year of Publication,
Pagination

Giving volume number in bold type lace is
very common in S&‘i' ioumals. but Is less
common in L&ISc ioumals. Placement of the
year at publication is a matter of style. Those
who cite through author and year list the rei-
erences as per Harvard system where the
year follows the author's name. Other prac-
tices prevalent are placement at the year be-
tore and after volume number and as the last
element oi the BR. A low place year within
circular brackets . This would avoid the con-
tusion In the case of journals which am to a
few thousands oi pages and where the page
number exceeds 1900. In such cases. distin-
guishing year oi pubiication from page num-
ber is a problem. Giving Inclusive pagination
can avoid this confusions.

6.6 Sequence of Elements in BFIs

Journals in the field of L&ISc follow the tol-
lowing sequence: place oi publication. pub-
lisherand year at publication . Others give
publishers name first .tollowed by place at
publication. Many vatiations are seen when a
chapter ot a composite book or a paper lrom
proceedings of a symposium or conference is
cited . It is important to provide both titles of
the main document and its part for obvious
reasons but many journals in S&T provide
only the title of the original publication or
name oi the conierence/symposium. In most
of the journals. the name(s) of the editor(s)
are preceded by the title of the original publi-
cation and the connecting words’ed by' differ-
ent styles are used for BFts pertaining to the-
sis and dissertations . The commonly used
order is :tItIe (in italics). the degree for which
it Is submitted (e.g . PhD, M Phil, Masters'
thesis. etc). name of the university, place and
year. In some ioumals. the degree comes as
the last element. Reports are cited. but not as
frequently as other documents. Here again.
many S&T journats do not include title. The
key element nameiy the report number. is
provided by almost all the ioumais alongwith

the name of the origanizationlpublisher. place
and year at publication.

7. IMPORTANCE OF PUNCTUATION

Punctuation ls important to avoid ambigu-
ity and pitfalls. A tew journals (Nature. Optical
Engineering. Joarnal of Physical Chemistry.
etc) divide the BR into three or four parts by
using a periodi.) in between them . Some use
a comma between the elements (Defence
Science Jaurnal. IJT, JSIFI. Journal of Apr
piled Physics. etc. A few (like Pramana)do
not use any punctuation . except between au-
thors. publisher and place oi publication. etc.
They prepare to distinguish dilierem ele-
ments through typography. A few of the ambi-
guities due to absence oi punctuation are
listed below:

(a) In a iournal without a volume number.
differentiation of the year and in the ab-
sence of Inclusive page numbers. the
year and page number may cause con-
fusion. For example: E.S.Josephscn.
J.Ghem.Soc.,1983. 1986.

(b) When conference title Is abbreviated. it
may be confused as a journal title as:
Proc.lnd.Nat.Sci.Acad. ( ajoumal)
Proc.lnt.ConI.Aerobiol. ( conference)

(c) In the absence of punctuation. initials
of the authors, particularly ‘J' may mis-
takenly be read as part of the abbrevi-
ated form of the title ot the journai. For
example : Robertson P J Design Engi-
neering. October 1978. 16-23.Here J is
the initial oi the author. but It could also
be taken as part of the name of the
Journal.

(d) In the case oi corporate authors. when
only comma ls used to separate ele-
ments. it may be mistaken for the title
of the document or vice versa. For ex-
ample: Department of Health. Educa—
tion and Wellare. Public Health
Service.Environmental Service. Na-
tional Air Polution Control Administra-
tion. Air Quality Control. Administrative
Criteria tor Hydrocarbons. NAPCA pub.
No.AP-64 (Govt. Printing Office, Wash-
ington, 0.0.). 1976.

(e) In the case of a composite book or a
series with a common title and with
specific titles tor different volumes (Le.
muitivolume series). the volume num-
ber should be placed at the appropriate
piece. Volume number should follow
the main title and the specific title
should be given thereafter. For ex-
ample:

Button, K.J.(Ed). infrared and millimeter
waves, Vol 5: coherent sources and applica-
tions, Part I.(NY. Academic Press.
1982).260p.

7. CONCLUSIONS AND
SUGGESTIONS

Standardization in BRs would hetp au-
thors, editors and publishers alike. For effi-
cient and unambiguous Information retrieval 3
standard style at presentation 01 BFIs is nec-
essary. The following suggestions are given
to arrive at a standard style tor BHs:

1. The main purpose oi providing a BFI
would not be served it the title oi the docu-
ment being cited (a joumal article or a paper
from a proceedings or a chapter Irorh a hook
or the title of a report.etc) Is not included. It is
important tor taking quick decision whether a
cited work is to be consulted or not consider-
Ing that the title is a true representation 01 the
content of the work.

2. Dividing the BR into convenient groups
or parts—say three or tour—would make the
BFis unambiguous. For example, author(s)!
editor(s): title of the cited document; title of
Ioumal. volumetissue no).year in brackets.
inclusive pages punctuated appropriately or
conierence/symposium name (preceded by
‘paper presented at').etc.; place. month and
year or the title of the original work toilowed
by editors' name (5) (in the case 01 a com-
posite book); place 01 publication. publisher.
year. etc. are some convenient groupings.

3. Giving inclusive page numbers and use
01 parentheses tor the year avoid contusion
01 pages with the year 01 publication (In the
case of journals running Into thousands at
pages). inclusive pagination also provides in-
tormation regarding the size of the document
cited in terms oi pages. It helps the user as
well as the librarian to calculate the cost in
case the document is to be procured from a
copy suppiy centre .

4. Usage of upper and lower type tacos tor
author's name would be simple and also easy
for typesetting.

5. Giving Imprint Information .l.e. place of
publication. publishers name and year of pub—
lication within circular brackets avoids unam-
biguity . This would also avoid contusIOn
about place and year of oonterence in the
case of conference/symposium proceedings.

REFERENCES

1. Indian Standards Institution. iS:2381-1975 : Recommendations for bibliographical reierenoeHs-
sential and supplementary elements (iirst revision). (New Delhi. ISI. 1979),16p.

2. International Standards Organization. ISO: 690-1975(E): Documentation-bibliographical reter-
ences—essentiai and supplementary elements. (Switzerland. ISO, 1975),Bp.

3. British Standards Institution. BS 1629:1976: Recommendations : Bibliographical references. (Lon-

don. BSI, 1976).1 1p.

4. Merton. Robert K. Foreword. In Citation indexing: Its theory and applications In science. technology
and humanities. ed by Eugene Garﬁeld. (New York. John Wiley. 1979).p vii.

5. Weinstook. M. Citation indexes. in Encyclopaedia of Library and Inlormation Science. ed by Ailan
Kent and Harold Lancour. Vol 5. (New York, Mares Dekker. 197i),p16-40.

6. Laweni. SM. Vaiidity of citation criteria for assessing the iniluence of scientific publications: new
evidence with peer assesment. J Amer Soc Inform Sci34(1).1983; 59—66.

7. Mount. Ellis. A national standard tor bibliographical references. J Amer Soc Inform Sci 28(1).1977:

3-18.

8. Butte. S and Fiajagopelan. T.S. Literature citations in scientiﬁc and technical periodicaIs—A survey.

J Scient lndustr Res 1 7A(7). (1958);259-61 .

8

i

