ROLE OF LIBRARIES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY‘

For any inaugdration you start by saying that
you are extraordinarily pleased to be here to
inaugurate. I would like to submit this time that I
really feel very happy to do so.

For most of my scientific career. I have
worked in one of such buildings as this namely,
the library. In the later part of my career, I have
been totally dependent on another area ie the
system studies. ltis often said in England that
changes in cabinet are decided in the clubs. I
suspect that scientiﬁc findings are first
conceived in the libraries. In my career as a
scientist, I found library not only a place of
inspiration , a place for originating ideas, but
also a place to run away from routine jobs and
various kinds of disturbances. There has
always been an unsatiable desire to get
absorbed amongst the books and journals. If
you have not visited library for a week you feel
that you have missed some journal in your
discipline. This is something like not seeing
Sunday movie on television. You start getting
upset and worried. Before you know where you
are. you are constantly in the library opening
the magazines from the mailbag before the
librarian gets a chance to open them.
Sometimes librarians are nice, they tell you that
you are doing a librarian’s job, but you get on

with all this. Librarians themselves can be great ‘

sources of inspiration.

One of the difficulties we face in our country is
the lack of proper scientific and technological
environment, a kind of sustained culture in the
pursuit of science & technology.Secondly we
are too poor to afford many good laboratories.
But all these things to an extent are made up by
excellent libraries with rich collection of
journals, books, magazines, monographs and
various other facilities that go with information
dissemination. They take you away for some
time from miserable surroundings and transfer
you to some of the outstanding contributions of
great scientists and you feel to be in a blissful
environment. It is this that makes the difference

between a good and a poor research
laboratory One has only to read memoirs of

5
a

Feynman or even J Oppenheimer to know how
much the existence of good library faci|ities at 5
Princeton University determine many of their {

creative Contributions, specially in elementary
oarticles.

In our case, we had a disadvantage. The
libraries were originally scattered in a number
of buildings and the persons who were posted
to libraries initially were the persons who did not
want to be there in the ﬁrst place. Often theytelt
that you Were disturbing them. It you rush upto
ask for a book, you really have oftended them. It
was mainly because of the fact that we have not
given the libraries the importance we ought to
have given to them. But I am happy that at last
we have got a building and that Defence
Science Library has shown signs of a greatdeal
of reinvigoration. The Defence Science Journal
has come up well and some of the special
issues are also becoming important and
relevant.

DESIDOC has been a great source of help
personally to me, whenever I needed a
reference or information. Unfortunately, South
Block is too far for me brush in here to look at
the journals, much as I would like to do. People
are helpful to me by providing this kind of
information. But what I liked more was the fact
that they not only provide information but are
happy in sharing it. Often I found them saying
that you asked for this reference, but have you
checked up this reference which is much
better? I am very grateful to them for this. All
these activities you can perform only when you
have a good building and also the facilities. To
an extent, I think, in every country, libraries are
breaking in their feet, breaking in their
foundations. We are now suffering in an age of
information pollution, i.e., too much of
information, too much of it, some of the
information is patently wrong, and there is too
much of it.

 

* Speech delivered by Dr. VS. Arunachalam, SA to RM, at the inauguration of New Building of DESIDOC and ISSA on

02 August 1988.

We may have to consider how we can use the
. information effectively and store it. From the
stock of books ‘we have to go in for
miniaturisation of information, may be to laser
disk or microﬁche, etc., as we cannnot
accommodate: all books and iournals,
howsoever big the buildings may be. They
would occupy the whole campus. Some of
these are unpalatable decisions because we
Would like to see huge volume of journals in our
library. But what is going to happen is, instead
you will see a small computer terminal telling
you it is availabte on a laser disk. l think we
ought to be prepared for this.

Also, we find that many of our colteagues do
not go to thelibrary. At one stage, in Defence
Metallurgical Laboratory. Hyderabad, I used to
look into the list as to how many of them have
borrowed books at the week end. Many of my

colleagues came to know of it and suddenly
everybody started getting the books issued on
Fridays, and promptly returning the same on
Mondays. But gradually we have to persuade
them, because a great deat of information can
be useful and we can avoid duplication. It can
help us to leapfrog, but-there is also a danger
that we go on reading but not be creative
enough. I think, this kind of risk we ought to
take. I

I hope that the new building of DESIDOC
would provide them an opportunity to see how a
modern library ought to be. More than anything
else we have to see how they can reduce the
dimensions, so that the library can become
versatile.

l have great pleasure in inaugurating this
building.

 

We can be knowledgeable with other men‘s knowledge, but we cannot be wise

with other men's wisdom.

—- Michel de Montaigne

 

