 

SA to RM unveiling the inauguration stone of the building. Shri SS Munhy Director, DESIDOC, is also seen in

the picture.

DESIDOC MOVES INTO NEW BUILDING

DESIDOC—a seIf-accounting and
independent establishment of DRDO since July
1970 — was partially houeed in the

monumental building known as Metcalfe
House. Uptil now, some technical and
administrative divisions of DESIDOC were
located in different hutments spread all over the
sprawling Metcalfe House campus.

The new building of DESIDOC is located in
the campus and has three wings. B-Wing, a
single storeyed block, was occupied in April
1986 by the Printing Division and is equipped
with phototypesetter and photo-offset
machines. Wing-A, a ﬁve storeyed structure,
houses the Director’s office, Computer and
Information Processing, Documentation
Projects, Training, Translation, Technical
Coordination & Works, Reprography,
Publications, Stores Management, and

Administration divisions. One and a halt floors
in A-Wing are occupied by the Institute of
Systems Studies and Analyses.

DESIDOC Library. popularly known as
Defence Science Library, spread over four
ﬂoors of B-wing. It has provision for movement
of documents and readers from one ﬂoor to
others within the Library through a ‘book-cum-
reader lift’ in addition to the main lift connecting
all the floors of Wings A&B. There is a single
entrance-cum-exit gate from the second ﬂoor
and a helical stair-case from the first ﬂoor tothe
top floor, The Library has separate stacks for
books, periodicals, reports, standards and
speciﬁcations, microforms and display of
current periodicals and reference materiat
Facilities for storage of material in non-
conventional media, such as microfiche

floppies, CD-ROM etc., and microfitm reader!
printer facilities are available in the Library.
Facilities for viewing video films on science and
technology are available in the Library.
Provision has been made on selective basistor
central air—conditioning for ensuring long life of
documents and for the convenience of readers.
Xeroxing facilities already exist in the reference
and periodicals sections for the convenience of
the readers to get copies at the documents

instantaneously. Computer is being used for
library functions, such as circulation control,
catalogue updating and answering readers’
queries. A separate Hindi section within the
Library will be operational soon for those
interested in reading Hindi literature.

The fifth floor of B—Wing will house video and
projection facilities equipped with the latest
video and audio equipment.

 

Knowledge is proud that he has learned so much ;wisdom is humble that he knows no more.

— William Cowper

Books are good enough in their one way but they are a mighty bloodless substitute for tite.

— RL Stevenson

 

