Sh" KC Pant, Raksha Manm inaugurating the C&m.
~eeted.(f& I tor) are: Shn ss Murthy, Chairman,
Oganising Committee and Director DESIDOC: Shn Bansel, Distinguished Scientisi and CCR&D; Dr. Sem
Pitrode, Adviser to the Prime Minister on TechnologyMissions and Lete Shri PG Krishnemurthy, Convener.

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON BIBLIOGRAPHIC
DATABASES AND NETWORKS
The Defence Scientific Information &
Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) organised
an International Conference on Bibliographic
Databases and Networks during 22-25
February 1989 at New Delhi About. 330
delegates including.about 30 foreign experts
participated in the conference. An exhibition of
current information technology products and
services was also organised along with the
Conference. Shri KC Pant, Defence Minister
inaugurated both the Conference and the
exhibition. Dr. Sam Pitroda, ~dviserto the
Prime Minister on Technology Missions
delivered the keynote address on the occasion.
In organising the Conference, DESIDOC
was assisted by the Association of Government
Librarians and InformationSpecialists (AGLIS).
The Conference was co-sponsored by the
Dept. of Science & Technology; Aeronautics
Research & Development Bbard (ARDB);
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL); Dept.
of Atomic Energy; Dept.' of - Biotechndogy;

Dept. of Electronics; Dept. of Science and
'Technology; National Informatics Centre (NIC);
National Information System for Science and
Technology (NISSAT); and Oil and Natural Gas
Commission (ONGC).
Only invited papers from the Indian and
foreign specialists having expertise in planning,
design, implementation and/or operation of
databases and networks were presentedin four
technical sessions devoted to: Planning and
Development of Databases, Operation of
Databases, Planning and Development of
Networks, and Operation of Networks. These
sessions were chaired respectively by Dr. FG
Kilgour, Founder Trustee of OCLC, USA; Prof S
Sampath, Chairman, Recruitment and
Assessment Centre, DRDO, New Delhi; Shri
SPS Mahendru, General Manager, CMC Ltd.,
New Delhi; Shri YL Agarwal, Chairman &
Managing Director, TClL , New Delhi; and Dr. N
Seshagiri, Director General, NIC, New D.elhi.

Lively discussion followed the presentation
of papers. There was, also a panel discussion
on the problems faced in the implementation
and operation of databases and networks. The
panelists were: Mr. Barry L Burton, Hong Kong
Polytechnic; Dr. FG Kilgour, Founder Trustee,
OCLC, USA ;and Dr. Roger Flynn, Universityof
Pittsburg, USA; arid Shri MS Narayanan,
Director, ASG., DRDO. Shri YN Reddy, Director
Computer Centre,
Delhi Electric Supply
Undertaking moderated the discussions.

Shri SL Bansal, Distinguished Scientist and
Chief Controller Research & Development, in
his Presidential address emphasized that
information centres should devote special
attention to the use of new computing and
communication
technologies
for
communicating with the users for ascertaining
their information needs and providing them
exhaustive information through resource
sharing and use of national and international
networks at reasonable cost. He mentioned

Shn KC Pant. Raksha Mantri opening the exhibrtion on information technology products and servrces.

Inaugurating the Conference, the Defence
Minister said that India was on the threshold of
a revolutionary change in its economic and
social life, largely occasioned by rapid
advances in information technology. He
adv~sed the information scientists and
database managers to use technology as a tool
to meet the needs of the end users. He further
stressed that since techno!ogy k n ~ w sno
geographical boundaries, scientists and
engineers should modify these technologies to
suit the Indian milleu, especially in rural areas
so that the poor harvest the dividends accruing
from adoption of the new technologies.

that the network connecting all technical
information centres (TICS) of DRDO, as
envisaged by DESIDOC, was under active
consideration of DRDO HQrs.
Dr. Sam Pitroda, Adviser to the Prime
Minister on Technology Miss~ons,delivered the
keynote address. Highlighting the importance
of information in the present day life, he
emph'asized that information is the basis for any
action in the government. Merging of
communication and computer technologies
had given a new thrust to the tasks of
organising, structuring, transmitting and
manipulating information to derive a variety of

inputs. No technology had such an impact as
information technology, he opined. He
informed that the government was already
seized of the problem and that projects like
Vikram, INDONET, RAICNET, NICNET,
etc.were at various stages of implementationor
, operatiomJThe programmme of interlink~ng
over 150 university libraries throdgh a
dedicated'network is on the anvil. He stressed
the need for linking of information systems with
the people to harness the power of information
for better and expediiious gains. He advised
adjustment to new work environment, work
culture and work standards and described
manpower as an asset for lndia which must be
put to maximum u'se.

-

Earlier, Shri SS Murthy, Chairman of the
Organising Committee and Director, DESIDOC
welcomed Shri KC Pant, Dr. Sam Pitroda, Shri
SL Bansal and other distinguished guests and
dele gates, and explained the objeciives of the
Conference. He said that a number of online
networks are coming up in India, some of them
being already in operation. He hoped that %he
experts presenting their papers at the
Conference would provide useful guidelines
and directions of value in the planning and
establishment of
networks that
are
contemplated or are on the anvil. He also
mentioned that although many of the
databases operating in several countries hold
huge volumes of data or information, they have
low retrieval efficiency, as the indexing and
informat~onretrieval aspects have not been
given adequate attention., He hoped the
Corlference would also discuss in detail
aspects like vocabulary control, retrieval
efficiency, etc. in addition to other aspects.
Dr. S Ramachandran, Secretary, Dept. of
Biotechnology in his valedictory address,
advocated the creation and updating of
databases and making them accessible not
only to experts and decision makers but also to
industry and common users . He said that lndia
IS well advanced in adoption of information

Pandit Hatiprasad Chaurasia playing on the flute.

technology in comparison not only to
developing countries but developed countries
as well. He felt that many people in lndia are
satisfied with limited information,but if weare to
be competitive at global level, we must know
first of all what is happening in the rest of the
world. He stressed the importance of the supply
of reliable and processed information, as
information has become a marketable
commodity and plays a vital role in
decision-making.
The. four-day Conference was interspersed
with two cultural programmes in the evenings,
one on the opening day in which Shri Siva
Prasad gave a novel performance through
whistle music at Azad Bhavan Auditorium.
AnothBr. programme on the same evening was
Kuchipudi dance by the duo Shri Jaya Rama
Rao and Smt. Vanashree Rao. On 23 February
1989 at Ashok Hotel Convention Hall,
celebrated flutist, Pandit HariprasadChaurasia
gave his performance following Hindustani
classical music performance by the well-known
vocalist Smt Krishna Bist.

