GUIDELINES FOR SOFTWARE ACQUISITION
PK Bhat and JC Kewlani

DRDO Computer Centre, Metcalfe House, Delhi - 1 10 054
Computer users require software for
specific applications but are sometimes unable to decide as to whether they should go
in for its in-house development or acquisition
from external sources. And in case a
decision is taken to buy the software, how
should they go about the task? ~ h j sarticle
endeavours to answer such questions
for the
guidance of a user in respect of various steps
in software acquisition, viz. feasibility study,
market exploration, software selection
process, vendor selection, benchmarking, etc.
The suggestions made are based primarily On
the long experience of ihe authors in the area
of computer software.

concern for both computer professionals and
users.
1.1 National Scene in Computer Software

India made its entry into the computer
age in a small way in the sixties with the
acquisition of a few institutional minicornputers. Some more minicomputers and a few
mainframes made their appearance during the
seventies. Apart from the executive1 supervisor, the only software ordered along
with these machines included compilers of
then-in-use high-level languages, assembler,
system
and a limited range of specific
packages for business, industrial or scientific
use.

1. INTRODUCTION

Computer users are frequently required
to take vital decisions in respect of purchase
of software. Success in computer operation,
depends to a large extent, on the correct
choices made in this respect. The present
article, arising out of the authors' extensive
experience in in-house development of software as also their acquisition from external
sources, lays down broad guidelines for
procedure of software purchase for the benefit of users intending to acquire software from
external sources. However, this article does
not cover the aspect of computer virus which
has in recent years become a matter of

The decade of the eighties saw a major
shift from minicomputers to micro-computers
initially and then to the IBM-compatible
personal computers (PCs). Desktop computers, as powerful as the minis, with much
smaller space and installation requirements,
and at just a fraction of the mini's cost
became available. The IBM compatible PCs
and their clones revolutionised the approach
to the use of computer. The portable 4GL
software available on these machines eliminated the need for tedious application
programming. This has made the PCs very
popular and'brought them within the reach of
every researcher to work with and manager

for performing decision-support functions. The
favourable government policy has also played
a major role in the proliferation of computers
and their suppliers.

hampered. The management thus has to
study and evaluate the software available from
various software houses. The packages may
be available off-the-shelf or customised.

With a steep rise in the number of computers and their users, there has also been a
rise in the demand for software. This has led
to the development of a large number
of software packages. At one end of the
spectrum are packages which are tuned-up
versions of the existing IBM-PC software,
offering some improved or added features
over the initial package, and at the other end
are packages developed specifically to suit
the Indian user environment. The software
consultancy service organisations take up
customised application development for the
users.

2. ACQUISITION OF SOFTWARE
2.1 Feasibility Study

Studies on the software requirement of the
project and the corresponding available resources would enable the user to evaluate the
possibility of in-house development of the
software for the project vis-a-vis its acquisition from external sources. Constraints of
expertise and time may force the user to
decide in favour of acquiring software from
an outside agency.
2.2 Market Exploration

1.2 Software Requirements in DRDO

Development of software for implementation of complex projects needs a strong base
in terms of software specialists. In DRDO, this
resource is somewhat limited and for this
reason in-house development is at times

The user has to contact the vendors who are
likely to have developed the kind of software
required for the project for a discussion on
the user software requirements. After having
understood the requirements, the vendors
would either offer a package which can be

System using image processing software

supplied off-the-shelf or offer to devetop a
customised package which would meet the
user requirements. They would also submit
quotations regarding price and specify terms
and conditions about payment.

-2.3 Software Package Selectinn.
' .

should be modular in design, with structured coding, i.e. it should be a self contained unit.
Documentation : Full and good quality
documentation must be provided by the
vendor. Anything less than full documentation should not be accepted.
Complete documentation pertains to
areas like

(ii)

._

.LC,

I . )

Of the several options available, selection
of the right software package mainly for its
long-term effectiveness is a difficult task.

Although several packages may appear
similar, they may not necessarily have the
same capability. An ideal package is not just
a software. It is also expected to provide
for implementation planning, formalised
education, continual structured support,
on-going enhancement programmes, and
user-interaction.
Adoption of a logical approach and fixing
of precise criteria is necessary for making a
sound evaluation. The following are the major
parameters to be taken into consideration in
this respect:
2.3.1 Technical Soundness : The package

should be technically sound, and capable of
meeting all the requirements of the user.
2.3.2 User-friendliness : The software should

be user-friendly, i.e. it should be easily understandable and operable with minimum mental
strain and physical effort on the part of the
user.
2.3.3 System Changes : The package should
be amenable to incorporation of such changes
as may be necessary, including initial
changes, changes imposed by program maintenance and as also those associated with
extension of package facilities. It is important
to fix the responsibility for affecting these
changes. Should it be the user's responsibility then the vendor should provide source
listings of the package and should guarantee
the following :

(i)

Modularity of Design : The package

-

-

identification of input and output
elements,
full record specifications,
program logic,
data specification,
test data and
Operating and conversion procedures.

2.3.4 Installation and Training Support : The
supplier should specify the support which he
would provide with the package. It must
include help during conversion and initial
running, together with formal education programme for the user's team.

2.3.5Initial and Running Costs : The acquisition modes vary considerably across the
range of packages available. Some packages
are offered only for direct purchase by the
users, while others are custom-built with
provision for payment on the basis of stagewise development. Maintenance support
charges are usually inc\uded in the contract.
In such cases, where separate charges are
to be paid for maintenance purposes, clear
settlement must be done within the framework
of financial terms.
2.3.6 Acceptance Tests : The conformity of
packages to user requirements is determined
for ready-built and custom-built packages. In
the case of custom-built packages, continual
and meaningful dialogue between the user
and the vendor is necessary to ensure generation of a potentially successful package.
The acceptance tests run on the software
packages include :

(i)

Test Running, done on the test-data,

specially created for the purpose,
(ii) Pilot Running, based on data provided
by the user, and

(iii) Parallel Running, based on live data
used by the system/project for which
the package is acquired.
2.3.7 Quality Assurance : The package
selected by the user should not only be
capable of serving its desired purpose but
shoutd also be adaptable, reliable and of good
quality.
2.3.8 Maintenance Support Assurance : The
user should ensure that the vendor can
provide continued and the best possible
maintenance support.
2.3.9 Technology Application : An important
consideration is whether current technology is
being applied to make the software package
really effective in terms of timeliness, accuracy, ability to handle data at reasonable cost
and capability to handle potential security.
2.3.10 Compatibility, Control and Recovery
Problems : The prime concern at the time of
acquisition of a software package is its
compatibility with the user's existing hardware
and software configuration and the familiarity
and specialisation of the supplier in that
environment. That way the supplier will be
able to communicate better with the user and
consequently ensure smooth installation and
on-going support.
2.3.11 Vendor Selection : The first step is to
shortlist the suppliers who are able to provide the required package on the basis of set
criteria. The vendors considered should be
financially stable, be dedicated suppliers of
software, be true professionals, have industry
recognition and a good reputation.

For effective support and quality-assurance,
the vendor must meet the following requirements :
(i) The representation and stability of the
vendor company is essential for the

Software processrng of a digital image

future support of the system. In such
cases where phased extensions have
been envisaged in the system plans, a
disastrous situation can arise if the
vendor company goes into liquidation
just when the user is about to implement
a major extension programme . It is,
therefore. essential that the vendor
company chosen has a sound financial
backing and a strong customer base.
(ii) The vendor must have adequate staff
and technical resources so as to be in
a position to provide the requisite maintenance support.
-5

2.3.12 Benchmarking : A software package
must not be acquired merely on the basis of
its reputation. It has to be tested in actual
user environment. Benchmarking tests are
necessary to evaluate the relative performance of the software package. However, the
user has to be clear that the tests must not
be unduly complex; instead these should be
realistic and relevant. Setting proper tests may
involve days or even weeks of manual work.
Users sho6ld set the test-plans for software
efficiency, quality and reliability.

In case the package to be acquired is only
a module to be integrated with other modules, it is imperative to ensure interfacing of

the module with other modules of the integrated package.

coming up. The software costs, however,
continue to be high and a user has to be
very circumspect in software procurement.
3. CONCLUSION
Selection process is a complex job. The
above
guidelines based on several years of
The use of computer has increased treof the authors in the software
experience
mendously over the years. Lower hardware
development1
acquisition for super-minis, PCs
costs are bringing computers within the reach
and other special-purpose systems, have
of more and more users. Software requirements of the users are also simuttane~usly~ been laid down with the purpose of helping
the users to take appropriate decisions while
going up and one can see a number of
purchasing s o h a r e from external sources.
specialist software-development houses

66

Knowledge is a steep which few may climb while duty is
a path which all may tread."
-LEWIS MORRIS

66

Books are good enough in there own way hut-they are a
mighty bloodless substitute for life."
-RL STEVENSON

