ADOPTION OF CD-ROM IN LIBRARIES

C.K. Ramaiah
DESIDOC, Metcalfe House, Delhi 110 054,

-

Describes briefly CD-ROM
its characteristics, advantages, limitations and mechanisms for recording and reading information. The
basic configuration of a CD-ROM system and some guidelines for its
installation are given. The major attempts made to effect standardization
in installation and operation of CD-ROMs are reviewed. Applications
of CD-ROM in libraries and information setvices in compact disc
format are enumerated. Gives a brief account of his experience with
CD-ROM at DESIDOC. 7Re future trends like networking and use of
erasable optical discs and the influence of these developments on
Indian libraries are discussed.

1. INTRODUCTION

Due to the complexities and high cost
of online information searching, readers find
it easier to use CD-ROM. Its u w offers
unlimited access to databases at a fixed
cost, interactive searching in comparison to
hard copy or microfiche. In addition, it provides thb potential to browse, though it is
a single-user system. CD-ROM may not
replace online services or hard copies completely, but it does offer an alternative option
to searchers.

CD-ROM is the acronym for 'compact
disc read only memory' and is one of the
types of optical discs. It uses digital audio
compact disc (CD) system for storage and
retrieval of information. This mediurif is not
a replacement for any existing medium like
print, microforms or magnetic online; rather
it supplements all these media. Presently, it
is a useful medium available at a low cost.
Moreover, it has reliability, permanence, durability, high capacity and scope for mass data
distribution. It is free from the risk of demagnetization and other causes of data loss due

-

to mishandling of the magnetic media. At
the same time, it does not require any
back-up files for storing as in the case of
online media.
2. CHARACTERISTICS

A CD-ROM disc (12 cm. dia ) can store
600 MB of data, which is equal to

2,75,000 pages of text or
1,500 floppies (5.75" DD-DS diScs) or
9,000 pages of graphics and 8 bit stereo
audio or
18,000 pages of computer graphics or
4,500 hours of digitized voice (16 KB) or
10 copies of commonly used 20 volume
encyclopaedia.
The CD-ROM has established itself as
an efficient, fast and cheap medium. Its
replication can be done just for $2.75 a disc
within a 60-day turn around. The projected
life of 10 years for CD-ROMs at the initial
stages has been enhanced to 3b years for
write once read many (WORM) type discs,
which now stands at 100 years according
to Sony Corporation. These discs are small,
light and robust and inexpensive to distribute
by mail or other means. Even though retrieval
of information through CD-ROM is a bit
slower as compared to optical discs, information can be accessed randomly. Since it is
very much a user-friendly system, no training
is needed for its operation. It has the following
advantages:

*

high storage capacity,
low production cost,
high archival life,
easy portability,
speedy retrieval,
ease of use, and
safety of data.

This technology is now at an early postexperimental stage. It requires minimum understanding to start the computer and then use
the CD-ROM disc. CD-ROM access time is

lower than in the magnetic disc or semiconductor memory, because of its constant linear
velocity (CLV) format. Therefore, database
retrieval software has to be modified to overcome this limitation. One cannot write, store
or alter the data after mastering (the process
of making an original plate which is sub
sequently used for making multiple copies)
the disc because of its read only memory.
So, it is an alternative to the present-day
magnetic floppy discs, but it cannot replace
them totally. In this context, it is easier to
pick up a book or journal and read, as and
when desired than using a CD-ROM disc.

4. RECORDING/RETRIEVING OF

INFORMATION
Information is stored digitally in the form
of 'pits' and 'lands' of variable lengths on the
concentric/spiral tracks of reflective layer of
CD-ROM disc. Basically, there are two methods
of recording data on these discs:

i) Constant Angular Velocity (CAW Method :
This method is similar to ordinary phonograph
recording, where data is stored on concentric
circles and the data packing density decreases
from circles near the centre to those towards
the periphery. Here, its disc drive rotates at
a fixed speed and picture frames can be
recorded for each revolution.
ii) Constant Linear Vdocity (CLV) M e t M In
this method data is stored on the spiral track,
and the packing density of data from the
outer circle to the innermost circle is unifonh.
The speed of rotation of the drive is controlled,
so that the speed of the outer circle is slower
than the inner circles. By this method data
can be accessed by block address.
For fast random access of data, the disc
is spun at CAV, so that all tracks per revolution
have the same division in sectors, each having
the potential to store the same amount of
information. Hence, the inner track has higher
density. h e latest method is to bum holes
in a high absorbing layer 9n the rear side of
a transparent substrate by focusing a low
powered laser beam e.g. Al-Ga-As. In the

e

beginning a good coding system is chosen
for writing data on the disc, so as to avoid
cross-talk of powerful recording spot in the
check signal. The check laser is given a
different wavelength from that of the recording
laser.
Datdnformation is retrieved by translating
the position of 'pits' and 'lands' into a timedependent signal. Reading is done here by a
non-contact method which is free. of wear.
The information can be protected against dust
and damage by simple coating with a transparent lacquer layer. Moreover, non-contact
allows the fast random access, which is of
great importance in data storage and retrieval.
5. SYSTEM CONFIGURATION

The hardware components in this system
are: i) IBM PC XT/AT or IBM compatible,
Macintosh or *pie II type of microcomputer
with 512 KB RAM which includes (i) computer,
monitor, magnetic disc drive , (ii) CD-disc drive,
(iii) interface card, (iv) cables, and (v) printer.
The CD drive is used to read the disc which
is available either as a stand-alone unit or an
integral part of a PC. Some of the CD-ROMs
available are Philips CM 100, CM 110, CM
121, CM 131, CM 132, CM 201, CM 210,
Hitachi's CDR-1502s, CDR- 1503s, CDR-2501),
Sony's CDU 100, CDU 200, CDU 5002, Reference\ Technology 500 Data drive, and
Tboshiba's XM-2000A.
Connecting CD-ROM drive with a PC is
not as simple as plugging a VCP into a TV
set. It requires an interfacing card for interfacing the CD drive with IBM PC. The standard and commonly used interface is the
IBM-based small computer system interface
(SCSI), which is available in most of the
latest PCs. The other interfaces available
include a high speed serial interface RS233C, RS-432, IEEE 488 parallel interface,
etc. Philips CM 153, CM 154, CM 155,
Hitachi's IF 13, IF 14, IF 14A, and Sony's
CD 6-200, 6-231 are some of the models
available.
CD-ROM software is linked to the operating system of the microcomputer because

* MONITOR

CD-ROM

RETRIEVAL
SOFTWARE

the information is not only transferred from
the disc to the computer, but also written
on that computer's hard disc/floppy drive.
6. INSTALLATION OF THE SYSTEM

All the vendors, irrespective of the make
of their system, provide adequate instructions
for installation. But sometimes the supplier
may forget or be reluctant to supply the
related manuals along with the drive and
interface. This causes delay in installation of
the system. Once we receive the hardware,
i.e., drive, interface card, related cables, system installation software and the manuals,
hardly two hours are needed for installing
the system. The main steps in the installation
of the system are:
setting of jumpers, depending upon the
type of computer attached, as given in
system specification manual,
fitting the interface card in the host computer,
connecting the host computer to the disk
drive with the interface cable, supplied
along with the disk drive, and another
power cable of the drive for running the
disk drive,
setting of DIP switches if they are not
pre-set,
installing the system software In the host
computer from the diskettes supplied along
with the hardware, and

loading the database software for reading
and retrieving the information from compact disc.
Anyone with basic knowledge about the
computer can use the system easily. One
can search the database easily with the help
of the manual.
7. OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS

The recommended operational conditions
for these systems are : temperature 5-35
degree C , 20-80 per cent humidity and
220-240 V power supply for Indian conditions
(European model). Normally, the drive should
not be moved during operation, because
error is likely to occur in the reading operation.
It is always advisable to avoid sudden
changes in temperature where the system
is installed.
8. STANDARDIZATION

Philips and Sony have prescribed CD-ROM
standards and have prepared red, yellow
and green books. The yellow book covers
the physical recording standards for CD-ROM
and its error detection code (EDC) and error
correction coding (ECC) to meet the demands
of data storage and retrieval, whereas the
red book covers CD-digital audio recording
standards, and the green book covers CDI formats. There is overlap between yellow
and green books. The other prominent groups
working on the formulation of these standards
are High Sierra Group, Optical Disc Forum,
UK, National Institute of Standards Organisation (NISO), USA and Information Industry
Association (IIA), USA.
9. CD-ROM AT DESIDOC

DESIDOC has acquired a Philips CM
110/30 system and installed it at a cost of
$1390. Whitakers Books in Print 1988
database and Grolier Academic Encyclopaedia 1989 are used in day-to-day operations in the library. NTlS and LISA databases
1989 too have been acquired; these

databases are updated quarterly and
semi-annually. DESIDOC proposes to acquire
the databases like Applied Science and
Technology Index, Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature, and McGraw-Hill Encyclopaedia for the year 1989. The databases
acquired are used for ready referencelliterature searches by the scientific community.
The library has selected mainly those
databases on CD-ROM which can be retained
permanently and a few of the important
databases which are to be subscribed annually. Most of the database publishers insist
on return of the old discs after the updated
disc has been received. In case the user
fails to renew his subscription, he has to
return the disc as per the agreement. So, it
seems that most of the librarians/information
scientists, especially in India, are reluctant
to get these systems because of restrictions
like this. There is a need for library associations to approach collectively the publishers
for redressal of various problems faced by
them. In the western countries, alternative
arrangements are available, whereby these
systems and databases can be installed on
annual rental basis, whereas in India such
facilities are not available.

Earlier, sharing the CD-ROM drite was
not possible, but of late research has been
undertaken and partial success has been
achieved in this direction on experimental
basis. Now it is time for getting multi-user
and/or networked environment systems.
Micro Medex has succeeded in the experimental stage and has announced a next
generation system in the form of a multi-user,
dial-up system, which will be attached to a
variety of hosts i.e., main frame computer
systems. Meridian Data Inc. has CD-Net and
CD-Server systems that make CD-ROM
drives available as network resources. Spectrum Interactive has announced a multi-user
local area network (LAN) system which is in
use for the SABRE Travel Network (USA)
and can support up to 14,000 locations and
60,000 terminals.

e

rlC
11. FUTURE TRENDS

Optical disc technology is having considerable impact on the working of offices,
factories and homes, especially in libraries,
because of its vast storage capacity in small
area and fast retrieval of data made possible.
Now new formats like compact disc-interactive (CD-I), compact disc-video (CD-V) and
compact disc-interactive video (CD-IV) have
come out from the CD-ROM. On the other
side, WORM type discs have also come in.
Hypertext systems are another type, which
feature machine-supported links both within
that open up
and between documents
exciting new avenues for information retrieval.
Hypermedia is the extension of hypertext, in
which the networked elements can be text,
graphics, speech, audio recordings and pictures. Optical discs are hypermedia.

-

users at the same time through local area
networks. There are only two unsolved issues
which restrict the widespread acceptance of
CD-ROM: copyright and standardization.
Technology only will eventually resolve these
two issues in due course of time.
If we classify all the formats of CDs from
the point of view of their use in library and
infovation services (LIS), these may be
categorised as follows:
tools for library automation like
books/serials cataloguing, public
access catalogues, etc.,

-

An erasable optical disc named magneto-optic disc is the latest form of this
family which can store 6000 MB of data on
a thin film of a magnetic material. 3M company had developed these erasable optical
discs in 1988 and prototype discs are available at a few places. Further research is
going on to store more information, say 6000
to 7000 MB, on a 5 1/4" disk. On the other
hand, direct over-write technology, which is
still in experimental stage, is likely to eliminate
the double throughput in magneto-optic two
step erase-and-rerecord cycle, and disc
drives.
12. APPLICATIONS OF CD-ROMs IN
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION
SERVICES

Introduction of CD-ROM in libraries and
information centres has ushered in a new
'optical information systems' era. Most of
the libraries in advanced countries have
already acquired these systems and are providing instantaneous information services to
the readers. CD-ROM has solved major problems of these libraries in many ways by
making easy access to information at a low
cost, storing of information and use of the
limited miniaturised form resources by many

bookdserials selection tools,
8

reference tools, and

8

databases available in online format.

The various tools in CD-ROM format are
given in Appendix A under four categories
mentioried above.
13. CONCLUSION

If CD-ROM is the best information retrieval
devicdmedium, then erasable CD will be the
best storage device. The fact is that the
CD-ROM technology will not replace the
existing technologies like paper media, microforms, magnetic and online media; rather
it will supplement them. When advantages
like space saving, and faster and random
access to information are considered the
use of CD-ROMs will not be costly for libraries. As the CD-ROM technology is still in
its developmental stage, one has to wait till
the technology is available at low cost to
even small librariedinformation centres, as
happened with computers a few years back.
If the Indian suppliers are able to supply
these machines on rental basis without much
problems it will be of great help to the small
libraries, which are unable to buy new systems.
14. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author is grateful to Shri SS Murthy,
Director, DESIDOC, for the encouragement
to write this paper. He also wishes to express

his gratitude to Shri VK Rangra, Sci E for
his guidance and suggestions in improving
the draft of this paper.
FURTHER READING

1. Beteler, M. Combining image and text
using a CD-ROM document delivery system. Inter. J. Micrographics Video
Techno1 6 (1/2) 1987; 1-4.
2. Chen, PPS. Compact Disc-ROM: how it
works. IEEESpectmm 23(4), 1987; 44-49.
3. Handley, T. An introduction to CD-ROM.
Inform Media Technol 19(3), 1986;
103-106.
4. Handley, T. CD-ROM and optical publishing systems. (Cimtech Publication No.
26) Cimtech, HaMeld, 1987.
5. Lambert, S. and Repiequat, S. Ed.
CD-ROM: the new papyrus, the current
and fuwre state-of-the art. Microsoft
press, Red Mond, 1986.

6. Marlor, H. Data structures for CD-ROM.
Bull. Am.Soc. Inform Sci. 38(4), 1987;
18-20.
7. Mullan, N A and Blick, A R. Initial experiences of untrained end-users with a life
sciences CD-ROM databases: a statutary
experience. J. lnfom. Sci. 13(3), 1987;
139-41.
8. Paisley, W and Butler M. The first wave:
CD-ROM adoption in offices and libraries,
Pt.1. CD-ROM Libraran3(2),1988; 21(3).
9. Roth, JP. Ed. Essentialguide to CD-ROM.
(Meckler Publishing, West Port), 1986.
10. Silver, H. Managing a CD-ROM installation: a case study at Hahnemann University. Online 12(2); 1988; 61-66.
11. Watson, P D and Golden G A. Distributing
an online catalogue on CD-ROM: the
University of Illinois experience. Online
10 (3), 1983; 65-73.
12. Williams, B J S., CD-ROM: a new medium
for publishing. Inform Media Tech0119(3),
1986; 107-109.

APPENDIX-A
I. TOOLS FOR LIBRARY AUTOMATION
ACTMTIES

(i) Cataloguing

(a) Biblio File's Catalogue: Catalogue
Production Module (CPM) is the
first
bibliographic
CD-ROM
database, in which all the three
million MARC records of Library
of Congress, are recorded on four
discs. One can search these
databases by author, title, ISBN,
ISSN, LC Card No., year and place
of publication and type of material.
Library Corporation that developed
this system is providing the
CD-ROM drive and support kit (i.e.
interfaces and cables to be used
for IBM PC/XT/AT and compatibles) for $2930.
(b) lngram Book Company: Laser
search is another IBM PC/CD-ROM
information resource system for
LIS. It incorporates a fully integrated acquisitions management
program that creates, orders and
maintains their fund accounting
records.
(c) Horizon Information Services (HIS):
Cataloguer's tool kit is a system
developed by HIS which includes
MARC-ENGLISH, MARC-STM (English cataloguing information for
scientific, technical and medical
libraries) and MARC-LAW (English
language legal records). It produces catalogue cards, book
lables, general orders, and does
original cataloguing and can be
linked to other local, online or
circulation systems.

(d) General Research Corporation
(GRC): Laser Quest, an IBM
FPC/CD-ROM system, is meant
mainly for retrospective and new
library cataloguing functions. It
provides access to the GRCCOM
Resource database, which con-

@,

tians 4 million MARC records,
including English and foreign titles
for books, serials, audio-visual
materials, maps, manuscripts and
archival materials.
(e) Carrolitan Press, Inc: A subsidiary
of International Thompson Information/UTLAS, this company has
developed a CD-ROM-based information service called MARVLS,
which uses video discs- to store
information. MARVLS contains
complete shelf list of the LC. This
company has also developed three
more systems called DISCON,
DISCAT and LAWMARC.

(9 Gaylord Brothers, Inc: MINIMARC
is a video disc system which can
support up to four standard video
disc players and provide access
to over 3.5 billion characters of
online data. It requires two laser
discs simultaneously to have complete database with indexes.
(g) Library Systems and Services, Inc.
(LSSI): It is also a PC/MARC system which is in LC classification
available in machine-readable
form. It includes all MARC formats,
including serials, maps, and manuscripts. It can be accessed
through windowing features.

(ii) Serial Control
Faxon Company: Micro Linx, a microcomputer-based CD-ROM system
for serial control, has been developed
by Faxon Company. It can store complete records of the entire LC MARC-S
serials for identification of title,
keywords, etc. Author search can be
conducted. The best feature of this
system is that any record can be
downloaded
into
user's
own

databases and can be edited according to the user's requirement.

(iii)

Public Access Catalogues
Many libraries have started or completed the accumulation of their
databases for the purpose of resource
I sharing. Some of them have produced
new laser-based 'Public Access
Catalogues (PAC).'
(a) Brodart produced the first PAC
called Le Pac (Local Public Access
Catalogue) on CD-ROM and
started marketing it in July 1985.
The system can store one million
MARC records with their indexes
on a single CD-ROM disc.
(b) Marcive, Inc. has been the first
company to use WORM discs for
distributing their PAC. It allows
continuous updating of the discs
containing bibliographic records.
Marcive/PAC holds 100 MB of user
data and has a total capacity of
115 MB, i.e. almost one-sixth of
that of a CD-ROM disc. It can be
used as union catalogue.
(c) The Ramapo Catskill Library System has developed and installed
a video disc-based union cataloguing system, which contains about
six lakh records.

II. BOOKS/SERIALS ACQUISITION TOOLS
ON CD-ROM
CD-ROM technology provides a convenient way to store and distribute large
amount of information. So, now-a-days
a lot of dictionaries, encyclopaedias,
directories, catalogues, etc. are available
in CD-ROM form.
(a) R R Bowker has published its entire
Books In Print (BIP) series on one 12

cm CD as Books In Print. Thus, the
system comprises books in print, subject guide to BIP, BIP supplement,
forthcoming books and subject guide
to forthcoming books.
(b) Whitaker has also started publishing
the British Books In Print on CD-ROM
disc and updates it quarterly.
(c) The Library Corporation has started
its Any-Book on CD-ROM disc. The
disc contains an automated acquisition system that automatically converts the data into a purchase order
format for printing or for sending to
the vendor in addition to Any-Book
database.
(d) R R Bowker publishes its Ulrich International Periodical Directory (UIPD) on
CD-ROM as Ulrich Plus, which covers
68,000 periodicals in 534 subject
areas. It contains 35,000 additional
titles from irregular serials and annuals
and Bowkers international serial
database update in addition to the
UIPD.
(e) EBSCO has started producing 'The
Seriab Directory: An International
Reference Book' on CD-ROM, which
contains 1,13,000 international serial
publications and a 'Ceased Title'
index.

Ill. REFERENCE TOOLS/SERVICES
CD-ROM

ON

American
(a) Grolier's Academk
Encyclopaedia on CD-ROM: The
entire 21 volume Academic American
Encyclopedia (AAE) is now available
on a single CD-ROM disc for $199.
The encyclopaedia odcupies 100 MB
including an electronic index, where
groups of words, keywords, concepts
in context and article titles are listed,
and each search can be conducted
in less than five seconds.
@) Mapping Services

i) DeLORME mapping system has
started a new mapping service which
can scan and store colour maps on
a CD-ROM disc. It is the first digital
world atlas on compact disc. These
maps are stored in a compressed
digital video format. The user can
view many maps, separately or with
vector data su'perimposed over each
source. It is useful in the field of
navigation, command and control,
engineering/surveying, and fleet management.

ii) GEOVlSlON is another geographic
database useful for land developers,
social organisations, municipal and
public
departments.
It
uses
GEODESK workstationfor reading the
disc.

(t) IS1 has also brought out its Science

Citation lndex

on CD-ROM.
IV. DATABASES

(g) Wilson company has brought out its
Indexing Periodicals, Applied Science
and Technology Index and Readers
Guide to Periodical Literature on
CD-ROM.
(h) INSPEC has started a joint venture
called 'IEEWIEE Publications Ondisc'
(IPO, containing the full text of the
IEEhEEE Journals and Conference
Proceedings.

A number of major online database publishers have announced CD-ROM versions of online databases in various fields
like engineering, science, medicine, library
8 information science, finance and geography. The major online database vendors
like DIALOG Information Services. Inc.
and BRS Information Technologies have
also developed their databases on
CD-ROM.

(a) TMS and UMI (University Microfilms, '
Inc) have jointly developed a system
called Information Delivery Module
(IDM) which stores and retrieves IEEE
Journals as facsimile page images.
The system can display text images
of IEEE journals with high resolution;
it also has the capacity to zoom-in
the drawings and diagrams in these
journals.

-

(b) Engineering Information, Jnc. has
started publishing its Computerised
Engineering Index (COMPENDIX) on
CD-ROM in the fields of electrical
and computer engineering, chemical
engineering and aerospace engineering. This disc covers the abstracts
from July 1983 and is published quarterly.
(c) Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) is
publishing its abstracts as a quarterly;
the abstracts are which were drawn
from 12,000 journals on a CD-ROM
disc in the field of health and safety
in chemistry.

(d) Royal Society of Chemistry started
its Current Biotechnology Abstracts
on CD-ROM disc in 1983.
(e) National Technical Information Service (NTIS) has started publishing its
bibliographic database of abstracts
on CD-ROM in the fields of i)aeronautics, aerospace and astronomy ii)
, computers, communications and
electronics, iii) energy and natural
resources, and iv)--environmental
health and safety.
(f) Cambridge Scientific Abstracts (CSA)

has started publishing the full year
abstracts in Aquatic sciences and
Fisheries (ASFA) on a single compact
disc under the name COMPACT
CAMBRIDGE. It holds the information
from around 2,75,000 typed pages
text which is updated quarterly.
(g) Silver Platter Information, Inc. is one
of the leading CD-ROM distributers/publishers dealing with above
databases in various fields.

Knowledge is proudthat he has learned so much; wisdom is humble that he knows no more.

- Wlliam Cowpar

Booksare good enough in their one way but they am a mighty bloodless subatiMe for life.

- RL st even so^,

