ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING :EMERGING TRENDS
D.S. Bedi and Geeta Vats
Defence Scientific Infonnatiorl& Documentation Centre, Metcde House,Delhi-I 10 054

Abstract
Describes the electronic publishing concepts and their applications in
scientificpublishing. Highlights the electronic publishing technologiesand
the products that have given electronic publishing a prominent position
in the marketplace. Consolidates the trends emerging in the field o f
electronic publishing in the background o f fado= affecting both its
promotion and inhibition.

Introduction
Electronic publishing, like all other types of
publishing, is concerned with dissemination of
information for public sale or use. Recent
changes in the supporting hardware base particularly personal computers with
reasonable screen resolution of 70-100 dots
per inch (dpi)and laser printers with reasonable
screen resolution of 300-600 dpi - have
enabled widespread application of electronic
publishing concepts. It allows traditional
publication to be done better and has
introduceda new medium not possible before.

and made archival knowledge available to an
ever expanding audience. This was further
facilitated through the development of offset
printing
using
photographic
plates.
Composition was done at a special multi-font
typewriter or a special photocomposer that
placed images on paper. This composed text,
together with drawn graphics, is then pasted
up to form pages and photographed to make
the plate for printing either by offset press or
by simply copying the paste-up material using
a copier.

Advent of Electronic Publkhing

From Stone Carving to Electronic
Publishing
The history of printing technology is
fascinating. The earliest documents were
carved in stone, scratched in wet clay or drawn
on parchment or matted.fibres. Invention of
the printing press and movable type allowed
reductions in the cost of production of books

The information content of a document goes
far beyond the simple text and graphics which
it contains. How information is presented is not
less significant. It is here that the new
technologies are having a major impact.
Everything is handled using a computer. Tools
have now emerged to support the development of documents and their maintenance. The

personal computer equipped with a visual text
editor has replaced the typewriter in any
environment where documents are created.
The ability to manipulate text without having
to rekey it has revolutionized the way
documents are created. Likewise, tools for the
preparation of illustrations make the job of
creating a mixed-media document simpler.
Pages are laid out using the computer's
memoy rather than paper, scissors and glue.
The benefits are twofold : the document is
typeset with added information due to the
presentation format at a cost commensurate
with that of a text-only typewritten documeht.

printing facility. The approach to manuscript
preparation involves embedding format
commands in the source file of a document
which is prepared with any simple text editor;
the source file can be given as input to a
formatter program that generates a file of
printer commands; the printer program takes
that file and a file of fonts. and D~MStbe
documents. The formatter proqram-ekes care
of margins, selection of fonts, centering,
--aiging@nn,
p a r a -g-.r a p 3 , spa?&
between wards-...a& iusfificatian L . l i s e s ,

Electronic Submission

Componentsof Electronic Publishing
The term 'electronic publishing' is generally
ysed to sign& the use &computers in the
production
of printed publications and
also in
- -------.
the sense of
--.-dEkbution of information
---- - using
-&r!p~&~. anh~s~mnzudcati~n&c_hnoBut electronic publishing is a more
radical service than either document delivery
or information. It is a form of publishing where
the computer network becomes the primay
medium of creation, storage and distribution
of information.
The application of the above electronic
publishing concepts in scientific publishing has
been considered here to illustrate the
phenomena involved. The process of technical
publication, in its broad sense, leads from
gathering of information during research and
development to its appearance in a journal.
This process usually consists of four crucial
steps : manuscript preparation, electronic
submission,
printing,
and
electronic
distribution.
Manuscript Preparation
Systems for manuscript preparation have
become quite sophisticated. When coupled
with high-resolution laser printers, they help
produce results of professional calibre. When
coupled with low-cost, medium-resolution
laser printers, they provide a creditabledesktop

-

I
_

2

Electronic submission, the second crucial
step, refers to the transfer of a manuscript
electronicallyfrom author to editor, from editor
to reviewer, or from editor to publisher. The
file must be stored in a standard text code (e.g.
ASCII) that can be read by different computers;
it can be transferred on a floppy disk, over a
telephone connection, or over a network.
Some WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You
Get) editors store format information as
non-ASCII codes in the source file, in many
cases preventing their transmission over phone
connections and networks. Nevertheless,
within a few years, all format codes will be an
important medium of manuscript transfer.
After the networks are in operation, a major
obstacle is lack of standards for describing
documents and their components. How are
paragraphs, sections, fonts, tables, charts,
graphs, citations, and the like to be
represented? How many markup languages the name for description languages in the
publishing trade - should publishers support
and editors allow? Even today, in the absence
of standards, many publishers are pleased to
receive a copy of a source file; all they need
to do is manually strip out the format
commands and insert their own. Often called
'capturing the author's keystrokes,' this saves
work and removes the possibility of e m r s that
normally occur when the publisher retypes the
manuscript.

Growth of Electronic Publishing

J

Printing, the third crucial step, involves the
use of formatters' output to drive devices
ranging from 'letter quality' dot matrix printers
to laser printers and phototypesetters. The
patterns of small dots impressed on paper by
a dot matrix printer are too coarse to produce
aesthetically pleasing documents. The more
sophisticated laser printer consists of a
m i c r o ~ r o c ~memory
a
for holding fonts
and the data to be minted, and a 'marking
--e n a i d the marking engine uses a laser to
imprint images on paper, the laser's control
signals coming from the microprocessor rather
than from an optical scanner. The
manufacturers of printers have been interested
in standardizingthe lariguages in which printer
input (formatteroutput) is expressed. The most
common example in the United States is
Postscript.
Electronic Distribution

/'

,

Electronic distribution means dissemination
of the contents of journals by electronic means
rather than on printed paper. No refereed
journal or commercial magazine is now
distributed electronically.
In what ways might electronic distribution
be practical? A facsimile with a resolution of
300 dpi sent over a 1,200-baud telephone link
.with ten-to-one image compression would take
2-3 days of continuous transmission, amassing
a long-distance phone bill of about $830. If
the magazine were described in a markup
language, it could be transmitted in 2 hours
(phone bill about $30)and could be converted
to printed copy by a receiving computer withi'n
a few hours. Who would pay these connect
charges or hardware costs, when a printed copy
can arrive in the mail for $l?
A more practical approach proposed is
based on electronic queries by subscribers.The
subscribers would, at their convenience,
connect to the publisher's computer and
examine tables of contents and abstra&, they
could then order either printed or electronic
version of articles, of interest to them.
I
-___llj

i
,
I

i
I
J

ij

The existence of a large, and numerate,
computer-owning population is what makes
possible many of the recent advances in
electronic publishing. As a matter of fad, the
growth of electronic publishing is the result of
several diverse factors coming together. On the
more positive side, these include improvements in computer power, reduced storage
improved
and
cheaper
costs, ,
telecommunication facilities, and better and
cheaper terminal design. That these factors
coincide with the publishing industry facing
higher labour costs, a shortage of skilled staff,
poor industrial relations and a vastly increased
output of information is another important
consideration.
Though advances in hardware and
publishing technologies have a major role, it
is continuing advances in telecommunication
which have made possible much of the recent
growth in electronic publishing. This indudes
both improvements in the public switched
networks and the arrival of dedicated data
networks. This is also an area where electronic
publishing undoubtedly benefits from
advances really directed at other, and more
wealthy, sectors of industry. Many of the
telecommunications developments are aimed
at areas like banking, airlines, insurance
companies, etc, with potential advantages for
the publishing industries.

Electronic Publishing Technologies
The base technologies of electronic
publishing are diverse and thii is true for the
products that result from their application. Over
the years, combinations of computing,
communication and publishing technologies
have been used to generate products falling
into one of the following four main categories :
.b - r o a v services (e.g.
teletext, cable television);
intera-@ve. m_1cp4 (e.g. videotext,
online, some cable teleLision services);

a

discrete products (e.g. video
- ~ d e ocassettes,

9,

------others (e.g. the electronic journal,
hybrid products like videopabearch).
u
- ------

Teletext
Teletext comprises one-way broadcast
narrow-band services delivered via use of the
VBI (vertical blanking interval). In function, the
broadcast teletext signal is carried on five or
six blank lines (the VBI) at the start of each
television frame. Teletext information is stored
?in the frames, and for technical reasons each
libray of up to 200 pages is cycled
tn acces&e
continuously. Users wis. .
setvice
_--- use a numeric kevpod_tcsmrllcate-the
pages required, and these are displayed at the
next
print in the &s_I..---

1_

_
<

videotex
Videotex system functions by using the
television set as a display terminal, while linking
it to a computer via a conventional telephone
line. Information is stored on the host
computer, with one or more frames making up
a page of information. The pages contain both
text and gaphics, and users can select
subsequent pages by observina a numbered
list of options on the screen and pressin&
' d&md number on a k e w e n u selection).
Viewdata is a less commonly used t e r ~
-MI!
lrideptex systems delivered
----.
__exciusively
-- by t e l e ~ l i n e .
Teletex

especially business
automated office.

or

the

Online computer-based information services
probably comprise the most mature market
sector of electronic ~ u b l i h i w .It foms a
fundamental part of the information
infrastructure in most developed countries. In
an online system, the user approaches a
database via telecommunication link between
his terminal and the database. The microcomputer terminal provides interaction
between them. The user can search for a
specific information by narrowing down his
search through descriptors and index terms. In
the case of full-text databases, one can get full
l
in a normal
text besides the u ~ a citations
database. The user can also have the display
on a dumb terminal and use telephone or telex
for sending his query.
,

Electronic joumal

An electronic journal is the one where the
refereeing and distribution of
an item are carried o u t without any pa&
intermediaries. Much of the drive for the
electronic journal comes from the concern
within the scientific community over current
pressures on conventional publishing. The
interest in the electronic journal is spurred
mainly due to the literature, literature scattsr,
%e-cost
- - -of publication, delays in disseminating
I-rmaoitn
through conventional
-- rrc
channels
and
added
pressures
on library
Y
b u w i s is a full text delivey system and
differs from conventional bibliographic
databases available online only in the nature
of material being carried.
As can be seen, the links between many of
these products are at best feeble Despite the
comprehensive nature of such a list, ~lectronic
publishing is essentially in its infancy. Many of
the products covered are transitory - as distinct
from transient - and are clearly the forerunners
of far more sophisticated services. Such an
-a.

d-

C-

This term refers to the combination of word
processing and telex, where information is
exchanged among terminals using a common
business letter format at a transmission speed
of 2,400 bits per second (which is nearly 50
times faster than the telex operating speed of
50 bits per second). Teletex is often considered
a part of the videotex/teletext phenomenon,
because it also brings together computerised
information systems for a mass market,

community

example is broadcast teletext, which will be
surely replaced in time by far more
sophisticated services using full channel
delivey mechanisms, either broadcast or more
probably via cable networks. Even
bibliographic databases online, among the
most successful and stable of the strictly
information technologies in electronic form,
are evolving quickly.

Problems in Electronic Publishing
While the potential of electronic publishing
has been recognized for some time, it is now
becoming clear that many of the products will
take longer for commercialisation than had
been anticipated initially. As we progress, it is

-

___-

._-----

services, will hamper the progress. It is also
noticeable that wheF-or
--- -ra~idlv
--"--emerging e l e c t r o n i P Y o exists,
~ --- like
software, pre-recorded video cassettes and
even teletext, Cese are not really in direct
competition with the printed equivalent.

Lack of Hard Market and User Information
The la_ck_of
hard market and user information
highli&hted by the electronic documerii
delivey sector tends to be a major problem
ublishing.
for those-vni
It is also one of the factors that has delayed
progress, as many of the lamer companies are
..
understandablv u , d h g to invest withouta
Elear indication of the potential market,

i
d
-

C

Higher Cods
Publishing has traditionally been regarded
as an easy-enty industry. This is less true of
-many electronicpublishingsectors where initial
Lardware, marketin~andsupport costs tend to
be
high. Jn video particularly, start-up costs are
high and this has prevented many conventional
,publishers from entering the market. Even in

more established information services areas,
like secondary publishing and online,
launching a new product now involves major
expenditure before any returns are
Y
forthcoming.
Absence of Stamfards

\

The absence of proper guidelines and
standards in many areas is a major disincentive,
both to corporate investment and purchases
by indbidual end-users. In some hardware
areas, there has been a willingness by
companies to switch manufacture from one
product to another with scant regard for users
who may be locked into an earlier system.
Legal Implications

Outside the product standards area,
electronic publishing has major legal
implications for which solutions are not easy
to find. Copyright, privacy, trans-border data
flow and many other problems are thrust into
limelight by a technology capable of handling
vast quantities of information at unprecedented
speed. The whole electronic publishing area is
littered with legal problems which demand a
solution. Delays and uncertainties in the legal
area will undoubtedly have an impact on the
speed with which many electronic publishing
products reach the marketplace.

Conclusion
While many publishers turned to electronic
publishing in the 1970s seeking some sort of
panacea for the economic and industrial
problems they ihen faced, it is now becoming
increasingly clear that this form of publishing
offers no easy solutions. In fact, it is a v e y
complex area where few companies are
currently making money and the cost of enty
is often v e y high both in terms of capital
investment and skilled staff.
The impact of electronics and modem
computer technology on the creation and
publication of written information has thus just
predict-that
begun to be felt. One can safely-_-----

____----

-

4

the paperiess offices are far away. In fact, the
&verse c ~ u l dbe expected; more and more
people will be publishing more and more
material on paper. The information glut will
continue to expand. The new electronic media
would not replace paper, but augment it by
providing more efficient and effective access
to information. And when that information is
found, a paper copy &;;illbe made.
c- -

4.

5.

-e.

References
6.
1. John
Guensey.
The information
professions in the electronic age. Clive
Bingley, London, 1985, 206pp.
2. Denning, PJ. The science of computing :
electronic publishing. Amer Scient, 74,
1986,582-85.
3. Case, D. The personal computer : missing

7.

link to the electronic journal? J Amer Soc
Inform Sci, 36(5), 1985; 309-13.
Case, D. Electronic submission 'of
manuscripts : the academic author's
viewpoint. In Challenges to an information
society: proceedings of the 47th ASIS
Annual Meeting 1984,21; 175-76.
Garson, LR and Howard JH. Electronic
publishing : potential benefits and
problems for authors, publishers. J Chem
Inform Comput Sci, 24(3), 1984,119-23.
Cronin, B and Martyn, J. Publiclprivate
sector interaction : a review of issues with
particular reference to document delivey
and electronic publishing. Aslib &,
36(10), 1984; 373-91.
Amy, SJ. Teletext-based electronic
document delivey (Project HERMES). J
Docum, 41(1), 1985, 15-32.

Knowledge is proud that he has learned so much; wisdom is humble that he knows no more.
William Cowper

Books are good enough in their own way but they are a highly bloodless substitute for life.

RL. Stevenson

