DESIDOC — AN OVERVIEW

Beginning with this issue an overview of the constitution, components,
achievements, acﬁvities and services provided by DESIDOC will be
brought out for the beneﬁt of our readers. Each subsequent issue of the
Bulletin will carry a feature on one of the multifarious activities of
DESIDOC, highlighting the achievements in particular area, the facilities
available, the services provided to the users, etc.

. IDESIDOC - A Central Resource for

Scientiﬁc Information

Information is a vital resource for research
and development. For carrying out research in
a subject area, information on the work being
done, or that has already been done elsewhere
is very important to avoid repetition of R&D
work to the extent pOSSible. A good deal of
savings in resources and efforts can be
achieved if such information is made available
to scientists at the right time, in the right form.

Genesis

Realising the importance of information, the
Defence Research & Development
Organisation (DRDO) created a Scientific
Information Bureau (SIB) in 1958, soon after
the formation of the Organisation. The job of
SIB was to collect and process scientiﬁc and
technical information of Defence interest and
disseminate it to the concemed R&D scientists
and other agencies of the Ministry of Defence.
In 1967, SIB was reorganised and renamed as
Defence Scientific Information and
Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) with wider
scope and responsibilities. It became a
self-accounting unit in 1970 to function as one
of the DRDO establishments headed by a

id

state-of—the-art reports, current awareness
services, etc. Such compilations are regularly
sent to various DRDO Labs/Estts and other
users of DESIDOC services.

Dissemination of Information

The library and information scientists of
DESIDOC provide information in anticipation
as well as against specific requests from the
users. As anticipatory information services,
DESIDOC brings out abstracts/indexes
bulletins. state—of—the-art reports, technical
digests. etc. Literature searches are regularly
conducted for providing information to the
Scientific Adviser to Raksha Mantn', Chief
Controllers of R&D. and other users in the
DRDO HQrs and its laboratories. Modern
information technologies have been inducted
into the system for quick and effective
dissemination of the processed information.

Onlr'ne Searchng of Information

DESIDOC has the facility to search online
several international bibliographic databases
through an arrangement with 'DIALOG
Information Service, USA. Scientists from
DRDO Labs/Estts have been utilizing this
facility for comprehensive information searches
related to their R&D work. The database
searching is done over telephone lines.
DESIDOC has started using the facility of
gateway packet switched data service made
available by Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited,
to Delhi users for searching bibliographic
databases efficiently and at cheaper rates.
Facilities of online searching of the catalogue
of holdings of Defence science library, from
the DRDO HQrs are also available.

Sharing the Resources

DESIDOC is attempting to establish an
information network for sharing of scientific
information resources among DRDO Iabs/estts.
The need for creating an online bibliographic
information network utilizing adequate
computer and communication facilities under

4

technology both in the Defence and the civil
sector. The regular publications include (1)

Director. Today. DESIDOC has become one
of the India's premier national information
centres. Over the years, it has grown in terms
of competence and services." Its functions can
be broadly classified and described as follows :

Collection of Information

Scientiﬁc and technical information of
Defence interest is collected from various
published and unpublished sources. The
Defence Science Library (DSL) functioning in
DESIDOC acquires books, journals, reports.
patents, etc, and this collection serves as a
base for the manifold information services of
DESIDOC. Information scientists of DESIDOC
regularly scan selected documents as and when
they are received in the library and collect
information relating to various
projects/activities of DRDO. Microfilms,
microfiches and compact discs are some of the
recent additions to this central resource for
information on a wide range of topics related
to Defence.

Processing of Infbrmation

The information collected from various
sources is processed into various assimilable
forms like abstracts. indexes, digests.

3

the Ministry of Defence was mooted at the
'National Conference on Scientific Information
for Defence’ organised by DESIDOC in
February 1986. The action plan for the
implementation of this network was worked
out at the national seminar on ‘Defence
Science Information Network' organised by
DESIDOC in February 1987. DESIDOC
organised an ‘International Conference on
Bibliographic Databases and Networks' during
22 — 25 Feb 1989 with objectives of obtaining
technical inputs for the planning, design and
implementation of computer-based
bibliographic databases and networks.

Computerisation of Information Services

To cater to the ever-increasing scientific
information requirements of DRDO,
computerisation of the library operations like
acquisition, circulation, etc is being done by
DESIDOC. A database containing 12,000
records covering the collection of DSL from
1980 onwards has been developed and is
available online as mentioned above.
Necessary software for the creation of database
and retrieval of information has been
developed in-house. Using this software,
bibliographic details of books, reports, patents
and standards can be searched online through
different access points, including author‘s
name, subject keyword, class number, report
number and accession number.

Communicating Defence Science

Apart from disseminating the information,
published or unpublished, the results of R&D
activities in Defence science and technology
are communicated through regular and ad hoc
DRDO publications brought out by DESIDOC.
These publications are varied in their scope
and presentation and cater to a diverse
audience, including research scientists,
decisiOn makers, Defence Services personnel,
students. and the general public. These
publications help in creating an awareness
about the applications of Defence science and

DESIDOC has established
reprography and polygraphy

modern
facilities.

Defence Science Journal (Quarterly), (2) R&D
Digest (Bi-monthly), DRDO Newsletter
(Bi-monthly), (3) DRDO Samachar (Hindi,
Quarterly), and (4) Popular Science &
Technology (Half-Yearly). The ad hoc
publications include conference proceedings,
technical brochures, progress reports and
monographs. The editorial and other
publication facilities available at DESIDOC are
utilized by DRDO labs/estts and the HQrs.

Translation Services

In-house facilities are available for translating
research articles, patents, standards, manuals
and books from Chinese, Japanese, French,
German, and Russian into English. In addition,
a panel of expert translators is also maintained
to meet the demand for translations from
various foreign languages. Abstracts of
research articles appearing in foreign language
joumals are prepared and published in English
as a quarterly publication titled. ’Science
Abstracts from Foreign Language Journals.‘
The information on the S&T articles translated
by DESIDOC and the translations procured
through other translation agencies in India is
also compiled and maintained in a
computerised format.

Supporting Services
In its endeavour to disseminate up-to—date
and comprehensive information to its users,-

DESIDOC produces high- quality audio—visual
material such as colour slides and overhead
projection transparencies. Audio and video
recording and microfilming are done on
demand for DRDO Labs/Estts for making
technical presentations. With its modern,
phototypesetter-based offset printing unit, duly
supported by an automatic process camera and
other accessories, DESIDOC provides facilities
for printing the classified reports and other
publications of DRDO. Efforts are on to make
such printing facilities available near places
where there is a conglomeration of DRDO
Labs/Estts. One such phototypesetter-based
printing unit is being established at Hyderabad.
A technical information centre (TIC) is
functioning at the DRDO HQrs as a branch of
DESIDOC. for catering to the day-to- day
information needs of the HQrs and the Dept
of Defence Research 8r. Development
secretariat.

Other Activities

DESIDOC expertise is being used through
consultancy work by other Government
departments/organisations. A couple of
consultancy projects are under way. Many of
its staff members are on the expert committees
of the national organisations/departments such

as BIS, CSIR, ICMR, DBT, DST, DSIR and the
Planning Commission.

"Books dragoan enough in their own way but
they are a mighty bloorﬂcss subsimre for life".

RI. STEVENSON

