FOCUS ON DESIDOC

PUBLICATIONS — A MEANS OF COMMUNICATING SCIENCE

 

 

This column carries a series on the constiurtion. components.
achievements. activities and services provided by DESIDOC. Beginning
from January 1990. each issue features one of the multifarious activities
of DESIDOC,  the achievements in the particular area, the
facilitiesavailable.thesewicesprovidedtotheusers,etc.

 

 

DESIDOC functions as the publication wing
ofDRDOandsothedisseminaiionof
information covering the turnout developments
in Defence science and technolog; forms an
important component of its  Towards
this end. DESlDOC brings out a few periodicals
and some adhoc publications. These
publications are varied in their scope and
presentation and rater to a diverse readership,
including research scientists, decision makers.
Defence personnel, students and the general
public. The popularity of these publications is
indicative of the efforts of DESlDOC to
inculcate awareness about the applications of
Defence science 8: technology in both the
Defence and the civil sectors. The priced
publications are amilable to any one interested
inrecetvingﬁiem.0thersareforlimited
circulation and are available only to selected
readers. The periodicals brought out by
DESIDOC are brieﬂy described below:

Defoe Science Journal

Defence Science Journal (DSJ), a primary
research journal of DRDO. contains original
research papers, review papers and short
communications in the various disciplines of
sciencehavingabearingon Defence.The
Journal.withthehighqua|itypaperspublished
inttsvariousissues.bringstothenoﬁceof
Its readers the research output in Defence

The papers appearing in DSJ are
abstracted/indexed in many intemational
abstracting/indexing periodicals which include
Indian Science Abstracts. INSPEC Science
Abstracts, Chemical Abstracts. Engineering
Index. COMPENDEX. Mathematical Reviews.

and BlOSlS.

Popular Science & Technology

Series

The Popular Science 8: Technology (PST)
series is aimed at popularizing Defence science
and technology among the Defence personnel.
students and the general public. Each issue of
the series gives comprehensive information on
particular topic of Defence interest in popular
stylelheseriescreatesanawarenessofarrrent
developments in frontier areas of science and
technology and promotes knowledge and
understanding of the subject. The text is written
by subject Specialists and it is profusely
illustrated; the treatement of subject is kept at
senior secondary school level so as to make it
quite comprehensible. Two issues of PST are
brought out every year. Each issue in the series
ispriced atRs 10 or below. The following issues

have been brought out recently:

Night Vision Devices : Describes various
instruments that help to see in dark (this

publication is out of stock).

Battle with Barnacles

fouling and anti-corrosive paints.

Computers and Defence Applications :
Describes different types of computers. their
hardware and software. Highlights their

applications. specially in Defence.

Super Vision :

pertinent to organizational behaviour.

4

3&0 Digest

'RErD Digest' is brought out bi-monthly
tohidilightimportantnationalandinternational
scientiﬁc and technical developments of
Defence interest. Information on the latest
developments is culled out from a large
number of scientiﬁc and technical journals
received in the Defence Science Library.
The publication has served as an important
sourceofinformationfortheDefenceServices
Staff College entrance examinations. The
publication has a restricted circulation.

DESIDOC Bulletin

Current developments in the ﬁeld of
infatuation scierroe and technolow are brought
to the notice of the information specialists
through 'DESIDOC Bulletin.‘ a bi-rnonthiy
house bulletin of DESIDOC. The Bulletin gives
information on new products and devices and
covers the abstrads of articles in the field of
information science and technology. culled out
from current journals received in the Defence
Science Library. A feature on a topic of current
interest in information science and technology
is included in each issue of the Bulletin. The
Bulletin also covers the activities of DESIDOC.
 the services rendered by DESIDOC
to its users.
Other Publications

Apart from these  DEIDOC also
brings out some catalogues and indexes of
interest to the users. DESIDOC circulata
regularly the list of current accessions to the
Defence Science Library. DESIDOC. The
Centre has compiled several union catalogues,
which include the Union Catalogue of
Periodical Holdings of DRDO Labs/Bits and
Union Catalogue of Patents held in DRDO
Last'Estts. It has also brought out the list of
Holdings of- Periodicals in Defence Science
library. Some of the recent. adhoc publications
brouyit out by DESIDOC are:
NACSlD Prowedlngs. Contains the papers
presented at the National Conference on
Scientific Information for Defence' held during
25-26Feb1986atNewDelhi.Thisisapriced
publication.

science and technology and the work being
done in this area. The Journal is multi-
disciplinary in nature and covers the entire
gamut of Defence- related subjects. including
aeronautirs, armaments. electronics. explosives.
naval science. food technology. human
physiology. computer applications. etc. The
Journal. brought out quarterly in the months
of January.April.Julyand0ctober.isavailable
on subscription and has many Indian and
foreign subscribers.

Special issues of D8.) are brought out
from time to time to provide state-of-the-art
on a given topic of current Defence interred.
The review articles covered in each special
issue are written by experts specializing in
a given subject area. Eminent scientists in
the respective ﬁelds are associated with these
issues as Guest Editors. The publication of
such special issues have helped not only
in highlighting the state-of-the-art on the
various selected topics. but also in stimulating
hutherresearchinthetopicscovered.Thetitles
of the special issues brought out so far are:
ocean Optics. food research. high altitude
medical research, Ramanna festschrift, signal
processing. titanium. explosives. toxicology.
computer applications in Defence. gas turbines.
Ill-V compound semiconductor materials and
devices. and Prof Suri Bhagavantam
commemoration issue.

Electronic Warfare '. Outlines deﬁnitions.
concepts and principles of electronic warfare.
electronic countermeasures. and electronic

: Describes the
organisms that cause fouling of ships. the
process of corrosion and the countenneasures
developed, including the use of various anti-

counter—countermeasures. Highlights future
trends in electronic warfare.

Satellites : Presents the conceptofsatellitesin
a nutshell. Describes various apects of
satellites. including its fabrication. function. and
launching. Highlights the Indian and
lntemational Space programmes.

The forthcoming issues are : ABC of
Toxicology. Missiles, Communication. and
lasers. ltisproposed to publish thePSTseries
quarterly.

DRDO Newsletter

‘DRDO Newsletter‘. a bi-monthly house
bulletin of DRDO. highlights the major
achievements.  future plans and related
activities of DRDO. The objective is to reduce
the communication gap amongst various levels
of ofﬁcers comprising the scientiﬁc. technical
and managerial staff in various DRDO
Labs/Ems.

For ensuing comprehensive coverage on the
 of the laboratories. one scientist from
each of the DRDO labs/Estts has been
nominated as the 'local correspondent‘ for the
Newsletter. These correspondents are
responsible for the collection and 
of information for publication in the Newsletter.

DRDO Sumachar

To communicate the activities and
achievements of DRDO to the people who are
wellversedinl-lindi,aHindiversionofthe
news items published in ‘DRDO Newsletter' is
brought out as a quarterly publication, 'DRDO
Samachar.‘ This has helped considerably in
communicating information about DRDO

Describes the supervisory
aspecs of management. covering topics

achievements to the jawans stationed in the
remote areas. The ﬁrst issue of the Samachar

was published in July 1989.

Defence Research 8: Development - Products.
Ptocesses and Technologies. Lists the recent
products. processes and technologies
developed by various DRDO Labs/Estts. The
status of the developments is also given.

Infrastrch

The publication work of DESIDOC is
supported by a team of technical editors with
good scientiﬁc background and sufﬁcient
experience in technical editing and medalists
in printing. The manuscripts are procesoed on
personal computers and the processed texts are
transferred onto the phototypesetter without
having to recompose the entire matter again
and checking proofs at various levels of
composingThisfiletransferprocenthashelped
considerably to reduce the time gap between
the preparation of manuscript and production
of publications.

Desktop publishing software packages have
been acquired to avoid the manual. time-con-
suming process of page make-up. The camera-
ready copies of the pages are produced directly
on the laser printer, especially for small publica-
tions like circulars. leaﬂets. handouts, etc.

Computerized Malling System

The mailing of DESIDOC publications has
been computerized. The database of the
mailing lists contains around 1500 records. The
database. developed using dBase 111 software,
can give selected lists of various categories of
addresses like government departments, R&D
institutions, public sector units. etc. The search
and edit facilities provided. enable updating the
database regularly. The mailing lists are taken
on self-adhesive mailing labels.

Documentation Cell for Editing

A Technical Editing Cell is being established
in DESIDOC to edit the various DRDO
publications on request. The Cell aims at
providing editorial assistance in the preparation
of technical manuals. feasibility reports. state-
of-the-art reports, and periodic progress reports
on the projects. Several jobs have already been
processed under this project.

