HYPERTEXT - AN AID TO INFORMATION SEEKING
D.S. Bedi
Defence Scientific Information & Dbcumentation Centre,
Metcalfe House, Delhi-110054.

ABSTRACT
Hypertext systems feature machine-supported links-both
within and between documents-that open possibilities for
using the computer as a communications and thinking tool.
The articlegives an introduction to the world of hypertext.
Discusses the features of an idealized hypertext system,
focussing on machine-supported links as its essential
feature. Surveys some of the most important design issues
that go into fashioning a hypertext environment. Outlines
the major application areas of hypertext technology and
the hyper-text systems developed for these application
areas. Highlights the advantages and disadvantages of the
hypertext systems.

INTRODUCTION
The exponential growth, increasing
complexity and multidisciplinary nature of
scientific and other forms of knowledge have
exposed human limitations in handling such
information. The hypertext and other
electronic information systems overcome
such human limitations by providing
mechanisms for compact storage and rapid
retrieval of enormous volumes of textual,
numeric and visual data. The importance of
these systems lies in their potential capacity
to augment and amplify human intellect.

WHAT IS HYPERTEXT ?
The term hypertext, coined by Ted
Nelson, describes a vast netdork of text
fragments linked together, an electronic
writing and reading system that uses the
power of the computers for more than

editing and display. A hypertext system has
three prominent components :
a database of text;
- a semantic net which connects the text
components; and
- tooli for creating and browsing this
combination of text and semantic net.
-

In short, hypertext is a text database plus
semantic net plus interface. Hypertext
systems allow users to traverse complex
networks of information quickly. Authors
can easily link passages and references;
readers can freely move among text
fragments to find sources of quotations,
journal article references, definitions, and
related passages.
From the writer's point of view, bypertext
systems are the next generation of word
processing. In addition to word processing

features like block moves, search and
replace, and spell or style checking, the
hypertext writing tools can extend the
writing process with telescopic outlines,
posted notes that do not affect the main text,
electronic book marks, and browsing modes.
From the reader's point of view, hypertext
systems are a new generation of database
management. Full text is accessible from
multiple perspectives, for various purposes,
and through different search strategies.

contents, (ii) by searching the network
for some string or keyword, (iii) by
navigating around the text using a
'browser' that provides a direct
two-dimensional graphic view of the
underlying database.
DISPLAY SCREEN WITH BROWSER

/

FEATURES OF A HYPERTEXT SYSTEM
The concept of hypertext is simple :
windows on the screen are associated with
objects in a database, and links are provided
between these objects. The features of an
idealized hypertext system can be outlined
as :
The database consisting of a network of
textual nodes.
The windows on the screen correspond
to nodes in the database on a one-to-one
basis, each having a name or title
displayed in the window.
The standard window system operations
are supported : windows can be
repositioned, resized, closed and put
aside as small window icons. The
position, size, column and shape of the
window or icon give cues to the contents
of the windows.
The windows can contain any number of
link icons representing pointers to other
nodes in the database. Clicking a link
icon with the mouse causes the system
to find the referenced node and to
immediateIy open a new window for it
on the screen.
The user can easily create new nodes and
new links to new nodes for annotations,
comments, etc. or to existing nodes for
establishing new connections.
The database can be browsed in three
ways : (i) by following links and opening
windows successively to examine their

r-,---,-------,-----------J

HYPERTEXT DATABASE

Figure 1.

Fig 1 illustrates how a hypertext browser
provides a. direct two-dimensional graphic
view of the underlying database. Node 'A'
has been selected for full display ,of its
contents. The browser view in the Fig shows
not only which nodes are linked to 'A' and
by which links, but also how the subnetwork
fits into the larger hyperdocument.
Delimiting hypertext from other electronic
information systems

Some of the electronic information
systems share features with hypertext, but
do not qualify as hypertext systems for want
of one or the other of the features of an
idealized hypertext systems described above.

Some of these electronic information
systems are :
Window systems. Though such systems
do have some of the interface
functionality, they have no single
underlying database-lack the database
aspect of hypertext.
File system. File system has been
claimed to be a database where one can
move among 'nodes7 (files) by simply
invoking an editor by their names. But,
a sophisticated notion of machinesupported links-a primary feature of a
hypertext system-is missing.
Butlineprocessors.With their integrated
hierarchical database and interface, the
outline processors do approximate
hypertext but they provide little or no
support for reference between outline
entries.
Database management system have links
of various kinds, but lack the single
interface to the databasethe hallmark
of hypertext.

-

LINKS AND NODES
BLOCKS OF HYPERTEXT

BUILDING

Machine-Supported Links

The most distinguishing characteristics of
hypertext are its machine support for tracing
the references and the speed with which the
system responds to referencingrequests. The
machine-supported link-the referencing
device-forms an essential feature of
hypertext. It is this linking capability which
allows a non-linear organization of text.
Links can be used for several functions :
They can connect a document reference
to the document itself;
They can connect a comment or
annotation to the text about which it is
written;

*

They can provide organizational
information;
They can connect two successive pieces
of text, or a piece of text and all of its
immediate successors;
They can connect entries in a table or
figure to longer descriptions, or to other
tables or figures.

L i can have names and types.
Referential Links

Two points in a hypertext system can be
linked by reference and by organization. The
reference method is non-hierarchical. It uses
referential links that connect points or
regions in the text. Referential links are the
kind of links that most clearly distinguish
hypertext. They generally have two ends,
and are usually directed. The origin of the
link is called 'link source' which acts as the
reference. The other end, 'link destination'
functions as the referent. The two ends can
be either a point or a region:
Link point is referred to the icon
indicating the presence of the link and
shows the link's name and type or it
may show the name andlor type of the
destination node. The display of links
can be suppressed to make the
documents appear linear.
Link region is a set of contiguous
characters displayed as a single unit.
Org(~~~zation
Links

Organization links also establish links
between points in hypertext, but differ from
referential links in that they implement
hierarchical information. They connect a
parent node with its children and thus form
a strict tree sub-graph within the hypertext
network graph.

An outline processor is a work processing program which is specialized for processing
outlines, in that its main commands deal with movement among, creation of, and
modification of outline entries.

Keywords Links

each node type. These distinguishing
features help the user differentiate at a
glance the broad classes of typed nodes that
he is working with.

These links provide an implicit linking that
'occurs through the use of keywords. This
ability is a valuable aspect of hypertext as
one of the chief advantages of text storage
on a computer is the ability to search large
and complex documents for substrings and
keywords.

Semi-structured Nodes

Cluster Links

Composite Nodes

Cluster links are made of links connecting
more than two nodes. These are useful for
referring to several annotations with a single
link, and for providing specialized
organizational structures among nodes.

The composite nodes provide another
mechanism
for
aggregating related
information in hypertext where several
related hypertext nodes are glued together
and the collection is treated as a single node
with its own name, type, etc. This facility
allows a group of nodes to be treated as a
single node. The composite node can be
moved and resized, and closes up to a
suitable icon reflecting its contents. The
sub-nodes are separable and can be
rearranged through a sub-edit mode.

Hypertext Nodes
The hypertext nodes play a significant role
in defining the operation performed by a
given hypertext system. Most users favour
using nodes which express a single concept
or idea, and are thus much smaller than
traditional files. In this way, hypertext
introduces an intermediate level of machine
support between characters and files.
Hypertext invites the writer to modularize
the ideas into units in a way that allows : (i)
an individual idea to be referenced
elsewhere, and (ii) alternative successors of
a unit to be offered to the reader (for
instance, more details, an example, or
bibliographic references). The expression of
ideas into discrete objects to be linked,
moved and changed as independent entities
is another feature of the hypertext system
that offers enhanced retrieval and
recognition over computer processed flat
documents. Nodes can be of various types :

Typed Nodes
Some hypertext systems sort nodes into
different type. These typed nodes are useful
as the types can be used to differentiate
various structural forms. Hypertext systems
that use typed nodes generally provide a
specialized colour, size or iconic form for

These are typed nodes which contain
labelled fields and spaces for field values.

DESIGNING A HYPERTEXT SYSTEM SOME ISSUES
Design decisions that affect information
seeking in hypertext systems are related to
defining access points, creating the user
interface, and providing search strategy
features.

Defining access points
A key decision for designers is what access
points to define and how to link these points.
They should be at least as rich as those
available in books. Designers must decide
how much more to offer and how much
unrestrained jumping from point to point to
allow. Designers should consider the
targeted task domains and typical user
population in deciding how fine the access
points should be and what links among access
points should be visible to users.

Creating the user interface
An interface enables users to perform
their tasks by providing selection and

feedback mechanisms and inputloutput
devices. In a book, the default sequence is
top-down due to the linear nature of the text.
The interactive and flexible characteristics
of hypertext require users to make more
choices in searching for information.
Further, each selection requires appropriate
and understandable feedback to maintain a
fruitful interaction. In view of non-linear
organization of information in hypertext,
mechanisms for selection and feedback are
critical to good design.

Providing search strategy features
Search features like Boolean connectives,
string search proximity limits and scope
limits facilitate rapid access to information,
but cause additional cognitive load on the
part of the user and substantial preprocessing
of the database itself. The systems that
provide only browsing features allow casual,
low cognitive load exploration, but are
inefficient for directed search tasks.
Development of a hybrid system that guides
discovery should be considered in all design
decisions, thereby striking a balanced
analytical and browsing search strategies.

The flexibilitylcomplexity trade-off
Systems transparent to one user may
frustrate and impede others. Flexibility
inevitably leads to complexity. Just as
printed indexes and directories are organized
to facilitate retrieval, so electronic
information systems must be organized to
suit the typical purpose of anticipated users.
All designers must grapple with the issue of
when to stop adding features. In general,
each feature added to a system demands
additional machine overhead. Many also add
user cognitive load. These effects must be
considered in all design decisions.

CLASSIFYING HYPERTEXT SYSTEMS

'

The hypertext systems can be classified on
the basis of their application. There are four
broad application areas for which hypertext
systems have been developed :

Macro Literary Systems
These hypertext systems were developed
for the study of technologies to support large
on-line libraries in which interdocument
links are machine-supported i.e. all
publishing, reading, collaboration, and
criticism takes place within the network.
Bush's Memex, Engelbert's NLSIAugment,
Nelson's Xandadu Project, and Trigg's
Textnet are some of the hypertext systems
implemented under this category.

Problem Exploration Systems
The hypertext systems falling under this
category are highly interactive systems which
provide rapid response to small collection of
specialized commands for the manipulation
of information. These systems are basically
tools to support early unstructured thinking
on a problem when many disconnected ideas
come to mind. Examples are: Lowe's,
UNC's WE, and outline processors.

Structured Browsing Systems
These systems are designed primarily for
applications involving large amount of
information or requiring easy access to
information. These are similar to macro
literary systems, bdt are smaller in scale and
are applied for teaching, reference, and
public information, where ease of use is
crucial. CMU's ZOG and Knowledge
Systems' KMS, Emacs INFO subsystem,
Schneiderman's Hyperties, and Symbolics
Document Examinee are notable examples.
General Hypertext Techndogy
This category includes the hypertext
systems having one or more applications, but
their primary purpose is experimentation
with hypertext itself. These are general
purpose systems designed to allow
experimentation with a range of hypertext
applications
(for
reading,
writing,
collaboration, et). Some examples: Brown
University's,
Intermedia,
Textronix
Nephena, Pitman's CREF and MCC's Plane
Text, and Apple's Hypercard.

HYPERTEXT
EXAMPLES

SYSTEMS

-

SOME

Hyperties (hypertext based on the
interactive encyclopedia system) enables
users to easily traverse a database of articles
and pictures by merely pointing at
highlighted words or images. Highlighted or
coloured words or phrases within the text
become the menu items, selectable using a
pointing device. Rather than isolated and
explicit menu items, the content of
embedded menu items provides information
and cue for the selection of further
information.
This
embedded-menus
approach and simple user interface enable
users to explore large databases easily.
Hyperties users -merely touch or use a
cursor to specify topics of interest. Users may
continue reading or ask for details about the
selected topic. An article about a topic may
be one or more screen long and contain
several pictures. As users traverse articles,
Hyperties traces the path and allows them
to return to previous articles, all the way
back to the introductory article. Users can
also select articles and pictures from an
index.
Hyperties was designed to support easy
browsing of text and graphic databases.
Results of many evaluative studies
demonstrated'that even novices find it easy
and effective to use. It is distributed by the
Cognetics Corporations of Princetors
Junction, NJ.

Electronic Encyclopaedia
Electronic Encyclopaedia is the full text
of Groliers Electronic Encyclopedia on
CD-ROM. The print version of the
Encyclopedia occupies 20 volumes. The
hypertext version consists of 60 megabytes
of text and 50 megabytes of indexes that
contain pointers to each occurrence of every
word in the Encyclopedia, all occupying less
than one-fifth of a single CD-ROM disc. The

powerful search software for this system
provides rapid access to all occurrences of
any word or phrase entered by the user.
The experiments conducted with this
system suggest that novices can successfully
Electronic
apply
hypertext.
The
Encyclopedia is much more controlled than
other hypertext systems in that jumps from
article to article depend on a list of articles
retrieved by a query. A user who wants to
see an article not on the retrieved list must
pose another query or enter a separate mode
that allows look-up of single articles by title.
On the other hand, the full text search
feature is totally under the control of the
user.

THEADVANTAGESOFHYPERTEXT
Though the intertextual references have
been a part of traditional literature, the
importance of hypertext is that the
references
are
machine-supported.
Hypertext has offered new possibilities of
authoring and design on one hand and for
reading and retrieval on the other.
Authoring deals with structuring of ideas,
order of presentation, and conceptual
exploration. The unit of this level of the
authoring is the idea or a concept. Since the
idea can be expressed in a node, this level
of work can be effectively handled by
hypertext. As the writer thinks of new ideas,
he can develop them in their own nodes, and
link them to existing ideas. The specialized
refinements of hypertext environment assist
the movement from an unstructured network
to the final polished document. Hypertext
may also offer new possibilities for accessing
large information sources. The operational
advantages of hyertext can be summarized
as :

Ease of tracing references
Machine support for link tracing means
that all references are equally easy to follow
forward to their referent, or backward to
their reference;

i

Ease of creating new refemwe
Users can grow their own networks, or
simply annotate any document with a
comment without changing the referenced
document.
Information structuring

Both hierarchical and non-hierarchical
organizations can be imposed on
unstructured information; even multipk
hierarchies can organize the same material;
Global views

Browsers provide table-of-contents style
style views, supporting easier re-structuring
of large or complex documents; global and
local views can be mixed effectively;

Customized documents
Text segments can be tbreaded together
in many ways, allowing the same document
to serve multiple functions;
Modultrrity of information

Since the same text segments can be
referenced from several places, ideas can be
expressed with less overlap and duplication;
Consistency of information

References are embedded in their text,
and if the text is moved, even to another
document, the link information still provides
direct access to the reference;

Task stacking
The user is supported in having several
paths of inquiry active and displayed on the
screen at the same time, such that any given
path can be unwound to the original task;
and
Collaborations

Several authors can collaborate, with the
document and comments about the
document being tightly interwoven.

PROBLEMS WITH HYPERTEXT
The problems with hypertext are :

The problem of having to know (i) where
one is in the network and (ii) how to get to
some other place that one knows exists in
the network. In a traditional linear text
documents, one can search for the desired
text earlier or later in the text. Hypertext
offers more degrees of freedom, more
dimensions in which one can move, and
hence a greater potential for the user to
become disoriented;
Cognitive overhead
C

The additional effort and concentration
necessary to maintain several tasks or trails
at one time is the other fundamental problem
with using hypertext.

LbrtEng d data is a long process; and
Loss of h d i a r i t y with traditional book
format.

Though the concept and the advantages
of hypertext were clear several decades ago,
the widespread interest in hypertext has
upsurged recently maidiy because of cheap
and readily available supporting technology.
Today, due to the avilability of powerful,
high-resolution personal workstations, there
is growing interest in the extension of
hypertext to the more general concept of
hypermedia, in which the elements which
are networked together can be text,
graphics, digitized speech, audio recording,
pictures, and animation. Towards this end,
three of the largest ongoing research projects
are: Notecards from Xerox PARC,Neptune
fromTekmmk, and Intennedia from Brown
University. There are also commercial
hypermedia products, such as Apple's
Hypercard and Owl International's Guide.

,

FURTHER READING
1. Conklin, J. Hypertext - an introduction
and survey. Computer, 206,1987; 17-41.
2. Marchionini, G & Shneiderman, B.
Finding facts vs browsing knowledge in
hypertext systems. Computer, 21,1988;
70- 80.
3. Rada, R. Writing and reading hypertext
- an overview. J Am Soc Inf Sci, 40,
1989; 164-71.

4. Smith Karen E. Hypertext - linking to
the future. Online, 12, 1988; 32-40.
5. Scacchi, W. On the power of
domain-specific
hypertext
environments. J Am Soc Inf Sci, 40,
1989; 183-91.
6 . Irish, PM & Trig, R H. Supporting
collaboration in hypermedia: issues and
experiences. J Am Soc Inf Sci, 40,1989;
192-99.

We can be knowledgeable with other men's knowledge, but we cannot be wise with other
men's wisdom.
Michel de Montaigue
Knowledge is a steep which few may climb wiiile duty is a path which all may tread.
Lewis Monis

