FOCUS ON DESIDOC

DEFENCE SCIENCE LIBRARY
>

This column presents the activities, services and
achievements of DESIDOC. Beginning from January
1990, this is the fifth article in the series. Each issue
highhghts the achievements in a particular area. The last
four issues have covered an overview of DESIDOC, its
publication, information processing and dissemination,
and translation activities.

DESIDOC functions as a central agency
of Defence Research & Development
Organization (DRDO) for collecting,
processing and disseminating scientific and
technical information for the scientists and
technologists of the Organization * i n
particular and the Ministry of Defence in
general. The Centre aims to meet the current
and futuristic information requirements of
these personnel. The task of gathering
information for high-tech Defence projects
requires trained information scientists
having sufficient exposure on Defence
problems. DESIDOC is proud to have an
excellent information resource base in its
modem and well-equipped library and also
trained information scientists for providing
the relevant information. The Library is
called the Defence Science Library (DSL)..
GENESIS

'Ihe DSL had its beginning in April 1948
when a small library, having nearly 400
books and about a dozen scientific
periodicals, provided information support to
the research and development activities
related to Defence problems. The Library
functioned from one of the rooms of the
secretariat of Scientific Adviser to the

Defence Minister at South Block, New
Delhi. Over the years, the Library grew and
it acquired a large number of books and
technical reports covering diverse aspects of
Defence problems. Due to space constraints,
the Library was moved to NPL building and
then in 1959 to the Metcalfe House, an old
and monumental building named after the
British Reagent. During the last 30 years of
its existence in the present campus, the DSL
has seen many upheavals. It had to be shifted
many times from one building to another
owing to paucity of space and natural
crilamities. Sometimes the Library had to be
fragmented and housed in hutments.

Any library having an excellent collection
cannot be called a good library if it lacks
modem infrastructure and a reasonably
aesthetic environment, the latter being
necessary for ensuring concentration and
necessary inspiration. The new 5-storey
building, inaugurated by Dr VS
Arunachalam, SA to RM, on 2 Aug 1988,
has separate stacking arrangement for
books, back volumes of periodicals,
technical reports, and display of current
periodicals on various floors. The Library
has single entrance-cum-exit at the second

floor with helical staircase connecting all the
floors. The fifth floor will house video and
projection facilities, equipped with the latest
video and audio equipment. The Library
provides all amenities for free flow of
information to the readers, coupled with
xeroxing, microfilm readers printer and
CD-ROM facilities. Reference tables, study
carrols, and proper illumination have been
provided at all the floors of the Library.
COLLECTiON DEVELOPMENT

The DSL has a rich collection of
documents in the various fields of science
and technology, including aeronautical
sciences, rockets and missiles, armaments,
explosives and propellants, electronics,
computer science, physical and life sciences,
materials science, operational research, and
management. It is responsible for collection
development
of
books,
journals,
monographs, technical reports (both
classified . and unclassified), patents, and
standar,Mspecifications on these subject
areas. The holding of the D'SL is given in
Table 1. The Library functions as a central
agency for procurement of all technical
publications for DESIDOC, DRDO HQrs
and some of the DRDO labdestts. It also
arranges foreign exchange frop DRDO
HQrs and the Director of Military
Regulation and Forms (DMR&F) for
procuring publications which are not
available through normal book trade
channels for all the DRDO labs/estts/HQrs.
To speed up the procurement, deposit
accounts are opened for the US patents and
other US Government publications.
Special Collection

The DSL maintains a special collection of
old and classic reference books on one hand
and upto-date reference sources on the
other. Some of the old collections are :
Handbuch
der
Physique, Beilstein
Organische Chemie, Progress Reports in
Physics (1930s), Progress in Astronautics
and Rocketry, Advances in Space Science &
Technology, Advances in Polymer Science,
Annual Reports of Chemical Society, and

annual reviews and advances on important
topics of science and technology. The DSL
is known for its rich collection of reference
material on military science.
The rare reports having their origin during
the Second World War are also being
maintained at DSL. These include : British
Intelligence Objectives Sub-committee
(BIOS) reports, Combined Intelligence
Objectives sub-committee (CIOS) reports
with
indexes,
Royal
Aeronautical
Establishment (RAE) reports, Aeronautical
Research Council (ARC) technical reports,
Materials Research Laboratory (Australian
Defence) reports, Defence reports <from
Commonwealth Countries, and US RAND
reports.
Other Reference CoUeetion

Several new titles have been recently
added to the reference wllection of the
Library, which include : Collier's
Encyclopedia (24 vol), Oxford English
Dictionary (12 vo1+4 supplements), World
Book Encyclopedia (22 vol), Encyclopedia
McGraw-Hill
Americana (30 vol),
Encyclopedia of Science and Technology,
New Knowledge Library (35 vol), Metals
Handbook (17 vol), Scientific Papers of CV
Raman (6 vol), and Janes' Series of World
Book on weapons, aircraft, fighting ships,
etc. A large number of directories, subject
and language dictionaries, yearbooks,
annuals, handbooks, catalogues, maps,
atlases, and conference proceedings on
almost all S&T subjects are also avaiIable
for reference.
Amongst the reports literature, some of
the important reference publications are :
Government Reports Announcements &
Index, Govemment Reports Annual Index
Index Fortnightly Journal & Annual Index
(6 vol), NASA's Scientific & Technical
Aerospace Reports, Monthly Catalogue of
US Government Publications, Defence
Research Abstracts (UK), Dissertation
Abstracts International (USA), Selected
RAND Abstracts, and US Patents Gazette
and World Patent Abstracts (Dement).

At present 735 current wientific
periodicals are being received in English and'
other important foreign languages on regular
subscription basis. In spite of the inflationary
pressure and budgetary crunch, the DSL is
subscribing to fnajor secondary periodicals.
Some of the indexing and abstracting
periodicals are: Chemical Abstracts
(1927+), Physics Abstracts (1947+),
Electrical & Electronics Abstracts (1947+),
Patent Abstracts (1962+), International
Aerospace Abstracts (1%2+), Solidstate &
Superconductivity Abstracts (1980+),
World Surface Coating Abstracts (1%9+),
Engineering Index (1950+), Index Medicus
(1%2-78), Biological Abstracts (1950-77),
Applied Science & Technology Index
(1%1+), and Indian Science Abstracts
(1%5+).
Ail back issues of the Journals and
Transactions of IEEE (up to 1980) and
Procqedings (up to 1970) have also been
acquired in microfilm or microfiche form to
conserve space.
Technical Reports

The technical reports collection is
85,000
publications
approximately
comprising various types of reports,
conference
proceedings,
theses,
standards/specifications, patents, etc. The
DSL is the depository of all the classified,
restricted and unclassified annuaYprojectl
progress reports emanating from most of the
DRDO lawestts. The Library also has in
its collection the reports issued by the
National
Aeronautics
&
Space
Administration
(NASA),
National
Technical Information Services (NTIS),
RAND
Corporation
(USA),
Commonwealth Countries, Defence and
public sector undertakings in India, IfFs,
ISRO, BARC, CSIR laboratories, Indian
universities
and
other
research
organizations. It has a complete set of
American Society of Testing Materials
(ASTM) standards, Indian standards of
'

Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), Defence
standards (UK), and Joint Service
Specifications (JSS) of Directorate of
Standardisation (India). It has a good
collection of the US, British, German, and
Russian patents.
Table 1 :Holding Ot Deface Science Library
(1990)

Books
Back volumes of journals
Journal titles (current)
Titles of back-sets of journals
Reprints
Technical Reports
(including classified reports)
Standards, specifications and
patents
Microdocuments
(Microfilm rolls: microfiche)
Reports reprints
Microfilm cartridgtscontaining
US military & industry
standards (35 mm)
Video cassettes
Audio cassettes
Magnetic tapes
Compact discs
Language learning kits akmg with
books & cassettes in Russian,
French, German, Japanese, and
Chinese (for basic and advanced
course)

COMPUTERIZATION
OPERATIONS

OF

LIBRARY

All house-keeping and management
functions of the Library, including serial
acquisition, budget control, circulation and
acquisition are being computerized using the
Defence Library Management System
(DELMS)
software
developed
by
DESIDOC. This wiil considerably help in
improving the efficiency or library services.

Online Catalogue

LIBRARY & INFORMATION SERVICES

A database on bibliographic information
of books, reports, monographs, conference
~jroceedings,etc available in the collection
of tbe DSL from 1980 onwards has been
created and is being updated. The

In addition to normal library functions like
technical processing, issueheturn of books
and periodicals, answering reference
queries, and providing inter-library loan,
facilities, the following specialised services
are also offered by the Library :

.

Procurement of Books and Periodicals

Online Catalogue

computerization of information regarding
documents procured before 1980 is under
process for inclusion in the database. This
catalogue is available online and helps the
users in searching bibliographic details oT the
literature sought by the reader from the said
collection of the DSL through different
access points, including authorleditor,
subject keywords, class number, report
number, and accession number. The readers
can search the information through a PC and
can obtain the printout. This catalogue will
be linked to other computers in DRDO
labdestts in Delhi through local area
network (LAN)and outside Delhi through
telecommunication link.

Online Search of Foreign Databases
The online facility for searching foreign
bibliographic databases through DIALOG
Information Service, Inc, US, is available in
the Libraj.. Scientists from DRDO
1absJesttshave been utilizing this facility free
of cost for searching information related to
their project work from time to time.

Apart
from
procuring
books,
monographs, technical reports, journals,
video cassettes and non-conventional
published material for updation of its
collection, DSL has been given the
responsibility of procuring S&T literature for
the Technical Information Centre (TIC) at
R&D HQrs, Office of the Fire Adviser,
Directorate of Explosive Safety Group,
Scientific Advisers to the Chiefs of the Army
and Air Staff, and some of the local DRDO
labsfestts. The procurement is mainly based
on
the
recommendations of
the
scientists/project leaders working on vahous
DRDO projects.
Bibliographic and Reference Services
List of references and bibliographies with
abstracts are prepared on topics of Defence
interest both in anticipation and on demand.
Adequate number of trained staff helps the
users of the Library in the identification and
location of books, journals, reports and
other relevant material on particular topics.
Information Supply
Information scientists having years of
experience in various subject disciplines
regularly scan current scientific journals,
indexing and abstracting journals, reports,
dissertations, patents, etc; identify literature
on on-going Defence projects; and process
it for dissemination to the users.
XeroxDocument Copying Service
The Library provides document copying
facilities on its different floors for the
convenience of the users. Xerox copies of
documents are also supplied to the DRDO
labdestts located outside Delhi on request.

CD-ROM Service

strategy and tactics; chemical, biological and
radiological warfare; anti-missile defence
system; missile technology; detonators,
explosion effects and ballistics; anti-aircraft
defence system; anti-submarine warfare; and
fire control and bombing systems. These
microfiche are given on inter- library loan
for a short period to those libraries who have
microfiche reading/printing facilities.

MIL SpecTzications service

CD-ROM Workstalion
The DSL is one of the few libraries in the
country to offer CD-ROM search facilities
to its users. The system installed in the
Library includes a disk drive (Philips-110
model); a PC, and a parallel 5rinter. To
begin with, the Library is subscribing to four
bibliographic databases in CD-ROM format.
They are : NTIS Report Index, Library &
Information Science Abstracts (LISA),
Whitaker's BOOKBANK, and New
Groiiers' Encyclopedia. These Databases
can be searched through author, descriptors,
keywords, report numbers, etc. depending
upon the database being searched. The
search results can also be obtained in print
form.

The DSL subscribes (since 1987) to the
complete set of 50,000 US MIL
specifications/standards in microform with
bimonthly updations. Under this service,
thousands of hard copies are supplied against
the requisitions received from the DRDO
labstestts in the quickest possible time. A list
of such hard copies is regularly sent to the
users. Each list gives US MIL numbers, title
of document, and number of pages.
Microfilm ReaderJPrinter Sewice

The Library has one Minolta RP-505 and
one Canon PC-70 microfilm reader and
printer with different magnification facilities
for reading microfilms/microfiche and
microfilm cartridges and preparing hard

SRIM Service

The DSL is subscribing to National
Technical Information Services (NTIS)
reports on subjects of interest to DRDO
grouped in nine categories under the
Selected Research in Microfiche (SRIM)
service of the NTIS. All NTIS reports are
automatically received by the Library within
few days of their announcement in the
Government Reports Announcement &
Index (GRA&I) fortnightly journal. All
reports received under this arrangement are
notified to readers through a monthly
bulletin, 'SRIM Service for NTIS Reports.'
Titles are arranged under nine categories :
optics and lasers; military operations,

Microfilm ReaderlPrinter

copies from these microdocuments. It also
has a portable Bell & Howell portable
microfilm reader.
7

Current Military Science and Technology
Contents

On specific request from the Eastern Air
Command, the contents of selected military
periodicals (50 nos) are notified to.them and
the demand for the supply of reprints from
these journals is met on a limited scale.
LIBRARY PUBLICATIONS

Lit of Acces8iaus of Books (Monthly).
Gives bibiiographic details of all
documents received during the preceding
month for information of users.
List of Accessions of Rcperts Literature
(Monthly).
Gives all bibliographical details, including
report number and accession number for
easy location of specificreports by the users.

List of Current Periadicrds (Annual)
Gives title, frequency, mode of
acquisition, place of publication and the year

from which the journals are subscribed or
received in the DSL. It also includes a broad
subject index.
Union Catabgw of Patents in DRDO
L a w (1987)

Holds data of the patents held in various
DRDO labdestts. The catalogue is available
both online and in printed form.The patents
included in this publication are arranged
according to UDC classification and
information can be searched through patent
number, patentee, and descriptor.
Holding of PeriodicPls in DSL (1982)

Gives information on holding of
periodicals,
including
proceedings,
arranged
transactions,
bulletins,
alphabetically by titles held by the Library.
The entries include title, frequency, sponsor,
place of publication, volume, issue and year
of publication, holding and missing volumes
and numbers. The publication includes
classified index and key to classified index.

Knowledge-is of two kinds--we know a subject ourselves and we know w k r e we can
find information on it.
Samuel Johnsdn

No man's knowledge here can go beyond his experience.
John W

e

