FOCUS ON DESIDOC

REPROGRAPHIC ACTIVITIES
This column presents the activities, services and
achievements of DESIDOC. Beginning from January
1990, this is the sixth article in the series. Each issue
highlights the achievements in a p&icular area. The last
five issues have covered an overview of DESIDOC, its
publication, information processing and dissemination,
translation, and library activities. '
'

The importance of reprographics in the
present context of information management
system is well-recognized. Reproducing
&pies from a source document through
photographic, xerographic or electronic
means in the least possible time is normally
the service expected from a reprographic
facility.

video projectors, and computers is used for
preparing material for effective technical
presentations.
Photographic Coverage

DESIDOC provides reprographic services
to the scientists and managers from the
technical'directorates at DRDO HQrs and
DRDO labdestts mainly in the following
areas:
photographic coverage-printing and
enlargement;
slid= making and projection;
Microfilming;
Document lamination;
Audiolvideo recording/dubbing; and
Video programme production.

DESIDOC
normally
provides
photographic coverage for seminars,
meetings, conferences, workshops and
exhibitions organized by DRDO locally and
sometimesoutside Delhi also. Over the years
DESIDOC has developed expertise in
industrial photography, whereby the photographic faalities are provided to a large
number of DRDO labdestts in picturizing
the products developed by them. DESIDOC
played an important role in taking photographs of the products/facilities in colour for
publication in the product catalogue,
'Defence Research & DevelopmentProducts, Processes, Technologies,' brought
out by DRDO on the occasion of the Joint
Commanders Conference in 1986.

DESIDOC provides slides, photographs
and video recordings required by the DRDO
scientists and managers for technical
presentations and in the preparation of
technicalreports, etc. An intermix of various
media like slide projector, overhead and

To cater to these photographic activities,
DESIDOC is equipped with current
pfiotographic equipment, including 35 mm
SLR camera, 120 Rollei 66 medium format
camera, Linhof 120 medium format camera,
and their attachments (lens, filter, etc.).

REPROGRAPHIC SERVICES

'

humid) weather conditions are taken up for
lamination at DESIDOC. DESIDOC has
been laminating sign boards, information
leaflets/brochures, covers for reports, etc
originating from DRDO labs/estts/HQrs.

AC 650dust Colour Enlarger, Durst Coloiu Prinr
Processor is in the background

Audio
recording
of
conference
proceedings and high level technical
presentations at DRDO HQrs is undertaken
by DESIDOC against specific requests.
Dubbing of audioivideo programmes is also
undertaken.

S l i i Making and Projection Activities

Microfilming

The preparation of slides and provision of
proper facilities for their projection d u r i ~ g
the various technical presentations is one of
the important reprographic activities of
DESIDOC. The slides prepared by
DESIDOC have been used for technical
presentations
during
national
and
international conferences in India and
abroad. This work has won appreciation
from the top level managers of the
Department. Several different techniques of
slide making, viz., black & white, colour and
blue toning utilized by DESIDOC in the
preparation of slides involve different
exposures and chemical processing methods.
Normally, the matter for slides comes in the
form of a hand-written or typed manuscript.
To make a camera-ready copy, the matter
received is set in suitable typography and
through proper placement of photographs,
graphs, etc. The text for slides is composed
on the desk top publishing system, MAC-11,
which provides both a wide variety of type
sizes and type faces and flexibility in
composing and editing.

A planetary 35 mm Copex-SBI microfilm
camera is used for microfilming of
documents having archival value. The
camera can expose the original records of
sizes from A5 (148 X 210 mm) to B1 (707
x 1000 mm). Old records pertaining to the
release of foreign exchange and procurement
of technical reports from foreign countries
were microfilmed and sent to the Reports
Division of DESIDOC for proper
documentation and storage. Copex-SBI
camera is also used in making slides.

SBI Gevaert Copex Microfilm Camera

DESIDOC has the facility to laminate the
documents upro A3 (297 X 420 mm) size.
The document having archival value or those
used very frequently or those which are to
be protected against unfavourable (rough,

MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT

DESIDOC has conducted several training
programmes for the DRDO personnel
working in the field of photography, namely,
'Training in Scientific Photography,'

'Visualization through Slides,' and
'Pmduction of 35 mm Slides.' DESIDOC
staff are deputed from time to time for
training on different aspects of photography
at the various professional institutes at.Delhi
or within the country.

During the last two years, DESIDOC has
produced 11,000 colour and B&W prints,
45,000 calm slides, and 63,000 microfilm
documents as per the request of users. To
keep record of each slide, photograph and
microfilm made, and update it frequently is
a very cumbersome process. To manage
efficiently the record of jobs, DESIDOC has
created a computerized database of
negatives, slides Wd photographs. This has
belpecl considerably in avoiding the
duplication of jobs and increasing tbe speed
of pmcmhg the jobs on demand. A similar
database is created for the inventory of stores
being maintained for carrying out the
rqmgraphic activities of the Centre.

A

project

on

'Establishment

of

Pmfcdxd Grade Video Recording and

M u d i o n Unit' was sandioned in May 1988
to plan, design and set up a d m
medium-sized video studio for pmducth of
eduattimal and ocientific htms of use to
DRDO scimtists. The scientific staff
recruited so far under the project was given
a familkhation coursc/training on the
various aspacts of video pmgmmmp
production at the Central Institute of
,
Council
Educational T ~ l o g yNational
of Education Research & 'kahing, New
Delhi. The design of studidsy&ms for
professional work is a highly technical job
for which DESIDOC has engaged a
profesdmal consultation group. The 6nal
report of the c o d t a n t is awaited. However
with the existing facilities, video coverage
was provided for the following occasions :

Laser experiments at DSC (1990),

Iiindi Day function at DSC, DESIDOC,
m'RL (1990),
RM's programmes in Delhi, Ajmer and
Uttar Pradesh (I=), Signing of MOU
between DRDE and 12JDAG product,
Madras, (19891, and
Demonstration of parajumping/sailing at
DRDE Agra, (1987).

T b k of and iook at your work as -.it
were done by ymenemy. If you look at it to
erfmirc it you are lost
If we look at it to set where it is wrong, we &dl 8tc this and
make it righttr. If we look at it to see where it is right, weshall see this andshall not makc
it righter. We cannot see it both wrong and right at the same time.

.......

