DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 15-23
© 2012, DESIDOC

International Information System for Agricultural Sciences and Technology
and Indian Participation
Hans Raj and V.S. Kaushik
Agricultural Research Information Centre and National Input Centre for AGRIS,
Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi
ABSTRACT
The paper briefly describes the history and development of International Information System for the
Agricultural Sciences and Technology (AGRIS), its network, documentation tools, products/services, HRD and
capacity building programme. An attempt has been made to showcase the contribution of India in AGRIS
development. Limitations and problems faced during AGRIS Input preparation have been discussed in detail
and an Action Plan is suggested for further progress and success of AGRIS programme in India.
Keywords: Agricultural sciences and technology, database management, agricultural information systems, Food
and Agriculture Organisation

1. INTRODUCTION
AGRIS is an international bibliographic information
system for the agricultural sciences and technology. The
AGRIS database is an enormous collection of 2.6 million
structured bibliographical records1. This system is
managed centrally by the WAICENT/FAOINFO
Dissemination Management Branch of the Library and
Documentation Systems Division (GIL) of Food and
Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations. It is
a cooperative system in which participating countries
input the references to the literature/documents produced
within their boundaries and, in return, get an access to the
information provided by the other participants. The
database contains 75 per cent journal articles, 18 per cent
monographs, 6 per cent conferences papers and
1 per cent other literature. The 16 per cent of the records
refer to non-conventional literature (not commercially
available) and 21 per cent records include abstracts.
Language-wise, the database contains English (58 %),
French (8 %), German (7 %), Spanish (7 %),
Japanese (4 %), Italian (3 %), Russian (3 %),
Portuguese (2 %), and other language articles 2 (8 %).
To date, 159 national and 31 international and intergovernmental centres participate and submit about
14,000 items per month. The bibliographic inputs
submitted by the participating countries are collected
and processed in the AGRIS processing unit, Vienna,
which is hosted by the Division of Scientific and

Technical Information of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

2. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The AGRIS was created in 1974 by the FAO of the
United Nations to facilitate information exchange and
provide bibliographical control of the world literature
dealing with all aspects of agriculture. The development of
AGRIS is based on the development of scientific
documentation over several decades. International
Nuclear Information System (INIS) was the first attempt to
implement the concept of the international cooperative
information system. Thus, in order to understand the
history of AGRIS, it is necessary to know about the
history of INIS. In the second half of the 1960s, the IAEA
launched the INIS, a major project to promote the
exchange of information on all aspects of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
In 1962, a panel of experts recommended that the
IAEA should help UNESCOs efforts to encourage R&D on
mechanising, storage and retrieval of information, and the
broader study of science abstracting at the international
level. In 1965, Soviet and US experts outlined a scheme
for an international information system to cover the
expanding flow of literature on the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and to meet the information needs of
countries at different levels of development and different
15

backgrounds and traditions in the techniques of
information handling. In 1968, an international team of
experts made a detailed study of the system and drew up
a report to the Board. The system was designed to
provide machine-processed data on the particular nuclear
topic that a user selected. It is decentralised in the sense
that each participating State is responsible for preparing
and arranging the input of all literature relating to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy that is published or
becomes available in that State. In the early 1990s, the
INIS database began to be available on CD-ROM as well
as on-line and in print. INIS served as a model for other
information systems, such as, UNISIST, a worldwide
science information system developed by UNESCO, and
the AGRIS, a similar system covering food and agriculture,
operated by FAO in co-operation with the IAEA.
In 1963, John Sherrod, Director of the Science and
Technology Division of the Library of Congress, who had
conceived international cooperative information system,
became a member of the staff of the Division of Technical
Information of the US Atomic Energy Commission (AEC).
In February 1968, John Sherrod and A.I. Lebowiz were
transferred from AEC to the US National Agricultural
Library (NAL) and a working group consisting NAL,
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux (CAB), FAO, and the
European Community was set up. At that time, the major
English language agricultural bibliographic tools were
National Agricultural Library Catalog; Bibliography of
Agriculture published by NAL and a series of abstracting
journals covering many aspects of agriculture published
by the CAB. Apart from this, there were more than 700
secondary abstracting and indexing services in
agriculture. In 1968, agricultural researchers in the US
relied on the CAB as the largest agricultural abstracting
service3.
In 1970, FAO set up an ad hoc Study Group to
propose ‘Possible Frameworks for, a World-wide
Agricultural
Information
System.
The
first
recommendation of the Study Group was to implement
Level-I service of AGRIS. No professional leadership was
able to represent AGRIS effectively in FAO or outside of it.
FAO did not have a Division of Scientific and Technical
Information. The FAO established a Research Division in
the mid-1980s and a Library and Documentation Systems
Division were established. Before 1979, AGRIS was
implemented as Level-I so it did not include abstracts.
This became AGRIS policy in 1979 and the number of
abstracts in AGRIS has consistently increased. At
present, more than 21per cent of the citations submitted
to AGRIS included abstracts. In the early days of AGRIS,
it was decided to develop AGROVOC, a multilingual
indexing and retrieval thesaurus with the help of IDRC.
After its completion and implementation, the indexes to
the printed version of AgrIndex, the principal AGRIS output
product were based on AGROVOC. At that point, the
indexes were still produced only in English, which were of
16

limited use for their usability in many parts of the world,
such as, Latin America and Francophone Africa. After that
FAO produced three language versions (English, French
and Spanish) of AgrIndex. This AgrIndex was discontinued
from 1998.
In order to overcome the lack of coherent and
coordinated approaches to the AGRIS information system
architecture, an assessment of AGRIS was conducted in
2000. Limitations in AGRIS were identified in four areas:
(a) difficult access to the original documents, (b)
incomplete coverage, (c) independent systems and (d)
structural and institutional constraints. As the AGRIS
system aims to decentralise data processing and to
prioritise national capacity building and enhancing
autonomous management of national agricultural
information, a new strategic vision has been developed. To
address these limitations, a ‘new vision for AGRIS’ had
been under work since 2000. In 2009, AGRIS adhered to
Coherence in Information for Agricultural Research for
Development (CIARD), a global initiative of international
partner organisations (such as, DFID, CIARD, GFAR,
etc.) committed to working to increase the public benefits
deriving from investment in agricultural research and
innovation for development. Currently, AGRIS continues
its research into improving access to science technology
and agricultural information globally available on the web,
under the CIARD umbrella4.

3. SCOPE AND COVERAGE OF AGRIS
The scope of AGRIS coincides with the scope of FAO
and covers agriculture and its related fields, including
fisheries, forestry, food, veterinary science and rural
development. The AGRIS categorisation scheme is the
basic manual for the categorisation of agricultural
literature and agricultural research projects to be included
in AGRIS, and gives a breakdown of the AGRIS subject
scope into a number of main fields, which are further
subdivided into specific subject categories. The subject
scope of AGRIS includes all technical, economic and
sociological aspects of agriculture, including forestry,
animal husbandry, the aquatic sciences and fisheries,
and human nutrition. The literature covered includes
conventional documents, such as serial articles, books,
published conference proceedings, etc., but also nonconventional material, such as scientific and technical
reports, theses, conference papers, etc., that are not
readily available through normal commercial channels are
also included. Non-conventional materials constitute
about 20 per cent of the database.

4. WEBAGRIS
The new WebAGRIS Version 2.0 was released to
robust information management system having integrated
numerous updates, error fixes, and new features. The
main achievements in this version include adaptation of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

WebAGRIS for compliancy to the AGRIS AP metadata
standard, upgradation of the incorporated AGROVOC
thesaurus, improvements in the search interface,
improvements in the data entry system, export/download
features, and inclusion of updated documentation.
WebAGRIS is a complete, multilingual web-based
system for distributed data input, processing and
dissemination (through the Internet or on CD-ROM), of
agricultural bibliographic information. WebAGRIS also
allows to link to documents that are available in electronic
format. It is based on common standards of data input
(meta-data standard data structure), and dissemination
formats (export formats (XML, HTML, ISO2709)), as well
as subject categorisation schema and thesauri, i.e.,
AGROVOC5. Depending on the ‘architecture’ of the
production process and resources. WebAGRIS can be
used either as a local application or in a joint collection of
information (through exporting, harvesting data, etc).
Each AGRIS network participating centre can choose to
host a website for inputting, searching, and/or sending
data to the central AGRIS database for publishing on CDROM. WebAGRIS improves accessibility of information,
generally, through the use of multi-database or multi-host
searching, and harvesting.
The current version of WebAGRIS2 is realised by
AGRIS/CARIS and Documentation Group, GILW, FAO in
close cooperation with the Institute for Computer and
Information Engineering (ICIE), Poland and IICA/CATIE,
Costa Rica. The interface is based on html forms, and has
been implemented as a CGI program. The program is
invoked by the web server process. The access to the
CDS/ISIS databases is managed through BIREME’s
software ISIS-DLL, an application program interface (API)
for CDS/ISIS software of UNESCO in the Windows
environment.

5. NETWORK OF AGRIS
An AGRIS information exchange network has been
created for AGRIS participants, and other partners, who
have an avid interest in AGRIS6. It is an interactive forum
allowing for an open exchange of information, as well as
providing an effective mechanism to inform the AGRIS
community about new developments. To date, 190
national, international and inter-governmental centres
participate in AGRIS. Each centre is responsible for
cataloging and indexing all documents within the AGRIS,
which are published within its borders. The AGRIS
Processing Unit collects input from all centres and
merges the information into the database. AGRIS
contains information in many languages. All records
describing non-English documents include an English
translation of the title. Abstracts have been included since
1979. The scope of the AGRIS network is to make
available all kinds of relevant agricultural research
information, giving particular emphasis to information
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

sources that are not easily accessible through other
services (widely known as non-conventional or grey
literature, e.g. theses, reports, etc). The network is part of
the national agricultural information services of the
participating countries. The FAO’s role is to assist its
member countries to reach the goal of self-sufficiency in
information management and to ensure information
exchange between national and regional systems. The
AGRIS system uses UNESCO’s Micro-CDS/ISIS
software as a database engine.

5.1 Capacity Building in Proposed AGRIS
Network
Information and technology are essential components
of capacity building and sustainable development for
AGRIS. The Report of the Expert Consultation on the
Redesign of AGRIS, held in Rome in January 1998,
stressed a transition in emphasis from data processing to
information dissemination, with a new focus on developing
information management capacities among countries and
enabling them to develop a national umbrella for
information management programmes. It was also stated
that the network of AGRIS national participating centres
and skills that have been acquired should be retained and
should fulfill capacity building role. The capacities of the
individuals, institutions, and countries should be
developed and improved in order to allow them to deal
effectively and autonomously with the management of
agricultural information.
The AGRIS network involves in training in all forms,
including the training of trainers, as one of its main
priorities. Training is most essential tool required for
teaching new skills and enabling effective capacity
building.

6. AGRIS DOCUMENTATION TOOLS
AGRIS Hqrs has developed following tools for
developing AGRIS database:
•

AGRIS/CARIS categorisation scheme

•

AGROVOC thesaurus

•

AGRIS guidelines for bibliographic description

•

AGRIS classification scheme

•

AGRIS magnetic tapes specification

•

Record format and codes

•

Serials list

•

OCR instructions

•

Terminology and codes for countries

Two main documentation tools of the above list, viz.,
AGRIS/CARIS categorisation scheme and AGROVOC
thesaurus are:
17

6.1 AGRIS/CARIS Categorisation Scheme
The AGRIS categorisation scheme is one of the tools
used for subject control in AGRIS. It can be used jointly
with AGROVOC in order to describe completely and
precisely the subject of a document or a research project.
It has been prepared to:
•

Define the scope of AGRIS

•

Assign subject categories to entries in AGRIS

•

Arrange entries in AgrIndex (printed till 1998) and
bibliographies extracted from AGRIS

•

Assist in retrieval from AgrIndex (printed till 1998) and
from the AGRIS databases

Each subject category is represented by a three digit
alphanumeric code. By a process of analysis, concepts
expressed in a document or describing the subject of a
research project are identified by the indexer and
transcribed into the components of the indexing language
used in the retrieval system. The subject categories
assigned reflect as precisely as possible the main ideas
expressed in the documents, in order to locate references
relevant to a particular subject quickly and accurately. An
expanded ‘Subject Index’ also has been prepared for
AGRIS/CARIS categorisation scheme.

6.2 AGROVOC Thesaurus
The AGROVOC is a multilingual structured thesaurus
of all subject fields in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food
security, and related domains (e.g., sustainable
development, nutrition, etc). It consists of words or
expressions (terms), in different languages and organised
in relationships (e.g. ‘broader’, ‘narrower’, and ‘related’),
used to identify or search resources. Its main role is to
standardise the indexing process in order to make
searching simpler and more efficient, and to provide users
with the most relevant resources. The AGROVOC
thesaurus was developed by the FAO and the
Commission of the European Communities, in the early
1980s. It is updated by FAO in about every three months
and users can see the specific changes on the
AGROVOC website.
The AGROVOC is available in the six official FAO
languages: English, French, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese,
and Russian. It has also been translated into Czech,
Farsi, German, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese,
Korean, Lao, Polish, Portuguese, Slovak, and Thai, and is
being translated into other languages such as Malay,
Moldavian, Telugu, Turkish, and Ukrainian. The Hindi
version of the AGROVOC thesaurus was developed in
cooperation with the Indian Institute of Technology,
Kanpur (India). National organisations and institutes are
invited to translate AGROVOC into their local languages.
Queries should be directed to the AGROVOC team (FAO18

Agris-Caris@fao.org). AGROVOC is made up of terms,
which consist of one or more words representing always
one and the same concept. For each term, a word block
is displayed, showing the hierarchical and nonhierarchical relations to other terms: BT (broader term),
NT (narrower term), RT (related term), UF (nondescriptor).
These relationships provide the scope and structure
for the AGROVOC thesaurus. For instance, knowing that
a broader term for ‘Air pollution’ is ‘Pollution’ and that
related terms are ‘Atmosphere’ and ‘Greenhouse effect’
defines the scope of information represented by these
terms. Additional scope notes are used in AGROVOC to
clarify the meaning and the context of terms when
necessary. Taxonomic and geographical terms are tagged
for easy searching, filtering and downloading. AGROVOC
can be downloaded freely for non-commercial use. It is
available in MySQL, Microsoft Access, Tag Text,
ISO2709, XML, SKOS, and OWL formats.
AGROVOC web services have recently gone online as
part of the initiative to encourage developers of agricultural
information management systems to incorporate
AGROVOC into their applications via web services,
instead of using local copies of the database. With web
services, updates to the thesaurus are immediately
available, reducing the time and effort necessary to
regularly download and incorporate the latest version of
the thesaurus into applications.

7. REDESIGN OF AGRIS
The AGRIS systems were set up over 36 years ago to
enhance the capacities of FAO member nations to
access, exchange, and use agricultural literature and
research data in a way that would stimulate agricultural
development. The focus since this time has been on the
building of the AGRIS databases through a co-operative
input programme, which has been valuable in: (a)
providing complementary coverage, in particular, of
national gray literature not cited in other international
indexing or cataloguing databases, and (b) capturing
information on agricultural research projects in developing
countries. In addition, in many FAO member countries,
the AGRIS databases and associated tools and services
have served as a catalyst for the development of national
and regional agricultural information services.

7.1 Scope and Mandate of New AGRIS
Information System
The AGRIS aims to encourage the exchange of
information among developing countries, whose literature
would not be covered by other international systems. In
practice, however, the overall increase in input to AGRIS
in recent years has largely come from some European
countries, Australia, and USA, and mostly represents a
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

catching up on data converted from non-AGRIS formats.
The input from Latin America, the Caribbean and Africa
has been very low, so it is questionable whether under the
current complex environment the existing AGRIS
databases alone can contribute effectively to meet the
changing information needs of member nations. It is also
doubtful whether the current system is cost-effective,
given the heavy expenditure that FAO incurs in collecting,
converting, checking, and correcting the data received
from input centres, and the limited efforts that FAO and
participating centres devoted to dissemination. Hence, it
is recommended that the effort put into the AGRIS
systems be redirected in support of a more general role in
improving the production, management, accessibility, and
dissemination of agricultural information, with priority
attention being given to the neediest countries.
In fulfilling this new strategy, the infrastructure and
skills that have been built up to support the production of
the AGRIS databases has to be retained, and, where
necessary, reorganised, but with work programmes
redirected in order to help fulfill this more general
capacity-building role. The FAO should keep the
responsibility for coordinating the work required, which
should be executed under a new and invigorated AGRIS
conducted in close partnership not just with member
countries but also with like-minded regional and
international organisations. The specific tasks of FAO
under this system should be to:
•

•
•

Develop tools and methodologies for the collection,
storage, management, and dissemination of
agricultural information, based on electronic
technologies and following the WAICENT model,
which can be used at national, regional, and
international levels as part of a global information
exchange process
Assist in the development of human capacities for
information management and dissemination
Help mobilise the financial resources needed by
developing countries to acquire and manage
information

•

Facilitate the exchange of information at national,
regional, and international levels, by promoting
collaboration, information sharing, and joint projects

The role of the member nations under the new system
are to focus on facilitating decentralised and distributed
access to a wider range of information sources and
services to guarantee that a country’s information
reaches a broader audience both within and outside the
country, and to ensure that users have efficient access to
information needed for research and decision making.
Instead of sending bibliographic references to FAO,
participants will facilitate access to their references, data,
and full-text information wherever it is located by linking it
to FAO’s information system. In exchange, all
participants will have access to more information,
including source documents, in a more timely and
effective way.

7.2 Products and Services
For over 36 years, the AGRIS input centres have
focused most of their effort on compiling, organising and
processing agricultural information published within their
national boundaries and sending that information in a
common format to be integrated in a centralised
database. That integrated database was then distributed
in print format, magnetic tape form, online and compact
disc.
•

AgrIndex was monthly bibliography product of AGRIS
database published in English, French, and Spanish
language. It was discontinued in 1998

•

Magnetic Tapes: These tapes contain same
information as in AgrIndex and these were also sent to
AGRIS centres on demand

•

CD ROM Products
•

AGRIS 1998: Containing bibliographical
references for 1998 from the AGRIS database

•

AGRIS 1999: With bibliographical references for
1999 from the AGRIS database

•

Help establish links and partnerships among
countries and organisations, with the appropriate
resources, experience, and capabilities, in pursuit of
the capacity building goal

•

AGRIS 2000: Produced to coincide with the
World Food
Summit-5YL,
and
holding
bibliographic references for 2000 from the AGRIS
database

•

Support the development of information policies and
strategies in the agricultural sphere consistent with
national development plans and the countries’
international obligations, such as intellectual property
rights

•

AGRIS 2001: Bibliographic references for 2001
from the AGRIS database

•

AGRIS 2002: Bibliographic references for 2002
from the AGRIS database

Play a leading role in setting standards and
guidelines for the collection, management, and
exchange of information

•

AGRIS disc set: Published by Silver Platter
comprising the archival disc (records from 19751998), the Current disc (records from 1999-

•

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

19

present, with quarterly updates; and the AGRIS
FHN (Food and Human Nutrition) disc covering
1975-present, updated twice yearly. Available
directly from Ovid Technologies/Silver Platter
•

AGRIS Resources CD
•

Complete AGRIS dataset from 2000

•

Latest version of AGROVOC

•

AGRIS archive of guidelines, tools and
software

•

Beta1 version of the new WebAGRIS

•

Set of documents for the introduction of new
standards for the exchange of data

•

Manual on cataloguing and indexing

•

New tools from UNESCO, Bireme and ICIE to
manage ISIS databases

and improvements. Many useful comments were taken
into consideration in developments of the AGRIS
database on the web. AGRIS database on the web is
being widely used. During the first two months of 2006,
there were approximately 300 user sessions per day,
each with an average length of about 5 min. To provide a
comprehensive information service to the AGRIS/CARIS
community, an electronic information centre has been
launched on the web1, which is the central point for
information exchange between AGRIS centres and for the
dissemination of data produced within the AGRIS
network. The information centre has become the clearinghouse mechanism for the centres, the AGRIS
Coordination Unit in FAO, and all the AGRIS partners. A
new search engine was also made available on the AGRIS
FTP server (windows-based stand-alone application). It is
a user-friendly retrieval tool, which is designed to work
with any CDS/ISIS database. The monthly outputs of
AGRIS are published in ISO2709 exchange format.

7.3 AGRIS on the Web

8. AGRIS IN INDIA

To improve the accessibility of AGRIS database to a
wide audience AGRIS database was made available on
the web. A beta version became available on the web in
January 19991. Now, the entire AGRIS database from
1975 onwards is available on web. The new AGRIS search
application gives the user the possibility to search the
entire AGRIS data, comprising about 3 millions
bibliographic references, stored in the AGRIS XML format.
This new interface exploits the advantages of both opensource full-text search engine APIs (Lucene), and
structured XML. The result is an extremely fast
application, as with a Google query language but with the
potential to formulate highly complex queries. The new
AGRIS search application is based on open source
technology which can be easily further developed. After
the release of version 1.0, AGRIS is preparing a smaller
update for autumn that will increase the usability of the
search assistant. Since the beginning of 2007, AGRIS
included semantic search improvements that exploit the
use of AGROVOC in AGRIS. The released AGRIS search
application has a very simple function that transfers the
title of a selected reference into Google and searches the
internet for this resource. Similarly, AGROVOC is now
also accessible on the internet2 in English, French,
Spanish, and Portuguese. The two web products are
tightly integrated, allowing the user to consult the
AGROVOC thesaurus directly from the descriptors in a
given AGRIS record. Upon its release, the availability of
the web-based database was announced within the
AGRIS information exchange network. A number of
specialists both in the developed and developing world
were identified and invited to test the database on the web
and to offer their comments and suggestions for changes

India has an extensive network of agricultural and
allied sciences research institutions and agricultural
universities under NARS of India, comprising hundreds of
institutions and thousands of researchers. Likewise, the
information generated is also no less than an ocean in the
form of varied types of publications including age-old
manuscripts and ever increasing number of new additions
to them. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR), being an apex scientific organisation at the
national level plays an important role to generate, manage
and disseminate agricultural information. In 1961, the
Council decided to create a system to record on-going
research projects and of late shifted towards digitisation
of records. An attempt is made here to present major
progress made in this direction along with future vision. In
1974, Govt. of India took decision to participate in AGRIS
database of FAO. Consequently, Agricultural Research
Information Centre (ARIC) of ICAR was made the national
input centre for inputting Indian agricultural information to
this database7. Since then, ARIC under the Directorate of
Knowledge Management in Agriculture (DKMA) has
digitised approximately one lac bibliographic records of
research information published in various Indian journals
and made available to world agricultural community
through the AGRIS network. In India alone, 47 agricultural
universities and about 500 specialised institutions and
non-governmental organisations are engaged in
agricultural research, education, and developmental
activities. Together they generate a large volume of
research information which consists of about 1500
doctoral theses, 5200 post graduate dissertations, and
14,000 research papers published in 565 journals, 3000
books, 2500 project reports, 2500 conference papers, etc.

20

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

8.1 Products and Services from AGRIS in India
8.1.1

Indian National Agricultural Bibliography

The Indian National Input Centre (INIC) for AGRIS of
FAO, ARIC of DKMA, has brought out Indian National
Agricultural Bibliography in four volumes derived from
AGRIS database. This bibliography contains about
30,000 Indian bibliographical records contributed by the
ARIC to FAO during 1975-1984.

8.1.2

Abstracting Journals

The publications of AGRIS in India include Indian
Agricultural Sciences Abstract and Indian Animal
Sciences Abstracts. The frequency of these journals is
half-yearly. These journals were printed up to June 2006,
after which they are only published on the ICAR’s
website3 under open access. These publications cover all
aspects related to agricultural and animal sciences.
Entries are arranged alphabetically as per the FAO
category scheme. The entries have been arranged under
different subject headings to facilitate reference by users
of varied interests according to their subject preference.
The entries include bibliographic details like author name,
affiliation, title, journal name, volume and issue number,
page, publication date, keywords, abstract, etc8.

8.1.3

Selective Dissemination of Information and
Document Delivery Services

Selective dissemination of information (SDI) and
document delivery services are provided free of cost to all
agricultural scientists, researchers, and students who
require specific information for various purposes such as
review of literature, research planning, decision making,
etc. Requests for these services are received from Indian
as well as foreign nationals. On an average, 50 such
requests are served every month.

8.2 Human Resource Development /Capacity
Building Programme

participants in inputting research information for inclusion
in the AGRIS. In turn, these trained professionals from
ICAR institutions and professional societies from all over
the country are expected to input their institutions’
research information into AGRIS. Participants were given
on-hand training on use of AGROVOC thesaurus, FAO
subject categorisation scheme, input preparation, data
entry, data export/import and operational aspects of the
software. AGROVOC thesaurus, AGRIS/CARIS
categorisation scheme and software were distributed to
the participants. They were allotted 3 to 5 Indian journals
already available in their libraries for inputting into the
database. These libraries supply their input to the INIC for
AGRIS at ARIC, who after quality audit of the data, sends
the data to FAO for inclusion in AGRIS.
So far the INIC of AGRIS has sent one lakh data
records, thus accounting for 3.85 per cent of the total data
in AGRIS. So far trainings have been given in indexing and
input preparation for AGRIS to librarians from 46 ICAR
institutions/SAUs/professional societies from National
Agricultural Research System (NARS) in India. The list of
these institutions is as follows:
1.

All India Soil & Land Use Survey Society, New Delhi

2.

Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad

3.

Andhra Agricultural Union Journal Society, Bapatla

4.

Central Avian Research Institute, Izatnagar

5.

Central Inland
Barrackpore

6.

Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hisar

7.

Central Institute for Research on Goats, Mathura

8.

Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture,
Chennai

9.

Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai

Fisheries

Research

Institute,

Capacity building is the combination of efforts needed
to develop, enhance and utilise the skills of people,
institutions and countries to manage and support
sustainable development, and to incorporate the
principles of sustainable development in strategic plans
and programmes. It is closely associated with an
approach, which emphasises negotiation, participation in
development processes, planning and implementation
and building of institutional frameworks, which favour such
advancements. Training is one of the major components
of the AGRIS programme in India.

10. Central Plantation
Kasargod

The ARIC of ICAR has organised trainings on indexing
and input preparation for AGRIS database for librarians
from ICAR institutions, professional societies in
agriculture and state agricultural universities9 (SAUs). Aim
of these training programmes was to give an exposure to

15. Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

Crops

Research

Institute,

11. Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla
12. Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture,
Hyderabad
13. Central Research Institute for Jute & Allied Fibers,
Barrackpore
14. Central Sheep & Wool Research Institute, Avikanagar

16. Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajamundry
17. Central
Tuber
Crops
Thiruvananthapuram

Research

Institute,
21

18. Fisheries Society, CIFRI, Barrackpore
19. Crop Protection Research Centre (CPRC), St.
Xavier’s College, Tirunelveli

8.3 Limitations and Problems Faced during
AGRIS Input Preparation
•

Many participating centres could not start supplying
their information due to financial and administrative
problems

•

Lack of adequate facilities and manpower at the INIC
and other data input centres located in the ICAR
institutes, is an impediment to speed inputting of
information

•

Most of the institutes’ libraries and ARIC does not
have sufficient number of computer and other
equipment for preparing input as per AGRIS
guidelines. This assignment could be completed with
the help of outsourcing. ARIC of DKMA does not have
sufficient manpower for input preparation and data
entry work. The available staff with ARIC can only
monitor the work as well as quality control

•

There is no adequate arrangement for in-service
training or refresher course for those who are engaged
in this work

•

Library staff of ICAR institutes is not familiar with
AGROVOC thesaurus

•

Shifting of trained manpower at the INIC and other
data input centres is proving barrier for development
and further growth of NARD/AGRIS

20. Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagadh
21. Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture,
New Delhi
22. Directorate of Oilseeds Research, Hyderabad
23. Directorate of Wheat Research, Karnal
24. Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture &
Technology, Pantnagar
25. Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi
26. Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute, New Delhi
27. Indian Grassland & Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi
28. Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow
29. Indian Society of Agricultural Biochemists, CSAUAT, Kanpur
30. Indian Society of Agricultural Economics, Mumbai
31. Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar
32. Journal of Interacadamecia Society, Kalyani
33. National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resource, Karnal
34. National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi

8.4 Challenges Ahead
•

Inclusion of regional language literature in the AGRIS

•

Receiving cooperation from all ICAR institutions/
SAUs/professional societies in agriculture in inputting
the data

•

Inclusion of conferences paper, reports, case studies,
thesis and dissertations (grey literature) in AGRIS

35. National Centre for Agricultural Economics & Policy
Research, New Delhi
36. National Centre for Integrated Pest Management,
New Delhi
37. National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal

8.5 Steps to be Taken by Indian National Input
Centre

38. National Institute of Research on Jute & Allied Fibre
Technology, Kolkata

•

There is need for regular training programmes for
librarians of ICAR institutes, SAUs and professional
societies for input preparation for AGRIS and after
training the progress should be monitored regularly to
solve problems and doubts

•

Since sufficient manpower is not available for data
entry and input preparation, this work needs be
outsourced

•

There is a need to increase staff at the INIC of AGRIS
located at ARIC of DKMA

44. National Research Centre on Rapeseed Mustard,
Bharatpur

•

Strengthening of infrastructural facilities, and addition
of more technical staff at the input centres

45. Vevekanand Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhan Sansthan,
Almora

•

To keep pace with the new development, it is
imperative that ARIC team is trained periodically in the

39. National Research Centre for Equines, Hisar
40. National Research Centre for Sorghum, Hydrabad
41. National Research Centre for Soybean, Indore
42. National Research Centre on Camel, Bikaner
43. National Research Centre on Mithun, Jharnapani

22

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

field. Such trainings could be organised in-house or at
local/national/international levels

8.7 Action Plan for Success of AGRIS in India
The required steps include increase in the AGRIS
management staff, no shifting of trained staff,
strengthening of infrastructural facilities, addition of more
technical staff at input centres. In order to keep pace with
the new development, it is imperative that AGRIS team is
provided refresher trainings periodically, which could be
organised in-house or at local/national/international
levels. A proper manpower development plan has to be
prepared to include data generated in the different
organisations. The volume of information on agriculture
and allied sciences in India is so large that one or two
institutions may not be able to handle it. A close link
between different information generating institutions is
essentially vital as large volumes of information remains
uncovered in this information system of national/
international importance. There is an urgent need to
identify regional agricultural information centres (4 or 5
over the whole country) where capability to handle
regional information has to be created and strengthened.
A consortium may be formed under the overall coordination of ARIC of the DKMA of ICAR. The role,
functions and responsibilities of each consortium member
be defined. The consortium members should meet
regularly to exchange experiences, to address the
problems being faced and plan future strategies to meet
emerging needs of the end users of the database. Lastly,
it is highly desirable to sensitise authorities and other
potential users and beneficiaries of database about the
importance of information management and ensuring its
free flow among people to draw maximum advantage of it.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

REFERENCES
1. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AGRIS
20.03.2011).

(accessed

on

2. Lebowitz, A.I. AGRIS 1968-1994: Insights and
lessons-A personal memoir by ex-Head, AGRIS/
CARIS Coordinating Centre.
3. http://www.fao.org/agris (accessed on 20.03.2011).
4. http://agris.fao.org/knowledge-and-informationsharing-through-agris-network
(accessed
on
20.03.2011).
5. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Agricultural_Information_
Management_Standards (accessed on 20.03.2011).
6. http://www.icpa.ro/AgroWeb/AIC/RACC/Agris.htm
(accessed on 20.03.2011).
7. Bose, P.C. AGRIS. In Handbook of libraries, archives
and information centres in India, edited by B.M.
Gupta.
8. Hans Raj; Singh, Vijender & Ghosh Roy, Mitali.
National agricultural research database of India:
Current status and future vision. Paper presented at
the Afita-2006: Fifth International Conference of
Asian Federation for Information Technology in
Agriculture, Bengaluru. 2006.
9. Hans Raj & Ghosh Roy, Mitali. Scientific publishing
and open access in agricultural sciences in India.
Paper presented at 1st AGRIS Conference on Open
Access in India, 6-7 November 2006, Hyderabad.
ICRISAT, Hyderabad. 2006.

23

