DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 24-30
© 2012, DESIDOC

Web-based Agricultural Information Systems and Services
under National Agricultural Research System
Nabi Hasan
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi-110 016
E-mail: hasan@library.iitd.ac.in

ABSTRACT
The paper provides the brief background of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) and the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). It elaborates the National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP)
and the components of the National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) with special reference to the
Component-I under which all the important and most innovative web-based projects, i.e., KrishiPrabha, CeRA,
and e-Granth falls. The overview of these projects including objectives and deliverables has been highlighted
especially keeping in view of the current scenario of the NARS institutions. It further elaborates the rationale,
mission and objectives of the projects, the methodologies, and work programs. It also shows the directions
and outcomes of the projects. The long term positive deliverables of the projects have also been projected.
Keywords: National Agricultural Research System, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, National Agricultural
Technology Project, National Agricultural Innovation Project, KrishiPrabha, CeRA, e-Granth,
e-resources consortium

1. NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
SYSTEM
The National Agricultural Research System (NARS)1,
is one of the largest systems of its kind in the world, with
more than 26,178 full-time equivalent research staff
functioning in government, public, and higher education
institutions and universities. It comprises the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)’s 45 national
institutes, 17 national research centres, 6 national
bureaus, 25 directorates, and 4 national institutes with
deemed university (DU) status; and one central
agricultural university and 46 state agricultural universities
(SAUs). About 93 per cent of the funds for NARS research
and development are sourced from the government.

2. INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
The ICAR2 is an autonomous apex body constituted
under the Department of Agricultural Research and
Education, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.
Formerly known as Imperial Council of Agricultural
Research, it was established on 16 July 1929 as a
registered society under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 in pursuance of the report of the Royal Commission
24

on Agriculture. It is responsible for coordinating, guiding
and managing research and education in agriculture
including horticulture, fisheries, and animal sciences in
the entire country. Spread across the country, this is one
of the largest national agricultural systems in the world.
The body is headed by the Director General, ICAR with
headquarters at New Delhi. The ICAR is a pioneer in
ushering the green revolution and subsequent
developments in agriculture in India through its research
and technology development that has enabled the country
to increase the production of food grains, etc., thus
making a visible impact on the national food and
nutritional security. It has played a pivotal role in
promoting excellence in higher education in the field of
agriculture. It is engaged in cutting edge areas of science
and technology development and its scientists are
internationally acknowledged.

3. NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY
PROJECT
After the WTO, there were rapid global changes in
agricultural trade and the National Agricultural Technology
Project (NATP)3 was conceived as a pilot project. It was
launched in November 1998 and was an initiation of the
Government of India with World Bank assistance. The

overall objective of NATP was to revitalise the agriculture
technology generation assessment, refinement, and
dissemination systems. Keeping in view the scope, the
paper is confined to the related sub-component of the
Project, i.e., Information Systems Development (ISD). A
sub-component under ISD was ‘Strengthening of Library
Improvement and Networking (SLIN)’.
The sharing of resources through networking is
regarded as the most practical way, utilising available
resources to meet the increasing information
requirements. The transfer and dissemination of
information is key in the concept of a network at local,
regional, national, and international level. The ICAR under
NATP initiated in a planned way, the application of latest
ICTs for Agricultural Libraries and Information System
(ALIS) in the NARS around 1994. Dr S.L. Mehta, the then
National Director, NATP is the pioneer in this initiative and
significantly contributed in transforming the agricultural
library and information system from a traditional to a webbased automated library and information system. With
the NATP funds for the agricultural libraries, rapid
transformations have taken place in different scientific and
academic institutions in the country by way of embarking
upon the computer and telecommunication based
networks and electronic resource management. During
the years of the project component, the NATP provided
financial support for the various equipments, infrastructure
facilities and for improving the information resources and
services of the ICAR institutes and the SAUs.

3.1 NATP Grouping of Agricultural Libraries
Keeping in view the regional balance, the NATP4
identified some agricultural libraries as regional libraries
which are shown in the Table 1. The funds were provided
from World Bank through NATP for strengthening
agricultural information base, digitisation, training, CDROM databases, etc.
The NATP has made possible the journey of libraries
from storehouses to the stage of information centres. It
has changed entirely, the library automation scenario of
the NARS libraries and of course the mindset of its
service providers and users, especially the scientific
community who is always interested to go through the
latest information in their profession around the world
without wasting much time and visiting the library as
minimum as possible. The project has helped in making
the information and the library services available on the
desktops of the scientists and they are now using the
library services and facilities at a time which is convenient
to them and the way they want. They need not visit the
library for information as the information is now available
online and they need to visit the library only when they
require personally reading or borrowing some document,
resulting in saving the precious time of the scientific
community and library staff as well.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

Table 1. Regional libraries identified by NATP
S. No. Region

Regional Centre

1.

North

(i) CSK HP Krishi Vishvavidyalaya (CSKHPKV),
Palampur
(ii) Punjab Agricultural University (PAU),
Ludhiana
(iii) GB Pant University of Agriculture and
Technology (GBPUAT), Pantnagar

2.

North-East (i) Assam Agricultural University (AAU), Jorhat

3.

East

(i) Orissa University of Agriculture and
Technology (OUAT), Bhubaneswar

4.

West

(i) Gujarat Agricultural University (GAU), Anand
(ii) Rajasthan Agricultural University (RAU),
Bikaner
(iii) Mahatma Phule Krishi Vishvavidyalaya
(MPKV), Rahuri

5.

Central

(i) Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishvavidyalaya
(IGKVV), Raipur

6.

South

(i) Kerala Agricultural University (KAU),
Thrissur
(ii) University of Agricultural Sciences (UAS),
Dharwad

4. NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL INNOVATION
PROJECT
The NAIP5 is world’s second biggest World Bankassisted agricultural project being executed by NARS
with a life-span of six years. Started from 24 July 2006 to
2012. The objective of the NAIP is to facilitate an
accelerated and sustainable transformation of the Indian
agriculture, so that it can support poverty alleviation and
income generation through collaborative development and
application of agricultural innovations by the public
organisations in partnership with farmers, private sector,
and other stakeholders.

Figure 1. NAIP website.
25

The specific programmes of NAIP are:
Component 1. To build the critical capacity of the ICAR
as a catalysing agent for management of change in the
Indian NARS
Component 2. To promote production to consumption
systems research in priority areas/themes to enhance
productivity, nutrition profitability, income and
employment
Component 3. To improve livelihood security of rural
people living in the selected disadvantaged regions
through
technology-led
innovation
systems,
encompassing the wider process of social and economic
change covering all stakeholders
Component 4. To build capacity to undertake basic and
strategic research in frontier areas to meet challenges in
technology development in the immediate and predictable
future.
Among the four components of NAIP, the
Component 1 aims at bringing in the organisational
changes in the NARS so that it becomes a dynamic
innovation system, capable of responding to the present
as well as the future needs of Indian agricultural research
development. The emphasis inter alia is on:
(a) Strengthening of the ICAR net
(b) Digitised content
management

creation

and

knowledge

(c) Strengthening of libraries of SAUs and ICAR institutes
into the fully electronic libraries connected over the
ICAR net
(d) Formation of an ICAR e-journal consortium for
centralised subscription of e-resources and
information sharing in the agricultural domain at
national level, etc.

It is important to mention that the current web-based
information systems, services, networks and libraryrelated ICT-based implementations, i.e., KrishiPrabha,
CeRA, e-Granth, etc., have been supported through NAIP
only.

5. KRISHIPRABHA
Doctoral research is the harbinger of scientific enquiry
in all domains of knowledge which initiates the researchers
into a scholarly journey to academia. The extensive
background
information,
detailed
methodology,
discussions, inferences, and exhaustive bibliography make
it an original and unique resource which, in most cases,
may not be available in any other form. This enormous body
of literature offers a wealth of information, if only they are
catalogued, archived, and disseminated. But for want of
institutional and organisational mechanism to archive and
disseminate, the doctoral dissertations are hardly noticed
or read. These resources must be preserved for the
posterity and used by the contemporary scientists.
Keeping in view the importance of the doctoral
dissertations, the project KrishiPrabha6–Indian Agricultural
Doctoral Dissertations Repository–was envisioned. The
title ‘KrishiPrabha’ has its own significance. ‘Prabha’
means ‘morning’, in other words ‘beginning of the day’.
Since this project is first of its kind in agricultural discipline
in India; hence the title ‘KrishiPrabha’ is given. It was
sanctioned by ICAR under its NAIP in November 2007. The
objectives of the project initially targeted to be achieved
within a time limit of two years from the date of its
commencement however the same was extended until
March 2011 with additional funding.

5.1 Rationale
There are about 47 agricultural universities and 4
deemed agricultural universities in India which award
doctoral degrees in agriculture and allied disciplines.

Figure 2. KrishiPrabha website.
26

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

These doctoral dissertations are one of the very important
and valuable original sources of information. There is a
need to unveil this resource to the scientists across the
world. This objective can be achieved if the following steps
are taken:
(a) Indian Agricultural Dissertations Repository (IADR) is
set up for the preservation of information enshrined in
the dissertations for the posterity and use by the
current generation;
(b) Repository, so established, is used for evaluation of
research findings, and the evaluation reports are used
for further pursuit and generation of agricultural
knowledge;
(c) Same repository is utilised for the creation of
electronic database of doctoral dissertations;
(d) Database, so created, is made accessible online to
the national and international users; and
(e) Same database is further utilised for the publication of
an e-journal reporting abstracts of the dissertations in
order to disseminate information.

5.2 Scope
(a) Digitisation of agricultural doctoral dissertations
produced in India from 2000 onwards;
(b) Maintenance of the digital library thus created;
(c) Collection of hard copies of the old dissertations, if
spare copies are available with the respective
universities; and
(d) collection of soft copies of dissertations to be
produced in future for updating of the database of the
digital library.

5.3 Objectives
The Project has been sanctioned for the achievement
of the following objectives:
(a) To develop, organise, and sustain knowledge-base of
Indian agricultural dissertations in digital form and
make it accessible online;
(b) To develop a standard format for submission of etheses to the SAUs/DUs;
(c) To upgrade skills of human resources in SAUs/DUs;
(d) To publish a journal in electronic form/hard copy form
from the database.

5.4 Stakeholders in the Project
The digital library and repository was developed along
a distributed cooperative model which is already
functional from the Nehru Library of HAU, Hissar as the
Nodal Agency. This Agency is responsible for data
capturing, editing, indexing, organising, aggregating, and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

other operations leading to the development and
maintenance of the digital library and repository. The 51
Agricultural Universities including Deemed Agricultural
Universities offering PhD degrees in agriculture and allied
disciplines spread over the country serve as sources of
data for this project. The entire NARS system has free
access to the digital library database with full-text of PhD
theses and bibliographic records of Masters’ degree
theses. The access is IP-based for full-text authorised
users and up to abstract level for others.

5.5 Impact and Deliverables
The expected outcomes/deliverables of this project
which have already been achieved up to great extent are:
(a) Integrated database of abstracts already digitised by
SAUs/DUs;
(b) Digital library (full-text) of more than 10,500 Indian
agricultural doctoral dissertations is available and
many more are in the pipeline;
(c) Indian agricultural dissertations repository of hard and
soft copies;
(d) Standard template for online submission
dissertations from remote locations;

of

(e) Capacity building through trainings/workshops.

6. CONSORTIUM FOR E-RESOURCES IN
AGRICULTURE
The consortium for e-resources in agriculture
(CeRA)7,8 is a consortium of e-journals being subscribed
by ICAR and provides access to more than 126 libraries of
the NARS. It is in the project mode and is functional from
the country’s premier national institute for agricultural
research, education, and extension, i.e., IARI, New Delhi
and is funded by NAIP.
Oral communication has been an integral part of
people to people interactions in all civilisations. With the
advancement of science and technology, the process of
communication has expanded over the years to cover
print and other modes like computers, mobile phones,
and associated gadgets. With rapid growth of internet
facilities and advancement of web technology, almost all
reputed international journals are available over the
network for the use of scientific community. Accordingly,
the NAIP funded the CeRA at the IARI in November 2007
to facilitate accessibility of scientific journals and other
resources to all researchers/users in the NARS.

6.1 Objectives of CeRA
(a) To upscale the existing R&D information resource
base of ICAR institutions/universities comparable to
world’s leading institutions/organisations;
27

(b) To subscribe e-journals and create e-access culture
among scientists/teachers in ICAR institutes/
agricultural universities; and
(c) To assess the impact of CeRA on the level of research
publications measured through NAAS ID and Science
Citation Index.

•

CeRA maintains usage and other data for compiling
the reports and further improving the system.

•

Steering, monitoring cum negotiation, and working
committees have been constituted and meetings are
held periodically to achieve objectives of consortium.

•

CeRA in collaboration with e-Granth and AALDI
organised a Seminar cum User Meet on 24-25
February 2011.

6.2 Deliverables
(a) Online accessibility of all important journals and other
resources related to agriculture and allied sciences to
researchers and students of the consortium;

7. E-GRANTH CONSORTIUM9-11

(b) Quick access to R&D information as available
worldwide and permanent archive of the subscribed edatabases; and

The NARS has a very large and extensive collection of
repositories in the field of agriculture and allied sciences,
spread all over the country in different libraries, academic
institutions, museums, and in authors’ collections. This
invaluable heritage has to be documented, preserved and
made easily accessible to end users, for which
digitisation is the solution. Digitisation means acquiring,
converting, storing, and providing information in a
computer readable format that is standardised, organised
and available on demand. Digital technology opens up a
totally new perspective. The internet holds millions of
websites and is a place for research, teaching,
expression, publication, and communication of
information. The important points as per the rationale of
the project may be summarised as:

(c) Improvement in the quality of scientific publications,
teaching and research guidance.

6.3 Accomplishments
•

IP-based access to CeRA resources has been made
available to NARS institutions and universities. Webbased URL (www.cera.jccc.in) is available with easy
and customised interface and facilitating the online
access and document delivery. More than 2000
journals are covered.

•

Subscription to all relevant and important resources
from Annual Reviews, Springer, CSIRO, Elsevier,
Taylor and Francis, Nature, SCI, Indian journals,
Oxford, Wiley, ASA, etc. have been made available.

•

•

Numbers of training/workshop/orientation programs
have been arranged at local and national level for
maximising the usage of subscribed resources.
Researchers being assisted to access full-text of
library subscribed journals (which are not available in
CeRA); the Document Delivery Request System has
been in place.

7.1 Rationale of Project

•

Services too archaic in the light of ICT revolution

•

Localised services

•

Possible duplication of resources

•

Space limitation for growth

•

Staff crunch

•

Staff training

•

Budget constraints

•

Poor visibility in catalogues, etc.

Figure 3. CeRA website.
28

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

Figure 4. e-Granth website.

7.2 Objectives
(a) To create OPAC under Indian Agricultural Research
Group Catalogue of all the partner library resources
with OCLC partnership;
(b) To digitise important institutional repositories/
resources of leading NARS libraries including rare
books and old journals and make them open access
under NARS;
(c) To strengthen capacity building for library and
information management system (open to all libraries
of NARS).

7.3 Resources in Institutional Repositories
(a) Theses, annual reports, newsletters, success
stories, special bulletins, convocation addresses,
endowment lectures, faculty/scientists’ profiles;
(b) Pre-prints, authors’ collections, monographs,
handbooks, course curricula, lecture schedules,
lecture notes, proceedings of trainings, ppts;

4. Ch. Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University
(CCSHAU), Hissar
5. CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishwavidyalaya
(CSKHPKV), Palampur
6. GB Pant University of Agriculture & Technology
(GBPUAT), Pantnagar
7. ICAR Library, ICAR, New Delhi
8. Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Izatnagar
9. Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth (MPKV), Rahuri
10. National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal
11. Tamilnadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University
(TanuVAS), Chennai
12. University of Agricultural Sciences (UAS), Bengaluru

7.5 Human Resource Development
Training of library professionals and other staff
associated with the project includes:

(c) Important reports of committees, notifications,
projects, statistical reports;

(a) Digital library software and OAI-PMH

(d) Archives of heritage value such as awards,
certificates, visitors’ handbooks, rare photos;

(c) Digital library content management standards

(e) Digital objects of plant varieties, insects, nematodes,
microbes, audio/video recordings, etc.

7.4 Consortium Composition
1. Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New
Delhi – Lead Centre
2. Acharya NG Ranga
(ANGRAU), Hyderabad

Agricultural

University

3. Central Institute of Fisheries Education (CIFE),
Mumbai
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

(b) Library automation and WorldCat

(d) Capacity building of librarians and other professionals
on library management with reference to union
catalogue
(e) Creation, organisation, and management of online
digital libraries and institutional repositories
(f) Use of Web 2.0 technologies
(g) User interaction and web-security
(h) Online search services
(i) Organising annual conference cum workshops, etc.
29

7.6 Deliverables/outcomes

REFERENCES

(a) Catalogues of selected libraries is being converted
into union catalogue and is now part of WorldCat
under the group name ‘Indian Agricultural Research
Group Catalogues’

1. Indian
Council
of
Agricultural
Research.
http://www.icar.org.in (accessed on 14.10.2011).

(b) Major selected libraries becoming e-Granth or digital
libraries with the digitisation of most of the
institutional resources

3. NATP.http://www.icar.org.in/files/ar0304/14nationa
l%20agricultural%20technology%20project.pdf
(accessed on 14.10.2011).

(c) Most of the librarians under NARS have acquired
modern knowledge such as library and information
management, union catalogue, Z39.50 server and
client, OCLC membership, web 2.0 and library 2.0
technologies, digital library and digital preservation, epublishing, etc. Some of the professionals got
advanced training with OCLC, NAL, etc.

4. IARI. http://www.iari.res.in (accessed on 14.10.2011).

(d) The first annual conference of librarians and
informaticians of NARS in the lines of CALIBER/
NACLIN was organised during 24-25 February 2011
(e) The libraries and infolibrarians would be ready to
migrate to modern management paradigms with web
2.0 and library 2.0 technologies
(f) Partner libraries would become at par with world
libraries with respect to library and information
management, rich with digital resources and web
contents
(g) Institutional digital repositories
(h) Trained librarians in maintenance of digital library
(i) Union catalogues–serials, monographs,
dissertations, etc.
(j) Website with content management system
(k) Open access service provider, etc.

8. CONCLUSIONS
For the projects and web-based agricultural
information systems and services for the NARS users,
libraries and librarians have so far been very
successful, starting with NATP model. The missions
and objectives of the NATP, NAIP, KrishiPrabha, CeRA
and e-Granth are being achieved specially as far as
libraries, librarians, web-based systems and services
under NARS are concerned. The outcomes have
started coming from all the point of views of the projects
and it is expected that currently running project
components, i.e., KrishiPrabha, CeRA and e-Granth
will achieve their goals and new heights as per their
mandates in the time to come.

30

2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Council_of_
Agricultural_Research (accessed on 14.10.2011).

5. NAIP. http://www.naip.icar.org.in
14.10.2011).

(accessed

on

6. KrishiPrabha. http://202.141.47.8:8080/HAU/thesis
.html (accessed on 14.10.2011).
7. CeRA. http://www.cera.jccc.in (accessed on 14.10.2011)
8. Visakhi, P. Consortium for e-resources in agriculture.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(5), 24-30.
9. E-granth. http://www.egranth.ac.in (accessed on
14.10.2011)
10. Hasan, Nabi & Visakhi, P. Strengthening of NARS
libraries under e-granth: A NAIP consortium. In
National Conference on Knowledge Management in
the Globalised Era: Lead Papers, edited by Madan
Kumar, Stanley, et al. AALDI National Conference, 2123 April 2010, New Delhi. AALDI, New Delhi, 2010.
pp. 261-66.
11. E-granth project document. NAIP, ICAR, New Delhi,
2009. 170 p.

About the Author
Dr Nabi Hasan is presently working as Deputy Librarian
in Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. He has published
two books, compiled two bibliographies and has over 55
publications. He is member of Editorial Boards of four
international and national journals of Library and
Information Science. He was the first Borlaug Fellow from
developing countries in Library Information System at
Cornell University, New York, USA in 2006. He is the
recipient of the Vice-Chancellor Appreciation Award 2003
for the Exemplary Work and Conduct. His library received
Best Library of the Year Award 2010 at the World
Management Congress, New Delhi. He has implemented
three ICAR/World Bank funded projects on library
automation, digitisation and institutional repositories and
has also implemented ISO 9001-2008 standard in the
library. His area of interest includes: e-books,
scientometrics, institutional repositories, digitisation,
RFID, and e-resources consortia.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

