DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 31-37
© 2012, DESIDOC

Digital Content Creation and Management in Agricultural
Libraries in India: Issues and Trends
Rabindra K. Mahapatra
Orissa University of Agriculture & Technology, Bhubaneswar–757 003
E-mail: rkm_02@yahoo.com; rkmahapatra60@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Many Indian libraries have taken up the challenge of modernisation to develop the machine readable
catalogues, and machine readable full-text databases to provide greater accessibility to full text documents
of different nature in order to provide seamless information to their users. The paper examines the status of
the digitisation of agricultural libraries in India and the role of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research in
developing new digital initiatives in content creation and agricultural digital library management. It elaborates
upon the tools and technologies required for agricultural digital libraries management.
Keywords: Agricultural digital libraries, digital content management, agricultural libraries, digitisation

1. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of information and communication
technologies (ICTs) has made dynamic changes in the
structure and functioning of the library and information
centres in the present day information environment.
Traditional library system has been transformed into elearning and virtual learning system. In order to ensure
utmost use of information resources for remote users
there is a dire necessity of digitising those resources and
making them available through the web.
With the advent of the world wide web, every
organisation could begin developing its own information
services and new collaborations could be facilitated to
share and disseminate resources. Users are presently
more conversant with the new technologies and
demanding electronic-based services. While providing
information services, libraries have strived to convert the
manual method into electronic mode of services. Having
been empowered with the advantage of the new
technologies, libraries have got the opportunity to digitise
those services to be used by different user groups along
with the facility of archival features.
The most striking feature of such a digitisation
procedure is to create digital contents because without
creating contents in digital forms, libraries will not be able
to provide services in electronic formats. There is no doubt

that some advance libraries have started to provide
contents in digital formats and taking steps as to how the
contents are converted into digital formats and made
available on the network, CD-ROM and other services
where hypertext format is of utmost use1.
Agricultural libraries now face a situation in which the
sharing of resources of other libraries and access to
information in digital formats has become the primary
requirement for the users. Dissemination of information in
agricultural sector has been highly emphasised due to its
direct impact on the farming community. The agricultural
scientists are striving hard to develop new crops and
transform the traditional cropping pattern into more
agricultural produce and more profitable to the farmers. In
such a situation the dissemination and use of right
information for a wider audience in agricultural sector
appears to be a significant approach.
It is for this reason that the national agricultural
research system (NARS) has been invigorated and the
emergence of agricultural research information system
(AGRIS) has been given adequate importance.
Furthermore, agricultural research library information
system has been developed to strengthen the information
dissemination pattern among the agricultural users. It is
an acknowledged fact that one of the major thrust areas of
library and information services is digitisation of collection
and services.
31

Many Indian libraries have taken up the challenge of
modernisation to develop the machine readable
catalogues, and machine readable full-text databases to
provide greater accessibility to full-text documents of
different nature. Digitisation is the answer to such a
situation. In order to digitise a library’s collection, it is
required to create contents in digital format. How far the
agricultural libraries would get the benefit of such
digitisation and content creation is the crux of the
problem. The paper is designed to reflect the state of
digital content creation and management of agricultural
libraries in India.

2. DIGITISATION OF AGRICULTURAL
LIBRARIES IN INDIA
With a view to cater to the library and information
needs of the agricultural information users Indian Council
of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has strengthened and
improved the agricultural libraries in the country. All the
agricultural universities in India having central libraries,
regional libraries, and college libraries at other campuses
are well developed. Under the ambit of ICAR research
institutes, national research centres, project directorates,
and national bureaus have libraries of their own catering to
the information needs of their respective users. All the
libraries under ICAR started computerisation during the
AHRD Project. However, with the NATP support during
2001-05 all the central libraries have been completely
automated. A large collection of thesis has been digitised.
Further, a number of CD-ROM databases are subscribed
by university and college libraries. Internet access has
been provided by to the students and faculty members of
agricultural academic and research institutes. The
libraries in all agricultural universities have inter and intra
networking communication links, powerful desktops, and
servers. All those libraries are provided with CD-ROM
databases searches by subscribing to CAB Abstracts,
AGRIS, AGRICOLA, VET-CD, etc.
Some libraries are also subscribing to EBSCO,
PROQUEST, and e-journals, etc. Moreover, it is
encouraging to note that the collaboration between
agricultural specialists and information specialists are
increasing. Librarians are providing leadership that brings
improvement in the research performance and
effectiveness in all the agricultural libraries2. In order to
revitalise the agricultural information environment in India,
ICAR has taken major steps to develop an AGRIS. During
eighth five year plan, ICAR has embarked upon a project
called AGRIS to bring the power of information technology
to the NARS. An AGRIS network was developed to exploit
the potential of modern computing power in planning and
management of agricultural research.
As a part of this project, agricultural research library
information system was built up towards the
32

modernisation and networking of libraries of ICAR
institutes and state agricultural universities. The basic
purpose of such a project is to strengthen the working
condition of libraries and to develop creation of digital
contents, databases, and compilation of information on
regional agricultural development. Another significant
mission of the project is to transform traditional libraries
into digital libraries. Adequate initiatives were taken up to
adopt ICTs to promote and facilitate the development of
digitisation of information resources of libraries. Efforts
have been made to strengthen the automation of library
management activities and developing union catalogue
compatible with World Cat. The creation and
maintenance of digital repositories of university and
research institutes have been started. Networking of
libraries and development of consortium have been
developed. The capacity building and re-structuring of
library and information centres have been initiated.

2.1 e-Granth Project
Under the National Agricultural Innovation Project
(NAIP), a scheme has been assigned for developing
agricultural library network in India for digitisation, content
creation, knowledge management, strengthening libraries
of agricultural universities and institutes and formation of
e-journal consortium of agricultural sciences. As a part of
the digitisation and content creation effort decision was
taken by ICAR to develop the digitised version of books
and other collection in libraries of the NARS system. The
consortium partners are Indian Agricultural Research
Institute (IARI), ICAR Library, N.G. Ranga Agricultural
University Library, Central Institute of Fisheries
Education, G.B. Pant University of Agriculture &
Technology Library and Chaudhury Charan Singh Haryana
Agriculture University Library. The exact title of the project
is ‘e-Grantha-Strengthening of Digital Library &
Information management’ under NARS. While the
duration of the project is 36 months, the cost sanctioned
is Rs. 861.48 L. The objectives of the project are to: (a)
create OPAC under Indian Agricultural Research Group
catalogue of all the partner library resources with OCLC
partnership; and (b) to digitise important institutional
repositories/resources of leading NARS libraries including
rare books and old journals and make them open access.

2.2 Consortium of e-Resources in Agriculture
The ICAR has developed the Consortium of eResources in Agriculture (CeRA) in 2008 with the
following objectives:
•

To develop the existing R&D information resource
base of ICAR institutes/agricultural universities, etc.

•

To create an e-access culture among scientists/
teachers in ICAR institutions/state agricultural
universities.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

•

To develop a Science Citation Index (SCI) facility at
IARI for evaluation of scientific publications, and

•

To access the impact of e-resources usage on the
level of research publications measured through SCI.

The consortium has collected more than 2700
journals primarily from Elsevier, Taylor & Francis, CSIRO,
Annual Reviews, and Open J-Gate publishers for
composition of the database. The consortium consists of
126 libraries of agricultural universities, ICAR research
institutes, and centres in India. All the participating
centres are given one IP and password to log on to CeRA
database for access and use. The user may choose the
simple or the ‘advance’ searching mode from the home
page. Users can browse the journals by subject, title,
publisher in alphabetical order. By registering his name,
the user gets the alert of his interest after creating the
profile. Arrangement has been made among the
participating libraries to provide the hard copies of the
article at their respective institute’s cost to the users.

2.3 KrishiPrabha
The ICAR has taken a good step in creating the digital
contents of the research works in agricultural subjects in
India. It was decided that all the PhD theses submitted to
agricultural universities and research institutes would be
digitised and will be used in a networked environment. A
project under NAIP was assigned to the Nehru Library of
Chaudhury Charan Singh Agricultural University, Hissar,
Haryana. The university library has taken the step to
digitise the PhD theses available in all 45 agricultural
universities and ICAR institutes in India.
During the first phase, the project covered digitisation
of theses from 2002 to 2007. All the theses available in
agricultural university libraries were scanned and data
were sent to the Nehru Library for compilation and editing.
Till date, 7500 theses have already been entered into the
database for use. Each participating library is given an ID
number and password for proper browsing and retrieval of
theses. The metadata of the thesis is confined to the
bibliographical details and an abstract. The different
search options such as, author, title, supervisor, subject,
institution can be used to search the document. Besides
this, advance search like multiple key word, free text
searches, etc., are available to make the database
accessible. Users of KrishiPrabha can access the
content through user ID and password or through the IP
address provided. The project is a successful digital
content creation activity of the agricultural research
initiative in India.

2.4 Development of Institutional Repositories
The ICAR has a vast scope for research in agriculture
in India where 97 institutes are working under its ambit.
Apart from that 45 agricultural universities are also
engaged in research work with the funding from ICAR.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

Almost each agricultural university has one research
department called Directorate of Research headed by one
Dean of Research. There are some indigenous research
projects undertaken by agricultural researchers. The
outcomes of such research activities are presented in the
form of research reports which are disseminated for
furtherance of research.
Considering the bottleneck in the use of such reports
in printed form, the digital formats are highly encouraged.
The whole gamut of research activities in agricultural
science is required to be captured in digital formats and
made available to the researchers through a network
system. Now most of the research institutes and
universities have developed their institutional repositories
in the form of file and databases primarily available in their
respective web sites. Such institutional repositories are
growing in nature due to its increasing use. Apart from
such research reports, the institutes and universities have
annual reports, patents, monographs, handbooks,
seminar papers, and statistical reports which should be
available to the researchers in soft copy form through the
Internet. While some of the institutes and universities are
taking steps to convert the printed copy to digital formats,
still a large numbers of such materials are not available in
soft copy forms. There is a greater need for developing the
institutional repositories of the institutions and
universities in agriculture in India so as to make the whole
spectrum of research available in digital formats.

2.5 Digitisation of Agricultural Information
Digital technologies and online information resources
have brought fundamental changes in how the research is
done. The most important component of digital library,
however, is its digital collection. The information content
of a digital resource includes virtually any kind of
electronic media (text, image, graphic, video, etc.)
licensed database of journals, articles, and abstracts.
Before developing a digitised system, it is pertinent on the
part of the information specialist to determine the users
group in agricultural sectors and their needs. Agricultural
information users are agricultural scientists, faculty,
researchers, students, extension workers, farmers,
policy makers, administrators, and industrialists. Another
important aspect is the users’ competency of using
digitised information. The information specialist has to
fully ensure that those users coming under ambit must be
aware of such digitised information use so as to help
develop a successful digital library. Digitisation is the
answer to high cost involvement in the duplication of
resources in all the libraries. It facilitates live and
interactive access to wide variety of content online. It is an
ideal solution for budget constraints, staff crunch, and
space limitation for growth. Valuable archives owned by
libraries are required to digitise so as to allow online
access to researchers, teachers and students to which
they would not otherwise have easy access.
33

The most striking part for the information specialist is
to identify the information resources to be converted into
digital format. In such a step it is required to determine the
usability of documents for digitisation. In agricultural
libraries, information resources generated by the
institutions are primarily of indigenous in nature. However,
judicious decision is to be taken to list out the documents
to be created into digital format. Information resources
constitute such as, annual reports, newsletters, bulletins,
lectures, seminar papers, research papers, review
papers, profile of scientists, convocation addresses,
patents, monographs, handbooks, extension materials,
course curricula, training manuals, power point
presentations, reports of important committees, project
papers/reports, and statistical reports, etc. But PhD
theses and master degree dissertations and research
reports are the most dynamic form of information
resources that need to be converted into digital formats.
Adequate attention is required to see that what sorts of
documents are to be converted into digital formats.

and faculty. Hence, the need for content creation and
management seems to be one of the latest functions of
libraries which are providing the services in this digital era.

Creation of digital library is the order of the day.
Leading institutions having good libraries are striving to
create digital contents of their collection and services and
managing those contents for wider use and long term
preservation. Creating contents in digital form is a
technical job that needs expertise. Irrespective of the
subject category, every library can take up the job of
digital content creation and management. The following
paragraphs categorically depict the content creation and
management process which is also applicable for
agricultural libraries. Agricultural libraries in India who are
interested to develop their library contents into digital
formats may adopt similar methods of content creation
and management.

2.6.1

2.6 Digital Content Creation
The librarians’ role is to provide different types of
information services from the library collection and those
services are contents created in separate shape and size
suitable for the needs of the user groups. Computer has
the facility to create contents in digital formats and the
communication technologies have given the scope to
communicate over a network environment. The amount of
information is emerging in an exponential manner where,
it is difficult to trace the specific information for a specific
group of users. However, creating contents in digital
formats and their management has become the order of
the day in this digital era. Although, content creation in
libraries in not new, the content created in digital formats
and disseminated in a network environment appears to be
of
recent
development.
The
creation
of
digital contents will be an integral part of library’s future.
Digital contents directly support the teaching and
research objectives of researchers and faculty in higher
educational institutions. Digital contents created should
meet the instruction and research needs of the students
34

The contents refer to the knowledge of anything and
almost everything contained as information and is
available both in its conventional as well as nonconventional form. Before creating contents, the
information specialist has to design the strategy of
developing the contents in digital formats. One should
emphasise the factors such as type of contents, method
of creation cost involved, needs of the users and
sustainability of content creation for a longer time. In
these circumstances what type of contents are to be
created is a matter to decide. How the nature of content
will attract the users groups is to be decided. A long term
budget will be needed for the creation and effective
management of such contents. The contents created
must serve the users community so that they must derive
satisfaction out of such activity.

Stages of Content Creation

While designing a content creation programme in an
organisation by its library, it is essential to look into the
stages of creation. At the first stage, it is required to
collect different types of information on different aspects
of the digital contents. The recording of documents is
necessary to keep track of them. After identifying the
information to be digitised, prototypes are to be developed
to determine the suitability of the content creation
system. The best step is to create the proper contents.
The contents, needed to be created, are to be converted
into digital information forming a file or database. The
contents already created need to be navigated through
the web pages with necessary links to make the contents
to be accessed and distributed over a network system.

2.6.2

Types of Contents

The content creation authority needs to know what
types of contents are to be created. Before determining
the types of contents here, it is necessary to ascertain
the process of content creation which is basically divided
into two types: (1) dynamic content and (2) static content.
Dynamic contents are those multimedia components that
are primarily treated as moveable in nature. Such
contents are audio, video, both audio-visual video
conferencing, songs, movie clips, etc. But the static
contents are presented in the form of texts, pictures,
graphs. However, the type of digital contents for creation
can be categorised as graphics, texts, multimedia,
databases, and file from websites.

2.6.3

Infrastructure

For content creation, one needs certain physical and
resource infrastructure. These resources are equipments,
software, human resources, and financial resources.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

Equipment: Computer systems with good storage
capacity, a scanner, and a network environment with
server are basically needed for content creation. The
hardware equipments such as flatbed scanner, auto
document feeder book scanner, micro film/fiche scanner,
server and work stations are essential to convert the print
document into digital formats.
Software: Software for scanning, optical character
recognition (OCR), word processing, spell-checking,
image management. Video and audio capture is required
to manage the conversion process. Software tools—
Photoshop 6.0, Omni Page Pro 11.0, Acrobat 6.0 and
Frontpage 2000 are useful programs for content creation.
Human Resources: Trained and skilled manpower are
needed to develop a content creation and management
system.
Financial Resources: Adequate and regular funding is
required to manage the content creation and management
activities for salaries, equipment, software, running cost
of the organisation, etc.

2.7 Metadata Harvesting
Metadata is a set of information which remains in
same hierarchical relationship with another set of
information. It is something data about data. Metadata
improves the performance of information retrieval. A
metadata record can include representation of the content
context, structure, quality, performance condition and
other characteristics of an information bearing objects.
Metadata is a method of making information available
about resources in libraries. The concept is of utmost use
when content creation and subsequent treatment of the
digital item. The metadata to be harvested may be in any
agreed format. The primary role of the metadata
harvesting is to facilitate resource discovery when
resources are stored in a number of distributed,
independent repositories by exporting metadata about
items in these repositories3.

2.8 Quality of Content
While digitising documents, one should establish
the right quality of the contents as well as for the
archival documents. These should be stored in a widely
used ISO formats such as TIFF and such other
emerging formats. The archival quality of the digital
format does not totally replace the original documents,
as the contents created in archival format are treated
as original. Special devices and techniques are used to
convert digital contents for documents of cultural
heritage and historical records. Special skill and care is
required to develop the highest quality of digital
contents for preservation of rare documents.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

2.9 Management of Digital Contents
The management aspect of digital contents is the
most important task for the content creator since it
involves the effective and future use of the contents in an
organisation. Content management is a set of tasks and
processes for managing contents explicitly targeted for
publication throughout its life span from creation to
archival use4.
Content management system is a tool that is
designed to facilitate the access to all types of digital
assets available in libraries. The primary objective of using
such a tool is to manage the available digital assets from
their creation to archiving. It is basically a web-based
management system that facilitates the users to create,
modify, edit the digital contents. As the large number of
contents are required to be created, and designed for
presenting qualitative information to the users, a system
is essentially required.

2.9.1

Content Management Operations

To make the content management system effective,
certain operational steps are required. At the design
stage, a right decision is taken as to how to organise the
contents for easy access and presentation. To devise a
right shape to the contents at authoring stage, the
additional materials like graphic and multimedia
attachments need to be added. The revision of the
process is required to improve the contents. Authority
must provide the sanction to be included into the system.
Contents in different formats are to be converted into
specific formats readable in web-based formats. The
contents ready to be disseminated is required to be
stored in a right kind of database for easy and fast
retrieval.

2.10 Content Management Organisations
To make the digital library system viable, some
organisations have cropped up to take the responsibilities
of content creation and management. The libraries may
use the services of Sirsi Corporation, Innovative Interfaces
Inc, Bibiliotech Review, Library Technology Guides,
Innovative Internet Application in Libraries, Auto Graphics
Inc., Sagerbrush Corporation and OCLC Web Express
Service Centre, etc. These are some of the leading
organisations working for digital content creation and
management for the libraries and information centres.

3. CASE STUDIES
Web-based Information Services for Agricultural
Research for Development (WISARD) is a platform for
providing access to projects, experts, organisations, and
other outputs including documents, articles, and web
35

pages. WISARD itself consists of an easy to use
interface giving both access and ability to input and
update information. Currently, WISARD contains more
than 15,000 resources that are also available through
web. It is also used as a platform for creating customised
portals by other organisations such as FARA, the CGIAR
Project Portfolio archive, the InterSard Good Practices
database, and the FAO Global IPPM archive. The FAO
CARIS projects database is currently integrated with the
WISARD platform which now contains over 55,000
records5. Developers of WISARD products, based in the
Netherlands, are actively engaged with GFAR, FAO,
DFID, CTA, and CGIAR in ‘coherence’ initiatives. The new
web 2.0 tools and approaches also are being developed
for FARA and a global horticulture portal including an open
source discussion application and open source virtual
learning environment. The organisation is engaged in
content creation and management in agricultural subjects
for a wider dissemination of web-based information to the
researchers worldwide6.
The University of Illinois has developed large scale
digital content creation. The digital collection of the library
includes large caches of unique materials worthy of
digitisation. Almost all the contents are created in the
public domain. Faculty, researchers, and library staff have
developed expertise in working with XML, OAI, and
database technologies for digital libraries. The project
such as teaching with digital content, emblem books,
slavic digital resources, and the archives database/EAD
projects have made some headway in providing digital
library services to their users. Work has been undertaken
to identify and capture born digital materials for their
collections7. The basic level of hardware and software
support for digital library development appears sufficient
and provides a good basis for investigating aggregated
services, via, OAI, metasearch tools, or digital object
management systems. The distributed, entrepreneurial
mode of grant, upon which the library relies, has been
successful in other areas (OAI, Mellon Recon Project)
and should be applied to DL opportunities. An institutional
repository is on the horizon.
The IGCAR has developed the content creation and
management activity of its library documents. The ecollection of its library includes e-journals, fast breeder
reactor proceedings, standards, CD resources, and other
technical documents. There is a heavy demand of
scientists and engineers of their institute digitisation of inhouse documents which should be available on the
network, so that they can access them any time from
their desktops. As a part of the digitisation activity of their
resources, they have created the digital contents of
research reports, newsletters, annual reports, PhD
theses (abstract), and internal report of their organisation.
For content creation, they have selected the list of
documents for digitisation, decided by an expert
36

committee. The approved documents are digitised by
appropriate hardware and software. Such converted
documents are then edited by software tools and again
converted to PDF. The entire PDF document is made
searchable by running OCR software, published on to web
and made available to internet for wide use by all8.

4. CONCLUSIONS
The modern library systems and services have
developed the mechanism of content creation and
management in digital formats, which would be available
in the networked environment. Agricultural libraries are no
exception to it. Under the ambit of ICAR, initiatives have
already been taken to digitise the agricultural book
collection through e-Grantha, conversion of PhD theses of
agricultural universities and research institutes into digital
format through the project KrishiPrabha. A consortium of
e-resources in agricultural (CeRA) has already been
working successfully. Efforts are on to develop
institutional repositories of agricultural institutions. Open
access publishing has already entered into the
agricultural publishing industries in India. All those
initiatives became possible in converting the print
resources into digital. It is because digital content
creation has become the necessity of this modern day
information dissemination process. Libraries have to
develop the necessary infrastructure for content creation
and management, develop metadata harvesting and adopt
content managements operations. Thereafter, it would be
possible for them to disseminate the information in a webbased networked environment for a wider use.

REFERENCES
1. Ganesh, A.C. & Tamizchelvan, M. Content creation,
organisation and management: Transition time for
information professionals. Information Resource
Management. DRTC, Bengaluru, 2002.
2. Brahma, Sasmita & Mahapatra, R.K. electronic
information resources in agricultural libraries in India:
An appriasal. In Dynamics of e-resources and usage
trends in digital era, edited by R.K. Mahapatra; D.K.
Swain & K.L. Jena. SSDN Publishers & Distributors,
New Delhi, 2011.
3. Rao, Nageswar; Jeyshankar, R. & Babu, Ramesh B.
Open archives initiates and metadata harvesting. In
Dynamics of e-resources and usage trends in digital
era, edited by R.K. Mahapatra; D.K. Swain & K.L.
Jena. SSDN Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi,
2011.
4. Kaliammal, A. & Thamaraiselvi, G. Content creation,
access and management process in the digital era
with few websites of international content
management systems.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

5. FAO. National Case Studies. 2nd Expert
Consultation: International Information Systems for
Agricultural Science and Technology (IISAST). Food
and Agriculture Organisation, United Nations, Rome,
2007.
6. http://www.wisard.org/wisardtheme.asp (accessed
on 04.01.2011).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

7. Hoyt, Nicholas. Content management system
accessibility/conference.illinois.edu/do (accessed on
04.01.2011).
8. Varathan, K.; Soundararajan, E. & Somasejharan, M.
Content management system: A study of IGCAR
library. IGCAR website (accessed on 31.01.2011).

37

