DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2012, pp. 64-69
© 2012, DESIDOC

Information Technology on Surge: Information Literacy on Demand
S. Yadagiri* and Prashanth Vidya Sagar Thalluri**
*Library & Information Centre, Nizam College (Autonomous), Osmania University, Hyderabad-300 007
**IBS Case Development Centre, IBS, Shankerpalli, Hyderabad
E-mail: *sygiri1@yahoo.co.in; **tpvsagar2002@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Dawn of information technology created a revolution, triggering the information explosion on the digital
front. Rapid changes in the technology further gave impetus for digitisation of information, which in turn raised
the need for information literacy among the public. The onset of cutting edge technology in telecommunications,
on the other hand, also created more opportunities for the creation of new content to further en-mass the
expanding digital universe. However, the client or the information seeker, despite having internet accessibility,
is far away from information sources. Present paper delves deeply into the possible threats created by
information explosion and the necessary action to be taken by library and information professionals in dealing
with and managing the information sources to bring them to the mouse click of right information seeker at the
right time, thus making them comply with the normative principles propounded by the father of library &
information science, Dr S.R. Ranganathan.
Keywords: Information technology, information explosion, information products, social networking sites, social
media, library and information professionals, information education, literacy

1. INTRODUCTION
Information technology (IT) is the use of computers and
other relevant electronic devices in creating, processing,
and delivering the information products. The Information
Technology Association of America (ITAA) defines IT as ‘the
study, design, development, implementation, support or
management of computer-based information systems,
particularly software applications and computer hardware1’.
As the adage says, necessity is the mother of invention, so
is the need for increased use of information systems, which
created an environment for innovation. The IT was shaped
by US Defence Forces during the cold-war era. However,
the invention of world wide web by Tim Berners-Lee in early
1990s opened up the IT and related services for the use of
common man across the globe. Innovation of cutting-edge
technology in communications during the late 20th century
gave further impetus to the rapid expansion of digitised
formats of information easily accessible online. Constant
digitisation of information on the other hand led to
information explosion and expansion of digital universe,
encompassing many fields of study.

1.1 Information Explosion
In its executive summary, the International Data
Corporation (IDC) Digital Universe white paper2 gives clear
64

evidence of expanding digital universe. It reads: ‘There’s
no secret here. YouTube, a company that didn’t exist just
a few years ago, hosts 100 million video streams a day.
Experts say more than a billion songs a day are shared
over the internet in MP3 format. London’s 200 traffic
surveillance cameras send 64 trillion bits a day to the
command data center. Chevron’s CIO says his company
accumulates data at the rate of 2 terabytes–
17,592,000,000,000 bits–a day. TV broadcasting is going
all digital by the end of the decade in most countries2’.
The IDC white paper also observed that the total
amount of digital information increased from a mere 5
exabytes (5 billion gigabytes) in 2003 to 1,288 x 1018 bits
in 2006. According to computer jargon, it equals to 161
exabytes or 161 billion gigabytes, i.e., equals to almost 3
million times the total information available in books ever
published. IDC report forecasted that the new additions to
the digitised information per year during 2006-2010 will
multiply over 6 times, i.e., from 161 exabytes to 988
exabytes and by 2010 about 70 per cent of the digital
information will be created by individuals making a
number of business entities, government and nongovernment organisations to check the reliability,
security, compliance, and privacy of the digitised
electronic information. The chief research officer behind
Received on 06DESIDOC
April 2011
Revised
on 13 Sept
J. Lib.
Inf. Technol.,
2012, 2011
32(1)

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2006

Ten fold
Growth in
Five Years.

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Source: Gantz, F. John3, et al., pp. 3.

Figure 1. Growth of digital information worldwide.

In addition, the rapid growth in communication
technology not only gave space for more telecom
operators but also gave subtle encouragement to the
growth of digitised information.

2. GROWTH OF COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY: CHANGING FACE OF
INFORMATION LITERACY
The key force behind the growth of information,
expansion of digital universe and the growth of social
media is basically the onset and growth of
communication technology. In Indian context, during 50
years of its independence, the government took utmost
care in giving importance to communication technology to
cover every nook and corner of every state, district, and
village across India. Thus, starting its nascent steps in
1947, the communication technology has spread across
India and by early 1990s almost every region in India was
connected with fixed line telecommunications supported
by basic infrastructure.
The structural reforms of Indian economy in 1991
aiming for liberalisation and globalisation opened the
doors for the private players to enter into the
telecommunication and IT. It gave further impetus to the
growth of technology and in 1992, the global system for
mobile communications (GSM) technology was
launched4. After launching of GSM, there was a time lag
for almost a decade, with the government implementing
various measures to develop the basic communication
infrastructure to be able to compatible with the
forthcoming technologies.
The dawn of the new millennium brought the golden
age for Indian telecommunication. The launching of code
division multiple access (CDMA)/wireless local loop
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

(WLL) technology in 2001, voice over internet protocol
(VoIP) in 2002 and broadband in 2003 enlarged the
pipeline through which information can be transmitted
without any congestion. The launch of 3G spectrum in
2007 further encouraged the mobile phone devices
manufacturers to produce 3G compatible devices
supporting national and international telephony, short
message service (SMS), multimedia message service
(MMS) and accessibility to internet, television, etc. In
addition, the mobile phone devices like Apple iPhone created
revolution by embedding the technology to automatically
switch between different types of networks such as EDGE,
3G, and Wi-Fi to facilitate better accessibility to internet and
to fasten the download speed (Fig. 2).
TECHNOLOGY

the white paper, John Gantz said, ‘the number of new digital
information
bits
created
in
2008
was
3,892,179,868,480,350,000,000, which should be read as
3 sextillion, 892 quintillion, 179 quadrillion, 868 trillion, 480
billion, 350 million2’. The digital universe is expected to
expand to 1,800 exabytes of information by 20113 (Fig. 1).

Fixed Line GSM CDMA/WLL VoIP Broadband 3G/WiMax MNP

YEAR

1947

1992

2001

2002

2003

2007

2009

Source: Thalluri, Prashanth Vidya Sagar & Gonela, Saradhi Kumar4.

Figure 2. Indian communications industry: Technological
developments.

Thus, the growth of telecommunication and the
availability of high-end mobile phone devices like
smartphones supporting the 3G spectrum technology,
created avenues for the increased access to
information on internet and exchange of ideas simply
through mobile phones. Taking this into consideration,
a number of big players such as Google and Microsoft
launched the software for mobile devices to be
embedded in the smartphones. Obviously, the smartphones encourage the user to surf the internet, check
e-mail, uploading videos and pictures, chatting online
and even share-market trading. They provide facilities
equitable to that of a personal computer. This
phenomenon led to the onset of new online segments
like micro-blogging, WAP browser and making the
websites compatible with the WAP browser, etc. As it
is very easy to access internet through their mobile
phones, the users started using their mobile phone
devices even during their leisure time to enter into
social networking sites to exchange their thoughts,
opinions, likes and dislikes, etc.

3. SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES
By nature, man is a social and socially cooperative
animal. With his intrinsic inquisitiveness, a person,
though informally and spontaneously, is eager to know
about others, their interests, activities such as listening,
watching, reading, writing and so on. This basic nature of
human encourages social interaction, which formed the
65

basis for the 21st century internet applications such as
facebook, twitter, myspace, cyworld, bebo, Hi5, etc.
These are the social networking and micro-blogging
websites, which are increasingly attracting millions of
global academicians, industry researchers, intelligentsia
as well as common public who have used them into their
daily lives.
Boyd & Ellison5 define social network sites as ‘webbased services that allow individuals to (a) construct a
public or semi-public profile within a bounded system,
(b) articulate a list of other users with whom they share a
connection, and (c) view and traverse their list of
connections and those made by others within the
system. The nature and nomenclature of these
connections may vary from site to site5’. On the other
hand, micro-blogging sites such as ‘twitter’ allows the
user to write and post a small note on any topic and make
it instantly available to be read by entire online
community, who in turn can reply to these small ‘posts’,
thus providing ground for entering into conversation,
making responses, swapping ideas, and offering
suggestions.
In both social networking sites and micro-blogging,
the information shared by the author is instantly
accessed by the author’s ‘followers’–people who are
interested and want to receive all updates from the author.
Thus, the social networking sites allow many people to
interact with each other and to get connected with the
people of same interests. Interaction with one person in a
group will automatically create the network with all other
people in that group. Hence, the people of same interests
always get connected and share their favourites through
these social networking sites and micro-blogging. That is
the reason why these social networking sites have
become the targeted market for many industrialists
offering products and services.
Hence, the expanding digital universe is added by a
variety of content on daily basis either through social
media or micro-blogging whatever the form may be, and
this increasing digitised information is attracting more

number of people. Thus, by creating vast business
potential, the social networking and micro-blogging have
become a new mantra for industrialists to promote their
products and services.

3.1 Social Media
Social media networking offers free entry and exit of
people discussing various topics and sharing their views
and opinions. As it is the virtual world where one may or
may not show the original or pseudo identity, more and
more people express their feelings, emotions, likes and
dislikes in this second world, more than they actually do
in their day to day life. It is the main reason why the social
networking sites such as facebook, myspace.com,
blogger, twitter.com, etc., are gaining more number of
registrations. In April 2008, the number of minutes spent
by the registered users on Facebook was 1,735,698 min
which increased to 13,872,640 min by April 2009
recording nearly 700 per cent growth (Table 1).

3.2 Micro-blogging
In addition to social networking sites, the microblogging made the information sharing and querying quite
easy bringing the work even to the finger tips. These
micro-blogs helped in writing short essays, sharing ideas,
thoughts, opinions, beliefs, posting content, videos,
photos, pictures, etc., giving scope for sharing and
seeking information and to develop virtual friendship-wise
relationships.

3.3 Marketing Potential of Social Networking
and Micro-blogging
The social networking sites are gaining more
importance for promotion of products, goods, and
services. The increasing online traffic raised the
importance of the social networking sites such as
facebook, twitter, etc. As large number of people use
social media, even the big companies and the marketing
professionals are also targeting their consumers through
the social networking sites rather than the media like
television. For example, Vodafone has created an

Table 1. Top US social networking and blog sites by time spent
Rank

Website

1

Facebook

1,735,698

13,872,640

2

Myspace.com

7,254,645

4,973,919

-31

3

Blogger

448,710

582,683

30

4

Tagged.com

29,858

327,871

998

5

Twitter.com

7,865

299,836

3712

6

MyYearbook

131,105

268,565

105

7

LiveJournal

54,671

204,121

273

8

LinkedIn

119,636

202,407

69

9

SlashKey

N/A

187,687

N/A

10

Gaia Online

173,115

143,909

-17

Source: http://blog.nielsen.com
66

April 2008 minutes (000)

April 2009 minutes (000)

Year-over-year % growth
699

9

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

exclusive webpage on the social networking site,
facebook, before launching its new Zoozoo campaign
intended to create a new brand name for the company.
Similarly, Hindustan Unilever Ltd also focused more on
creating a separate online page on facebook rather than
media while promoting its own social networking site,
sunsilkgangofgirls.com. By the end of first decade of 21st
century, even the media also started concentrating on
social networking sites such as facebook to advertise and
promote its programmes. It clearly reveals that the social
networking sites are becoming the core areas than the
media, from which the lava of information can be poured
out through various vents to reach the audience or
customers or clients.

3.4 Social Media: Creating Environment for
Evolution of Virtual World
Social media has become powerful paving the way for
the creation of virtual worlds where the real feelings are
shared and genuine friendships can be made between the
people who otherwise never could have been met. These
virtual worlds are at the summit of internet and social
media. A number of virtual worlds based on different
themes are at increase on internet. Some of them are
based on casual gaming and role-playing, while some of
them are intended for education, content creation, etc.
Even the software frameworks are also available that help
in creating users’ own virtual worlds and to host them on
their own servers (Table 2).
However, the press release presenting the
highlights of IDC’s Worldwide Digital Marketplace
Model and Forecast, 2009, gave more insights and

expected expansion of digital universe by 2013. It
reads: ‘More than 1.6 billion people–a little over a
quarter of the world’s population–used the internet in
2009. By 2013, over 2.2 billion people–more than one
third of the world’s population–are expected to be using
the internet. More than 1.6 billion devices worldwide
were used to access the Internet in 2009, including
PCs, mobile phones, and online videogame consoles.
By 2013, the total number of devices accessing the
internet will increase to more than 2.7 billion6’. It means
that the online user community and the information
seekers are expected to grow exponentially. It means
that the library and information professionals–if
committed to achieve the principles propounded by the
father of library science, Dr S.R. Ranganathan–are
obliged to put strenuous efforts to capture the online
user community.
Commenting on the expansion of digital universe,
John Gantz stated, ‘’with a wealth of information and
services available from almost anywhere, internetconnected mobile devices are reshaping the way we go
about our personal and professional lives. With an
explosion in applications for mobile devices underway, the
next several years will witness another sea change in the
way users interact with the internet and further blur the
lines between personal and professional”6.

4. SNOWBALLING EFFECTS ON
INFORMATION INSTITUTES, AND
INFORMATION PROFESSIONALS
The report titled, IDC’s Worldwide Digital Marketplace
Model and Forecast, 2009, states, ‘The most surprising

Table 2. Types of virtual world
Type of virtual world
Social media

Gaming

Purpose
Offers tools for users to create and customise their own virtual rooms or spaces,
enables 3-dimentional Chatroom facility for conversations and also offers sale of
virtual goods and services
Allows users to play smaller and casual games

Examples
Kaneva, There, Lively, Vivaty,
IMVU

Club Penguin, Habbo, Neopets,
Dizzyworld
Role-playing
Seeks the user to assume a role and play accordingly in a themed world of Massively World of Warcraft, Age of
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs). In addition, offers trading in goods Conan (fantasy themed);
and services through the medium of in-game currency
EVE Online, Ultima Online
(science fiction themed); Gaia
Online
Content Creation
Enables users to create their own content on education, politics, gaming, business,
Second Life, HiPiHi
etc., share it or sell the content to other users.
Education
Aimed to educate children on certain topic, these websites also contain features
Whyville, Handipoints
for casual gaming
HandiLand, MinyanLand
Interest-based
These are based on the tastes, interests and hobbies of the users such as sports,
vSide, Stardoll
dance, music, etc.
Branded
Created around certain real world brands, these websites seeks the user to buy a
vMTV, Webkinz, Barbie Girls
real product before they enter into the virtual world of that particular brand
Mirror Worlds
Uses 3-D maps and pictures of earth, mirroring the real world, thus, in
Unype, Twinity, Amazing
turn promote the tourism
Worlds
Virtual Worlds Platforms They are software frameworks that enable users to create their own virtual worlds.
Active World, Croquet, Some
platforms even enable the users to host virtual worlds on their own servers.
Multiverse, OLIVE, Metaplace,
Project Darkstar

Source: ‘Introduction to virtual worlds’10.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

67

fact is that, in 2008, the amount and pace of information
passed over the internet, phone networks, and airwaves
actually increased faster than IDC had predicted last
year–to the tune of millions of gigabytes. This is a
problem for businesses7.
Thus, the information technology has created a
snowballing effect on the digital universe making it to
expand rapidly and thereby, to increase the demand for
virtual libraries and information repositories or
databases, rather than the real physical existence of
library and information institutes and their professionals.
Hence, the demand for virtual information sources
overshadowed the need for physical availability of books
and other print materials. At this juncture, a number of
questions come to the forefront: how the increasing
technology can be better utilised to deal with varied
formats of information literacy expanding in the digital
universe? How to manage and market the information to
attract a potential information seeker and turn him/her
into a habitual information seeker? How the library and
information professionals have to deal with the social
media to reach the right client at the right time, thus,
serving the purpose of librarianship and complying with
the five laws of library science pronounced by Dr S.R.
Ranganathan.

4.1 Effect on Physical Existence of Libraries
Growth of online information literacy has a cascading
effect on the physical existence of information sources
and their repositories, i.e., libraries. Information
technology and increasing online readership has reduced
the demand for physical form of newspapers, books, and
other print materials. It even forced a number of book
publishing agencies and newspaper agencies which could
not upgrade their technology for internet compatibility to
shut down8. The impending crisis cautions the library and
information professionals to wake up at this early stage
and adapt the information technology at the earliest.

4.2 Reducing Relevance of Subject Keywords
and Subject Headings
Expanding Internet usage also started reducing the
relevance of the subject keywords. It is only through the
search engines that a person can search online
information. These search engines are user friendly and
optimised to search the information from generic terms.
Accordingly, most of the people use generic terms rather
than specific keywords or subject headings to search
their favourite information on internet. This concept of
using common terms and words that we use on a daily
basis to search online information is turning the Library of
Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) and Sears List of
Subject Headings (SLSH) into mere decorative pieces of
Library and Information Science. This may even demand
the optimisation of existing subject keywords compatible
68

to the online way of searching and also may seek a
change in assigning the class numbers.

4.3 Changing Role of Library and Information
Professionals
Till now the library and information professionals
served physically - whenever a user wanted a book, they
used to search their shelves and bring it to the client. And
once the book is returned by the user, the library
professionals replace the book or document or paper in
the proper position based on the class number and
catalogue. With the growth of technology, the library and
information professionals are forced to constantly adapt
the expanding technology. The library and information
officials, hitherto, were sitting in the libraries managing
the documents to serve the clientele. However, it is the
need of hour that they involve in continuous online search
to reach out to the right information seeker, as it not only
provides easy access for users and library professionals
to deal with each other, but also saves the time.

4.3.1

Empowering the Library and Information
Professionals

The main purpose of empowering the library and
information professionals is to carry out their duties
efficiently in the digitised community and to effectively
face the challenges posed by ever expanding digital
universe. It is very important for them to have strong
knowledge and skills need to deal with the application of
information and communication technology in library and
information services. If library and information
professionals have committed spirit to execute the
obliged duty of reaching the right information seeker at the
right time, they have to adapt many changes in their daily
working style, which in turn will empower them to deal
with the demands of expanding digital universe.

4.4.1 Technology Upgradation
Library and information professionals should be well
equipped with the technology to steer the information to
the right information seeker. Even today, after the end of
first decade of 21st century, there are many Indian
librarians, who do not even know how to search online and
how to send information through e-mail. This indigestible
situation demands a forcible and mandatory computer
literacy programme for all the library and information
professionals, because there is a chance that those who
cannot adapt this information technology revolution, may
not only remain at the back seat, but also force their
institution into obscurity.

4.4.2 Targeting the Social Media
The library and information professionals have to
target the clients through social media networks to attract
more demand for the information sources at hand. In the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

modern days, when even television is also promoting its
programmes on social media networks, the library and
information professionals are not immune to that. They
have to search for the potential avenues offered by social
media networks, so as to find and target various online
communities and groups interested in different fields of
study.

4.4.3 Changes in the Curriculum of Library and
Information Science
As the library and information professionals need to
know the search engine optimisation, they should be
equipped with the subject thoroughly. That means, the
information professionals have to be taught the basic
requirements of search engine optimisation from the very
early stages of their study including the certificate course
on library & information science. For the already working
library and information professionals, the search engine
optimisation knowledge has to be made mandatory to go
for the future promotions.

5. CONCLUSIONS
At the backdrop of infinite expansion of digital
universe and the possible threats created by information
explosion, it is the need of the hour for the library and
information professionals to take action. It is now or else
never, because the explosion of digitised information at
enormous levels may burgeon to such an extent where it
may even sideline the library and information science. The
current scenario of digital universe provides both
opportunities as well as threats to library and information
science and the library and information professionals. The
situation calls for the technological up-gradation of library
and information professionals and deserves them to steer
the information effectively to the right user. If the library
and information professionals cannot manage and
organise the expanding digitised information properly and
efficiently to bring themselves and their repositories of
information to the mouse click of the right information
seeker, then the main normative principle propounded by
the father of library and information science, Dr S.R.
Ranganathan–providing right information to the right
information seeker at the right time–can never be
achieved.

2. Gantz, John F., et. al. The expanding digital universe:
A forecast of worldwide information growth through
2010. International Data Corporation. Framingham,
Massachusetts, USA. March 2007. pp. 1. http://
www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/expandingdigital-idc-white-paper.pdf (accessed on 5.1.2011).
3. Gantz, John F., et. al. The diverse and exploding
digital universe: An updated forecast of worldwide
information growth through 2011. International Data
Corporation, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA.
March 2008. http://www.emc.com/collateral/analystreports/diverse-exploding-digital-universe.pdf
(accessed on 10.1.2011).
4. Thalluri, Prashanth Vidya Sagar & Gonda, Saradhi
Kumar. Mobile number portability in Indian telecom
industry: The disruptive effects and competitive
responses. IBSCDC. Hyderabad, 2009 Case Study.
http://www.ibscdc.org/Case_Studies/Strategy/
Industry%20Analysis/INA0108.htm (accessed on
15.12.2010).
5. Boyd, D.M. & Ellison, N.B. Social network sites:
Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of Comp.Mediated Comm., 2007, 13(1). http://jcmc.india
na.edu/vol13/issue1/boyd.ellison.html (accessed on
18.8.2011).
6. IDC. Number of mobile devices accessing the internet
expected to surpass one billion by 2013. International
Data Corporation. Framingham, Massachusetts,
USA. 9 December 2009. http://www.idc.com/get
doc.jsp?pid=23571113 &containerId=prUS22110509
(accessed on 21.12.2010).
7. Mellor, Chris. Digital universe adds sextillions to hit
487 billion gigs. The Register. 25 May 2009
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/05/25/idc_digi_ uni
verse_2009/ (accessed on 20.12.2010).
8. Thalluri, Prashanth Vidya Sagar, et.al. Newspaper
industry in US: Uncle Sam’s last wish? IBSCDC.
Hyderabad,
2009.
Case
Study.
http://www.ibscdc.org/Case_Studies/Strategy/Indus
try%20Analysis/INA0079.htm
(accessed
on
18.8.2011).

REFERENCES

9. The Nielsen Company. http://blog.nielsen.com

1. Paranjape, Anush. Information & communication
technology. 29 March 2009. http://www.oppapers
.com/essays/Information-Communicayion-Technol
ogy/198625 (accessed on 29.12.2010).

10. Introduction to virtual worlds.
http://www.scribd.com/doc/5570819/Introduction-tovirtual-worlds, September 2008

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(1)

69

