DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 2, March 2012, pp. 83-85
© 2012, DESIDOC

The Growth of E-books
Jack Meadows
Loughborough University, UK
Looking backwards in time I remember first getting
involved with e-journals in the 1980s. My first involvement
with e-books came a decade later. When I ask myself the
question-why this difference in time? then the importance
of prior expectations and custom becomes apparent. Ejournals were particularly acceptable in STM (science,
technology and medicine) subjects. People in these fields
were often well-acquainted with computers, and with
handling short pieces of text on them. Abstracts in these
fields provided some of the earliest electronic text
databases. The STM journal articles were fairly short and
could be scanned on a computer screen without too much
discomfort. E-books were of greater interest in the
humanities, or to general readers, than to STM readers.
Such readers expected books to be portable and properly
legible. Portable reading devices were worked on during
the 1980s, but it was only in the latter part of the 1990s
that viable personal digital assistants (PDAs) became
available1. These satisfied the portability requirement. The
second requirement-legibility-also received attention. This
meant satisfying the expectations derived from printed
books. Readers typically expected to read black print on
a white background, on a device that was no smaller than
a standard paperback, and under all light conditions.
Developments in both portability and presentation over the
past few years have been sufficient to make e-book
reading nowadays a generally acceptable substitute for
reading the printed page.

PORTABLE DEVICES
The problem with the word ‘e-book’ is that it is used in
two senses: it can refer either to the material being read,
or to the device on which it is read. I will look at the
second connotation first. One of the continuing debates
since the early days of the e-book has been whether what
is required is a dedicated device, or a multi-purpose
computer. It has been argued that PDAs with appropriate
book-reading software have been improving to such a
degree that they can satisfy book readers’ needs. The
obvious example is the iPad. This provides an iBooks
application which several major book publishers have
been willing to use. Perhaps more interestingly, both

Amazon and Barnes & Noble have provided apps to allow
their own systems (Kindle and Nook, respectively) to be
used on the iPad. Arguments in favour of a multi-purpose
device have usually hinged on the belief that owners of
hand-held computers will not want to carry around more
than one such device. Hence, there will be a convergence
of all the activities that interest them onto one gadget. The
proliferation in the number of apps now available certainly
suggests that there is some foundation for this belief.
However, it has been argued in the past, and is still being
argued today, that reading a book is a different kind of
activity from, for example, playing computer games. This
argument depends especially on readers’ expectations of
books. People have been brought up with printed books
and still regularly read them. E-books, it is argued, should
stick to this expected model, and this may lead to a
device that is not optimised for other apps. It may be,
however, that people’s reading expectations will develop
in the future so that convergence on a single hand-held
device becomes acceptable. For the moment, providers of
book-length material have to accept that it will be
downloaded to a range of different devices.
A major problem raised by this variety continues to be
that of compatibility. Whenever a new type of device
appears this question raises its head. The usual
assumption is that competition in the marketplace will
soon produce a market leader which becomes the de
facto standard. The often quoted example is the history of
videocassette recorders (VCR) in the latter part of the
twentieth century. After a number of years of competition,
one format-VHS-became the market standard. However,
competition does not always work this way. An example
is the long-continued competition between Apple
computers, with their own operating system, and
windows-based computers. Part of the reason in this
case for the continuance of both was that they had
somewhat different capabilities. I can remember stocking
teaching laboratories with computers when it became
necessary to put on electronic publishing courses. To
reflect what was happening in the publishing industry, it
was necessary to provide two laboratories-one with Apple
computers and the other with windows-based computers.

Received 24 January 2012, accepted 30 January 2012, online published 17 February 2012

83

This was because graphics-handlers in publishing
preferred the former, while text-handlers preferred the
latter. There is an important difference between this
example and the VCR conflict, for the latter involved
incompatible hardware. Nowadays, incompatibilities are
more likely to be a software problem, and can usually be
resolved by some kind of software fix on the original
hardware. This makes it possible for different systems to
coexist, though most people would agree that a universal
standard is a better solution.

CONTENT
Turning now to e-books in terms of their contents,
material to be read electronically was available well before
portable devices for reading it. Project Gutenberg, for
example, was already providing book-length content in
the 1970s. The growth in the number of books that the
project archived electronically was, however, fairly limited
until the early years of the present century. (When Project
Gutenberg began, getting the text into machine-readable
form was a fairly tedious process; this difficulty had eased
by the latter years of the twentieth century). Over the past
ten years, the number of books stored by the Project has
soared to nearly 40,000 titles. During this period, other
sites have appeared and grown. One that I find useful, for
example, is the Internet Archive, which currently has well
over two million users each day. One development in
recent years has been the way the resources available
have become multilingual. Project Gutenberg, for
example, was essentially a source of English-language
texts until the early years of the present century, when it
became
explicitly
multilingual.
The
common
characteristic of these free databases is that they are
restricted to material that is either out of copyright, or has
explicitly been licensed for use2.
Discussions of making the contents of printed books
widely available, have been dominated by the question of
copyright from the early days. The long-continued saga of
Google Books in the United States reflects the difficulty of
the problem. One of the big questions has been what to
do with so-called ‘orphan’ publications. Many books are
still in copyright but are out of print. Where the copyright
is owned by an existing publisher it is straightforward
enough to negotiate. But the copyright in many works
resides with the author. (This contrasts with the typical
position for journal articles, where there are
correspondingly fewer difficulties with ‘orphan’ works).
Tracking down each individual-sometimes even
establishing whether they are still alive is a timeconsuming process. But attempts to evade doing this
soon run into legal problems: as happened with google
books3. Even if negotiations with publishers over content
go ahead, there are other pitfalls. For example, e-book
platforms increasingly include a text-to-speech
mechanism. From the viewpoint of the e-book provider
84

this is part of an integrated package. However, publishers
have traditionally seen audio editions as being distinct
from the printed version, and expect to negotiate for them
separately.
An equally difficult question is the pricing of e-book
contents. Publishers receive manuscripts in electronic
form from their authors, edit them in that form in-house,
and then transmit them to the printers for paper-based
production. For e-books, this last step is omitted, so one
would expect the e-book version to be considerably
cheaper than the printed version. This is often not
reflected in the price. For example, Amazon has found
publishers unwilling for major cuts to be made in the price
of e-book material. (one of the publishers’ arguments is
that they cannot allow the printed version to be undercut
by too much). In consequence, if the print version of a
monograph on Amazon costs about £30, the electronic
version is likely to be priced at only a bit less than £25.
Even for popular fiction, the printed paperback version
may cost £5 and the electronic version £4. It may be that
publishers are correct in financial terms. The results so far
from Springer e-books, for example, suggest that the print
and electronic versions of their monographs are managing
to coexist in terms of numbers of purchasers.
The situation for books has always been appreciably
different from journals. Authors of journal articles are not
paid for publication: indeed, they may have to pay for the
privilege. So they are usually happy to see their work
reproduced as widely as possible free of charge. Authors
of books may receive royalties for their work, and they are
often more hesitant about providing free access. This is
less true of research monographs, where the likelihood of
significant royalties is small. Moreover, authors in this
field worry about the prices publishers are asking for their
work. Research monographs costing £60 are not
uncommon, and publishing runs are rarely more than a
few hundreds. So academic authors naturally worry more
about the restricted access to their work that all this
implies. One way round the problem is self-publishing.
For example, using an on-demand publisher, such as Lulu
in the United States, a monograph could be produced for
£20 or less, while still including a royalty to the author.
The problem with self-publishing lies, of course, in
assessing the quality of the publication, since this
typically relies on the author’s own judgement. The
problem is rather less important for books than for journal
articles, since the value of a books has traditionally been
established via reviews after publication. Nevertheless,
most authors of monographs like to be published by a
body that is seen as having a good reputation for quality.
One result is a current growing interest in institutional
publishing. Most universities are now accustomed to
handle online archives of journal articles produced by
members of staff, often using their library facilities. It is
not too big a step from this to including original bookDESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

length material in such archives. In fact, open access
monograph publishing in the humanities and social
sciences is currently on the rise, partly because of
institutional collaborations of various kinds4.

SUMMARY
The concept of an ‘e-book’ materialised over forty
years ago. For many years, the problem lay in developing
a portable device which readers found acceptable for
reading text. Over the past decade, this problem has
mostly been overcome. The argument has moved on to
whether readers will prefer to use a dedicated or a
multifunctional device. Text for reading was already
available when the first portable devices came on the
market, and the use of material that is out of copyright
has been reasonably straightforward. The problem has
been with material still in copyright, where it is necessary
to trace the copyright owner and recompense them.
Publishers fully recognise the significance of the move to
e-books, but are reluctant to pass on the savings which
electronic handling can provide. This is providing

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

motivation for authors and their institutions to examine
other channels for handling and distributing electronic
texts. Considerable research on e-books, their problems
and usage, has been done down the years: this now
provides a solid background for detailed discussions of
the points raised here5.

REFERENCES
1. Wilson, R. Evolution of portable electronic books.
www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue29/wilson/
2. Lebert, M. A short history of ebooks.
www.etudesfrancaises.net/dossiers/ebookEN.pdf
3. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Books
4. Adema, J. Overview of open access models for ebooks in the humanities and social sciences.
bpnet.eclap.eu
5. JISC National E-books Observatory Project: 20072010. observatory.jiscebooks.org

85

