DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 2, March 2012, pp. 86-94
© 2012, DESIDOC

Users’ Perception About E-books in India
Chennupati K. Ramaiah
Pondicherry University, R.V. Nagar, Kalapet, Puducherry-605 014
E-mail: ckramaiah.lis@pondiuni.edu.in

ABSTRACT
This paper aims to study the users’ understanding and acceptance of e-books in India. This study was
carried out by conducting a survey using questionnaire as a tool to find out users’ views on using e-books
as compared to printed documents. This study was carried out during the period of January to March 2006
covering a wide range of ages, subject backgrounds, computer experience, occupations, and comfort in using
computers in their daily life. The readers survey found that Indians are generally willing to use and read
e-books though they continue to prefer and use printed publications. Generally, the users are aware of the
advantages and limitations of each medium and will tailor their choice according to their needs. Of the total,
slightly less than half of the users (41 %) are ready to pay the same or slightly lesser price as compared
to printed publications, 24 per cent are half or quarter the price of printed publications.
Keywords: E-books, e-publications, users’ perception, e-books use

1. INTRODUCTION
The developments in the field of information
technology (IT) have brought about a rapid change in the
way people think about information. Nowadays, peopIe
want remote information available on their desktops,
laptops, and mobile phones. This was unimaginable
before the computer era, when books and journals were
available only in the print form. In fact after the emergence
of electronic books (e-books) and electronic journals
(e-journals), the library users have become more
demanding and expecting information at their fingertips.
While this trend is more or less true-with library users of
many developed countries, however, in India though the
use of e-journals in libraries is increasing steadily but the
use of e-books did not pick up much because of various
reasons.
Since then many people worked in this area and
developed several new things (both hardware and
software) related to e-books. For several years, it has
been anticipated that e-books will gain wide spread use
as an educational tool, but this has not yet actually come
to true1-3. After longtime, now we have inexpensive but
highly functional portable reading devices and increasing
number of e-book titles in majority of the subject4-6 and a
technologically literate student population hungry for new
electronic media. The college classroom is an obvious

target for e-books implementation because college
students typically embrace new technologies and also
purchase a high volume of expensive7,8 cumbersome and
rapidly discarded books.
The aim of this study is to examine the users’
perception about e-books. So, the users in India were
surveyed to know their perception and acceptance of
e-books. The objectives of this study are: (a) to find out
the understanding about e-books; (b) to find out the users
usage of e-books; (c) to find out the users preferences
between printed and e-books; (d) to find out the users
willingness to pay for e-books; and (e) to find out the
problems faced by the users while using e-books in India.

2. RELATED RESEARCH
E-books are catching up fast especially with school
and college students9. However, the use is not prevalent in
all types of users in India. The reasons for this are many:
lack of electronic content in Indian languages, lack of
proliferation of ICT tools in rural areas which constitute a
major chunk of the Indian population, and many others.
E-books are not available at affordable price so are not
taking their place in people’s collections, educational
institutions, libraries, and corporate offices. Presently,
reading devices are not that cheaper and needs some
more time to become cheaper in India. In spite of many

Received 11 August 2011, revised 10 October 2011, accepted 16 November 2011, online published 17 February 2012

86

technological advancements in this area including their
size than ever before, and their percentage, which is not
that significant in India, as compared to cell phones.

residents of Hyderabad, Delhi, and Bangalore but came
from different parts of the country to work in various
organisations/institutions.

Few studies have been conducted on the use of
e-books. Some of the recent research studies addressed
the issues related to the acceptance and integration of
e-books10,11 scholarly monographs12 and textbooks13 in
academic libraries. The results of these studies, showed
a slow acceptance of digital resources except e-journals.
In another study, it was found that 80 per cent of the
e-book users in Spain are men14. Among those who have
purchased or received e-books, 25 per cent have bought
mysteries and thrillers followed by 26 per cent business
and investing books. Several people studied the users’
perception about e-books6,13,15,16,17 the use of e-books,
impact on print media, and several other environments.

4.2 Computer Experience of Users

However, some users particularly elders still want
printed copies of the works to read and analyse. It was
observed in a previous study conducted in Singapore19.
The study also revealed that the majority of readers
(61 %) were ready to pay for e-content and e-publications
with 26 per cent the same or slightly lesser price
compared to print-publications and 15 per cent half or
quarter the price. And in the present study, the users
prefer to use short-term reading documents like reference
tools and reports in electronic form, and printed sources
for long hours of reading.

3. METHODOLOGY
A survey was conducted through questionnaires to
collect data on the users’ perception about e-books in
India. The survey was carried out during January-March
2006. Survey sample covers users ranging from 20 years
of age onwards to 52 years belonging to a variety of
professions including librarians, software professionals,
academicians, students, and other people. A total of 150
questionnaires were distributed to users with varying
profiles and backgrounds. Of these, 120 people
responded and the same were used for the analysis and
results are presented.

4. USERS’ PROFILE
4.1 Demographics of Users
The users surveyed were in the age group of 20 to
above 50 years old. Among them 62 per cent are in the
early twenties, 10 per cent are in late twenties, 6 per cent
are in thirties and the rest are in forties and fifties. All the
respondents were Bachelors degree holders, of which 40
per cent were BTech degree holders, 14 per cent MCA
degree and rest were having BA, MTech, PhD, and other
degrees. The sample covers a range of professionals
including software professionals, teachers, research
scholars, professors, etc. All the users surveyed were
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

Among the users nearly 42 per cent of the
respondents had been using computers for the past 6-10
years, 10 per cent had 15-20 years experience and 20
per cent had 11-15 years of experience. The high
percentage of computer experience also has a positive
impact on the receptivity and usage of e-books.

4.3 Frequency of Computer Usage
The findings of this study revealed that the majority of
the users (82 %) are daily computer users. Slightly less
than half (48 %) of them use computers only for surfing the
internet, and another group of 16 percentage use for
sending e-mails. This is significant because it was found
in other studies also that frequency of computer and
internet usage affects on the receptivity and usage of
e-books20.

4.4 Ownership of E-book Reading Devices
Among the respondents, most of them (90 %) own a
PC. Out of the remaining, 6 per cent users owned a
laptop, PDA, WAP phone, and an e-book reader. This is
not surprising because the PC is no more expensive to
many people in the present Indian society and regarded
as the most prevalent computing device in the world.

4.5 Frequency of Internet Usage
Users were asked to indicate how often they use the
internet. It was found that 48 per cent use internet almost
everyday, 44 per cent use a few times a week and rest of
them (6 %) use once in 1-2 weeks. The higher frequency
of internet usage also has an impact on the receptivity and
usage of e-books, as most of them are spending lot of
time on internet.
As per figures released by the Internet Governance
Forum, India has 81 million internet users in 2008. India
ranks fourth in the world in terms of internet users and US,
with 220 million internet users, tops the world. China, with
210 million users, comes in a close second followed by
Japan with 94 million users (www.getcounted.net) at third
place. About 9 per cent of the users are accessing the
internet primarily for entertainment and the number of online
transactions (e-commerce) were steadily increased. Out of
these users, the young men, older men, and working women
groups were using internet mostly. Whereas, non-working
women were using internet for searching of jobs and dating
purposes in significant numbers. It was found that the time
spent on the internet increases with the age of the user. For
example, school children spend weekly an average of 322
87

min, college students spend an average of 433 min, older
men spend an average of 580 min, working women spend
an average of 535 min, however, non-working women
spend 334 min a week.

advantage of e-publications being online they will be able
to access them either from the work place or on the home
PC. The results of this study also give more or less a
similar trend of usage patterns of e-books by users16.

This clearly shows that the present survey population
could be inferred to be generally high computer literates,
frequent internet users and owners of computing devices
particularly PC and such a profile can be expected to be
more receptive to the usage of e-books. Of the total, 90
per cent respondents own some form of computing
devices, have internet access and are comfortable in
using computer. A survey done in the US has also found
among the greatest deterrents to use are technological
difficulties as reader’s use of e-publications would require
computer and internet access (for online publications)
along with the appropriate computer related skills21.

5.3 Length of E-books Usage

5. USAGE OF E-BOOKS
Users were asked whether they have read or used
e-books before. The majority of the respondents (72 %)
have used but slightly over quarter of them (28 %) have not
used before. These findings are similar to other studies in
which they have already found a co-relation between
frequency of computers usage, computing devices
ownership, and frequency of internet usage of
e-publication20,21.
The study shows that the respondents do not lack
adequate access to e-books, as most of the respondents
are known to have frequent access to the internet and
online publications also. None of the respondents
indicated lack of access as a reason for preferring to use
printed version of books.

5.1 Future Use of E-books
Among the respondents who have not used e-books,
54 per cent said they would use in the next 6 months, 15
per cent said they will be using within 1 year and 31 per
cent do not know if they will use e-books in future. Of the
total, 69 per cent of the respondents indicated that they
are eager to start using e-books.

5.2 E-books Usage Place/Point
Among the respondents, slightly less than half of
them (45 %) used e-books at work, a third (33 %) used
them at home, 15 per cent used at school/college/
university, 3 per cent while commuting and a small
percentage at other places. It is interesting to know that
most users do not prefer using e-books while commuting
however, the majority of them prefer in US and European
countries. This indicates to the fact that most users
preferred to read or use printed publications while
commuting, due to several reasons such as satisfaction,
comfort, ease of use, etc. Nelson22 found that the main
88

Among the respondents who have used e-books, 21
per cent have been using for more than three years, about
a third (32 %) for 2-3 years and 44 per cent varies from six
months to one year. Nowadays, e-books are becoming
more popular than before so many libraries in India also
purchasing a sizable collections in few subject areas
such as IT, computer science, reference, medical
sciences, entertainment, etc. Nowadays, some of the
reference books are very cheap so many people are
purchasing for their personal/home use in India.

6. PREFERENCES TOWARDS PUBLICATION
FORMAT
Users were asked to indicate the type of documents
or publications they prefer to read or use in printed form
and in electronic form and also give the reasons for their
preference to each medium.

6.1 Users’ Preferences on Print and Electronic
Publications
Users were asked to select all the categories of
publications that they preferred in print and electronic
forms. Table 1 shows that the majority of the users
surveyed prefer printed books (72 %), followed by
newspapers (56 %) and magazines (54 %) in print form.
About 46 per cent prefer journals, 44 per cent prefer
reference tools like dictionaries, directories, etc., 22
per cent prefer reports, 26 per cent prefer maps and travel
guides and a small percentage (3 %) prefer other types of
documents in print form.
Table 1. Users preference print versus electronic form
Type of document

Preferred in print form
No.
%

Preferred in e-form
No.
%

Books

86

72

50

42

Magazines

65

54

24

20

Newspapers

67

56

34

26

Journals

55

46

62

52

Reference tools
e.g. dictionaries,
directories

53

44

67

56

58

48

Reports

26

22

Maps/travel guides

31

26

Others, if any,
please specify

3

2

10

8

Total

386

322

302

252

*Respondents chose more than one option so the total percentage
exceeds 100 %.

The reasons given by the respondents for preferring
print form include: portability, comfort in reading,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

usability, and flexibility. Portability of print forms was
the most frequently cited by respondents (23 %).
Comfort in reading was the next most potential factor
mentioned by (21 %) preferring in electronic form by the
respondents with comments like less eye strain, easy
to read, etc.
A small percentage (9 %) of the respondents quoted
readability also one of the factors and other factors
mentioned were availability, cost, latest information,
searchability, and accessibility. Overall, comfort in
using was the main factor because of which the
respondents preferred print form over electronic
publication.
Users were also asked to select all the categories of
publications that they preferred in electronic form.
Table 1 indicates that more respondents (56 %) prefer
reference tools in electronic form, 52 per cent prefer
journals, 48 per cent prefer reports, 42 per cent prefer
books, 26 per cent newspapers and 20 per cent prefer
magazines. It is a good sign that a considerable
percentage of the respondents are using reference
books in electronic form in India due to low cost and
easy availability.
Overall the survey shows that a slight majority of the
users surveyed preferred publications in electronic form
over to print form. The reasons mentioned by the
respondents for preferring to use electronic publications
including
searchability,
accessibility,
availability,
flexibility, and updated information. Further, it also
indicates that users prefer publications like reference
tools, journals, and reports in electronic form. The
reasons for this could be the easy availability of these
publications and availability of updated versions, when
compared to other forms of publications. Also these
publications, especially the printed report are very costly
when compared to the electronic forms.

7. PREFERENCE TO USE E-BOOKS
7.1 Type of E-book Form Preferred
The respondents were asked which type of e-book
format they preferred. Less than half of them (46 %) prefer
in using e-books on internet, more than a third (37 %)
preferred using e-books on CD-ROMs, 10 per cent prefer
DVD and a small percentage (4 %) preferred VCD form.
These results show that readers are still receptive in using
CD-ROMs, whereas the majority accesses e-books on
internet. Another possible reason for this could be the
availability of free e-books on the internet.
The majority (75 %) of the respondents preferred PC
to use e-books, 20 per cent preferred laptop and a small
percentage (3 %) use mobile phones. The reasons for this
could be because PCs are nowadays available for an
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

affordable price for common men in India, so majority of
them own PCs. Laptops are still expensive compared to
PCs so only marketing and executive cadres are using in
less percentage. Mobile phones with advanced features
are still costlier in India though basic sets are available at
reasonable rates hence small percentage of them are
only using.

7.2 User Satisfaction Rate
When the users were asked to rate the
satisfaction they had got out of reading e-books, less
than half (48 %) responded that they were somewhat
satisfied, 36 per cent were very satisfied, about 12 per
cent were very unsatisfied or unsatisfied and 4 per
cent were extremely satisfied. This indicates that
though the users are receptive to use e-books, they
still do not feel comfortable to use e-books because
printed books as printed books are handy, still
cheaper than e-books.

7.3 Probability of E-books Purchase
About a third (34 %) of the users surveyed said they
would definitely purchase e-books, 28 per cent said they
might or might not purchase, 22 per cent said they would
probably purchase, 4 per cent were not sure and 6 per
cent said they would definitely not purchase e-books. It
was noticed ‘that a small percentage (6 %) of the users in
the survey had never used e-books. This shows that
though readers are using e-books but they are not very
much keen on purchasing e-books. The prohibitive costs
of e-books, requirement of specific devices to read, and
lack of wide subjects’ coverage could be few factors
limiting in purchasing of e-books.

7.4 Availability of E-books in Local Libraries
When the users were asked about availability of
e-books in their local libraries, half (50 %) of them
responded positively and the other half (50 %) negatively.
Among those who responded negatively, 89 per cent said
that they want their local libraries to build e-books
collection, however, (11 %) responded negatively to the
same question. This indicates that users are willing to use
e-books if they are made available through their local
libraries. Nowadays, in cities, university libraries,
corporate libraries, and private college libraries started
spending 5-7 per cent their budget on purchasing of the
e-books. With time this percentage is increasing slowly
and plays a significant role on the users perceptions and
receptivity.

8. DESIGN AND USABILITY
8.1 Usability of E-books
The usability of e-books are shown in Table 2.
89

More efficient to perform search
tasks (efficiency)

20

11

5

3

4

169

Easy to remember in reusing the
e-books (memorability)

4

8

13

12

3

118

Fewer errors encountered and
easy to solve those (errors)

6

8

8

9

10

114

More satisfaction after use
(satisfaction)

8

11

6

8

9

127

8.2 Suggestions
When respondents were asked to make some
suggestions to improve the overall design and usage of
e-books, the following suggestion were received: (a)
natural language searching should be available; (b) better
search facility with more precision; (c) publishers should
conduct awareness programs all over the country on
regular basis; (d) produce items that are affordable to
Indian buyers; (e) e-books must be made available in all
major libraries; (f) awareness should be created among
the undergraduate and graduate students in usage of
e-books; (g) search engines only for e-books should be
developed; and (h) general e-books should be made free
of cost.

9. USE OF E-BOOK READERS
Of the total users surveyed, most of them (81 %) did
not own a PDA; only 19 per cent of them owned a PDA.
This could be again for the reason of high cost of PDAs
limited to rich and corporate community. But when the
users were asked if they would purchase PDA if the costs
come down, 73 per cent said they would purchase,
however, 27 per cent said they would not purchase a PDA
even if the costs came down. This shows that if the e-book
reading devices come down at reasonable prices then the
users are ready to purchase the reading devices which
are similar to mobile phones in today’s context.
When the respondents were asked if they faced any
problems with regard to the standards of e-books, the
majority of them (62.5 %) responded negatively but the
remaining (37 %) reported some problems with standards
of e-books. Of those who faced problems with standards,
when asked if they expected publishers to produce
e-books that can be read anywhere. 80 per cent
responded positively, 20 per cent said they did not expect
publishers to produce e-books that can be read
anywhere. This indicates that users of e-book readers are
optimistic that in future the publishers will bring out
e-books that are not device specific and can be read
across different platforms and will be interoperable.
When asked to list the features of e-book reading
device they like the respondents listed out features like:
less strain to the eyes, convenient for naive users, low
90

Users were asked to rate their user interfaces of
different types of e-books they have used. Table 3
indicates the users’ ratings of the interface on a scale of
1-5 where (1 is most easy to use and 5 is the least easy
to use).
Table 3. Ranking of e-books interfaces
Type of e-book

Rating of interface

Encyclopaedia Britannica

4

Guinness Book of World Records

4

Oxford English Dictionary

3

Computer science books

2

Literature

2

Novels

2

Dictionaries

1

Study purpose

1

Software utilities

1

Here, students did not understand the question and
the meaning to the user interface so gave reverse ranking.
Encyclopaedia Britannica has got better user interface
than other e-books but it was rated as difficult. If the
ranking reverses, the ratings are quite tallying to their
actual interfaces.

10. PROBLEMS WITH E-BOOKS
10.1 Problems Encountered While Using E-Books
The users were asked to indicate the problems they
had while using e-books. Of the total, 28 per cent said
hyperlinks in e-books were a problem, 18 per cent said
there was need for an integrated dictionary, 9 per cent
said full-text search was a problem, 14 per cent said
illustrations were problematic, 13 per cent indicated the
support for e-book readers and another 11 per cent
indicated references as problematic and remaining (5 %)
indicated footnote as problem.
30

28

25
20

18
14

15

13

10

11

9

5

5

2

0
Others if
any please
specify

171

Full-text
search

1

References

5

4

E-book
reader
support

4

8

Illustrations

3

12

Need for an
integrated
Dictionary

2

16

Footnotes

1

Easy to learn to use (learnability)

Hyperlinks

Usability of e-books

cost, multiple language support, facility to add user
comments, facilitate highlighting of important points,
ability to render any type of document properly.

% of users

Table 2. Usability of e-books

Type of problem

Figure 1. Problems of e-books.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

Many studies conducted earlier on problems faced by
users of e-publications in various environments with
different types of users23,24,25 and they all highlight the
almost similar kind of problems encountered by
respondents in the present study. The common problem
stated is the inability of e-publications to be as eye
friendly as print publications20. This factor is very essential
for long hours of reading; therefore users prefer to read
printed books rather than e-books. This also explains the
preference of respondents for short time value documents
or publications, such as magazines and newspaper
articles and reports, in e-format. Users are encounter
difficulties like getting lost and disorientated from scrolling
on monitor screens25,26. This also compounds the problem
of eye strain for the users. Minor bugs in application
software and compatibility issues also cause problems to
users. These are indicators for the e-media publishers in
general and e-books publishers in particular that the
current reading devices need to be optimised so that
reading on e-platform can be less straining and
cumbersome to the users. When asked to indicate
whether they would prefer to have facility to add marginal
comments, 82 per cent indicated they preferred to have
the facility to add personal comments/notes while 18
per cent indicated they did not prefer so.
The users were asked how they felt about frequent
updating of e-book’s content. The majority (61 %) of them
responded that frequent updating provides latest
information whereas for a small percentage (5 %)
indicated that frequent updating causes problems, 27
per cent felt that it was good but was expensive to
maintain, 7 per cent indicated that they do not like
frequent updating because lot of work is involved.
When asked to list the most liked features of e-books,
some of the respondents indicated that accessibility, cost
effectiveness, ease of use, efficiency, and portability of
e-books are some of the most-liked features.
Respondents indicated that facilities like search facilities,
dictionary-aided searches, versatility, and pdf rendering,
bookmarks, footnotes, hyperlinks, navigating through the
use of hits are useful for their use. Some of them indicated
that availability of latest content; updated editions are
easier to implement faster in electronic form that in print
form, coverage of a wide range of subjects were the
features that they liked the most in e-books. Some also
indicated that the availability of old and rare publications
at free of cost on internet. Some even indicated that the
beautiful presentation of e-books is the most liked feature.
This indicates that users like flexibility in use of e-books
which printed books can not offer like searchability,
hyperlinks, etc.
When asked to list the most disliked features of
e-books, the respondents indicated that the high cost,
requirement of specific devices, lack of facility to add
comments in some forms of e-books, small font size
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

used, and hyperlinks were some of the most disliked
features of e-books. Some others indicated the inability to
take e-books to relaxation places, causing eye strain,
lack of readability of content as features that they disliked
the most. Some respondents pointed out other reasons
like difficulty in concentrating for a long time while reading
an e-book, not able to magnify the page content, etc.
However, some of the e-books does have this facility to
change the font size big and magnify the page
reasonably. Many of the respondents also said that power
problems, and constantly changing technology were the
most disliked features. This indicates that though e-books
usage is there, there are problems presented by e-books
which need to be resolved, before their usage rate actually
catches up.
The respondents were asked to give their
recommendations to improve the features of e-books. The
respondents came up with many practical suggestions
about what features need to be improved and what new
features need to be added. The suggestions given by the
respondents can be broadly put into the following
categories:
(a) Value-added features: like associated dictionaries,
should allow to print and should not be protected by
security code.
(b) Ease of use: like easy to scroll through pages, there
should not be any unwanted links, hence minimise
the non-usable or unwanted material.
(c) Modifiable: should be modifiable to highlight
important points.
(d) Display: the display area should be bigger more
readable fonts should be used, and proper
background and foreground colours should be used.
(e) Cost: respondents indicated that costs should be
reasonable to Indian users and some of them should
be made free and for most commonly viewed e-books
there should not be any download limit.
Some other points that the respondents
recommended were: (a) e-books should be made
available in the libraries and facility to use them remotely
from home or office; (b) provide effective searching tool
with easy to use interface; and (c) should occupy less
storage space.

10.2 Onscreen Problems
When asked to list out the onscreen problems, the
users reported the following problems: eye strain,
headache, uncomfortable, cannot read for long time at
one sitting, font size should be bigger, problems with
some illustrations, show display may be disconnected.
So, most of them find using e-books at a long stretch
uncomfortable and straining.
91

Users were asked to rate the following problems on a
1-5 scale (where 1 is the most potential problem and 5 is
the least potential problem) which inhibited them from
using e-books. Each point in the scale was given
Weightage, i.e., 1 was given a weightage of 5, 2 a
weightage of 4, 3 a weightage of 3, 4 a weightage of 2, and
5 a weightage of 1. Each of the value in the scale was
multiplied with the respective weightage point given to it.
The results thus obtained were added to get the final
weightage.
Table 4 indicates that the high cost of e-books,
reading software/devices is the most potential factor to
inhibit the use of e-books among the respondents. The
next most potential problem to inhibit the user of e-books
was licensing issues involved in purchase of e-books.
This indicates that the users are not happy with the
restrictions on copying, printing and download limitations.
That is why licensing issues are a potential factor to
inhibit users from using e-books. The third most potential
factor inhibiting use of e-books is the difficulty in onscreen
reading continuously for a longtime. This cannot be
helped presently as the reading devices available are not
very eye-friendly. The next potential inhibitor is
surprisingly libraries. Users indicated that libraries are not
keeping up with current technologies and devices.
Another factor mentioned by the users is the less number
of e-books availability. The next factor mentioned is the
requirement of specific devices for e-books. Other factors
mentioned were non-availability of e-books in the users’
domain of research interest. E-books are currently
available mostly in the fields of science and technology,
computer science, fiction, leisure, etc. E-books in social
sciences and other areas are very less. Some other
factors inhibiting use of e-books mentioned were unable
Table 4. Problems in using e-books and e-book reading devices
Problems with e-books

1

2

3

4

5

Not comfortable with electronic
gadgets

6

3

6

4

8

56

Availability of e-books is less

10 4

8

3

7

103

High cost of e-books, reading
software/devices

13 11 3

3

1

125

Licensing issues involved in
purchase of e-books

14 9

3

1

3

120

Libraries do not subscribe or
utilise the new technology

10 7

7

2

1

104

Need training in use of e-books

6

2

5

3

11

70

Not many titles are available in
my area(s)

11 3

4

4

4

91

Specific device/software
requirement for an e-book makes
difficult to use

10 5

6

3

2

96

Unable to print from e-books

9

3

3

4

4

78

Quick updating of e-books/
reading devices

1

6

6

4

3

58

Continuously longtime on-screen
reading is difficult for me

15 6

4

2

2

117

92

Weightage

Table 5. Users willing to purchasing e-books
Factors for purchasing e-books

1

2

3

4

5

Cost of print vs. e-book

13

5

5

4

1

109

E-books reviews appeared in
professional magazines

8

4

3

3

7

78

E-book content quality

11

6

6

5

102

E-book publisher

6

2

4

6

9

71

Others if any please specify

2

1

1

1

2

21

E-book features

4

8

7

4

2

83

to print from e-books, quick updating of e-books/reading
devices, need training to use e-books and not comfortable
with electronic gadgets.

11. PURCHASING/PRICING ISSUES
It was revealed in the present study that most of the
users preferred using e-books if they are available free of
cost on internet. About 15 per cent respondents owned
e-books purchased by them and these indicated that they
buy e-books online internet.

11.1 Recommend E-books to Others
When asked if they would recommend e-books to
their friends/colleagues slightly more than half (54 %) of
them responded that they would do so ‘definitely’ 17
per cent said they ‘might or might not’ l5 per cent said
‘probably’, 5 per cent ‘probably not’, 5 per cent said they
‘do not know’ and 2 per cent said they would definitely not
recommend e-books to others. This indicates that by and
large the users are satisfied with the e-books and are
ready to recommend e-books to their friends and
colleagues.

11.2 Preferred Pricing Pattern
When asked to indicate their preferred pricing pattern
of e-books, 42 per cent indicated that they prefer. Onetime purchase of a title with a premium for perpetual
access; 26 per cent preferred annual subscription fees
access with ownership; 22 per cent preferred purchase of
a title with annual access fee premium and only; and 10
per cent preferred annual subscription fee access without
ownership. This indicates that more users prefer to spend
one time purpose for e-books with perpetual access.

11.3 Price Currently Being Paid by Users for Ebooks
A considerable percentage of the surveyed e-book
users (41 %) are not willing to e- books, 17 per cent of
them pay the same as printed publications,14 per cent
slightly less than printed publications, another 14 per cent
quarter of printed publications price,10 per cent claimed
they are paying half of printed publications price and 3
per cent followed other pricing patterns. This indicates
that users are still not very comfortable with using e-books
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

hence are not ready to spend on e-books. Some of them
purchasing e-books are either priced less than or same
as print version.

12. COPYRIGHT ISSUES
The survey indicates that the majority (62 %) of them
is aware of International Copyright Laws. However, more
than a third (38 %) said they are not at all aware of
copyright laws. The survey also indicates that among
those who are aware of copyright laws, majority of them
(58 %) showed concerns for the rights of the author and
indicated that they would not copy content from e-books.
Slightly less than half (42 %) do copy content from
e-books in spite of being aware of copyright laws. Most of
the e-book users (84 %) indicated that they do not face
any copyright related problems while copying content
from e-books. While one-seventh (16 %) indicated that
they do face problems while copying content from the
e-books.
When the respondents were asked to give
suggestions to combat the copyright problems of
e-publications in India, the following suggestions were
given: (a) the government should take care of the legal
problems; (b) making them available at very nominal price
so that copying and piracy can be stopped or minimised;
(c) copyright problems should be discussed at length by
arranging meeting between different countries technology
experts; (d) seminars and road shows should be
conducted to raise awareness about e-books and to
propagate and promote copyright laws in schools,
colleges and universities; (e) stringent laws should be
enforced against copying books and CDs; and
(f) software should not allow copying and apply these
restrictions based on books contents.
When the respondents were asked whether our
government should come up with Indian copyright laws
that protect the interests of authors, publishers and
users, 97 per cent responded positively and only 3 per
cent did not want that Indian Copyright Laws should come
up. This indicates that it is high time that the government
in India not only come up with stringent copyright laws but
also enforces them strictly. Unless the government takes
steps towards this, plagiarism will become rampant
harming the authors’ rights.

13. CONCLUSIONS
Users are generally willing to use e-books though
print books are predominant in today’s world. Presently,
the choice of the users to use e-books or print books
depends on the availability of required information easily
whether it is an e-book or print book.
However, it is also found that users are generally not
using e-books as extensively as print books. Majority of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

the users indicated that it was due to the fact that e-books
have not become as portable, flexible, and readable as
their print counterparts and still much more costly than of
print books. However, users in India are willing to use ebooks provided that e-books are available for reasonable
price in the market. Let us hope in a couple of years the
prices will come down, as technology improves, most of
the related problem are removed so that users in the
libraries, offices, and home environment will start using
them in longer quantities. Publishers, authors and uses
are looking forward for that scenario very soon in India.

REFERENCES
1. Armstrong, C.J., et al. A study of the use of electronic
information systems by higher education students in
the UK. Program, 2001, 35(3), 239-60.
2. Abram, S. eBooks: Rumors of our death are greatly
exaggerated. Information Outlook, 2004, 8(2), 14-15.
3. Chu, H. Electronic books: Viewpoints from users and
potential users. Lib Tech, 2003, 21(3), 340-46.
4. Cox, John. E-books: Challenges and opportunities.
2004. http://www.dlib.orq/dlib/october04/cox/10cox.html
(accessed on 21 March 2009).
5. Press,
L.
Emerging
dynabase
Communications of ACM, 1994, 37(3),11-16.

tools.

6. Mercer, Linda. Measuring the use and value of
electronic journals and books. Issues Sci. Technol.
Lib., 2000. http:/www.library.ucsb.edu/istl/00-winter/
article1.html (accessed on 21 March 2009).
7. Armstrong, C.; Edwards, L. & Lonsdale, R. Virtually
there? eBooks in UK academic libraries. Program,
2002, 36(4), 216-27.
8. Snowhill, Lucia. E-books and their future in academic
libraries: An overview. D-Lib Magazine, 7, July/Aug
2001.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july01/snowhill/07
snowhill.html (accessed on 21 March 2009)
9. Internet usage stats and population statistics. 2008.
http://www.internetworldstats.com/ (accessed on 21
March 2009).
10. Dillon, Dennisa. E-books: The University of Texas
experience, part 1. Library Hi Tech, 2001a, 19(2),113-25.
11. Dillon, Dennisa. E-books: The University of Texas
experience, part 2. Library Hi Tech, 2001b, 19(4),350-62.
12. Lonsdale, R. & Armstrong, C. Electronic books:
Challenges for academic libraries. Library Hi Tech,
2001, 19(4), 332-39.
13. Simon, E.J. Electronic textbooks: A pilot study of
student e-reading habits. Future of print media. 2001.
93

http://www.futureprintkentedu/articles/simon01.htm
(accessed on 21 March 2009).
14. Iglesias, Martha. 80% of e-book readers in Spain are
men. van Dusseldorp & Partners. 2001. http://
www.europemedia.netishownews.asp?ArticleID=5621
(accessed on 30 September 2008).
15. Summerfield, Mary; Mandel, Carol & Kantor, Paul.
The potential for scholarly online books: Views from
the Columbia University Online Books Evaluation
Project Publishing. Research Quarterly, 2000, 16(3),
39-52.
16. Liew, Chern Li; Foo, Schubert & Chennupati, K.R. A
study of graduate student end-users’ use and
perception of electronic journals. Online Information
Review, 2000, 24(4), 302-15.
17. Ramaiah, Chennupati K. An overview of electronic
books. Electronic Library, 2005, 23(1),17-44.
18. Rogers, M. Survey reveals college students’ growing
preference for e-texts. Library Journal, 2001, 126(2), 31.
19. Ramaiah, Chennupati K.; Choo, Heng Poh &
Kiranmai, C. Readers perception about epublications. In Technology management in libraries.
Festschrift volume in honour of Dr E. Rama Reddy,
edited by A.L. Moorthy, N. Laxman Rao & K.
Sudhakar Goud. Allied Publishers, Hyderabad, 2006.
pp. 129-51.
20. Ludwick, R. & Glazer, G. Electronic publishing: The
movement from print to digital publication. Online J.
Issues
Nursing,
2000,
5(5).
http://
www.nursinqworld.orq/oiin/topic11/tpc112.htm
(accesed on 30 September 2009).
21. Schloman, B.F. Nursing faculty and scholarly
publishing: Survey of perceptions and journal use.
Online J. Issues Nursing, 2001, 5(1). http://
www.nursingworld.org/ojin/topic11/tpc11_8.html
(accesed on 30 September 2009).
22. Nelson, T.H. Xanalogical media: Needed now more
than ever. In ACM Computing Surveys Symposium on
Hypertext and Hypermedia, 2000. pp. 214-15
23. Mutter, P. & Maurutto, P. Reading and skimming from
computer screens: The paperless office revisited.
Behavior and Information Technology,1991, 10(4),
257-66

94

24. Dillon, A. Reading from paper versus screens: A
critical review of the empirical literature.
Ergonomics,1992, 35(10),1297-326.
25. Adler, A. A diary study of work-reading: Design
implications for digital reading devices. In
Proceedings of ACM Computer Human Interaction
(CHI) 98. ACM Press, New York, 1998. pp. 241-48.
26. Gujar, A.; Harrison, B.L. & Fishkin, K.P. A
comparative evaluation of display technologies for
reading. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society 42nd Anniversary Meeting.
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Santa
Monica, California, 1998. pp. 527-31.

About the Author
Dr Chennupati K. Ramaiah is working as Professor and
Head, Department of Library and Information Science,
Pondicherry University, Puducherry. Prior to that he
worked as Pofessor and Librarian at Muffakham Jah
College of Engineering and Technology. Before joining the
college, he worked as Professor and Director, Centre for
Information Science, and Librarian of MGNIRSA,
Hyderabad. Before that he worked as an Assistant
Professor, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
for 6 years from 1999 to 2005. Prior to that Dr Ramaiah
was Deputy Director at DESIDOC, a national information
centre in Defence Science and Technology in India. He
has worked for 14 years in the Defence Research &
Development Organisation, India, as Scientist, and
worked in various areas including conducting research,
heading A-V Division and Defence Science Library. He
was a Commonwealth Scholar for PhD in Information
Science in 1989. Soon after obtaining his PhD, he set up
a multimedia lab and worked several years in designing
multimedia applications, presentation and training
materials. Dr Ramaiah’s formal education includes
Master’s degrees in Chemistry and in Library and
Information Science. He is a member of many
international professional bodies/societies such as the
Institute of Information Scientists, LA, ASIST, and ACM.
He has published more than 80 papers and three books.
His research interests include multimedia and hypertext
technologies, human-computer interaction, user
interfaces, e-books and e-publishing, archival informatics
and bibliometrics.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

