DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 2, March 2012, pp. 109-115
© 2012, DESIDOC

From Plato to Michael Hart: The Long Journey of E-books
P. Divakar
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
Uppal Road, Hyderabad-500 007
E-mail: divakar@ccmb.res.in

ABSTRACT
Genesis of e-books and the connected social implications have a long bearing on the dissemination of
knowledge. The strides in information technology have ushered in new content formats and reading devices.
An e-book is superior to a c-book in terms of storage, delivery and accessibility. E-books have tremendous
implications on libraries, library users and publishers. Around the world, there have been initiatives towards
the ultimate goal of enhancing public access to all recorded knowledge. Internet apart from facilitating self
publication of e-books, democratising access to knowledge and doing social good especially for developing
countries by improving literacy, and education.
Keywords: E-books, library management, self publishing, reading devices, content delivery

1. INTRODUCTION
In Plato’s Phaedrus, the dialogue between Socrates
and Phaedrus closes by questioning the value of the
written word. Writing things down “will atrophy people’s
memories”, and since it would make people rely on the
thoughts of others, “writing will make the things they have
learnt disappear from their minds.” Though Plato died in
347 B.C. at the age of 80, his philosophical wisdom
survives to this day. Plato’s prognostications1, and the
wider ramifications of the arrival of e-books and other
forms of digital communication, would be debated for
generations, including at the arrival of Gutenberg’s handoperated printing press in the 15th century and its
subsequent replacement by powered rotary presses.
Coming to the 21st century, for Michael Hart, the joy of
e-books, which he invented, was that “anyone could read
those books anywhere, free, on any device, and every text
could be replicated millions of times over”. He dreamed
that by 2021 he would have provided a million e-books
each, a petabyte of information that could probably be
held in one hand, to a billion people all over the globe—a
quadrillion books, just given away. As powerful as the
bomb, but beneficial. Sadly, before realising his dream
Michael, the founder of Project Gutenberg, the first ever ebook delivery platform, passed away on September 6,
2011. The mission statements for his project were:

•

Encourage the creation and distribution of e-books

•
•

Help break down the bars of ignorance and illiteracy
Give as many ebooks to as many people as possible

From Plato to Michel Hart, the world has witnessed a
plethora of path breaking inventions in communication—
from verbal to print and then to digital; and now the
internet, resulting in the e-revolution in every sphere of
human activity. Books and libraries are no exception.

2. DEFINITIONS
In common parlance, the book is used as a very
generic term, and its content may range from creative
literary material (an engaging novel or poetry) to reading
material for a school going child. At the high end, we have
Research Monographs, which from a librarian’s point of
view, are a kind of ‘information analysis and consolidation
product’. Books are valuable to a wide audience in the
sense that they provide information that people ‘can’t
easily gather at one place’.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, ‘book’ is a
written or printed work consisting of pages glued or sewn
together on one edge and bound in covers. It is a literary
composition that is published or intended for publication
as such a work.
The result of integrating classical book structure with
features that can be provided within an electronic
environment is generally referred to as an e-book. In that

Received 01 February 2012, accepted 14 February 2012, online published 17 February 2012

109

sense, the e-book is an information technology product
that facilitates reading and acquisition of information. It is
a written work readable on the screen of a personal
computer, or any other device specifically designed or
made compatible for the purpose. It provides the same
meaning as a conventional paper book (c-book) which
stores and communicates knowledge through reading. On
the positive side, an e-book is superior to a c-book from
diverse perspectives such as storage, transfer, delivery,
and accessibility2.
E-book is a new platform for accessing digital
information that preserves the benefits of having electronic
reading while providing many of the advantages of paper
books. Cox3 indicates that an e-book can support the
academic mission effectively, saving time and adding
value as a collective online reference, and for dynamic and
cost-effective collection management. On the negative
side, Doctorow4 indicates the resolution of an e-book is
too low to effectively replace paper and that we cannot
read an e-book without power and a reading device. Subba
Rao5 and Vassiliou6 provided a more comprehensive set of
definitions and explanations for the contemporary e-book.

2.1 Features of Electronic Books
Developments in information technology enabled us
overcome the limitations of paper books by adding a
series of useful features. E-books are dynamic, reactive,
and can be made available in different formats and/or
editions in a short time. With laptops and e-book reading
devices getting increasingly lighter and more powerful;
and internet connectivity becoming popular and reliable,
e-books are easy to access from anywhere.
From the technological point of view e-books demand
powerful processors, large storage, and the capability to
manage combinations of different types of data. The
motivations for producing e-books are more complex and
deal with economic factors as well. Cognitive issues
related to the ability of readers to use, appreciate, and
prefer books in electronic format to paper ones are also
equally important. The quality aspect also becomes
crucial, and for this reason the design process for
producing e-books has to provide additional value added
features that paper counterparts cannot provide.
Crestani7 attempted a conceptual classification of ebooks based on their features:

•

Page-turner books (imitate or maintain the features of
a classical print book)

•

Scrolling books (text scrolls almost without any
physical limitation. The page no longer exists as a
logical and physical unit, nor does any reference to
page numbers or to the page sequence).

•

Portable books (a bound set of pages using digital ink

110

that replicates the visual clarity of permanent black
ink on white paper. Content dispensed on portable ebook readers. e.g. Kindle, Nook)

•

Multimedia books (provide a mixture of different media
such as video, sound, animation, text, and pictures,
but lesser integration with text. Children like them)

•

Hypermedia books (present textual material and
integrate it with other related sources, such as video,
sounds, and pictures, and provide the reader with
alternative reading/ browsing paths)

•

Cyberbooks (completely free from any physical/
conceptual dependence on the paper book. They are
in a sense, active books with which readers can
interact)

Out of the above, portable books are becoming more
and more popular as appropriate technology has
developed. They imitate the conventional book as a
portable tool for providing information. However, they have
to deal with limitations in screen size, resolution, and
efficiency, but these are all technological rather than
conceptual aspects.

3. CONTENT FORMATS FOR E-BOOKS
There are three basic types of e-book formats: HTML,
document, and hand-held. Each type supports a different
presentation medium for the content and each has its own
benefits and pitfalls.

3.1 HTML
An HTML e-book is created using the hypertext
markup language—the same language used to create a
web page. The core content consists of standard web
pages containing text, graphics, Java applets, and
hyperlinks. Essentially, each page is a single web page
that one would otherwise see on a website. Once the
content is organised, they are compiled into a
compressed executable file. The file runs like any other
application and a suitable web browser needs to be in
place since many of the e-book compilers use the
features of the browser for display and navigation.

3.2 Document
The document e-book is compiled from a standard
document generated in a word-processor. To create such
an e-book, we simply add and format content and images
into a word-processor. Once the core document is
complete, the content is output through a driver that
produces a file with a .pdf extension. These types of
documents, in the portable document format (PDF),
require that the Adobe Acrobat Reader package (freely
downloadable from the internet) be installed on the
machine.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

3.3 Hand-held
The hand-held e-book is generated to run on one of the
many hand-held e-book readers available on the market
today. Creating a hand-held e-book is quite similar to
creating a document, or PDF. The difference is that the
final version is created using a compiler unique to the
target hand-held device.

3.4 Suitability

•

PDF and hand-held style e-books are suitable for
extensive, professional documents, and tend to be
less dynamic than an HTML e-book. These types of ebooks can also be printed into a format that can be
bound if the reader so desires.

•

Interactive e-books display animations or contain
components that change with user access. These
types of e-books are better handled in an HTML ebook. HTML compiled e-books are also better for howto-do, instructional, or informational e-books. E-books
(like Gray’s Anatomy) can be interactive over the
internet and can contain live links, graphics, forms,
shopping carts, JavaScript, embedded video, have
search capabilities, and can be password protected.

4. E-BOOK READING DEVICES
“The art of reading, I’m pleased to realize, is still far
ahead of the art of making e-readers”8.
Libraries have experimented with e-book readers over
a decade, but it was not until the introduction of the Kindle
that they got accepted for lending books. Librarians
tested many of the early e-book readers, to discover their
limitations and scope of possibilities9.
‘E Ink’, which gives the paper like displays used in the
majority of today’s e-book readers, was established on
the basis of Jacobson’s work at MIT in 1997. This brought
about a remarkable change in reading comfort10.
According to Forrester Research just seven percent of
all adults are presently buying e-books, and those seven
percent are already buying 41 per cent of their books
digitally and that these ‘Kindle-connoisseurs’ represent
the biggest demographic segment of consumer book
buyers. In addition to branded reading devices from Sony,
the major booksellers offer their own private label Kindlelike e-readers (such as Barnes & Noble’s Nook and
Borders’ Kobo). Simultaneously, all big retailers also offer
cross-platform reading apps such as ‘Kindle for iPhone’ or
‘BN for Android’. The bookstores are trying to keep up with
Apple and Amazon as long as possible on hardware.

complaints for e-book users. They found moving from
page to page was tedious, and it was difficult to find
specific chapters in the text or to locate particular words.
Mayes12, et al. show that subjects take longer to read
text on a screen than on paper. As for accuracy, students
using digital hypertext on a screen to find out specific
information in the text had higher accuracy than students
using the paper text. For reading comprehension, Dillon13
concludes that comprehension when reading from a
screen is better than reading from paper when performing
substantial searching or manipulation and comparison of
visual details among objects. However other studies have
indicated that visual fatigue is significantly higher with
when reading black objects on a white screen background
than reading paper. In addition, Martin and Platt14 also
found that the medical school students still prefer to read
from paper rather than from a screen.
Usage studies by Kang15 indicate that reading an ebook caused significantly higher eye fatigue than reading
a conventional book (c-book). This is mainly due to the
low contrast and resolution of the display for an e-book. In
addition, the reading efficiency for an e-book was lower
than that of a c-book. Since the reading habit for c-books
was established in childhood, people are more used to
reading c-books than e-books.

5.1 Implications for Individual Readers
Books purchased on Amazon.com that are readable
only on an Amazon Kindle e-reader, books purchased at
Barnes & Noble require a Nook e-reader, and some other
books purchased through Apple are viewable only on the
Apple iBooks app, and so on. The issue of incompatible
formats and the difficulty of organising books bought from
different e-book sellers are two things that one should
consider before committing to a specific e-book platform.
Ultimately, what consumers need is e-books that they
can buy and read anywhere, using any software they
choose on any device they have at hand, whether it be a
phone, a tablet, a laptop, or a PC. This issue is also
critical to library management and to the future success
of e-books.

6 PUBLISHERS PERSPECTIVE

5. USERS PREFERENCES

The web offers an additional advantage for publishers
in that it provides not just a means to reach customers
with product information, but with the product itself. Paul
Coates, publisher of Black Classic Press, asserts ebooks bring a tremendous good for minority authors and
publishers—global markets, diverse content, titles remain
in print forever. He sees the new medium as a way to cut
out the middle man, thereby increasing profits for
producers and lowering costs for readers.

Carlson11 in his survey of users indicates that
navigating through digital text is one of the biggest

E-books are likely to lead to a restructuring of the
publishing industry by enabling cross-border commerce.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

111

Apart from mergers and acquisitions among the existing
publishing houses, new kinds of business models are
developing to deliver the content over the internet.

•

Delivering forms that are born digital, with no precise
counterpart in print.

•

Moving out of established genres and formats: no
book-length novels or biographies, no full-length
cookbooks.

Publishers are also finding it difficult to forecast how
all these developments will turn out. According to
Esposito16, the disruption brought about by online
distribution of digital books is not a one-time thing. The
disruption is a process, with one disruption leading
inexorably to another.

6.1 Multime dia e-books
Though books about technology abound, books
themselves haven’t gone through the same degree of
technological change, as have other forms of
entertainment. In the 133 years since Thomas Edison
invented the phonograph, there have been more than a
dozen commercially available formats for playing back
recorded sound. In the 556 years since Johannes
Gutenberg’s Bible, the paperback and the audio book are
the only other major advanced book publishing formats
besides the e-book17.

6.2 Social Media for Marketing E-books
Content engagement tools such as comment and rate
applications that are widely used to enable ‘sticky’
websites can be deployed for e-books. Social media is
also bringing together readers of a particular title. Upon
opening the e-book file, the readers will have option to
record if they are in a book club or whether they wish to
join one. Real-time commenting or chat could also allow
readers to see what fellow book club members have to
say about the noted passages.

6.3 Cloud Computing for E-books
Software used by book publishers to manage
contracts, royalties, production workflow, sales, and
marketing have begun to migrate from relatively closed
systems that are internally maintained, to cloud-based
platforms on the web. Business drivers behind this
migration include a highly dynamic market for e-books
and other digital products. While questions remain as to
how quickly the transition will take, the possibility of
cloud-based book publishing promises to change the
nature of publishing infrastructure and with it the role of
the IT professionals in publishing18.

7. MAJOR E-BOOK INITIATIVES
Ever since the scanning and digital conversion
technologies became available, libraries around the world
112

started looking at the option of converting their print books
into digital formats with the goal of long-term preservation
and enhancing accessibility. Apart from libraries, few
voluntary organisations also took up the conversion. Even
corporate major, Google got into the business in
collaboration with libraries.

7.1 Project Gutenberg
Project Gutenberg is the first and largest single
collection of free eBooks. The premise on which Michael
Hart based Project Gutenberg was: anything that can be
entered into a computer can be reproduced indefinitely—
what Michael termed ‘Replicator Technology’. The
concept is simple; once a book or any other item
(including pictures, sounds, and even 3-D items) can be
stored in a computer, then any number of copies can and
will be available. Everyone in the world, or even not in this
world (given satellite transmission) can have a copy of a
book that has been entered into a computer. Project
Gutenberg e-texts are presented in ‘Plain Vanilla ASCII’
which is considered to be easy on both the eyes and the
computer.
The project currently offers free download of 38,000 ebooks in the public domain, all digitised by volunteers. In
the years to come, it aims to make available 10 million
books in 100 languages.
Project Gutenberg hosts lot of books, in the areas of
Indian history, philosophy, literature, and even on flora and
fauna of India. One can find the works of Rabindranath
Tagore, Sarojini Naidu, Valmiki to name a few.

7.2 Google Books
Google e-books project is as old as Google itself. In
1996, Google co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page
were graduate computer science students working on a
research project supported by the Stanford Digital Library.
Their goal was to make digital libraries work, and their big
idea was to index the books’ content and analyse the
connections between them, determining any given book’s
relevance and usefulness by tracking the number and
quality of citations from other books.
The crawler they wound up building was called
BackRub, and it was this modern twist on traditional
citation analysis that inspired Google’s PageRank
algorithms—the core search technology that makes
Google what Google is of today.
In December 2004, Google announced the beginning
of the “Google Print” Library Project, made possible by
partnerships with Harvard, the University of Michigan, the
New York Public Library, Oxford and Stanford. The
combined collections at these libraries were estimated to
exceed 15 million volumes. Subsequently, many more
university libraries joined the project. The project went
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

through several litigations and currently hosts huge
number of digitised books in all subjects, some of which
are freely readable.

7.3 Digital Public Library of America Project
The proposed Digital Public Library of America (DPLA)
is expected to serve as an open online collection of
digitised books and texts that project leaders hope could
one day incorporate every volume ever published. DPLA
might index and provide access to a wide range of broadly
distributed content. Guided by a Steering Committee at
the Harvard Law School’s Berkman Center for Internet and
Society, the project remains in its initial planning phase.
The DPLA will be the product of collaboration between
the largest library systems including Harvard, the Library
of Congress, the National Archives, and the Smithsonian
Institution. It intends to make use of existing free and
open source code; all new code funded by the DPLA will
be free and open source. To facilitate and maximise
interoperability, the DPLA platform will support open
standards. It will be freely accessible for others to fork,
host, and replicate with no discrimination based on use or
field of endeavor.

8. SELF PUBLISHING OF E-BOOKS
The internet has not only democratised access to
recorded human knowledge, but even helping potential
writers with creation and distribution of self published econtent. To self publish an e-book one doesn’t need any
special technological expertise. Self publishing is
possible using completely free software called e-book
compilers and one can use the Internet to either sell the ebook or give it away completely free to millions of
people19.
Self publishing is done without the involvement or
vetting of an established publisher and uses a publishing
system such as Lulu, Smashwords, Amazon’s Kindle
Direct Publishing or Barnes & Noble’s PubIt. Preparing
the book is easy using common tools like Microsoft Word
or Google Docs. There are several free e-book compilers
on the net.
Where does this leave authors in the developing world
who feel their works are currently underrepresented? They
can wait like everyone else for this concept to mature.
When it does, they can hope that reduced publishing and
distribution costs enable authors to reach readers in
distant lands. In the meantime, the global monopoly of
book publishers persists.

should include both page design and copy editing
costs. But the actual cost of printing a book is
eliminated, these represent significant costs in
countries that need to import paper and use older,
smaller presses.
(b) Distribution—With web distribution, all publishers and
self-publishing authors can now ship their products for
the cost of a web connection. Web costs are relatively
higher in the developing world, but costs are coming
down, and in any case, much lower than the cost of
actually shipping a box of books.
(c) Improvements in book promotion—Where writers
previously had to absorb costs for mailings and
brochures, they now can use individual websites,
directed e-mail, and cross-postings as a low cost
means of reaching potential readers.
While these are real advantages that open the world to
the books of authors and publishers who might otherwise
be invisible, the e-book effort is not without its own
problems. What may be most daunting to authors is the
confusion within the industry itself.

9. LIBRARY MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS
The increasing popularity of e-books has serious
implications for library management. The library, as a
content manager and provider, is rebalancing various
aspects relating to the development and design of
services for incorporating this new format. The
transformation of the format has serious implications on
the relationship between users and libraries, as well as
between publishers and libraries21.

9.1 Should Every Printed Page be Converted
in Electronic Form ?
The translation from paper to electronic environment
may not be appropriate for every type of publication and
for every type of reader tempting to accomplish have a
central role in judging the suitability of this transition. The
fact that technology is able to represent documents on
the screen may not be a sufficient reason for putting every
piece of paper into electronic format. It is necessary to
consider the subject matter and usage need of the
specific document before deciding if conversion to an
electronic version would be useful or not. But, however,
many conservationists and library activists believe the
other way. They argue that since books in print may not
withstand usability beyond 75 years, e-conversion of all
content is a must for carrying the content to future
generations.

Specifically, e-books present three potential benefits
to third-world authors20.

9.2 Changing Reading Habits of Users

(a) Reduction in publishing costs—These costs are not
reduced to zero, since any electronic publishing effort

The emergence of the internet has introduced new
ways for users to access library resources and has

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

113

shaped user behaviour and expectations. Users now
insist on instant and constant access to information,
often from distant locations, and as a result, remote
access to online library resources has become an
increasingly significant part of library service. People
spend time in finding micro information rather than reading
from cover to cover.
Users also require a federated search tool to
simultaneously search the library catalogues (for print
books) as well as the e-books accessible to them22. The
speed and ease of federated search tools make them
appealing, particularly the novice searchers. They do not
need to learn how to formulate searches in each of the
databases, nor must they learn how to interpret the
different results sets; federated search tools typically
display results in a common format. An efficient federated
search engine allows searching to be done in a timely
manner and eliminates the need for a user to learn
multiple search interfaces. Many federated search
interfaces also provide facility for deduplication.

views. Depending on the vision one supports,
conventional books will either become largely obsolete as
iPads, iPhones, Kindles, Nooks, tablets and dozens of
other yet-to-be-imagined e-book readers grow to
dominate the market; or publisher-produced print-onpaper will remain the primary means of interacting with
lengthy textual material. But librarians are generally
unconvinced that any existing e-book reader allows for a
more productive means of scholarly engagement than the
physical book.
At this point of time, while it is difficult to predict
whether e-books would totally substitute paper books,
they would certainly play a crucial role in education and
research. For a developing country like India, e-books
make more sense to leapfrog and achieve 100 percent
literacy.

REFERENCES
1.

Plato & Waterfield, Robin. Phaedrus. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2002.

9.3 Coping Up with E-books Quantity in
Future

2.

Press, L. From p-books to e-book. Communication of
the ACM, 2000, 43(5), 170-21.

Recently librarians have conceived23 a Global Library
Consortium (GLC) at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard. It is
the brainchild of Frances Pinter, former publisher of
Bloomsbury Academic in the UK, and founder of EIFL
(http://www.eifl.net/), an international library consortium of
consortia supporting greater access to information.

3.

Cox, J. E-book: Challenges and opportunities. D-Lib
Magazine, 2004, 10(10), 1082–093.

4.

Doctorow, C. Ebooks: Neither E, nor books. In
O’Reilly Emerging Technologies Conference, San
Diego,
CA,
2004.
http://craphound.com/
ebooksneitherenorbooks.txt (accessed on 1 February
2012).

5.

Rao, S.S. Familiarisation of electronic books.
Electronic Library, 2001, 19(1), 247-56.

6.

Vassiliou, M. & Rowley, J. Progressing the definition
of e-book. Library Hi Tech, 2008, 26(3), 355-68.

7.

Crestani, F.; Landoni, M. & Melucci, M. Appearance
and functionality of electronic books: lessons from the
visual book and hyper-textbook projects. Inter. J.
Digital Libr., 2006, 6(2), 192-09.

8.

O’Donnell, J.J. An idea whose time has almost come.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 2010, 56(38), B10.

9.

Clark, D.T. Lending Kindle e-book readers: First
results from the Texas A&M University project.
Collection Building, 2009, 28(4), 146-49.

The GLC proposal would operate with libraries pooling
together into a membership coalition that purchases the
rights to titles offered by participating publishers. Those
books would then be made available on an open access
basis, perhaps with Creative Commons license terms.
Libraries would place bids for each offered title into a pool,
and if there was sufficient interest to hit the price trigger
point, the publisher would release the title into the open
access pool with costs apportioned among participating
institutions. Once made open access, titles would be
publicly readable through a web browser interface, but
downloadable PDFs or EPUBs would only be freely
available to GLC members.
According to one estimate, by 2020 university
libraries may no longer need circulation desks (National
Center for Education Statistics data)24. This claim appears
reasonable, considering the increasing flood of e-books
and e-journals into libraries, and decreasing dependence
on print resources.

10. CONCLUSIONS
Today, determining the library shelf space is a far
more philosophical undertaking, as questions regarding
the future of the book invoke strong and often opposing
114

10. Harris, S. Emergence of the e-book. Nature
Photonics, 2010, 4, 748-49.
11. Carlson, S. Students complain about devices for
reading e-book, study finds. Chronicle Higher Edu.,
2002.
12. Mayes, D.K.; Sims, V.K. & Koonce, J.M.
Comprehension and workload differences for VDT and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

paper-based reading. Inter. J. Indust. Ergon., 2001,
28 (6), 367-78.
13. Dillon, A. Designing usable electronic text. Ed. 2.
Taylor and Francis, London, 2004.
14. Martin, L.A. & Platt, M.W. Printing and screen
reading in the medical school curriculum: Guttenberg
vs. the cathode ray tube. Behav. Inf. Technol., 2001,
20, 143-48.
15. Kang, Y.Y.; Wang, M.J.J. & Lin, R. Usability
evaluation of e-books. Displays, 2009, 30(1), 49-52.
16. Esposito, J.J. One world publishing, brought to you
by the internet. Publish. Res. Quart., 2011, 27, 13-18.
17. Hollander, S. Listen to the music: Lessons for
publishers from record labels’ digital debut decade.
Publish. Res. Quart., 2011, 27, 26-35.
18. Hill, T. The inevitable shift to cloud-based book
publishing: The next step in the digital transformation
of book publishing may be closer than you think.
Publish. Res. Quart., 2012, (in press) published
online 19 January 2012. DOI: 10.1007/s12109-0119249-9
19. Oghojafor, K. E-book publishing success: How
anyone can write, compile and sell e-books on the
internet. Chandos Publishing, Oxford, 2005.
20. Wresch, W. Perspectives on the right to publish:
Global inequalities, digital publications, and the
legacy of revolutionary France. Ethics Inf. Technol.,
2003, 5, 117-27.
21. Romero, N.L. The management of e-book collections
and their implication on the economic management of
the library. The Bottom Line: Manag. Lib. Finan.,
2011, 24(3), 173-79.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(2)

22. Foust, J.E.; Bergen, P.; Maxeiner, G.L. & Pawlowski,
P.N. Improving e-book access via a library-developed
full-text search tool. J. Med. Lib. Asso., 2007, 95(1),
40-45.
23. Brantley, Peter. Academic e-books: Innovation and
transition. Publishers Weekly, 3 February 2012 http:/
/www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/digital/
content-and-e-books/article/50486-academic-ebooks-innovation-and-transition.html (accessed on 5
February 2012)
24. Kurt, Will. The end of academic library circulation?
ACRL Tech Connect, 1 February 2012. http://
acrl.ala.org/techconnect/?p=233 (accessed on 10
February 2012)

About the Author
Shri Potluri Divakar has been handling scientific
information for the past 35 years. After graduating in
Biology at Loyola College, Vijayawada he obtained his
masters degree in Zoology with specialisation in
Parasitology from Andhra University, Visakhapatnam. He
obtained Associateship in Documentation and Information
Science from Indian Statistical Institute. He joined
ICRISAT, Hyderabad in the Sorghum and Millets
Information Centre in 1977. Currently, he is managing the
Knowledge Resource Centre at CCMB Hyderabad. He is
a Guest Faculty for various library science programmes at
IGNOU, BRAOU, University of Hyderabad, and Osmania
University. He has also been associated with UGC
Academic Staff Colleges, DRDO and CSIR-HRDC as
resource person for in-service training programmes. His
areas of interest include library management, scientific
information searching, and scientometrics.

115

