DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 197-203
© 2012, DESIDOC

Patent Information and Search
Pradeep P. Paranjpe
Patent Information System, CGO Complex, Seminary Hills, Nagpur-440 006
E-mail: paranjpe_pradeep@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
An important purpose of working of the patent system has been to ensure that the complete details of
the inventions sought to be patented pass in the public domain. Governments compensate the inventor for
this public disclosure by granting patent. However, access to this information was limited to the ‘on site’
availability in the patent offices and a limited number of libraries. Globalisation of economies forced international
cooperation in the field of patents and this coincided with the advent of internet. Today more than 95 per cent
of the patent information published worldwide is available on internet for anyone to access it freely without
any user fee. However, except for those who are very closely associated with the patent system, it is still
not understood that there is much more to patent information than being a reluctant disclosure of the invention
by an applicant for patent who tries to hide more than what is disclosed. This article attempts to dispel the
myths by explaining the nature of patent information and the contents of its carrier, namely, patent document.
It further surveys the availability of the patent information on internet, explains the structure of the free patent
databases including some basic features of searching patent information on internet.
Keywords: Patent information, patent search, patent database

1. INTRODUCTION
‘To secure the knowledge of the invention from being
lost’ was the stated objective of first Indian Patent law
promulgated in 18561. Since then, the patent law has
undergone many changes. However, this important role of
patent system has never been forgotten. The patent
offices all over the world are under obligation to publish the
knowledge of the invention which the applicant for patent
is obliged to disclose. Unfortunately, it has never been
utilised to its full potential due to various reasons ranging
from total ignorance of its existence to the lack of this
information was cumbersome. Since then, appreciation of
its multiple uses. Until early 1980s, access to there has
been a sea change. What was available only within the
four walls of the patent offices and a few libraries serving
as inspection centers, has now become available at the
click of the mouse, thanks to the advent of internet and
the very proactive decision of the patent offices to make
their patent databases available through internet, free of
charge. Cooperation between patent offices such as
trilateral agreement2 between the US Patent and Trade
Mark Office (USPTO), European Patent Office (EPO) and
Japanese Patent Office (JPO) has ensured that the patent
information of more than 80 countries is available in
searchable form in English, free on internet. Today, the
Received 09 December 2011, online published 18 May 2012

precision of the result of patent search is limited only by
the skill and knowledge of the searcher, the limitations of
the databases and the search engines.

2. PATENT INFORMATION
In the context of patents, an invention is an
industrially applicable, technical solution to a technical
problem. Besides industrial applicability, novelty and
inventive ingenuity of an invention are essential
qualifications for grant of a patent by the patent office.
Novelty and inventive ingenuity of the invention is judged
by the patent office with respect to the body of published
knowledge (prior art) as on date of filing the application for
patent. Thus, all applications for patents must add to the
technical knowledge existing as on date of filing the
application for patent.
All such applications for patents are published by the
patent office unless the applicant for patent withdraws it
within the permissible period. Since a grant of patent
creates property rights, armed with which the patentee
seeks commercial exploitation, this technical knowledge
has legal and commercial connotations. After the first
publication, the application for patent may be further
published at various stages of the process of grant of
197

patent and thereafter, incorporating amendments if any.
There are many other variants of patents such as utility
models, etc. which are also published. Patent document
is a term used for all such publications and the
information contained in these documents is called
Patent Information.

3. NATURE OF A PATENT DOCUMENT
Since patent document is the primary source of
patent information, it is essential that a user understands
the nature of contents of the patent document clearly.
Fortunately, patent documents are written and published
in a standard format and even the legalese of the patent
documents follows a more or less standard pattern and
terminology. The patent document published by the
patent office has four distinct parts: (i) First page, (ii)
Drawings, (iii) Description, and (iv) Claims.
The first page3 is added by the patent office at the time
of publication. It functions as a cover page and provides
complete bibliographic data of the patent document. The
description of each bibliographic data is preceded by a
number given in bracket. These numbers are
Internationally Agreed Numbers for Identification of
Bibliographic Data often referred as INID codes4. They are
useful to identify the nature of bibliographic data on the
first page, even if the reader is not familiar with the
language of the document. Thus, data against INID code
21 will always be ‘Application Number’ even if it is written
in a German patent in German language as
‘Aktenzeichen’.
The use of these INID codes still continues to be
important during physical inspection of the patent
document or its image but it has really no significance in
searching patent information on patent databases online.
Besides, the purely legally relevant information, the
technical information, that the first page provides
includes: (i) Title, (ii) Abstract, (iii) Representative
drawing, and (iv) Patent classification. Search reports
(result of search carried out by the examiner of patent)
may be part of the first page (US patents) or may be
included as an additional page.
The full list of bibliographic data and the INID codes is
available in the publication of World Intellectual Property
Organisation (WIPO) titled ‘Handbook on Industrial
Property Information and documentation’. It is available on
WIPO’s website in downloadable form. The drawings are
generally given on independent pages and are referenced
in the description specifically. The drawings illustrate the
most important embodiment of the invention. The
drawings may be provided for other variants of the
invention as well. In case of chemical patents, the
formulae or flow diagrams may be given in the drawings
but it is not uncommon to find them embedded in the
description.
198

The description is sequenced more or less in a
standard format. To begin with, it may reiterate the title of
the invention, followed by identification of the field of
invention. An example of a typical statement of field of
invention is5:
“The present invention relates to wireless
communications and, in particular, to a modified EVDO
wireless interface to facilitate communications from a
mobile terminal via a satellite relay”.
This is followed by a section on background. This
section provides survey of relevant prior art as known to
the applicant along with a recital of problems that have
been left unsolved. Thus, it brings into focus the need for
the invention. This narrative is followed by a summary of
the invention which the applicant for patent has proposed.
Next is the specific reference to drawings and their brief
description. This is followed by a full and detailed
description of the invention with reference to drawings.
The applicant for patent is under obligation to disclose at
least the best embodiment of the invention fully and
upfront.
In addition, the applicant, in a bid to show the
versatility of the invention and also to create a basis for
claiming as many embodiments as possible, gives
several examples and then invariably specifies that his/
her claim is not limited to the examples but also covers
other obvious variants. A typical statement5 reads
“The description of the embodiments is intended to be
illustrative, and not to limit the scope of the claims. As
such, the present teachings can be readily applied to
other types of apparatuses and many alternatives,
modifications, and variations will be apparent to those
skilled in the art.”
The claims are at the end of the patent document. The
claims clearly define the invention as claimed by the
applicant for patent. The scope of the claims is entirely
dependant on the disclosure in the description.
Hence, it can be surmised that the patent document
is technical document, written in a most precise and clear
manner so as to stand scrutiny of the court of law. It must
be noted, however, that the applicant for patent is not
obliged to provide any theoretical explanation for his
invention. One can not also expect the patent document
to read like a recipe. It is addressed to the mythical ‘man
in the art’ who may be an excellent workman but not a
theoretician or a genius.

4. TYPES OF PATENT DOCUMENTS
For a single invention and from a single application for
patent there can be a series of publications, such as
those published:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

•

Before examination by the patent office: As filed by
the applicant for patent

•

After examination: Incorporating changes agreed
between the patent office and the applicant

•

After disposal of opposition to grant: Incorporating
changes as ordered by the hearing authority

•

After the grant: The document which is the basis for
enforcement of patent rights

•

After post grant amendments: As may be ordered by
the competent tribunal/court of law

•

In between the above stages with additional
information: There may be other publication events
such as publication with search report, etc.

Each such individual patent document for the same
invention is identified by assigning a unique code called
kind of document code6 but, generally, the word
description of the kind of document is also available on
the patent document. All such publications disclose the
information about the same invention. However, their
contents may vary in details. For example, the patent
document published before examination may contain a
set of claims which may get modified later as a result of
examination proceedings. The purpose for which patent
information is to be used decides which kind of patent
document should be searched, retrieved and read. Thus,
for ascertaining the rights conferred on the patentee as on
date, the latest publication of a granted patent with
amendment if any will have to be looked at.

5. PRIORITY DATA7
Although the reference date for decision regarding
novelty and inventive ingenuity of an invention is the date
of filing an application for patent in a given patent office,
Paris Convention7 allows the applicant to file an
application for patent in one office (say his/her own
country) and then file application elsewhere within 12
months from the date of this earlier filing with the
reference date for these later filings being taken as date of
filing in the first patent office. However, to claim this
advantage or priority7, the applicant has to claim it and
declare the name of the country where he filed first
(priority country), the date on which the application was
filed there (priority date) and the unique identification
number allotted to the application by the priority country
(priority number). These three together constitute priority
data.

filing or across the countries wherever the patenting
process proceeds. It is important to remember that these
documents may not be exactly identical but certainly
contain information regarding the same invention. All such
documents which have at least one unique priority data
common are members of a patent family. This feature not
only helps the searcher by drastically reducing the actual
number of documents to be searched but also helps in
surmounting the language barrier. To know the details of
an invention disclosed in a Japanese patent it may not be
necessary to know Japanese language or to get it
translated because one can access the US patent
document (if it exists) which belongs to the same family.
As explained later, searching to retrieve all family
members of a patent family is easy.

7. PATENT SEARCH
Patent search means search and retrieval of relevant
patent information contained in patent documents to meet
the needs of the intended use. A searcher is also
expected to analyse the information so retrieved and
present the results of the analysis to the end user. Hence,
patent search is a domain of experts who not only
understand the nature of patent information and possess
the skill to search and retrieve relevant patent information
but also have technical capacity to read, interpret and
analyse the patent information. Almost the whole world’s
patent information is available online in searchable patent
databases, the focus of this paper will be entirely on
searching patent databases online.

8. PATENT DATABASE
A patent database is constituted by a collection of
patent documents and/or elements of information units
concerning these documents. Each unique patent
document constitutes a record and series of information
units concerning the patent document constitute fields of
the database. These fields correspond to the bibliographic
data (including abstract) and claims and full patent
specifications. Some databases offer many more
searchable fields. Respective websites hosting the
databases provide full list of such searchable fields. Many
patent databases are available for searching. List of some
of these which provide free access9, 10:

•

Australia
http://www.ipaustralia.gov.au

•

Canada.
http://patents1.ic.gc.ca/intro-e.html

6. PATENT FAMILY8

•

From the above two sections, it is clear that for a
single invention the process of patenting can give rise to a
large number of patent documents within the country of

European Patent Office.
http://www.espacenet.com

•

India
http://ipindia.nic.in/ipr/patent/patents.htm

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

199

•

Japan
http://www.ipdl.inpit.go.jp/homepg_e.ipdl

•

New Zealand
http://www.iponz.govt.nz/cms/_template/IPPATENT

•

People’s Republic of China
http://www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo_English/

•

Singapore
http://www.epatents.gov.sg/PE/

•

United States of America
http://www.uspto.gov/patft/index.html

•

United Kingdom
http://www.ipo.gov.uk/patent.htm

•

SurfIP
http://www.surfip.gov.sg/

•

Freepatentsonline
http://www.freepatentsonline.com/search.html

•

Google
http://www.google.com/patents

•

PatentScope (WIPO)
http://www.wipo.int/pctdb/en/

•

Patent lens
http://www.patentlens.net/

Some examples of licensed and fee-based databases
are World Patent Index (WPI), Marpat, MicroPatent
Patent Index (MPI), and QPAT. These fee-based
databases provide many specialised services and these
are value added databases. For patentability searches
(mentioned later in this article), their quality is
unbeatable, but for most other purposes the free patent
databases are adequate. The above lists are not
exhaustive though. No attempt is made here to describe
the contents and features of the individual databases
because the respective websites will provide help in
understanding and using the databases and the reader
will enhance his knowledge and skill in patent searching
by trying out simple searches using the help provided in
the respective databases.

9. PATENT DATABASES SEARCHING
Searching for patent information in patent databases
is an intellectual activity. Developing correct search
strategy is the key to a successful search. The strategy
for search will depend on the purpose of the search. One
or more strategies need to be developed and then
prioritised. Each strategy may be tried on sample basis
and then refined. For each strategy, one or more search
queries (which define the fields to be used, search terms
to be used in each field, operators to be used within the
field or across the field and order of precedence which the
search engine should follow) will have to be framed to
ensure that all the patent information required to fulfill the
200

purpose of search is obtained as a result of search. Next
step is the choice of the database(s) which will accept the
search query. However, one may be required to alter the
search strategy according to the database(s) available. In
fact, the choice of the data for selection of a database, a
thorough knowledge of the database is essential. Besides
the knowledge of the contents of the database (the
coverage by country, type of patent documents, the
publication dates of earliest and latest document covered,
gaps within the stated range), the fields that are
searchable, and operators that are acceptable for
operation within the individual search fields and across
the search fields must be known. A database may allow
the searcher to build his/her own complex search query
by use of various operators but some databases provide
easy to use stepwise formats and search windows which
can be used to build a fairly complex search query. It is
very important that the searcher knows the format in
which an entry in a search form is to be input. The rules
and methods governing manner of entry of query in the
searchable fields are given with examples in all the
databases and searcher should familiarise himself/herself
with the same.
Various levels of searching such as quick search,
smart search, expert search, advanced search are offered
by the databases. These levels differ in the complexity
allowable in the search. Searcher must also know the
extent of information which can be retrieved and the
stepwise method of getting it. Generally, the databases
provide a list of patent documents with title of the invention
(and some very important bibliographic data such as
publication date, etc.) as a first step result. The searcher
may select one or more of the documents from this list
and ask for next level details which generally include full
bibliographic data and an abstract of the invention. In the
next step (menu driven) one may get to see claims,
description and drawings or even the facsimile image of
the full document. The databases allow downloading of
search result at every step. Some databases allow the
searcher control over the display formats and the
contents. Based on knowledge of all these features and
matching the same with the search query requirements
selection of one or more databases for searching is done.
Searching in some typical fields is explained as:
9.1 Document Number Fields
Searching under document number field may be
performed for specific published patent document and
patent family.
9.1.1 Searching for a Specific Published Patent
Document
Typical and most commonly used field is the
‘publication number’. The patent document number
usually incorporates the code for publication country. The
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

search may have to be refined by using another
distinguishing identifier of a document such as kind of
document or date of publication in corresponding fields if
available and necessary. Result will invariably be a single
document.
9.1.2 Searching Patent Family
Using priority data in priority number field (if available)
will enable retrieval of all patent documents belonging to
the same patent family. Although, at least one priority
data is the common strand of a patent family, there may
be patent documents for the same invention which do not
share this common strand because the applicant may not
have claimed a priority. The solution is to use inventor
name (please see below) for searching. While it is not
mandatory to claim priority, it is mandatory that the name
of the inventor is disclosed.
Even if the applicant for patent has filed in two different
countries without claiming priority, the inventor name will
be same for documents published in both the countries.
Hence, by using inventor name as the search term, such
family members can also be retrieved. If the field provided
is simply “Document Number Field” then the appropriate
document (s) out of the list of documents bearing same
number can be selected based on the other bibliographic
data displayed.
9.2 Name Fields
Searching under name field may be performed for
specific published patent document in the name of a
specific applicant or assignee and by inventor name.
9.2.1 Name of a Specific Applicant or Assignee
The search in the field for applicant/assignee name
has to be carefully executed taking into consideration the
variations in the names of the same parent company in
different countries. Some databases provide facility to use
codes assigned to such companies and it may be useful
to use these codes instead of names in the assignee
code field. These searches help in tracking inventive and
consequently likely commercial and business activity of
the chosen company. If the company is active in several
technology fields then adding parameter of the technology
in the appropriate search field (e.g. patent classification
for the technology) with ‘AND’: Boolean operator will give
this perspective technology-wise.
9.2.2 Searching for Patent by Inventor Name
The use of inventor name to locate patent family
members has been mentioned above. This search is
useful for tracking inventive activity of a chosen inventor.
The most common problem in name searches is the
possible variations in the spellings of a name.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

9.3

Technology Fields

Patent documents for specific technology may be
searched using patent classification and by using
keywords. Citation search is a specialised technology
search as described in section 9.5
9.3.1 Searching for Patent Documents for Specific
Technology by Patent Classification
Patent classification is an excellent tool to search
patents pertaining to a technology to the level as specific
as the definition of the scope of a classification symbol.
There are several patent classification systems in use.
While national patent classification may be the most
appropriate search field for searching patent documents
of that specific country (e.g. use US classification for
searching US patent documents in the patent database of
USPTO), searches for patents of other countries are best
done using IPC field. A problem with using IPC for search
is the inconsistency in classification amongst different
countries. The European Patent Classification may be the
best option to search patents in the worldwide patent
database hosted by the European Patent Office because
of its unbeatable consistency. Each patent document that
is included in the worldwide database is reclassified by
the European Patent office as per the European Patent
Classification. The result is unbeatable consistency in
classification. The prerequisite for searching by
classification is thorough knowledge of the classification
system chosen. However, those unfamiliar with the
classification system may simply copy the classification
symbol assigned to a known patent document pertaining
to the technology under consideration. Function oriented
and application oriented patent classifications relevant for
a technology can be used with Boolean operator OR to
get patents from both these perspectives. For obtaining
patent documents for inventions which have identifiable
multiple facets or relevance, one can use more than one
classification, each representing a specific facet and then
use the Boolean operator ‘AND’ between them.
9.3.2 Searching for Specific Technologies by Keywords
Appropriate field to be used may be title of the
invention or abstract of the invention or the claims or the
full specification. Search through title may suffer because
of very less number of key words or presence of generic
terms and searching full patent specification may suffer
from too many words to search through. Searching claims
suffer from the words used being too legalese and
generic. By and large, abstract field is generally used for
keyword searching. The advantage of the abstracts is that
these abstracts are either the abstracts as considered
appropriate by the applicant and/or the patent office which
has the responsibility of first page and reflect the
characteristic features of the invention and use as well.
201

Some databases revise the titles (calling it extendable
title) and also rewrite the abstracts for greater utility. Use
of unique keywords, use of phrases and intelligent use of
synonyms (with ‘OR’ Boolean operator) are the important
prerequisites for good search results. If at all search is
conducted in full patent specification then use of
proximity operators is recommended.

This search is needed by: (i) inventors/applicants for
patents who would like to be sure about the novelty and/or
inventive ingenuity of their invention before filing an
application for patent, (ii) By examiners of patents of the
patent office before recommending grant of patent, (iii) By
those who are challenging the grant of patent, (iv) Those
who want to challenge allegation of infringement.

9.3.3

9.6 State-of-the-Art Search

Date Fields Searching for Patent Documents
Applied/Published

These fields are rarely used if at all alone. The date
field is always used in conjunction with other fields. The
Boolean operator used between the date field and other
field will invariably be ‘AND’. Within the date field
operators which define cut off dates (from this date
onwards, between two dates, prior to this date) need be
correctly used as per requirement.
9.4 Date Fields
9.4.1

Searching using Documents Cited in Search
Reports and References in Patent Documents

This is one of the most important and yet simple
method to retrieve patent documents pertaining to a given
technology. The premise is that if document A has been
cited by the examiner of patent in the search report for an
invention described in document B then A and B must
have closely related technical features. Now a document
(say C) cited in the search report of document B should
be close to B and hence A, B, and C all will be close
relatives of each other, A being the youngest and B being
the oldest. Hence, if one has retrieved (by any other
means) document A. it is possible to retrieve all its older
close relatives. To get the relatives younger than A, it will
be necessary to conduct a search for all documents in
which the document A (or B or C) has been cited.
Theoretically, one may obtain a good collection of patent
documents from latest to the oldest pertaining to a given
technology. Patent databases provide for such searches.
9.5 Some Important Patent Searches using
Technical Fields
9.5.1

Search to Decide Patentability of Invention

This search is conducted for ascertaining whether the
invention under consideration is novel and whether it
possesses inventive ingenuity. The search seeks to
retrieve all patent documents which disclose one or more
or all of the characteristic features of the invention as
claimed. The period of search may extend (backwards)
from the date of priority claimed to say 25 years (though
theoretically this limit can not be specified it is practical).
The patent documents will include patent documents from
all the countries (but generally restricted to what is called
PCT minimum documentation).
202

This search is carried out for patent documents
pertaining to a very specific technology and the purpose is
to know different technical solutions that have been
offered to specific problems in the technology under
consideration and to determine the state of development
of the technology. The period of search depends on the
rate of development in the technology but in general can
be restricted to last 5 to 15 years.
These searches are generally carried out before
initiating research to solve a technical problem. This
search may also be useful to find trends in the
development of technology in general or by specific
companies. For the later the applicant/assignee field will
have to be used in AND relationship with the technical
field.

10. CONCLUSIONS
Globalisation has brought importance of patents and
patent information into focus in last 20 years as never
before. The easy, quick (and free) availability of patent
information makes it imperative that every body in the
business of searching and retrieving technical information
is fully aware of the value of patent information and
acquires knowledge and skills for retrieving patent
information. The brief introduction to patent information
and patent searching may help the uninitiated to take first
steps in searching patent information for profit.

REFERENCES
1. James, T.A. Patent protection in India: Policy and
trends. In Conference on Intellectual Property Rights,
Globalisation and Related Issues, New Delhi, 2007.
2. Patent trilateral activities. United States Patent and
Trademark Office. http://www.trilateral.net/index.html
3. WIPO Standard ST.10/B. WIPO Handbook on
Industrial Property Information and Documentation.
3.10.2.1
4. WIPO Standard ST.9. WIPO Handbook on Industrial
Property Information and Documentation. 3.9.03.9.12
5. Patent
Document
31/08/2008.

No.

WO2008014520A2,

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

6. WIPO Standard ST.16. WIPO Handbook on Industrial
Property Information and Documentation. 3.16.13.9.2.
7. Paris Convention for Protection of Industrial Property,
March 20, 1883 including revision and amendments
thereafter: Article 4
8. EPO-patent families. http://www.epo.org/searching/
essentials/patent-families.html
9. National office databases, WIPO. http://www.wipo.
int/scope/en/dbsearch/national_databases.html
10. End-user patent searching using open access
sources. http://www.istl.org/10-inter/internet.html1.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

About the Author
Dr Pradeep P. Paranjpe, former lecturer in Nagpur
University, served for more than 5 years as an Examiner of
Patents and Designs in the Indian Patent Office, and later
worked in the Patent Information Systems, Nagpur for
more than two decades, with 11 years as Deputy Chief
Executive Officer. He received training in Patent
Searching and Patent Information Management at the
then USSR Patent Office in Moscow and The European
Patent Office in The Hague. Presently, he is associated
with SEARCH, an NGO at Gadchiroli and as a visiting
faculty at various institutes, imparting training in patent
information.

203

