DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 204-213
© 2012, DESIDOC

Tools for Search, Analysis and Management of Patent Portfolios
Muqbil Burhan and Sudhir K. Jain
Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology, Hauz Khas, Delhi-110 016
E-mail: muqbil.burhan@dmsiitd.org; Skjain51@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
Patents have been acknowledged worldwide as rich sources of information for technology forecasting,
competitive analysis and management of patent portfolios. Because of the high potential of patents as an
important indicator of various technology measurements and as econometric measure, patent analysis has
become vital for corporate world and of interest to academic research. Retrieving relevant prior art, concerning
the technology of interest, has been vital for managers and consultants dealing with intellectual property
rights. Tremendous progress in the field of electronic search tools as of late has led to a specialised and less
time consuming search capabilities even in the fields where search is mostly based on formulas, drawings
and flowcharts. Online patent databases and various other analytical tools have given patent analysis an
important edge, which otherwise required extensive and time consuming data collection and calculations.
Patents provide valuable information which could be used for various purposes by industry, academia, and
policy analysts. This article explores the various options and tools available for patent search, analysis and
management of patent portfolios, for efficiently identifying the relevant prior art, managing their own patent
clusters and/or competitive intelligence.
Keywords: Intellectual property rights, patent portfolio management, competitive intelligence, prior art

1.

INTRODUCTION

In the present economy, management and protection
of knowledge is of prime focus in corporate strategy.
Technology monitoring systems that allow timely
anticipation of technology change within the competitive
environment, in a situation where a significant portion of
the technical information is contained in patent
documents and not published in any other form, have
become the cornerstone of technology management1.
Patents offer a wealth of information and if properly
processed and analysed can yield a wealth of information
on competitors’ activities, R&D trends, emerging fields,
collaborations, etc., apart from uncovering relevant prior
art and decreasing the risk in huge R&D investments.
Public disclosure of patent application in the form of
publication takes place within 18 months of its filing. In
spite of a time lag of around 2 years of disclosure from the
invention and widely varying filing practices, patents
remain one of the most reliable and comprehensive
source of information on R&D activity and together with
the products in development and market data form the
backbone of competitive intelligence activities in various
technology sectors2.
Received 09 December 2011, online published 18 May 2012

Patent portfolios analysis holds an important strategy
for companies to give them a reasonably accurate idea of
the volume of the activity in specific research areas, reveal
the underlying trends, and detect emerging or hidden
information or deviations from expected patterns while
carrying competitive intelligence. Patent analysis is an
important tool for research activities, for example on
collaborations, location of research work, key inventors,
licensing, etc. Irrespective of the purpose for searching a
patent database, information from a patent document can
be retrieved based on bibliographic data, full-text or
surrogate documents. Surrogate document would mean
an abstract, series of keywords, series of indexing terms,
claims, title, IPC information, etc.3
Tremendous progress in the field of electronic search
tools as of late has led to a specialised and less time
consuming search capabilities even in the fields where
search is mostly based on formulas, drawings and
flowcharts, etc.4 Some of the examples include Markush
formulas,5 combinatorial chemistry,6 drawing and
flowcharts in mechanics,7 and sequences in biology.8
Internet search has been a vital and irreplaceable tool for
patent and non-patent prior art search.9,10
204

2. TYPES OF PATENT STUDIES
Most patent offices, and in particular industrialised
countries, including the International searching
authorities, have developed procedures for performing
searches for patent applications. Patent search options
are available on regional patent office sites, which offers
raw patent search. With the advent of various online
patent search tools and databases, the patent search and
analysis has become more rigorous and convenient for
purposes of industrial interest. These search tools provide
various options of search, analysis, sorting and
representation of valuable information present in patent
data. To achieve satisfactory results, companies seek
help from legal firms and/or various knowledge process
outsourcing groups for a comprehensive search. These
groups offer search and analysis of data for various
purposes of interest to different industries. Apart from
patent data, non-patent data is also of great importance
depending on the types and purpose of search. Various
strategies are followed to get the relevant hits (results).
Huge importance associated with these searches and
analysis for the companies seeking information has made
patent search and analysis a lucrative and heavily paid
job, charging the clients based on hourly services.

2.1 Patent Landscape Search
A Patent Landscape search is a very comprehensive
patent search in a given technical discipline which offers a
deeper analysis of a state of the art search. This helps in
taking an informed decision based on the bigger picture
offered by a systemised and analysed large pool of patent
data. Patent Landscape reveals the past and present
activities of various entities in a given area of technology
by way of graphical representation and visuals displays of
patent data and segregated based on various search
fields, such as keywords, citations, inventors, assignee,
classifications, etc. This helps in revealing the patenting
trends, competitor’s R&D over the years, monitor markets
and rapid innovations in the field of interest, identify gaps
in R&D, compare one’s own patent portfolio to determine
the valuable patents, and potential customers for
licensing, etc.1,11,12 In this kind of patent search, the
definition of the technical subject matter of interest is
usually relatively broad, although a combination with
precise keywords of IPC sub-classes or by (range of) IPC
main groups can be used to delimit the search4.

2.2 Validity Search
Validity search involves patent and non-patent
literature search based on selected claims of an issued
patent and is required for several reasons. Apart from
helping in the valuation of a patent where the closely
related prior art may bring the value down and no such
discovery will make the patent strong, validity search is
brought up during litigations and more often to identify
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

references that may challenge the presumption of validity
of a subject patent.
A strong understanding of the subject and some
creativity is required while identifying analogous
technologies that may also fit into the claim limitations.
This also requires a very broad interpretation of selected
claims to successfully define the scope of a validity
search. Search cut-off date or ‘critical date’ for search is
another important factor for consideration and depends on
the national laws in the issuing country from which the
subject patent originates13. Even if such art does not
seem to constitute a direct challenge to the claims, it
may still form the basis for a legal argument against
validity.

2.3 Prior Art, Novelty or Patentability Search
A preliminary patentability search before filing a
patent application gives an idea of closest related prior art
and, therefore, helps in drafting the patent claims ‘around’
the existing information. This helps in explaining the
novelty of the technology to the examiner. Patentability
searches are, basically, quick searches often carried out
to quickly scan a large set of search results for prior art
that appears relevant to the main idea. This also aids in
drafting patent specifications and defining the appropriate
breadth of claims. Novelty being the universal requirement
for patentability, these types of searches are very widely
carried globally in order to explain this criteria in the
patent application. Other criteria like ‘non-obviousness’,
‘usefulness or industrial application’ etc. are also included
in most patent laws. These criteria influence the
formulation of claims14. Although ‘Novelty’ criteria is
defined by the technical features explained in claims,
criteria like “non-obviousness” cannot be devised without
taking into account the way the prior art will be used
during the substantive examination phase4. This
influences the search strategy and therefore, one should
ideally carry prior art search like the patent examiner.

2.4 Freedom to Operate or Infringement
Search
A ‘freedom to operate (FTO) search’ examines the
claims language of third-party in-force patents to identify
those enforced patents or published patent applications
with claims that cover the target technology, process, or
product and is typically conducted as due diligence to
assess the risk of potential infringement. Infringement or
FTO search enable the company to determine the
barriers, if any, in the form of patents in their territories of
commercial interest for exercising desired industrial
activities8. This also provides direction to product
development programmes and uncovers licensing needs.
These searches hold very high importance for companies,
especially, before launching a new product. Failure to
identify patent that may be infringed by the product can
205

result in heavy financial losses in the form of costly legal
actions with uncertain outcome15. The search includes
active patents, published and pending patent
applications, and also expired patents (as potential
clearing documents). Broad full-text searches are
performed on the patent databases in the countries of
interest. Final results are based on a full review of the
claims of the most relevant located patents. Due to this
high importance associated with this type of search,
companies seek stringent search strategies for precision
in the results. Sometimes, other non-subject data (e.g.
country codes, expired or not patents, own patents, nonpatent literature) are also used to improve precision,
within the given constraints16.

3. SEARCH SYNTAX
Generally, the search engines offer their own syntax
definition queries, nevertheless understanding them help
in precision of search statements.

3.1 Boolean Operators
Widely used in programming and forming database
queries, Boolean operators define the relationships
between words or groups of words, e.g., use of ‘AND’ for a
narrow search and retrieving of records containing all of
the words it separates. Similarly, ‘OR’ can be used for a
broad search and ‘NOT’ for very narrow search. Relative
positions are of little relevance in operators like ‘AND’,
‘OR’ etc.

3.2 Proximity Operators/Searching
Proximity operators/searching limit the number of
words between the search terms, e.g., use of no operator
helps in finding the words as a phrase and within ‘X’ finds
words in a specific radius. The proximity operators like
‘NEAR’, which is same as ‘WITHIN10’ finds words within
10 words of each other and ‘BEFORE’/’AFTER’ help
finding words in relative order.

3.3 Wildcard Symbols
Wildcard symbols expand the scope of search.
Truncation (*) expands the search term to include all
forms of root word and can be limited by word length, e.g.,
Gen* to retrieve Gene, Genes, Genome, Genetic, etc.,
which can be limited to Gen*2 to limit it to Gene, Genes
and exclude Genome, Genetics, etc., from the search.

3.4 Nesting
Nesting is done to expand or limit searches using
various Boolean operators together by use of
parentheses, e.g. (X OR Y) NEAR (Z AND S).

4. SEARCH STRATEGIES
A comprehensive search strategy involves a well
planned methodology and use of many different factors
and tools. In this section, the methodology and some
important factors, to be taken into consideration as a part
of search strategy, are discussed.

Table 1. Search syntax widely used during patent search
Search syntax

Operator

Use

Boolean

AND

Narrow search and retrieve records containing all of the words it separates

OR

Broaden search and retrieve records containing any of the words it separates. The | can
be used instead of 'or' (e.g., 'mouse | mice | rat' is equivalent to 'mouse or mice or rat').

Proximity

Wildcard
symbols

Nesting

206

NOT

Narrow search and retrieve records that do not contain the term following it.

No Operator

Find words as a phrase, e.g., life stage transitions retrieves records containing the three
words immediately adjacent to one another and in the same order.

WITHIN "X"

Find words within a specified radius, e.g., carbon within 3 fiber retrieves records that
contain carbon and fiber in any order and within a three word radius of one other. Any
number may be used to determine the proximity radius.

NEAR

Find words within 10 words of each other, e.g., (women near violence)—retrieves
records that contain women and violence in any order and within a 10 word radius of
one other. Note: near is the same as within 10.

BEFORE

Finds words in a relative order, e.g., social before security. Note: adjacency is not
implied.

AFTER

Finds words that contain words in the relative order specified with the after expression,
e.g., scope after science. Note: adjacency is not implied.

*

Truncation—This expands a search term to include all forms of a root word, e.g.,
patent* retrieves patent, patents, patentable, patented, etc.

*

Multi-character wildcard for finding alternative spellings. Use to indicate an unlimited
number of characters within a word, e.g., behavi*r retrieves behaviour or behavior.

?

Single-character wildcard for finding alternative spellings—The ? represents a single
character; two ?? represent two characters; three ??? represent three characters, and
so on. Use within or at the end of a word, e.g., wom?n finds woman as well as women,
and carbon fib?? finds carbon fiber or carbon fibre.

()

Group words or phrases—when combining Boolean phrases and to show the order in
which relationships should be considered: e.g., '(mouse or mice) and (gene or pseudo
gene)
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

A search process should be organised in a systematic
and structured manner, and proceeded in a logical way. One
of the approaches in carrying structured search strategy is
to try the “most rational path”17. To help building a systematic
search process and get relevant hits without missing any
important document, relative relevance of the search keys for
the corresponding searched concepts should be taken into
account. Crude keyword-based search strategy could also
be used to carry title-abstract-based analysis of patent
document to retrieve relevant patent documents for further
analysis. A focused keyword search strategy can be merged
with the final set of crude keyword search results to obtain a
final set of relevant documents where the probability of
getting more hits is high. One can also start with a very
narrow and precise set of keywords with a relevant
classification, followed by a broad keyword based search.
With the use of broad keywords, the precision in the hits will
decrease and the number of retrieved documents will
increase. This can be used to judge the quality of search
strategies and better explained by the concepts of ‘recall’
and ‘precision’16,18.
‘Recall’ is the ratio of relevant retrieved documents to
the number of total relevant documents, while ‘precision’
represents the ratio of relevant retrieved documents to the
number of retrieved documents, e.g., when a search
engine returns 40 pages, and only 30 of which are relevant
while failing to return 50 relevant pages, its precision is
30/40 = ¾ while its recall is 30/70 = 3/7. The aim of an
analyst is, therefore, to have high recall and a high
precision19 which means retrieval of all relevant
documents and a low proportion of non-relevant
documents. Recall and precision, however, share an
inversely proportional relationship-an increase in
precision will lead to decrease in recall. Therefore, an
analyst needs to find a proper balance between the two.
Before beginning the search, it is necessary to
understand some vital elements associated with the search.
A healthy conversation with the client (R&D experts, legal
firm etc.) to gain an understanding of essential points will
make sure that spurious searches and hits are avoided. This
also helps in generating the best possible keyword search. It
is also quintessential to understand the legal motivations
and ramifications for the search. The legal aspects helps
apprehend not only why but also how search is to be
conducted. An understanding of subject matter and
technical background of the subject is always an advantage.
It helps in an efficient search. However, the analysts are
often made to adapt to subject areas that are only
tangentially related to their areas of expertise. Therefore, a
basic level of background competency should be gained
before devising a search strategy and proceeding with that.
A search strategy is devised based on the search scope
to select the sources in accordance with the motive behind.
Therefore, an understanding of the search scope is also an
important step at the outset of devising search strategy, e.g.,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

infringement or FTO studies will include searching only
active patent documents while as a patentability or prior art
search will require searching any publicly available
information anywhere. While proceeding with the search,
one should carry some flexibility of adjusting the strategy
iteratively, depending upon discovering of alternative
keywords, classifications, etc. An exhaustive analysis
which may include review of detailed description and
claims should also be conducted for the best search
strings. However, if the search strings seem reasonably
relevant, investigating all the results is suggested
depending on the time availability for carrying the search.
It is also advised to start with a very narrow, targeted quick
search at the outset followed with structured queries and
broad searches.

4.1 Quick Search
Quick search involves use of those search keys/
classifications that yield the relevant results with highest
probability. Quick search is generally carried out with a
very narrow set of keywords in combination with relevant
classification codes, using different set of Boolean
operators like AND, NEAR, etc. This is done with a
precise choice of keywords, avoiding the use of
synonyms of more general meaning. Truncations are also
avoided in this type of search. Quick searches are the first
rational step carried in order to yield results which give a
fair idea of further searches and help in revising the search
strategy. This is also done for projects of short tenure.

4.2 Classification-based Search
Searching patents based on their classification is being
done traditionally. There have been several patent
classifications in place and widely used for searching
patents. International patent classification (IPC), established
under Strasbourg Agreement, 1971, is being used by
majority of patent offices to classify their patent documents.
US patent classification system, which is applicable only to
US patents, also holds importance because of their
economic advantages. ECLA (European Classification
System), DEKLA (German classification system) and
Japanese F-term classifications are extensions of IPC
system which complement other systems by offering a
means for searching patent documents from different
viewpoints. They are being used to divide IPC classes into
smaller sub-sections. Apart from these classifications,
Derwent Patent Classification System (DWPI) is also being
used by various commercial patent databases like Thomson
Scientific to classify their prodigal patent repository. Patent
classifications hold much importance in patent search
and analysis. Different names for same inventions are
often used and some variations may be added during
translation of patent applications in different languages.
Use of patent classifications is of great value in such
situations to retrieve the relevant documents which may,
otherwise, be missed. Moreover, the concept of
207

classification is applicable to patent documents
irrespective of their language or terminologies being used
to describe the content. Therefore, the classification
system would help in finding those documents using
different languages or jargon that is liable to be missed in
the keyword based search. Classification search is,
generally, carried by identifying the relevant classes by
either going through the various classes of the relevant
classification or through initial search. A highly targeted
keyword based search may be carried at the outset to
identify few relevant documents. Considering their
classification codes further classification based search
can be carried out. The documents in the later search
may help in finding few more classification codes for
reviving the classification based search further. Boolean
operators can also be used between the classification
codes for narrow or broad searches.

commercial entities offering patent sequence information.
GenBank registers nucleotide sequences while as
GENESEQ and CAS registry include corresponding
translated peptide sequences also. Important sequence
databanks NCBI, EMBL, and DDBJ are under the
agreement known as the International Nucleotide
Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) to exchange
their sequences with each other which reach through
trilateral patent offices23 as shown in Fig. 1.

 

EBI
EBI

NCBI

EMBL-Bank

GenBank
DDBJ

4.3 Sequence-based Search
Nucleic acid (NA) and amino acid (AA) sequence
information is another challenge faced by researchers and
analysts during normal patent search. A very less
percentage of sequences have been patented or under the
process of patenting. Only about 5 per cent of total NA
sequences and around 29 per cent of AA sequences have
been patented or are under the process of being patented
globally, out of which only US contributes over 70 per cent
followed by UK (10 %) and Japan (6 %).21 This sequence
information is disclosed in different formats at various
locations in the patent document, e.g., claims, detailed
description, electronic tables, and/or drawings. Mostly,
sequences are retrieved from ‘sequence listing’ which is
in a computer readable format, having a sequence
identification number (SEQ ID NO). Sequences known
earlier are, generally, referenced with a public databank
accession numbers22. Patent sequence data is available
from public as well as commercial sources. GenBank/
Entrez, etc. represent the public efforts, while as CAS
registry/Derwent GENSEQ is the examples of

EPO

USPTO

Japanese DNA Databank

JPO
JPO
Figure 1.Trilateral exchange of sequences under INSDC.

Sequence databanks like GenBank provide a well
developed similarity search interface at NCBI web
system24. Search engines like STN provide a good
platform for search on GenBank, GENESEQ and CAS
registry etc. SciFinder is another good source for
exploring databanks like CAS Registry for BLAST search.
Similarly, Doubletwist web system can also be used for
accessing GENESEQ. In absence of any international
agreement for exchange of protein sequences, EBI
reformats the JPO and USPTO sequence data regularly,
providing those for similarity searching using the FASTA
algorithm24. Table 3 provides a detailed list of databanks
and their wide coverage along with their sources and
access points.

Table 2. Master documentation databases containing family and legal status information
Database

Producer

Coverage

DOCDB

EPO

EPO master documentation database containing patent
bibliographic and family data that covers patent publications from
20
over 90 patenting authorities worldwide .

International Patent
Documentation Centre,
Patent Family Service
(PFS)

Earlier produced by WIPO but later
acquired by EPO in 1991

Merged into DOCDB in 2007, INPADOC PFS contained multi
country bibliographic data.

International Patent
Documentation Centre,
Patent Register Service

Like INPADOC PFS, now part of the
European Patent Office's European
Patent Information and
Documentation Systems Directorate
(EPIDOS).

Worldwide legal status database sourced from many different
patent authorities.

Thomson Reuters

Patent bibliographic and family database with DOCDB coverage.
Moreover, it has human generated indexing for searching chemical
substances, structures, documents etc.

DWPI

208

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Table 3. Databases for sequence search
Databank

Producer

Description

GenBank

National Institute of
Health, US

Annotated collection of all publicly available DNA sequences since 1982 from
European Molecular Biology Lab, Data Bank of Japan and GenBank. Available on
National Center for Biotech ftp site.

GENESEQ

Thomson Scientific

Covers all biological sequences patented since 1981 from 41 patent issuing
authorities. Available through European Molecular Biology Lab like ftp site or
alternatively through GenomeQuest, STN and Thomson Pharma.

Chemical Abstract Services
Registry/ CAplus

CAS

Basic patents/applications published by 50 patent authorities from 1999 onwards.
Accessed through STN and SciFinder.

PCTGEN

WIPO (Producer)
FIZ Karlsruhe
(Database supplier)

Contains nucleotide and amino acid sequences submitted as World Intellectual
Property Rights Organisation/PCT applications. GETSIM (based on FASTA algorithm)
and BLAST included for similarity search. Accessed through STN.

USGENE

Sequence Base Corp.,
US

Provides searchable access to peptide and nucleotide sequences in all
published/patent applications within 3 days of their publication since 1982. Available
through STN or in house customised subscription.

Genome Quest IP

Genome Quest, Inc.

Contains nucleotide and protein sequences listed in applications from USPTO (since
1980), EPO (since 1979) and WIPO (since 1980). It also includes INPADOC,
GenBank, European Molecular Biology Lab, Data Bank of Japan, SIPO information
which is weekly updated. Algoriths include BLAST and GenePast. Accessed easily
through Genome Quest web interface.

European Molecular Biology
Lab Bank

European Molecular
Biology Lab European Bioinfo. Inst

DNA and RNA sequences from EPO, JPO and USPTO since 1982. European Bioinfo.
Inst. also allows similarity search against protein databases using FASTA. Access
through FTP archives, European Molecular Biology Lab sequence version archive
(SVA).

Data Bank of Japan

NIG, Mishima, Japan

Nucleotide sequences from EPO, JPO and USPTO since 1982. Access through Data
Bank of Japan FTP server and web API.

Patent lens

Cambia, Australia

DNA, RNA and protein sequences extracted from USPTO patented/published
applications. Uses NCBI’s BLAST software. GenBank Id can also be used for
searching sequences.

4.4 Searching Chemical Patents
Like polypeptides other chemicals also have their
characteristics that make them different to search with
the usual structure and/or text searching techniques.
Chemical abstracts services (CAS) offers a database
which includes patents published by around 26 regional
patent offices, containing million of abstracted and
indexed patent documents in all areas of chemistry and
chemical engineering. CAS registry members are the
unique identifiers assigned by CAS to compounds in their
database that help in identifying them and the associated
patent documents, since 1957, in the patent
database.Moreover, CAS registry file includes substance
information, for these indexed compounds. MARPAT is
another important resource in CAT database that has an
advantage over CAS Registry and BEILSTEIN files of CAS
in structuring Markush Structure25,26. CAS REGISTRY and
BEILSTEIN files allow searching only specific structures
reported in chemical literature.27
On the other hand MARPAT file includes generic
(Markush) structures representing more than one
substance. These generic prophetic substances27
represent virtually infinite set of substances by using
generic terms like heterocyclic, alkyl, carbonyl, etc. The
query structures on STN for MARPAT file allows use of
specific atoms/symbols e.g., PH, O, N, ME, etc. and/or
generic nodes, e.g., HY for hydrogen cycle.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

MARPAT and CA files can be used together to obtain
useful information or to transfer an answer set of one file to
another for a narrow search by combination of two. This
can also be done for retrieving INPADOC family
information retrieval.

4.5 Text Searching
Using one or more specific keywords query indexed
data, bibliographic data, title-abstract or full-text search or
just claims. A researcher can search for relevant patent
data which will also include patent documents which may,
otherwise, be improperly classified. Most of the
databases allow search based on text search, which can
be combined with classification or other types of
searches to carry out a narrow precise search.
A combination searching of text and classification is a
powerful method for retrieving relevant data, but should be
carried with passion. This may exclude some relevant
data. While searching for data, ‘backward citation’ and
‘forward citation’ (references from relevant patent
documents) should also be analysed. A file wrapper
analysis, which includes various office actions and other
important communications related to patent documents,
is of particular importance for certain kinds of searches,
e.g. validity search. Moreover, date range, which holds
legal importance, also primarily important in case of data
search analysis for FTOs, validity searches, etc.
209

Table 4. Databases for chemical substance search
Database

Producer

CAS Registry

CAS

Access

Update

Coverage

STN

Daily

Substances including protein and peptide sequences searched using 1 or 3 letter
abbreviations. Information about chemicals (organic, inorganic, minerals, salts,
alloys, sequences, mixtures etc.) from patents, journals, catalogs, reliable web
sources and GenBank seq. etc.

SciFinder

CAplus

CAS

STN
SciFinder

Daily

Patent (61 patent authorities) and journal references since 1800 onwards.
English language summaries translated from scientific literature published in >50
languages from >180 different countries. Conference proceedings, technical
reports, dissertations also included.

CASREACT

CAS

STN

Weekly

More than 37.9 million single and multi step reactions since 1840 onwards from
millions of published journal articles and patent documents.

Weekly

Electronic collection of more than 2.93 lakh chemical substances that are
regulated in key markets around the world.

Twice per
week

Commercially available chemicals, catalog database containing information
about >54 million commercially available chemicals and their suppliers.

SciFinder
CHEMLIST

CAS

STN
SciFinder

CHEMCATS

CAS

STN
SciFinder

MARPAT

CAS

STN
SciFinder

Daily

Includes generic (Markush) structures (1961 onwards) representing more than
one substance. Also includes citations to patents that include Markush
structures.

MMS (Merged
Markush
Service)

Questel

Questel

-

Markush chemical substance search indexed by Thomson Reuters and INPI,
French Patent & Trademark Office. Includes both generic and specific chemical
structures.

5. PATENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND
ASSOCIATED TOOLS FOR IP PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT
Knowledge of various information systems is
essentially required for a reliable patent prior art search
and analysis. Various studies have recognised this fact
and tried to explain comparatively a number of major
patent information systems.22,28,29,30,31 Intellogist32 is an
interesting example of a patent database assessment
tool that provides a comparison of patent databases. JISC
Academic Database Assessment Tool33 is another
example of comparison strategies for non-patent
literature.
Apart from patent search and information retrieval,
effective intellectual property portfolio management would
also require sharing and collaborating information within
different departments of an organisation. This is also
required in case of outsourcing for various types of patent
studies. ‘IP decisions are taken with contributions from
different departments that include R&D, legal, finance,
technology transfer, product development, competitive
intelligence, etc. Therefore, a proper IP portfolio
management would also require a streamline workflow
processes with collaboration throughout the organisation.
This helps in improving decision making within the
system and reduces the time and expenses associated
with IP management.
Various tools offered by different patent databases are
of particular importance in this regard. Table 5, provides a
concise list of some of the databases and various options
offered by them that help in efficient management of IP
portfolios.
210

5.1 Use of Macros
Macro is a collection of commands written in
Microsoft Visual Basic for applications that can automate
various programs such as repetitive document production
tasks, etc. to save lot of time. Macros can also be used to
create custom add-ins that include template from a
dialogue box or to store information for repeated use. Use
of macros in Microsoft Excel can be of great use in
increasing the efficiency of patent portfolio analysis.
Creation of macros like Family Sorter, Legal Status
Extractor, Split Count, Sanitizer, etc., helps in creating a
final report of relevant data in a Microsoft Excel, with
current legal status and other bibliographic data extracted
and sorted automatically along with INPADOC family
member details without spending much of time on that.
Moreover, this makes sure that redundancy of data is
avoided.
A final report can have embedded search interface in
Excel which helps the reviewer trace the results with ease
based on various keywords like inventor, assignee,
country, etc.

6. CONCLUSIONS
Patents are rich source of information and hold a high
potential as an important indicator of various technology
measurements. To retrieve the valuable information from
the patent documents in an efficient and cost effective
manner, it is essential to explore the methods of patent
search strategies to devise the one suitable to one’s
needs. With the advent of online patent databases and
various tools that allow an effective and reliable patent
search and analysis, managing patent portfolios has been
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Table 5. List of some important free and commercially available databases for IP portfolio management
Producer

Database

Coverage

Thomson
Reuters

Thomson
Innovation

Wide patent coverage
ThemeScape Maps: for identifying and relating predominant concepts.
Clustering Tool – Quickly find valuable relationships through linguistic analysis of search terms.
Citation Maps – Trace the history of an invention.
Charting – Instantly create lists or charts that are meaningful to your search.

Derwent
Innovations Index

Includes patent coverage to 1963 and patent citations to 1973, from 47 patent-issuing authorities.
Includes patent families, rewritten descriptive titles, abstracts, DWPI class codes, and cited patents.

Aureka

Conduct competitive IP portfolio analysis and for supporting R&D project prioritisation and optimisation
of R&D spending.Visualises data to reveal trends and opportunities and creates detailed reports and
export data for easy analysis.
ThemeScape maps to transform complex data into a visibly appealing landscape for quick review.
Aureka Directory Tree and Citation Trees help in visualising the competitive activity and future trends.
Aureka's Knowledge management tool creates a virtual workshop for teammates or selected
individuals for collaborative contributions and sharing.

Derwent World
Patents Index

DWPI contains over 20.7 million patent families covering more than 45.2 million patent documents,
with coverage from over 47 worldwide patent authorities.

IP Payments

Helps in streamlining worldwide payment processes. IP payments calculates payment due dates using
the most comprehensive IP Rules in the industry, so one can be confident he haven't missed a law
change in any of the more than 400 global jurisdictions covered.

Thomson Data
Analyser

Thomson Data Analyser desktop software offers a powerful interface for managing and extracting
business-critical insights from patent and scientific data within in-house or commercial databases.
Thomson Data Analyser provides an easy way to analyse trends, profile competitors, avoid or uncover
patent and copyright infringement, and identify strategic development opportunities in information from
both in-house and commercial databases.

Thomson IP
Manager

Offers an enhanced set of tools to help organisations further protect and manage their intellectual
property assets. Easily configurable software and role-based features help streamline the portfolio
management process for all stakeholders, providing end-to-end management of intellectual assets and
enabling collaboration between groups in the innovation and product management life cycle.

Orbit.com

Patent and industrial design search and watch covering BX, CA, CH, CN, DE, ES, EU, FR, GB, JP,
KR, RU, US and WO in native languages/ machine aided/human translated English. Offers companies
corporate tree and gives graphical and statistical analysis for market trends, positioning, family
member relationship, potential partners or competitors, etc.

Digipat

Provides
patent
copies,
Us
and
foreign
Displays 1 year of history with special features of filtering and sorting.

IP.Com

IP.com

Free database for searching over 10 million patent and patent related publications from US, Japanese,
Canadian, Chinese, and European patent authority databases.

Intellectual
Property
EXchange
Limited (IPEXL)

IPEXL Patent
Search

Free databases for patent search with a focus on Asian patent offices and multilingual support. Patent
search results along with bibliographic details can be exported to Microsoft Excel for analysis.

The Linux
Foundation

Linux Foundation
Patent Commons

Database of IT patents which the proprietors have pledged not to enforce if open-source conditions are
met.

Stroke of Color,
Inc.,

Patent Fetcher

Free database for US patent and published patent application PDF files

Cambia

Patent Len

Free database for full-text and status search of EP, WO, EP, and US patents

WIPO

PATENTSCOPE
Search Service

Free database for full-text search of patent documents including published international patent
applications (PCT).

Chemvalet Inc.
and
Multimus
Information
Technologies
Inc.

PharmaValet

Database of approved US and Canadian drugs with an associated patent information like expiration,
approval, extension dates, patent family and legal status. It also offers supplementary protection
certificate (SPC) and patent term extension information which is particularly of importance for generic
(drug) industry.

Questel

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

file

histories.

211

a less cumbersome job and also added much value to it.
Therefore, it becomes important for IP professionals to
have a better understanding of these databases and tools
to be in a position to find and choose the right tool to suit
his/her requirements in patent analysis and management.

13. Grandjea, N.; Charpiot, B.; Andres, Pena C. &
Peitsch, M.C. Competitive intelligence and patent
analysis in drug discovery mining the competitive
knowledge bases and patents. Drug Discovery Today:
Technologies, 2005, 2(3), 211-15.

REFERENCES

14. Harter, S.P. Search term combinations and retrieval
overlap: A proposed methodology and case study. J.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci., 1990, 41(2), 132-46.

1. Altschul. S.F.; Madden, T.L.; Schäffer, A.A.; Zhang,
J.; Zhang, Z.; Miller, W. & Lipman, D.J. Gapped
BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.,
1997, 25, 3389-402.
2. Andree, P.; Harper, M.; Nauche, S.; Poolman, R.;
Shaw, J.; Swinkels, J. & Wycherley, S. A comparative
study of patent sequence databases. World Patent
Inf., 2008, 30(4), 300-08.
3. Archontopoulos, E. Prior art search tools on the
Internet and legal status of the results: A European
Patent Office perspective. World Patent Inf., 2004,
26,113-21.
4. Chakravarti, A.K. & Krishnan, A.S.A. Technology alert
patent search system in electronics. Elect. Inf. Plan.,
1996, 23(6), 313-14.
5. Claus, P. Patent search and information in nineties.
World Patent Inf., 1982, 4(4), 149-54.
6. Community dedicated to comparing major patent
search systems. World Patent Inf., 2011, 33,168-79.
7. Davis, Smith E. A comparison of some patent
databases. World Patent Inf., 1988, 10(1).
8. Ebbe, T.; Sanderson, K.A. & Wilson, P.S. The
chemical abstract service generic chemical
(Markush) structure storage and retrieval capability.
J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1991, 31, 31-36
9. Fisanick, W. The chemical abstracts service generic
chemical (markush) structure storage and retrieval
capability. J. Chem. Inf. Comp. Sci., 1990, 30,
145-54.
10. Fletcher, J.M. Quality and risk assessment in patent
searching and analysis. Recent advances in
chemical information. In Proceedings of International
Chemical Information Conference, edited by H.
Collier, Montreux. 1992
11. Foglia, pasquale. Patentability search strategies and
the reformed IPC: A patent office perspective. World
Patent Inf., 2007, 29, 33-53
12. Gann Xu, G.; Webster, A. & Doran, E. Patent
sequence databases. World Patent Inf., 2002, 24,
95-101.
212

15. Hoetker, G. Patterns in patents: Searching the forest
not the trees. EContent, 1999, 22(5), 37-8, 40-2,44-5.
16. Hunt, David; Long, Nguyen & Matthew, Rodgers
(Ed.). Patent searching: Tools & techniques. Wiley,
Hoboken, NJ, 2007.
17. JISC-ADAT. http://www.jisc-adat.com/adat/home.pl.
18. Karasinka, E.H.; Ebbe, T. & Corning, J.F. New patent
information resources from chemical abstract service.
World Patent Inf., 1991, 13(3), 160-65.
19. Koschatzky, K.C. Praktische Durchfu hrung von
Recher-chen in patentdatenban-ken. Informations
Technik, 1991, 33(5), 259-62.
20. Kristin, Whitman. Intellogist. In Information sources
in patents, edited by Stephen R. Adams, Ed. 2. K.G.
Saur, Munich, 2006. p.148.
21. Lambert, N. Internet patent information in the 21st
century: A comparison of Delphion, MicroPatent, and
QPat. In 2004 International Chemical Information
Conference & Exhibition, Annecy, France, 2004.
22. Marie-Julie, J.M. Searching in flowcharts–A PD toolsdoc pilot project at the borderline between text and
image to access the most important features of an
invention. EPO Internal Publication, 2005.
23. Michel, J. & Bettels, B. Patent citation analysis–a
closer look at the basic input data from patent search
reports, Dordrecht. Scientometrics, 2001, 51(1),
185-201.
24. Schwander, P. An evaluation of patent searching
resources: Comparing the professional and free online databases. World Patent Inf., 2000, 22(3),
147-65.
25. Simmons, E.S. Markush structure searching over the
years. World Patent Inf., 2003, 25(3), 195-202.
26. Stevensborg, N. Searching combinatorial chemistry:
From biochips to catalysts and beyond–an EPO
perspective. World Patent Inf., 2002, 24, 13-23.
27. Stock, M. & Stock, W.G. Intellectual property
information: A comparative analysis of main
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

information providers. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol.,
2006, 57(13), 1794-803.
28. EPO. Useful tables and statistics, coverage and
codes.http://www.epo.org/patents/patent-informatio
n/raw-data/useful-tables.html.
29. Van der Drift, J. Effective strategies for searching
existing patent rights. World Patent Inf., 1991, 13(2),
67-71.
30. Wu, C. & Liu Y. Use of the IPC and various retrieval
systems to research patent activities of US
organizations in the People’s Republic of China.
World Patent Inf., 2004, 26(3), 225-33.
31. Yoo, H.; Ramanathan, C. & Barcelon-yang, C.
Intellectual property management of biosequence
information from a patent searching perspective.
World Patent Inf., 2005, 27, 203-11.
32. Ziman, J.H. Information, communication, knowledge.
Nature, 1969, 224, 318-24.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

About the Authors
Mr. Muqbil Burhan persuing PhD from
Department of Management Studies, IIT
Delhi. He is working in the field of patent
portfolio management and technology
transfer. He has a graduation and postgraduation in the field of Biotechnology. He
has also worked as IPR specialist at Evalue Serve,
Gurgaon.
Prof. Sudhir K. Jain is MHRD IPR Chair
Professor and the Chairman of Economics &
Entrepreneurship Group and Head,
Department of Management Studies, IIT
Delhi. He has published more than 100
research papers and has supervised 15 PhD
theses. He has been associated with WIPO in various
capacities and member of several committees set up by
the such as IPR Education Policy Committee, National
Entrepreneurship Policy Committee (Ministry of MSME),
and MHRD Technical Committee on WTO Matters
(Ministry of HRD).

213

