DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 220-227
© 2012, DESIDOC

Retrieving Patents: An Overview for Pharmaceutical Industry
Pratibha Gokhale* and Sudha Kannan**
*DLIS, University of Mumbai, Kalina, Vidyanagari, Santacruz (E), Mumbai-400 098
E-mail: pratibha_gokhale@yahoo.com
**Aditya Birla Science & Technology Company Limited, Taloja MIDC, Panvel, Raigad-410 208
E-mail: sudha.kannan@adityabirla.com

ABSTRACT
Patent system worldwide, as known today, is about two hundred years old and existed in some form
at least about four hundred years ago in parts of Europe. However, over the last twenty years the volume
of patents has grown phenomenally with interdisciplinary and complex subjects and the existence of internet
makes most of the information available in some form or the other and has thus made the searchers’ quest
more difficult. Thus, patent search has attained much greater significance as it is always interlinked with
commercial gains. India too has observed a quantum leap in patent applications in the last decade. Organisations
are attaching greater importance to patent filing and thus for patent searching too. Patent search, as a
profession has attained a significant position in the area of intellectual property .There has been several
attempts to simplify and make the patent search more efficient and effective. The present paper provides an
overview of the same.
Keywords: Patents searching, patent information system, online access, growth of patents in india, World
Intellectual Property Organisation

1. INTRODUCTION
Patent systems were established by industrialised
countries during the Industrial Revolution of the 18th and
19th centuries to provide incentive for the development of
technology and also provide information to later inventors
about the advances made by earlier innovators. The
earliest patenting system was established in Italy in the
15th century followed by Great Britain in 16231.
Patent right enforcements were limited to control of
the manufacture, use, and sale of the invention claimed in
the patent. A patentee had the right to practice the
claimed invention only if it did not require him to use
inventions claimed in patents owned by others. The
patentee has the right to license, reassign or sell the
rights conferred by the patent and to sue for infringement,
unauthorised manufacture, use or sale of a product, a
process, or an apparatus covered by the patent
claims.Patent systems require that the innovator
discloses his innovation to obtain intellectual property
rights. A patent right is for a limited period. In India, it is
generally for 20 years from the date of filing. In the present
international scenario, post the establishment of World
Received 09 December 2011, online published 18 May 2012

Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), the grant of
patent has been delinked from the life of patent. This was
necessary as different countries take varying number of
years for grant and thus resulting in substantially different
patent life in different parts of the world for the same
invention. Post the protection period, the patent is said to
expire and the process and the end product can be freely
used by anyone. In essence, it is a contract between the
government and the inventor, wherein the inventor gets
exclusivity for 20 years in lieu of full disclosure of the
invention. Also, a patentee has the right to decide who
may or may not use the invention for commercial purpose
during the period for which the patent is protected.

2. INTERNATIONAL PATENT TREATISE
TOWARDS HARMONISATION
Patent rights and collections of patent literature and
documenting these rights have long existed in
industrialised countries. Internationalisation of commerce
in the late 19th century necessitated the filing of patent
application in each of the country where the innovator
wished to exclude others from practicing the invention,
220

providing motivation for the formation of a treaty, to
establish standardised treatment for patent applications.
2.1 Paris Convention
The earliest such treaty is the ‘Paris Convention’ first
signed in 1883, that provides for acknowledgement of
priority in the member states provided that the country of
first application is also a member state, i.e., If a patentee
files an application in one of the member countries, he
could retain the same date of application and file in
another member country, but within twelve months. India
has been a member country of Paris Convention since
December 1998.
2.2 World Intellectual Property Organisation
The WIPO is an intergovernmental organisation and is
one of the 16 specialised agencies of the United Nations.
The role of WIPO is to promote protection through cooperation among nations. The WIPO was established by
the WIPO Convention in 1967 with a mandate from its
member states to promote the protection of Intellectual
Property throughout the world through cooperation among
states and in collaboration with other international
organisations. Its headquarter is in Geneva, Switzerland.
The World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) is a
specialised agency dedicated to developing a balanced
and accessible international intellectual property system,
which rewards creativity, stimulates innovation and
contributes to economic development while safeguarding
the public interest.
The WIPO publishes and allows free access to all
patent cooperation treaty (PCT) applications and the
corresponding documents. Recently, it has added certain
National applications and thus widened the scope of
patent data available. The PCT is an international patent
law treaty, signed by all WIPO members first agreed upon
in 1970.
India signed the PCT agreement in December 1998. It
provides a unified procedure for filing (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patent_applicationpatent)
applications to protect (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Invention) inventions in each of its Contracting States. A
patent application filed under the PCT is called an
international application or PCT application. As of June
2011, there are 144 Contracting States to the PCT2.
2.3 World Trade Organisation & Trade Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
The agreement on Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), an international
agreement administered by the WTO (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Trade_Organisation) that
sets down minimum standards for intellectual property
regulation came into force on 1st January 1995. In 2001, a
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

meeting held in Doha issued a statement known as ‘Doha
Declaration’ that addressed the concerns of developing
countries including compulsory licensing. The member
countries were provided adequate time to amend their
local laws with the least developed nations being provided
a period of 10 years until 2015 for implementation.

3. SELECT PRIMARY RESOURCES
3.1 Science Direct
The Science Direct3 provides access to full-text
contents of about 11,000 books and over 2500 journal
published by Elsevier Science. The databases for books
and journals are distinct from each other and are to be
subscribed separately. It is one of the largest databases
for primary information on chemistry and applied
chemistry including pharmaceutical chemistry worldwide.
3.2 Wiley Online Library
Wiley Online Library4 is one of the world’s broadest
and in-depth multidisciplinary collections of online
resources covering life science, health science and
physical sciences, social science, and the humanities. It
provides access to over 4 million articles from 1500
journals, almost 10,000 online books, and hundreds of
reference works, laboratory protocols and databases. It is
of immense value to a patent searcher as it provides
valuable primary information in the field of pharmaceutical
chemistry. The database has a simple interface and
delivers intuitive navigation, enhanced discoverability,
expanded functionalities and a range of personalisation
and alerting options.
3.3 United States Patent & Trademark Office
The United States Patent & Trademark Office
(USPTO) is the Federal agency for granting United States
patents and registering trademarks5. The USPTO fulfils
the mandate of Article I, Section 8, Clause 8, of the
Constitution6 that the Executive branch ‘promote the
progress of science and the useful arts by securing for
limited times to inventors the exclusive right to their
respective discoveries’. The USPTO website provides free
electronic copies of issued patents and patent
applications as multiple-page TIFF (graphic) documents.
The site also provides Boolean search option and
analysis tools.
3.4 Espacenet (often written as esp@cenet)
A free online service for searching patents and patent
applications, Espacenet7 was developed by the European
Patent Office (EPO) together with the member states of
the European Patent Organisation in 1996. There are
presently 38 member states. Every member state has an
Espacenet service in its national language, and access to
the EPO’s worldwide database, most of which is in
221

English. Espacenet provides free access to more than 70
million patent documents worldwide containing
information about inventions and technical developments
from 1836 till date. Besides European patents, it also
provides access to patents from most countries in the
world including US, Canada, Japan, Korea, China and
India.

4. SELECT SECONDARY SOURCES
4.1 Index Medicus
Index Medicus is a comprehensive index of medical
scientific journal articles published since 18798. It was
initiated by J.S. Billings, head of the Library of the
Surgeon General’s Office, United States Army. This
library later evolved into the United States National Library
of Medicine (NLM), which continued publication of the
Index. However, Index Medicus in the printed format
ceased publication due to dwindling customer base and
the online PubMed becoming more popular. PubMed is a
free database accessing the MEDLINE database of
citations, abstracts and some full-text articles on life
sciences and biomedical topics. The United States NLM
at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) maintains
PubMed as part of the Entrez information retrieval
system. It provides technical information which is crucial
for any patent prior art search in the field of
pharmaceutical sciences.
4.2 Beilstein
The Beilstein database9 covers the subject of organic
chemistry from 1771 to date. It contains over 9.8 million
compounds, 10 million reactions (making it the world’s
largest reaction database) and 320 million experimental
data on chemical properties. It also contains over 900,000
original author abstracts from 1980-present, as well as
pharmacological and ecotoxicological data describing the
bioactivity of organic chemicals. Since 2007, it is being
published by Elsevier.
4.3 Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry
Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry from
Wiley-VCH is the world’s largest reference book in the
areas of applied chemistry, industrial chemistry, and
chemical engineering10,11. It was first published in 1914 in
German and subsequent editions were also published in
German. The 5th edition published in1985-1996 was the
first edition in English. The subjects covered include
agrochemicals, biochemistry & biotechnology, energy,
cosmetics, fats and oils, polymers, plastics, metals and
alloys and many more. It includes over 1000 articles
written by more than 3000 experts and is considered to be
the first-stop source for any query or question concerning
chemicals, processes, physical and chemical data. It is
available both in printed and online versions. It has about
222

50 articles devoted to pharmaceutical science besides
several other articles on related subjects such as organic
chemistry, polymers, biochemistry, etc.
4.4 Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical
Technology
Kirk-Othmer also known as the ‘most famous
chemistry encyclopedia’ and the single most valuable
resource in a library’s chemistry reference collection. It
has proven to be a mainstay for chemists, biochemists,
and engineers at academic, industrial, and government
institutions since publication of the Ist edition in 1949. The
5th edition (2004-2007) includes necessary adjustments
and modernisation of the content to reflect changes and
developments in chemical technology. The scope
includes over 1000 articles on chemical substances,
properties, manufacturing, and uses. The topics relate to
industrial processes, unit operations in chemical
engineering; toxicology and health/safety aspects;
economic data and uses11; handling, storage and
regulatory information and fundamentals and related
scientific subjects. It has nearly 100 articles devoted to
pharmaceutical science.

5. PATENTING ACTIVITY IN INDIA
The rapid rise of India in the global economic
landscape has dictated world’s outlook towards India as a
potential destination for research, development and
innovation especially since it is known to be a low cost
centre. A primary indicator of innovation is the number of
patents filings. The number of patent applications filed at
the Indian Patent Office has steadily increased over the
years showing a steep increase since 2005. During 200910 over 34,000 patent applications were filed, while over
6,000 patents were granted. Of these granted patents,
530 were related to drugs and over 1800 were related to
chemistry and biotechnology combined. Indian
applications have risen steadily with about 2179
application in 2001-02 to about 7044 in 2009-201012.
The patent scenario in India as against some of the
leading patent filing countries of the world is depicted in
Table 1 below. The data is for the year 200813.
Table 1. Patent applications filed and Granted-India vs US,
Japan. Korea, China, EPO
Country

No. of Patents
Applications filed

Granted

China

289,838

093,706

EPO

146,150

059,819

India

036,812

018,230

Japan

391,002

176,950

S Korea

170,632

083,523

USA

456,321

157,772

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

5.1 Patent Law
The earliest legislation in India relating to patents was
the Act VI of 1856. The purpose of this legislation was to
encourage inventions and induce inventors to disclose
secret of their inventions. This act was subject to several
amendments. The Patent & Designs Act of 1911 brought
the administration of patents under the purview of
Controller General of Patents, Designs & Trade Marks.
This act was replaced much later by the Patent Act, 1970.
A major change introduced in the act was absence of
product patents with an aim to protect growth of
indigenous industries and public interest. This act was in
force for over 24 years and the changing economic
scenario in the world warranted a change. A second
amendment in 2003 introduced by way of Patent Rules,
2003.

The Patent Office is currently in the process of
making all its collection available online. A partial
collection of published patent applications, granted
patents and Controller General’s decisions are available
online and are searchable using multiple criteria such as
inventor, application number, applicant, etc.The patent
offices in India have regional jurisdiction. Companies/law
firms registered in these regions have to file their patents
in their respective regions only. Territorial jurisdiction of
the appropriate office for the applicants is:
Office

Patent Office, Head Patent Office. Covers all the regions in the
country not covered by the other branch offices.
Kolkata

The third amendment to the Patents Act 1970 was
introduced through the Patents (Amendment) Ordinance,
2004. The Ordinance was later replaced by the Patents
(Amendment) Act 2005 (on 4 April, 2005) which was
brought into force with effect from 1 January 2005. The
third amendment reintroduced product patents and was
primarily aimed at fulfilling India’s obligation under TRIPS.
Currently, patents in India are governed by the
Patents Act, 1970 (No. 39 of 1970) as amended by the
Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 and the Patents Rules,
2003, as amended by the Patents (Amendment) Rules
2006 effective from 05 May 2006.
The pharmaceutical industry was at a great loss as
they could not obtain monopoly over the products they
developed18. This also ensured that there were few
multinationals launching their products in India as they
could not enforce their monopolistic rights over their
product which had been developed by investing several
millions of dollars. Thus, the reintroduction of product
patents, in accordance with the TRIPS agreement, was of
great significance to the pharmaceutical industry and is
reflected in the number of patents filed.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Patent Office
Branch,
Mumbai

Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Goa and
Chhattisgarh, Daman and Diu & Dadra and Nagar
Haveli

Patent Office
Branch,
Chennai

Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu,
Pondicherry and Lakshadweep

Patent Office
Branch,
Delhi

Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and
Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttaranchal, Delhi, Chandigarh.

5.2.1

Office of Patent Information System, Nagpur

The Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry and Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion established Patent Information System (PIS),
in 1980. PIS, Nagpur caters to user needs on the basis of
patent documentation and computerised system for
retrieval and dissemination of patent information. The
objectives of PIS are:

•

To obtain and maintain a comprehensive collection of
patent specification and patent related literature on a
worldwide basis to meet the needs for technological
information, of various users in R&D establishments,
Government Organisations, industries, business,
inventors, and other users.

•

To provide technological information contained in
patents through, search services and patent copy
supply service.

5.2 Indian Patent Office
The Office of the Controller General of Patents,
Designs & Trademarks (CGPDTM)14 located at Mumbai is
headed by Controller General of Patents, Designs, and
Trade Marks. The Head Office of the Patent Office is at
Kolkata and its Branch offices are located at Chennai,
New Delhi and Mumbai where the Controller General is
located. The Offices of The Patent Information System
(PIS) and National Institute of Intellectual Property
Management (NIIPM) are at Nagpur. The Controller
General supervises the working of the Patents
(Amendment) Act 2005, The Designs Act, 2000 and the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 and also renders advice to the
Government on matters relating to these subjects.

Territorial jurisdiction

The PIS offers the following patent information
services on payment of appropriate charges:

•

State of Art Search

•

Bibliographic Search

•

English Equivalent Patent Search

•

Equivalent Family Patent Search

•

Assisted Search

The PIS
consultancy.

also

provides

preliminary

technical

223

6. PATENTING PROCEDURE IN INDIA
An invention can be filed as a provisional patent
application wherein a summary of the invention along with
inventor and applicant details can be submitted at the
Indian Patent Office. However, this has to be followed by
filing of complete specification including examples/
experimental data and claims within 12 months.
Alternately, a complete specification can be filed without
filing a provisional specification. Once the application is
filed, it is examined and then either granted or rejected.
The grant is published in the official gazette called the
Patent Journal. There is a provision to challenge the
patent after the grant, but within a period of 12 months.
The patent application is also published with bibliographic
details and abstract in the official gazette by the end of 18
months of filing. The application can then be challenged
any time before grant under certain condition, by any
party of interest. Once the grant has been intimated to the
patentee, the patentee is expected to pay the required
fees annually to keep the patent ‘active’ for its 20 year
period. Any lapse on payment of requisite fee by the
patentee, implies that the patent has lapsed and hence
non-enforceable. A sharp increase has been observed in
national phase applications through the PCT route-from
4164 in 2000-01 to 23431 applications in 2009-2010 and
the rise is quite steep post 200515.The Indian Patent Office
granted a record 98,881 patents during the period 20062009. A record 103,035 patent application were filed over
the same period16. The number of granted patents and
applications has reduced marginally in 2009-10 (Table 2).
Apart from manufacturing drugs, the product patent
regime is likely to assist the pharmaceutical industry to
tap outsourcing of clinical research. By participating in
the international system of IPR protection, India, with its
vast pool of scientific and technical personnel, and wellestablished expertise in medical treatment and health
care, has unlocked vast opportunities in both exports and
outsourcing and has the potential to become a global hub
Table 2. Patent applications filed vs granted
Year

No. of patents
Applicati ons filed

Granted

1999-00

04824

01881

2000-01

08503

01318

2001-02

10592

01591

2002-03

11466

01379

2003-04

12613

02469

2004-05

17466

01911

2005-06

24505

04320

2006-07

28950

07539

2007-08

35218

15261

2008-09

36812

16061

2009-10

34287

06168

224

in the area of R&D-based clinical research. The Patent
Ordinance also provides adequate safeguards to protect
the interest of the domestic industry, and the citizen from
any increase in prices of drugs.

7. PRIOR ART SEARCHING
An integral aspect of patents is the prior art search. It
is the search that determines whether a research project
undertaken in an R&D or a new product developed is novel
and inventive and hence eligible for a patent.
7.1 Pharmaceutical Industry and Information
Retrieval
Pharmaceutical industry worldwide, as known today,
was founded in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Insulin and penicillin, some of the known discoveries of
the 1920s and 1930s, came to be mass produced and
distributed followed by several other drugs17. Following
widespread sale and distribution, several countries
formulated and enacted legislations to test and approve
drugs. Drug companies differ from many other companies
in the fact that the input costs are very high. For instance,
only one out of every ten thousand discovered compounds
actually becomes an approved drug for sale.
Companies spend millions of dollars in the early
phases of development of compounds that will not
become approved drugs. Hence, the drug industry adopts
the strategy to protect its products and processes by
means of patents to exercise monopoly and also recover
the costs incurred.
The 20 billion USD Indian pharmaceutical industry has
been growing at about 10 per cent rise in the last few
years, especially since 2005, when India amended its
Patent Act to grant product patents. Both multinational
and Indian companies are progressively investing in
research and filing patents on the new products and
processes developed. Although the R&D expenditure of
Indian companies averages at about less than 2 per cent
there is an increasing interest in research and protecting
its inventions19,20.
It is difficult to determine the quantum of
pharmaceutical patents as against the volume patents
worldwide. Although total number of worldwide patents is
easily obtained, no database or any literature was
forthcoming regarding the number of pharmaceutical
patents worldwide due to its overlap with other subjects
such medical science, chemical sciences, and
biotechnology. After several searches and communication
with several database vendors, the relevant data could be
obtained from Derwent World Patent Index through
Thomson Reuters. It was found that of the current 78.8
million patents (2010) worldwide about 4 million relate to
pharmaceutical chemistry. Thus about 5 per cent of
worldwide patents are in the field of pharmaceutical
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

chemistry.Although there have been several studies done
on prior art search and problems associated with
searching, analysing and interpreting the search results,
it is difficult to retrieve studies specifically on
pharmaceutical industry and patents.
7.1.1

Methods for Searching and Analysing
Pharmaceutical Patent Information

Calcagno21 attempted to analyse pharmaceutical
patents utilising the chemical structure information
provided in Thomson’s Derwent World Patent Index
(DWPI). The article is an attempt to cluster chemical
inventions using fragment descriptions provided by the
Derwent chemical coding. Chemical structures in patents
are, often a combination of many structures, some real,
some prophetic, as represented by an entity called
Markush structure. This entity is akin to a chemical
compound library, and, indeed, usually incorporates both
a ‘scaffold’ and substituent parts. Thus, the objective of
analysing a set of patents can be more accurately
described as that of analysing a set of Markush
structures.
In addition, since a Markush structure is usually
associated with a family of patents, the objective was
more precisely defined as that of organising a set of
inventions (patent families) according to their Markush
structures. Further it also explores other directions in
which this concept can be advanced. One could explore
the plethora of clustering algorithms available including
other hierarchical methods (e.g., ward, group average,
bisecting Kmeans), non-hierarchical methods (e.g.,
Jarvis-Patrick, Kmeans), even fuzzy clustering (e.g., PC
analysis and fuzzy kmeans), which allow multiple cluster
membership.

the data and actionable business intelligence. The two
case studies relate to a subject area (Hepatitis C virus)
and assessment of a company.
Although several studies have been conducted it was
extremely difficult to obtain any specific study on
pharmaceutical industry searching methodologies and
issues. In India, pharmaceutical industry as one of the
largest filer of patents also has a large number of
litigations. In this context patent searching is of
paramount importance. Companies such as Dr Reddy’s
and Ranbaxy are among the top patent filers in India and
have dedicated teams for patent searching and filing and
litigations. They are one of the largest and influential
users of commercial databases for both chemistry and
patents.
7.1.2

Issues in Prior Art Searching

There is a huge demand for patents in Indian pharma
industry. However, on searching it was found that it was
difficult to retrieve the number classified under
pharmaceutical sciences from any of the commercial
databases leave alone the free databases, and other
primary resources. It was also observed that there is no
parity in the classification codes used across the various
databases. Although there are several commercial and
free databases and patent offices providing information on
patents and non-patent literature, the search is very
complex25.

According to a survey by Doganavsargil22, one of the
main reasons that discourages both current and potential
users of patent information in reading the current
awareness bulletins is that the search profiles do not
focus well on their changing information needs. The users
clearly expressed the need for new search profiles, as
well as the need of being provided with patent information
at different levels of detail. To appropriately suit the users’
needs, a few profiles received more than just one level of
detail. Dirnberger23 compared different search strategies
for establishing a focused patent landscape for the
biotech drug human recombinant insulin in terms of the
key indicators of patent search, quality, recall, and
precision. The search strategies included pros and cons
of ‘crude and quick’ vs. ‘sophisticated’ keyword search
strategies. It has been observed that keyword in
combination with sequence search strategies retrieve a
highly precise set of documents.

As the subject matter of a patent is generally
multidisciplinary and very specific nature, even
classification search does not help at times. Also the fact
that patents are filed in different languages26,27 in different
countries makes the search tedious and error prone.
There are several new databases and resources made
available in the recent past, which are trying to provide a
solution. However, even today a patent searcher is never
sure whether he has retrieved all patents in the subject of
interest. Often the searcher goes by his experience rather
than retrieved information. Hence, there is always an
element of uncertainty.A sample comparison on number
of hits retrieved while using classification tools was
done:.The cassification codes were used for search as
this method is known to be one of least error prone search
method. Keywords and assignee/applicants etc can be
different in different databases while the classification
codes are standardised codes issued by designated
authorities. To have a comprehensive and comparable
result European Patent Classification (EPC) and
International Patent Classification (IPC) were used. A
combination of two Classification codes was used to
reduce the number of retrieved results and obtain a set of
focused documents. Classification codes used:

Yang, et al24 illustrate the use of a text mining tool to
enhance patent analysis workflow to yield critical views of

IPC (WIPO): A61K38/00 (Medicinal preparations
containing peptide) & A61P3/10 (Special therapeutic

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

225

activity of chemical compounds-for hyperglycaemia, e.g:
antidiabetic)
EPC (EPO): A61K38/00 (Medicinal preparations
containing peptides) and A61K31 (Medicinal preparations
containing organic active ingredient)
Classification
Scheme

International
Patent
Classification

European
Patent
Classification

Class Number

A61K38/00 &
A61P 3/10

A61K38/00 &
A61K31

Total Patent

23297

795

Espacenet

16491

514

Thomson
Innovation

21293

484

Patbase

03544

100

Accessed on 24 March 2011.

8. RESULTS
Apart from manufacturing drugs, the product patent
regime is expected to aid the pharmaceutical industry to
tap outsourcing of clinical research. By participating in
the IPC and EPC were used as both the classification
schemes were searchable across multiple databases and
hence the differences in the results retrieved could be
studied. However, the databases were selected such that
they were as comprehensive as possible in terms of
number of years and countries retrieved. Differences were
observed between the free database (Espacenet) and the
three commercial databases used, viz., Total Patent,
Thomson Innovation and Patbase. There was a distinct
difference in the number of patents retrieved, even
between Espacenet and Thomson Innovation which are
comparable in terms countries and years of coverage. The
difference between these could be attributed to the
indexing system used by Derwent Patent Index used by
Thomson. Patbase retrieves only one entry per family and
hence the number is lower.
Nijhof28 proposed to define effective and efficient
searching: i.e., find relevant documents fast. In general,
the searcher should start as precisely as possible.
Search the unusual terms. Search by AND-ing precise
words (or phrases) and/or classes. Then expand
carefully: start searching abstracts or claims before
turning to full-text searching. Further work down from the
high precision words and classes to the lower precision
words and classes. Also citation and company or inventor
name searches may be of help to carefully expand the
collection of publications for review. Although these
recommended procedures and theories may seem to be
simple reading material, they require training and
management to be able to properly use these in practice.
226

9. CONCLUSIONS
System of IPR protection, India, with its vast pool of
scientific and technical personnel, and well-established
expertise in medical treatment and healthcare, has
unlocked vast opportunities in both exports and
outsourcing and has the potential to become a global hub
in the area of R&D-based clinical research. The Patent
Ordinance also provides adequate safeguards to protect
the interest of domestic industry, and the general public
from any hike in drug prices. Multinational companies in
pharmaceutical industry had maintained a low-key
presence in the Indian market due to rigid price control
and absence of product patents. However, the change is
evident in the substantial increase in number of patents
filed and granted at the Indian Patent Office in the last few
years. The online patent database from the Indian Patent
Office is still being developed and proves to be a hurdle for
prior art searching and India has still a long way to achieve
an effective system for prior art search both for patent and
non-patent literature. Thus, there is a need to study the
tools available for patent searching and an efficient search
methodology to retrieve an effective result.

REFERENCES
1. Adams, Stephen. Information sources in patents. KG
Saur, GmbH, 2006, pp. 86-89.
2. PCT Contracting States. http://www.wipo.int/export/
sites/www/pct/en/list_states.pdf (accessed in June
2011).
3. http://www.sciencedirect.com/ (accessed in May
2011).
4. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ (accessed in May
2011).
5. http://www.uspto.gov/ (accessed in May 2011).
6. http://www.house.gov/house/Constitution/Constit
ution.html (accessed in July 2011).
7. http://worldwide.espacenet.com/ (accessed in July
2011).
8. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ (accessed in
May 2011).
9. http://www.elsevier.com/ (accessed in May 2011).
10. Hauf, Werner. Patents. Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of
Industrial Chemistry, Ed 6, 2004, 25, pp. 219-43.
11. http://www.istl.org/06-spring/databases4.html
(accessed in June 2011).
12. Annual Report 2009-10: Annual Report of Office of the
Controller General of Patents, Designs &
Trademarks. India, 2011. pp. 95.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

13. World Intellectual Property Indicators, Geneva,
WIPO, 2010, 148 pp.
14. http://www.ipindia.nic.in/ (accessed in May 2011).
15. Annual Report 2009-10. pp. 33.
16. http://www.domain-b.com/economy/general/
20090720_india_grants.html (accessed in June
2011).
17. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharmaceutical_industry
(accessed in June 2011).
18. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharmaceuticals_in
_India (accessed in June 2011).
19. Indian pharmaceutical industry: 2011. http://
www.cci.in/pdf/surveys_reports/indian-pharmace
uticals-industry.pdf (accessed in June 2011).
20. Indian pharmaceutical industry: Collaboration for
growth. KPMG, 2006. http://www.in.kpmg.com/pdf/
Indianpharmaoutlook.pdf (accessed in June 2011).
21. Calcagno, Mark. An investigation into analysing
patent by chemical structure using Thomson’s
Derwent World Patent Index codes. World Patent
Inf., 2008, 30(3), 188-98.
22. Doganavsargil, Elif & Fattori, Michele. Decision tree
analysis as a tool to optimise current awareness
bulletins. World Patent Inf., 2008, 30(3), 212-19.
23. Dirnberger, Dietmar. A guide to efficient keyword,
sequence and classification search strategies for
biopharmaceutical drug-centric patent landscape
searches–A human pp. recombinant insulin patent
landscape case study. World Patent Inf., 2011, 33(2),
128-43.
24. Yang, Yun; Akers, Lucy; Yang, Cynthia; Klose,
Thomas & Pavlek, Shelley. Enhancing patent
landscape analysis with visualisation output. World
Patent Inf., 2010, 32(3), 203-20.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

25. Bhangale, M. & Shrivastava, V.D. Finding the hidden
treasure: A study on patent searching. In PLANNER,
2005. INFLIBNET Centre, 2005. pp. 445-73.
26. Peter, Vanderheyden. Overcoming language barriers
in patent research: A Lexis Nexis white paper:
adapted from a presentation at a meeting of WIPO,
September 2010. pp. 6.
27. Harris, S. Patent resources take on Asian challenge.
Research Information, Feb/Mar 2011, 14-15.
28. Nijhof, E. Subject analysis and search strategiesHas the searcher become the bottleneck in the
search process? World Patent Inf., 2007, 29(1), 2025.
About the Authors
Dr Pratibha Gokhale is working as Head,
Department of Library and Information
Science and In-charge Librarian, University
of Mumbai. She has worked as Librarian in
a multinational chemical company and as a
Professional Assistant in Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research. Having more than 35 years of
experience, she has several publications at her credit,
has attended national and international conferences, and
worked as a resource person for workshops and
continuing education programmes. Recently, she was
honoured by the ‘Granthamitra’ award.
Ms Sudha Kannan is working as Manager,
Knowledge Centre, Aditya Birla Science &
Technology Company Limited, the corporate
R&D for Aditya Birla Group, Mumbai. She
holds Master’s degree in Chemistry and
Library & Information Science. She also has
a diploma in Patent Law & Practice and has been working
in the field of intellectual property rights, especially
patents for the last several years. She is a registered
Patent Agent with the Intellectual Property Office, India.

227

