DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 233-239
© 2012, DESIDOC

Digital Copyright Protection: Issues in the Digital Library Environment
S.G. Hombal* and K.N. Prasad**
*Dravidian University, Kuppam, Andhra Pradesh-560 035
E-mail: sghombal@gmail.com
**Sarada Ranganathan Endowment for Library Science, Bengaluru-560 010
E-mail: prasadkn@vsnl.net

ABSTRACT
Copyright and intellectual property rights (IPR) have been established and extended over hundreds of
years. Although initially developed to give a publisher control over the right to publish (copy) a work, they
were extended to give rights to authors, painters, photographers, film producers, software writers, and many
others. ‘Access to information’ is the buzzword of the recent past and today is essential in business, education,
and research and has a direct impact on literacy levels, economic growth, and quality of life. Information hubs/
houses like archives, libraries and museums, etc. have had a fundamental role to play in the development of
a democratic society by enabling access for all members of the community to a wide range of knowledge,
ideas, opinion as well as cultural, and scientific and educational information. Libraries provide access to digital
material through a variety of legal constructs; license agreements, exceptions under national copyright law,
legal deposit, and the public domain. Digital rights management (DRM) poses a threat. At worst, it can block
access, at best it can inhibit by making access time-consuming and costly to arrange. Today, these institutions
are crippled by a parallel harmonisation of limitations and exceptions thrust upon them by technology (digital)
that serve the public interest, glorifying the ‘rights’ and de-meaning ‘fair-use’. An attempt has been made in
this article to introduce the issues concerning the copyright protection in the digital library environment.
Keywords: Copyright, digital copyright, intellectual property rights, digital rights management, digital library issues

1. INTRODUCTION
Information and communication technology (ICT) and
digital information have opened up new opportunities to
access essential content and provide innovative services
and scholarly information. Libraries provide access to
digital material through a variety of legal constructs;
license agreements, exceptions under national copyright
law, legal deposit, and the public domain. Libraries in the
west are already experiencing the problems associated
with digital rights management (DRM). Material bought by
the library has become inaccessible through technical
protection measures. The result is that the material is
effectively removed from the library collection. Anticircumvention laws prevent libraries from availing
themselves of their lawful exceptions under national
copyright laws. This can prevent or place restrictions on
copying or sharing or lending material, current awareness
services, book reviews, exhibitions, and sending
information to students who can’t come to the library. In
short, libraries have fewer rights in the digital environment
Received 09 December 2011, online published 18 May 2012

than in the print world. Instead, libraries have to negotiate
special agreements with individual rights holder to obtain
DRM-free material or permission to circumvent in
restricted circumstances. The result is that the digital
divide will increase as under-resourced libraries or those
in developing countries or the underprivileged
communities (ironically standing to benefit most from
digital technologies) lose out on their statutory rights.

2. COPYRIGHT HISTORY
The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary
and Artistic Works (Berne Convention- an international
agreement governing copyright), was first accepted in
Berne, Switzerland in 1886. It required its signatories to
recognize the copyright of works of authors from other
signatory countries (known as members of the Berne
Union) in the same way as it recognises the copyright of
its own nationals. It was Indeed a landmark event in the
history of copyright. The organisation subsequently
relocated to Geneva in 1960, and was succeeded in 1967
233

with the establishment of the World Intellectual Property
Organisation (WIPO) by treaty as an agency of the United
Nations1. WIPO’s Standing Committee on Copyright and
Related Rights met in Geneva to consider the copyright
exceptions and limitations on March 10-12, 2008, and
began discussions about exceptions to, and limitations
on, rights granted to copyright holders by international
instruments, a topic which is of vital importance to
developing countries. WIPO member countries
universally supported keeping the topic of ‘exceptions and
limitations’ on the Committee’s agenda.

Technologies (ICTs) have challenged the traditional
balance embodied in the copyright system. The 1996
WIPO Internet Treaties required signatory countries to
provide legal protection to technologies, technological
protection measures (TPMs), that can be used by
rightsholders’ to control access to, and use of, digital
copyrighted works. Private rightsholders have been able
to use legally-enforced TPMs to control the level of
access information users can have, and on what terms.

The WIPO Secretariat in 2008 was requested to
present on studies commissioned by WIPO on
exceptions and limitations for the visually impaired and
libraries and archives and was also asked to commission
a new study on exceptions and limitations for the benefit
of educational activities, including distance education and
the trans-border aspect of it. Member countries have
asked WIPO to include the subject of exceptions and
limitations to copyright and related rights for the purposes
of education, libraries and archives, and disabled persons
on the agenda of the Committee and to strengthen
international understanding of the need to have adequate
limitations, learning from existing models and moving
towards agreement on exceptions and limitations for
public interest purposes, which, like minimum standards,
were to be envisaged in all legislation for the benefit of the
international community. As a result, copyright
exceptions and limitations is an ongoing focus of the work
of WIPO’s Copyright Committee in the past and the
coming years. All these developments have been due to
the result of the demented international copyright regime
which is less balanced than it has been at any point in the
past2.

The invention of Abacus, long ago, paved way to an
evolution which mankind had not anticipated; not
anticipated to lead the path/way to form one of the most
important evolutions that was being evolved today on
which life revolves around and depends on it so much that
many-a-times it is unthinkable to do them without, such
as logarithms, calculators, punch card, tabulators,
Boolean logic, computers, compact discs, storage tapes,
telephone, internet, mobile phones, tablets and handheld
PDA’s, e-books, etc. The impact is such that it is used as
benchmarks by Governments and institutions, for making
policy decisions worldwide.

First, the range of rights granted to copyright owners
expanded. For instance, the 1994 Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
created a new right to control rental of copyrighted works
and extended copyright to ‘computer software’. The 1996
WIPO Copyright and Phonograms and Performances
Treaties created a new right of making available,
expanded the right of communication to the public, and
extended the right of reproduction into the storage of data
in digital form.
Second, the length of copyright term has also
expanded in recent years. Although the internationally
harmonized term is 50 years after the life of the author,
many countries have now adopted the higher term of life of
author plus 70 years (or in some cases 95 years), as a
result of recent bilateral trade agreements with the United
States and/or the European Community.
Third, while creating new opportunities for the creation
and dissemination of copyrighted works, new
developments in information and communication
234

3. DIGITAL EVOLUTION

Libraries have marched hand in hand, adapted and
adopted themselves when any new technology had
evolved paving way for electronic libraries, networked
libraries, digital libraries, virtual libraries, etc. In each of
the situations when libraries transformed there had been
problem situations which have been tried to overcome,
solve and find a resolution. Copyright issues have been in
the forefront all times even when digital libraries stated to
emerge.

4. COPYRIGHT IN DIGITAL LIBRARY
ENVIRONMENT
Digital technology enables the transmission and use
of all of these protected materials in digital form over
interactive networks. The process of ‘digitisation’ allows
the conversion of such materials into binary form (0s &
1s), which can be transmitted across the internet, and
then re-distributed, copied, and stored in perfect digital
form. While the transmission of text, sound, images, and
computer programs over the internet is already
commonplace, this is also becoming true for
transmission of audiovisual works such as feature films,
e-books as the technical constraints of narrow bandwidth
begin to disappear. A material protected by copyright and
related rights, spanning the range of information and
entertainment products, constitutes much of the valuable
subject matter of e-commerce.
Given the capabilities and characteristics of digital
network technologies, e-commerce has had a
tremendous impact on the system of copyright and
related rights, and the scope of copyright and related
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

rights in turn is affecting how e-commerce evolves. It is
essential that legal rules are set and applied
appropriately, to ensure that digital technology does not
undermine the basic tenets of copyright and related
rights. The digital environment is facilitating copyright
licensing by different means, including by helping to
rapidly locate and identify licensors and licensees,
providing virtual platforms for exchange and automating
contracts, payments, and the delivery of goods and
services. In this regard, digital technology is making great
impact on the territorial and temporal framework for
copyright licensing. Moreover, a number of new licensing
practices are emerging in the new technological
environment.
The proliferation of new licensing practices appears to
reflect the development of collaborative creativity and a
new, more dynamic position of the user in the network
environment. Each user is now, thanks to readily available
digital technologies and media hardware and software, a
potential consumer, producer, creator, and distributor of
creative work. While licensing is finely tuned for the
analog world, the digital environment has changed the
way in which copyright content is marketed, distributed,
delivered and consumed, and this has had significant
consequences for the upstream and downstream
processes of rights clearance1.
Business dictionary.com defines digital rights as:
“Copyrights associated with digitised content (such as
music or written works) published and/or distributed
online over internet or other computerised communication
networks”3.
Long before the arrival of digital or even electronic
media, copyright holders, content producers, or other
financially or artistically interested parties had business
and legal objections to copying technologies. The advent
of personal computers as household appliances has
made it convenient for users to convert media (which may
or may not be copyrighted) originally in a physical/analog
form or a broadcast form into a universal, digital form
(ripping). This, combined with the internet and popular file
sharing tools, has made unauthorised distribution of
copies of copyrighted digital media (digital piracy) much
easier.
Concerns in digital libraries have turned from how to
digitise materials, store and make to how to manage the
rights along with the materials. The advent of digital media
and analog/digital conversion technologies, especially
those that are usable on mass-market general-purpose
personal computers, has vastly increased the concerns of
copyright-dependent individuals and organisations,
because these individuals and organisations are partly or
wholly dependent on the revenue generated from such
works.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

5. COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT TYPES
Direct Infringement—Wholesale
distribution of copyrighted works.

reproduction

and

Contributory Infringement—Users knowingly encouraging
infringing activity infringement.
Vicarious Infringement—A violation which occurs when
operator has the ability to supervise users, but chooses
not to supervise and control for financial benefits4.

6. DIGITAL RIGHTS MANAGEMENT
The Digital Rights Management (DRM) is a term for
access control technologies that are used by hardware
manufacturers, publishers, copyright holders, and
individuals to limit the use of digital content and devices.
The term is used to describe any technology that inhibits
uses of digital content that is not desired or intended by
the content provider. The term does not generally refer to
other forms of copy protection, which can be
circumvented without modifying the file or device, such as
serial numbers or keyfiles. It can also refer to restrictions
associated with specific instances of digital works or
devices.
Webopedia defines DRM as ‘Short for digital rights
management, a system for protecting the copyrights of
data circulated via the internet or other digital media by
enabling secure distribution and/or disabling illegal
distribution of the data. Typically, a DRM system protects
intellectual property by either encrypting the data so that
it can only be accessed by authorised users or marking
the content with a digital watermark or similar method so
that the content can not be freely distributed’5.
Publishers and vendors across the world put their foot
together to bring out necessary counter measures to
protect themselves from piracy and infringement. They
argue that because of piracy, infringement, copyright
owners cannot make a return on their investments in
content creation; they will stop investing in new content
(or the continued exploitation of old content, for that
matter). Taken to the extreme, rampant infringement will
result in the collapse of the music, movie and publishing
industries, say copyright owners. Thus as a counter
measure they have been compelled to adopt new
protection measures such as DRM. The DRM
technologies are aimed at increasing the kinds and/or
scope of control that rights-holders can assert over their
intellectual property assets.
The DRM technologies have enabled publishers to
enforce access policies that not only disallow copyright
infringements, but also prevent lawful fair use of
copyrighted works, or even implement use constraints on
non-copyrighted works that they distribute; examples
235

include the placement of DRM on certain public-domain or
open-licensed e-books, or DRM included in consumer
electronic devices that time-shift (and apply DRM to) both
copyrighted and non-copyrighted works. DRM as of now
is most commonly used by the entertainment industry
(e.g., film and recording) and a few publishers.

•

Quoting a line from the movies in an e-mail to a coworker (reproduction)

•
•

Reverse engineering of computer code (reproduction)

7. DRM TECHNIQUES

•

The DRM techniques include:
(a) Restrictive Licensing Agreements
The access to digital materials, copyright and public
domain are controlled. Some restrictive licenses are
imposed on consumers as a condition of entering a
website or when downloading software.
(b) Encryption
This technology is designed to control access and
reproduction of online information. This includes
encryption, scrambling of expressive material, and
embedding of a tag, preparing backup copies for personal
use4.

8. DRM ISSUES
Libraries and archives play a crucial role, and some
have a legal mandate to preserve and make available our
cultural and scientific heritage for future generations. The
DRM jeopardises this role as they have the potential to
lock away covered material forever. The issue of long term
preservation carries a real urgency as media must be
adapted regularly to new data formats, operating systems
and data carriers. In addition, data (e.g. music, software,
electronic journals) stored in proprietary DRM formats is
at much greater risk of being lost once the playback
media is no longer available. Under DRM, there is a great
risk that the public record of the future may be distorted.
The DRM technologies attempt to control use of digital
media by preventing access, copying or conversion to
other formats beyond users.

Playing an excerpt of ‘play/drama’ in a copyright law
course (public performance)
Quoting from a novel in a review (reproduction).

If they are to preserve fair use in its traditional form,
the DRM technologies must leave room for these
unauthorised uses of copyrighted works, as well as
myriad other commonplace uses that have not been
tested in court6.
Fair use has repeatedly been invoked to prevent
copyright owners from misusing their copyrights in order
to stifle legitimate marketplace competition. The fair use
doctrine, thus, operates to limit copyright in order to
preserve competition. The fair use doctrine also plays an
important role by providing a reservoir of incentives to spur
innovation. Many DRM vendors express frustration with
the imprecision surrounding fair use and national
preservation laws. Unfortunately, fair use cannot be
defined with precision. The fair use doctrine operates as a
‘safety valve’ not just for free expression, but also to
mediate the tension between copyright and new
technologies7.
The collection and long-term preservation of digital
content pose challenges to the intellectual property
regime within which libraries and archives are
accustomed to working. When the problem is viewed in
this light, it becomes clear that the ambiguity of the fair
use doctrine is not a bug, but a crucial feature. If DRM
systems are to preserve fair use, they must somehow
preserve its ambiguity, its ability to evolve and embrace as
yet unrealised uses of copyrighted works. A consideration
of technologies past, present and future, and their
collisions with the fair use doctrine, illustrates the virtues
of ambiguity in fair use.

9. FAIR USE DOCTRINE AND AMBIGUITY

10. CONTROL AND TECHNOLOGY

Given the broad scope of the Copyright Act, copyright
would intrude into everyday life in innumerable ways were
it not for the fair use doctrine and other exceptions. Fair
use serves a crucial role in limiting the reach of what
would otherwise be an intolerably expansive grant of
rights to copyright owners. Were it not for the fair use
doctrine, each of the following activities would be
infringing:

There is no doubt that DRM has the potential to have a
tremendous impact on libraries and how they do their
work. The impact is hard to predict today because it is a
technology in the early stages of its potential
development. But it is possible to present some general
cautions based on current experience with protected
works. On the contrary, more sophisticated DRM
systems may allow libraries to provide additional services
beyond lending, such as integrating digital library
materials into courseware at educational institutions. But
DRM is likely to provide significant challenges as well,
especially in areas like control, technical requirements,
etc. This means that the content and the control of the
content will remain in vendor systems, and libraries will
‘outsource’ access to the digital materials to these

•

Whistling a tune while walking down the street (public
performance)

•

Cutting out a cartoon and posting it on your office
door (public display)

•

Photocopying a newspaper article for your files
(reproduction)

236

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

vendors and or users. This is not unlike the situation in
libraries today in relation to online databases and digital
reference materials, but the impact of this model should
be expected to increase as the technology grows in
complexity and expense. Implications of this model range
from the library’s right to archive materials to issues of
patron privacy8.
The DRM companies such as Adobe, Amazon,
Microsoft, Sony, etc. have developed licensing control
systems for digital copyright protection that prevent
printing documents, inhibit the use of print screen, and
prevent anyone who is not authorised from seeing
document content. Companies believe it as the only
effective way of protecting the ownership of the
information9.
The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) is a
United States copyright law that implements treaties of
the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO). It
criminalises production and dissemination of technology,
devices, or services intended to circumvent measures
(commonly known as digital rights management or DRM)
that control access to copyrighted works. It also
criminalises the act of circumventing an access control,
whether or not there is actual infringement of copyright
itself. In addition, the DMCA heightens the penalties for
copyright infringement on the internet. Passed on
October 12, 1998 by a unanimous vote in the US Senate
and signed into law by President Bill Clinton on October
28, 1998, the DMCA amended Title 17 of the US Code to
extend the reach of copyright, while limiting the liability of
the providers of online services for copyright infringement
by their users10.
On May 22, 2001, the European Union passed the
Copyright Directive or EUCD, which addresses some of
the same issues as the DMCA. The DMCA’s principal
innovation in the field of copyright, the exemption from
direct and indirect liability of internet service providers and
other intermediaries was separately addressed, and
largely followed, in Europe by means of the separate
Electronic Commerce Directive. There are already ‘digital
loan’ softwares in wide use by public libraries in the USA
that does not bother to impose any DRM on e-books,
opting instead to automatically delete the books after the
loan period has expired11.
In a resolute to make move against the DRM
prophecies certain initiatives have caught the world by
storm. They have been supported by individuals, agencies
and also being funded by them. Some of the
developments are:

11. OPEN ARCHIVES INITIATIVE
The open archives initiative (OAI) develops and
promotes interoperability standards that aim to facilitate
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

the efficient dissemination of content. The OAI has its
roots in an effort to enhance access to e-print archives as
a means of increasing the availability of scholarly
communication. Continued support of this work remains a
cornerstone of the Open Archives program. The
fundamental technological framework and standards that
are developing to support this work are, however,
independent of both the type of content offered and the
economic mechanisms surrounding that content, and
promise to have much broader relevance in opening up
access to a range of digital materials. As a result, the
Open Archives Initiative is currently an organisation and
an effort explicitly in transition, and is committed to
exploring and enabling this new and broader range of
applications12.

11.1 Open Archives Initiative-Protocol for
Metadata Harvesting
The open archives initiative-protocol for metadata
harvesting (OAI-PMH) is a low-barrier mechanism for
repository interoperability. Data Providers are repositories
that expose structured metadata via OAI-PMH. Service
Providers then make OAI-PMH service requests to
harvest that metadata.

11.2 Open Archives Initiative-Object Reuse
and Exchange
Open archives initiative-object reuse and exchange
(OAI-ORE) defines standards for the description and
exchange of aggregations of Web resources. These
aggregations, sometimes called compound digital
objects, may combine distributed resources with multiple
media types including text, images, data, and video. The
goal of these standards is to expose the rich content in
these aggregations to applications that support authoring,
deposit, exchange, visualisation, reuse, and preservation.
Although a motivating use case for the work is the
changing nature of scholarship and scholarly
communication, and the need for cyber infrastructure to
support that scholarship, the intent of the effort is to
develop standards that generalise across all web-based
information including the increasing popular social
networks of ‘web 2.0’.

11.3 Open Source Initiative
The open source model includes the concept of
concurrent yet different agendas and differing approaches
in production, in contrast with more centralised models of
development such as those typically used in commercial
software companies. A main principle and practice of
open source software development is peer production by
bartering and collaboration, with the end-product, sourcematerial, ‘blueprints’, and documentation available at no
cost to the public. This is increasingly being applied in
other fields of endeavor, such as biotechnology.
237

11.4 Creative Commons
In December 2002, Creative Commons released its
first set of copyright licenses for free to the public.
Creative Commons developed its licenses—inspired in
part by the Free Software Foundation’s GNU General
Public License (GNU GPL)—alongside a Web application
platform to help you license your works freely for certain
uses, on certain conditions; or dedicate your works to the
public domain. In the years following the initial release,
Creative Commons and its licenses have grown at an
exponential rate around the world. The licenses have been
further improved, and ported to over 50 jurisdictions13.

11.5 Free and Open Source Software
Freeware (from ‘free’ and ‘software’) is computer
software that is available for use at no cost or for an
optional fee, but usually with one or more restricted usage
rights. Freeware is in contrast to commercial software,
which is typically sold for profit. The term does not imply
that the software is free and open source software
(FOSS). Freeware is a loosely defined category, which
includes both closed and open source proprietary
software14.

11.6 GNU Project
The GNU project uses software that is free for users to
copy, edit, and distribute. It is free in the sense that users
can change the software to fit individual needs. The way
programmers obtain the free software depends on where
they get it. The software could be provided to the
programmer from friends or over the internet, or the
company a programmer works for may purchase the
software. Proceeds from purchases support the GNU
project. The GNU has four kinds of freedom for the
software:

•

Freedom to run the program

•

Freedom to access the code

•

Freedom to redistribute the program to anyone

•

Freedom to improve the software.

12. CONCLUSIONS
A ‘one size fits all’ rights solution is unlikely. Some of
the information resources will arrive at the library with their
own embedded rights technology, as e-books do today.
Some information resources on the market will have
controls that libraries find so unacceptable that they will
choose not to obtain those materials.
Some controls, such as further development of
access control technologies, will benefit digital libraries,
allowing them to provide more resources more easily to
remote users. The right answer to the rights question for
238

digital libraries is not between rights technology A and
rights technology B. Libraries need to understand a broad
rights landscape, i.e., heterogeneous resources to
manage and the users to serve. The due diligence needed
to assert will not only be to respect the intellectual
property rights in the resources being managed but also
to defend the rights of users to exercise their
constitutional and legal rights to make use of these
resources.
Today, one may need to think about a tiered system of
digital copyright protection, where stronger controls are
allowed in exchange for the fact that the copyright owner
is not able to use the available law as an effective
deterrent to copyright theft. The strengthening of the
existing copyright act and to explore the possibility of
bringing a new act in place is the need of the day.

REFERENCES
1. World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).
http://www.wipo.int
2. Hinze, Gwen. Making knowledge accessible across
borders: Mandatory minimum international copyright
exceptions for education. https://www.eff.org/wp/
making-knowledge-accessible-international-copy
right-exceptions-for-education
3. Business
Dictionary.
dictionary.com

http://www.Business

4. Wikipedia. http://www.wikipedia.org
5. Webopedia. http://www.webopedia.org
6. Coyle, Karen. The technology of rights: Digital rights
management. Based on a talk given at Library of
Congress, 19 November 2003.
7. Lohmann, Fred von. Fair use and digital rights
management: preliminary thoughts on the
(irreconcilable?) tension between them. Electronic
Frontier Foundation, March 2005. https://www.eff.org/
wp/fair-use-and-digital-rights-managementpreliminary-thoughts-irreconcilable-tension-betweenthem.
8. Electronic Frontier Foundation. Digital rights
management: A failure in the developed world, a
danger to the developing world. March 2005. https://
www.eff.org/wp/digital-rights-management-failuredeveloped-world-danger-developing-world
9. Adobe® Reader. http://www.adobe.com/ products/
acrobat/readermain.html.
10. IPR and copyright protection intellectual property law
is ineffective for copyright protection. http://
www.locklizard.com/ipr-protection.htm
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

11. Brinson, J. Dianne & Radcliffe, Mark F. An intellectual
property law primer for multimedia and web
developers. http://www.eff.org/pub/CAF/law/ip-primer
copyright, 1996.

Institute for Technology and Management, Bangalore, and
then joined National Public School, Bangalore. Presently,
he is working as Librarian at Primus Public School,
Bengaluru.

12. Open archives. http://www.openarchives.org

Dr K.N. Prasad obtained his PhD from Karnatak
University, Dharwad. He began his career at HMT Ltd.,
Bangalore, worked as Asst. General Manager. He has
published research papers in national and international
journals. He is on the Editorial Board of several journals.
He is currently Executive Officer in the Sarada
Ranganathan Endowment for Library Science (SRELS),
Bangalore. He is an expert in the areas of information
processing and retrieval, classification, digital divide,
intellectual property rights, etc. He has guided 12 MPhil
and 4 PhD students.

13. Creative Commons. http://www.creativecommons.org
14. Coyle, Karen. The ‘rights’ in digital
management. D-Lib Magazine, 2004, 10(9).

rights

About the Authors
Shri S.G. Hombal completed his MLibSc from Karnatak
University, Dharwad, and MPhil form Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai. He began his career as Librarian at

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

239

