DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 240-248
© 2012, DESIDOC

Traditional Knowledge Protection: An Indian Prospective
Mangala Hirwade* and Anil Hirwade**
*RTM, Nagpur University, Nagpur-440 015
E-mail:hmangala@rediffmail.com
**National Institute of Intellectual Property Management, Civil lines, Nagpur-440 001
E-mail: hirwade2004@indiatimes.com

ABSTRACT
Traditional knowledge is an important element of the intellectual and cultural heritage of indigenous peoples.
It reflects their social and historical identity and significantly contributes to the future well-being and sustainable
development. This paper analyses the features of indigenous knowledge, protection of traditional knowledge
in India and its benefits, biopiracy issues, and Indian experience. It further discusses the national and international
initiatives and Traditional Knowledge Digital Library, its benefits and outcomes against biopiracy.
Keywords: Traditional knowledge, indigenous knowledge, biopiracy, traditional knowledge digital library, intellectual
property rights

1. INTRODUCTION
Traditional knowledge has got a lot of attention
nowadays due to its utility all over the world. It has
become a focus in international forums. The protection
under intellectual property rights (IPRs) of traditional and
indigenous knowledge (TIK) has received growing
attention since the adoption of the Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992. Most indigenous
people have traditional songs, stories, legends, dreams,
methods and practices as means of transmitting specific
human elements of traditional knowledge. Sometimes it
is preserved in artifacts handed from father to son or
mother to daughter. The traditional knowledge or
indigenous knowledge can be found in multitude field
such as nutrition, agriculture and fisheries, human health,
veterinary care, handicrafts, performing arts, folk songs,
religion and astrology, and many other day to day
customs and practices.
The World Bank1 has stated the following features of
indigenous knowledge

•
•
•

Indigenous knowledge is local knowledge
It is unique to every culture or society
It is the basis for local-level decision making in
agriculture, health care, food preparation, education,
natural-resource management, and a host of other
activities in communities,

Received 09 December 2011, online published 18 May 2012

•
•
•

It provides problem solving strategies for communities
It is commonly held by communities rather than
individuals, and
It is tacit knowledge and therefore difficult to codify. It
is embedded in community practices, institutions,
relationships, and rituals.

Knowledge is a broader concept which might contain
different facets in it. Traditional knowledge is one of the
aspects of knowledge in its totality. According to Berkes,2
Traditional knowledge is a cumulative body of knowledge
and beliefs, handed down through generations by cultural
transmission, about the relationship of living beings
(including human) with one another and with their
environment. Further, traditional knowledge is an attribute
of societies with historical continuity in resource use
practice; by and large, these are non-industrial or less
technologically advanced societies, many of them
indigenous or tribal”

2. PROTECTION OF TRADITIONAL
KNOWLEDGE
The protection of traditional knowledge is important for
communities in all countries, particularly in developing
and least developed countries. Traditional knowledge
plays an important role in the economic and social life of
those countries. Placing value on such knowledge helps
strengthen cultural identity and the enhanced use of such
240

knowledge to achieve social and development goals, such
as sustainable agriculture, affordable and appropriate
public health, and conservation of biodiversity.

the public. Practically, all types of intellectual
property could, to some extent, be used for protection
of traditional knowledge. Traditional knowledge can be
protected under various modes of IPR, viz. copyright,
patents, plant varieties, industrial designs,
trademarks, trade names, geographical indications,
and repression of unfair competition.

Two forms of IP-related protection of traditional
knowledge have been developed3:

(a) Positive Protection
Positive protection gives traditional knowledge
holders the right to take action or seek remedies against
certain forms of misuse of traditional knowledge. It seeks
to secure protective legal rights over traditional
knowledge. This is achieved by either using the existing
laws or using legislative means to enact new sui generis
laws.

(b) Defensive Protection
Defensive protection deals with safeguarding against
illegitimate IP rights taken out by others over Traditional
knowledge subject matter. It seeks to prevent others from
using or securing IPR over traditional knowledge. For
example, some communities have created traditional
knowledge databases to evidence their traditional
knowledge as prior art in order to prevent perceived
abuses such as biopiracy. Disclosure is a tool to stop the
granting of patents, or the revocation of granted patents.
In IP law, patents cannot be granted or can be invalidated
if it can be shown that there exists “prior art”: Knowledge
in the public domain that is equivalent to the process or
product for which a patent is sought. Disclosure puts the
knowledge into the public domain. It does not stop use of
the traditional knowledge or associated resource - only
the monopolistic use of the knowledge or associated
resource for the 20 years of the patent.
Various suggestions to extend protection
knowledge, innovations, and practices include4:

to

•

Documentation of traditional knowledge: It is one
means of giving recognition to knowledge holders. But
mere documentation may not enable sharing of
benefits arising out of the use of such knowledge,
unless it is backed by some mechanism of protecting
the knowledge.

•

Registration: It deals with creating a system for
registration of innovations by the inventor Traditional
knowledge holders.

•

Development of contracts: Contacts with biotech or
other companies for commercialisation, transfer of
technology, benefit sharing, etc;

•

Grant of IPR under existing IPR systems: Intellectual
property refers to creations and innovations of the
human mind, such as inventions, literary and artistic
works, symbols, names, images and designs. IP
system protects such creations and innovations from
unauthorised use, including unauthorised copying,
adaptation, commercial use, and communication to

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

•

Development of a sui generis system: Sui generis
literally means ‘of its own kind’ or ‘unique’. It consists
of a set of nationally recognised laws differing from
country to country. A sui generis system might
consist of some standard forms of IP protection
combined with other forms of protections. It is a
system that can create legal rights associated with
traditional knowledge and promote its access and
benefit sharing. Protection under sui generis system
can assume any form, i.e., patents, trade secrets,
copyrights, farmer rights, breeder rights or any form
which is presently not covered under IP regime. This
differs from country to country5.

2.1 Protection of Traditional knowledge and
Sharing of Profit
Indigenous people have an immense understanding
about their ecosystems, flora and fauna, and the
techniques to use them. This knowledge when
transformed into formal specification is source of wealth.
Due to illiteracy and poverty, this knowledge may be
exploited by modern industries without permission or
sharing of profit. It is worth to mention here the case of
Kani Tribes of South India and Jeevani.
‘Jeevani’ is a restorative, immuno-enhancing, antistress and anti-fatigue agent, based on the herbal
medicinal plant arogyapaacha, used by the Kani tribals in
their traditional medicine. Within the Kani tribe, the
customary rights to transfer and practice certain
traditional medicinal knowledge are held by tribal healers,
known as Plathis. The knowledge was divulged by three
Kani tribal members to the Indian scientists who isolated
12 active compounds from arogyapaacha, developed the
drug ‘Jevaani’, and filed two patent applications on the
drug (and another patent based on the same plant but for
different use). The technology was then licensed to the
Arya Vaidya Pharmacy Ltd., an Indian pharmaceutical
manufacturer pursuing the commercialisation of
Ayurvedic herbal formulations.
A Trust Fund was established to share the benefits
arising from the commercialisation of the traditional
knowledge-based drug ‘Jevaani’. The operations of the
Fund with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders, as
well as the sustainable harvesting of the arogyapaacha
plant, have posed certain problems which offer lessons on
the role of IPR in benefit-sharing over medicinal plant
genetic resources and traditional medicinal knowledge6.
241

3. INDIA AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
India is a country which has been nurturing a tradition
of civilisation over about 5,000 years. India’s ancient
scriptures consist of 4 Vedas, 108 Upanishads, 2 epics,
Bhagavad-Gita, Brahma sutras, 18 Puranas, Manusmriti,
Kautilya Shastra, and Smritis.
India, known for its rich heritage of biological diversity,
has so far documented over 91,200 species of animals
and 45,500 species of plants in its 10 bio-geographic
regions. Besides, it is recognised as one of the eight
vavilovian centres of origin and diversity of crop plants,
having more than 300 wild ancestors and close relatives of
cultivated plants, which are still evolving under natural
conditions. India is also a vast repository of traditional
knowledge associated with biological resources.10
This multitude of natural wealth has created a
renewed interest in the traditional medicinal system,
which includes the Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and
Homeopathy systems (AYUSH). Ayurveda is the oldest
and most effective of these alternative systems of
medicine. The ancient scriptures of the Ayurveda are full
of instances where herbs with medicinal properties were
used not only for curative purposes but for increasing
physical and mental efficiency.

4. BIOPIRACY
Biopiracy can be defined as the stealing of biomedical
knowledge from traditional and indigenous communities
or individuals. The term can also be used to suggest a
breach of a contractual agreement on the access and use
of traditional knowledge to the detriment of the provider,
and also applies to bioprospecting without the consent of
the local communities7. Biopiracy is the illegal
appropriation of life such as microorganisms, plants, and
animals–including humans–and the traditional cultural
knowledge that accompanies it. Biopiracy is illegal
because of violation of international conventions and
where these exist (corresponding domestic laws) it does
not recognise, respect or adequately compensate the
rightful owners of the life forms appropriated or the
traditional knowledge related to their propagation, use,
and commercial benefit8.
Biopiracy can be described as grant of wrong patents
to invention that are neither novel nor inventive having
regard to traditional knowledge already in public domain.
Such patents may be granted due to lack of
documentation or recognition of taditional knowledge as a
prior art. Biopiracy may also happen in cases where
patents are granted according to the national legislations
which does not recognise certain form of public disclosure
as prior art. Biopiracy is misappropriation of genetic
resources or related traditional knowledge through patent
system. It is the exploitation of resources of a community
242

which lack development. It can be regarded as a double
theft because: (a) it allows theft of creativity and
innovation and (b) it establishes exclusive rights on stolen
knowledge and steal economic options of everyday
survival of indigenous communities on the basis of their
common knowledge9.

4.1 Biopiracy: Indian Experience
Transnational corporations have been racing against
each other to manufacture pharmaceutical products for
several years. The main ingredients of such products are
often the genetic material of the medicinal plants used by
the indigenous peoples of third world countries like India.
This quest for ‘green gold’ by the multinational
pharmaceutical companies is penetrating not only India
but all other biodiversity-rich third world countries as well.
The rise in the problem of biopiracy is alarming.
The knowledge and uses of specific plants for
medicinal purposes are important components of
traditional knowledge. Traditional medicines are a major
source of material and information for the development of
new drugs.
In 2000, the Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), India, found that almost 80 per cent of
the 4,896 references to individual plant-based medicinal
patents in the United States Patents Office (USPTO) that
year related to just 7 medicinal plants of Indian origin.
Three years later, there were almost 15,000 patents on
such medicines spread over the US, UK and other patent
office registers. In 2005, this number had grown to 35,000,
which clearly demonstrates the interest of the developed
world in the knowledge base of the developing countries.11
With reference to Yoga, the study conducted by
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) team on the
international patent databases in February 2004 found
249 patents taken on Yoga: in May 2005 found over 2300
patents, 2315 trademarks at USPTO and nearly 150
copyrights at USPTO, taken on Yoga.The reason for this
misappropriation at international patent offices, as
identified, is that the traditional medicinal knowledge
exists in local languages, such as Sanskrit, Urdu, Arabic,
Persian, and Tamil which is neither available nor can be
understood by patent examiners even in case of
availability, at international patent offices since the
information exists in local languages. In other words,
there exists a language and format barrier due to which
patents are being taken on the existing traditional
knowledge of India.12 A few examples of bio-piracy of
traditional knowledge are:

•

Turmeric (Curcuma longa Linn: A US patent (US
5,401,504) was granted to the University of
Mississippi Medical Center in 1995 on the use of
turmeric in healing wounds. This patent also granted
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

them the exclusive right to sell and distribute
turmeric. The CSIR challenged this patent on grounds
of prior art, supporting their claim by documentary
evidence of traditional knowledge, including ancient
Sanskrit text and a paper published in 1953 in the
Journal of Indian Medical Association. USPTO
revoked this patent in 1997 after ascertaining that
there was no novelty; the innovation having been used
in India for centuries. But for two years the patent on
turmeric had stood, although the process was nonnovel and had in fact been traditionally practiced in
India for thousands of years, as was eventually proven
by ancient Sanskrit writings that documented
turmeric’s extensive and varied use throughout Indian
history13.

•

•

Neem: (Azadirachta indica), which is taken from the
Persian name for the tree, Azad-Darakth, meaning
“the free tree.” It is in India that the tree is most widely
used. It is mentioned in Indian texts written over 2000
years ago and has been applied for centuries in
agriculture as an insect and pest repellent, in human
and veterinary medicine, toiletries and cosmetics. It is
also venerated in the culture, religions, and literature
of the region14.

• A patent would prevent local communities (who
have used the product for centuries) to continue
using the Neem
• The patent could block economic development of
developing countries.
• European Patent Office agreed to withdraw the
patent in May 2000 confirming that ‘nothing has
been invented, and that knowledge and use of
Neem have been widespread in India and
elsewhere for many decades’15.

•

•

USPTO has granted five patents on amla (phyllanthus
emblica), a tree that is widely grown and used in India.
Amla is one of the three ingredients of triphala, a
traditional ayurvedic formulation used for thousands of
years. One of the patents, filed by Unilever
Corporation, claims an invention using extracts of
amla in a hair coloring preparation. Four further
patents involving amla have been filed in the Japanese
Patent Office17.

•

US Patent No. 5,900,240 was granted to Cromak
Research Inc., based in New Jersey. The assignees
are two non-resident Indians, Onkar S. Tomer and
Kripanath Borah, and their colleague, Peter Gloniski.
The use of ‘karela’, ‘jamun’ and brinjal for control of
diabetes is common knowledge and everyday
practice in India. Their use in the treatment of
diabetes is documented in authoritative treatises such
as the ‘Wealth of India’, the ‘Compendium of Indian
Medicinal Plants’ and the ‘Treatise on Indian
Medicinal Plants’18.

•

Other examples are Kala Jeera (Cuminum cyminum)
US 5653981, Kumari (Aloe barbadensis) US
5652265, Amaltas (Cassia fistula) US 5411733,
Pomegranate (Punica granatum) US 5411733, Harad
(Terminalia chebula) US 5529778, Aswagandha
(Withania somnifera) US 5466452, etc19.

In 1994, European Patent Office (EPO) granted a
patent to the US Corporation W.R. Grace Company
and US Department of Agriculture for a method for
controlling fungi on plant by the aid of hydropholic
extracted Neem oil. This decision brought significant
opposition from many NGOs and environmental
organisations that oppose biopiracy. It drew up a
petition against this patent, for the following reasons:
• Biological resources are a common heritage and
should not be patented

•

21 May 2003 by the European Patent Office (EPO) in
Munich under the simple title ‘plants’. On 27 January
2004, Research Foundation for Science Technology
and Ecology (RFSTE) along with Greenpeace and
Bharat Krishak Samaj (BKS) filed a petition at the
EPO, Munich, challenging the patent rights given to
MONSANTO on Indian Landrace of wheat, Nap Hal.
The patent was revoked in October 2004 and it once
again established the fact that the patents on
biodiversity, Indian knowledge and resources are
based on biopiracy and there is an urgent need to ban
all patents on life and living organisms including
biodiversity, genes, and cell lines16.

Basmati Rice (Oryza sativa Linn): In 1997, Texasbased RiceTec was granted US patent 5,663,484 on
basmati rice lines and grains. This patent allowed the
company to grow and sell a ‘new’ variety, which it
claims to have developed under the name of basmati,
in the US and abroad. But it was revoked due to the
efforts of Indian Agricultural and Research Institute.
Nap Hal: MONSANTO, the biggest seed corporation,
was assigned a patent (EP 0445929 B1) on wheat on

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

The US government has justified the problems posed
by these patents due to ‘Informal systems of knowledge
often depend upon face-to-face communication, thereby
limiting access to the information to persons in direct
contact with one another’. Public at large does not benefit
from the knowledge nor can the knowledge be built upon.
In addition, if information is not written down, then it is
completely inaccessible to patent examiners everywhere
as prior art when they are examining patent applications.
It is possible, therefore, for a patent to be issued
claiming as an invention technology that is known to a
particular indigenous community. The fault lies not with
the patent system, however, but with the inaccessibility of
the knowledge involved beyond the indigenous
community20.
243

5. INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES TO
PROTECT TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
There are two international conventions that can be
applied when dealing with biopiracy: (a) CBD and (b)
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS).
The CBD is the first international agreement
acknowledging the role and contribution of indigenous and
local communities in the conservation and sustainable
use of biodiversity. The CBD entered into force on 29
December 1993. It has three main objectives21:
(a) Conservation of biological diversity,
(b) Sustainable use of the components of biological
diversity, and
(c) Fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out
of the utilisation of genetic resources
Under the CBD, states are recognised as the owners
of the natural biological resources in their territories
including their genetic resources and thus have a
sovereign right to exploit their natural resources and
determine access. Access to genetic resources must be
consistent to the parties obligation to respect, preserve,
and maintain traditional knowledge, innovation and
practices. States have a responsibility under the CBD to
facilitate access to, and benefit sharing arising from the
use of biological resources and to subject all access to
prior informed consent according to mutually agreed
terms22. The main goal of the CBD is to preserve biological
diversity while the goal of TRIPS is to stimulate
technological advancement, giving individual rights to the
inventor through IPRs. The WIPO, Inter-Governmental
Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources,
traditional knowledge and Folklore is working on issues
relating to contractual practices, traditional knowledge

databases and preparation of a document with elements for
a possible sui generis system for the protection of traditional
knowledge23 databases and registries compiled by WIPO
Member States are depicted in Table 1.

6. INDIAN INITIATIVES TO PROTECT
TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
Recently amended patent law of India contains
provisions for mandatory disclosure of source and
geographical origin of the biological material used in the
invention while applying for patents in India. Provisions
have also been incorporated to include non-disclosure or
wrongful disclosure of the same as grounds for opposition
and for revocation of the patents, if granted. To protect
traditional knowledge from being patented, provisions
have also been incorporated in the law to include
anticipation of invention by available local knowledge,
including oral knowledge, as one of the grounds for
opposition as also for revocation of patent. In order to
further strengthen these provisions, a new provision has
been added to exclude innovations which are basically
traditional knowledge or aggregation or duplication of
known properties of traditionally known component or
components from being patented24.
Other important initiatives in India
documentation of indigenous knowledge are:

towards

•

Preparation of village-wise Community Biodiversity
Registers (CBRs) for documenting all knowledge,
innovations and practices has been undertaken in a
few states.

•

State Plan for Kerala has also actively promoted
documentation of local knowledge regarding
biodiversity in People’s Biodiversity Registers
(PBRs). One pilot project has been completed in
Ernakulum district, in which NGO Kerala Shastra

Table 1. Databases and registries compiled by WIPO member states
Member

Genetic resources or
traditional knowledge
database

URL

Coverage

China

China Traditional
Chinese Medicine
Patents Database

http://chmp.cnipr.cn/engl
ishversion/help/help.html

China Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Patent Database English
Version contains 12,024 deeply indexed records of China TCM patent
literature with 31,283 TCM formulas in Chinese.

India

Traditional Knowledge
Digital Library (TKDL)

www.tkdl.res.in

TKDL is a collaborative project between CSIR, Ministry of Science and
Technology and Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. TKDL involves documentation of the knowledge available in
public domain on traditional knowledge from the existing literature related
to Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha in digitised format, in five international
languages which are English, French, German, Spanish, and Japanese.

Republic
of Korea

Korean Traditional
Knowledge Portal

www.koreantk.com/en/

Korean Intellectual Property Office (KIPO) decided in 2004 to formulate
information strategy planning for the building of a database of traditional
knowledge. The database, which was compiled between 2005 and 2007,
is based on traditional Korean medicine. A search service of the database
commenced in December 2007. The KTKP database is based on
scholarly articles about traditional knowledge. The articles were selected
from 47 Korean academic journals from various fields such as Oriental
medicine, pharmacology, serology and biology.

244

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Sahitya Parishad played an instrumental role. Another
interesting development in Kerala is the development
of a benefit-sharing arrangement between the Tropical
Botanical Garden Research Institute and the Kani
tribe; based on whose knowledge a drug was
developed and then marketed25.

•

State of Karnataka presents a unique example of
NGO initiatives in the formulation of PBRs which
proves to be a valuable tool for conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity and the preservation of
related knowledge.

•

Efforts of the Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, were the pioneering
effort in this field. By mid 1998, 75 Plant Biodiversity
Registers had been established in 10 states with the
help of Indian Institute of Science and others.

•

Gene campaign has documented biodiversity and
associated indigenous knowledge in Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, and Uttarakhand. It has focused on
three tribal populations: the Munnars in the
Chotanagpur region of Jharkhand; the Bhils of Madhya
Pradesh; and the Tharus of the Terai region of
Uttarakhand. Department of Science and Technology
of Indian government supported the documentation. In
addition to the collection of information on indigenous
knowledge, the project also involved making these
communities aware of the threat of biopiracy, and the
implications of IPRs and various national and
international developments concerning the protection
of biodiversity and indigenous knowledge. Medicinal
plants and knowledge related thereto was sought to
be documented with the help of educated tribal youth.
Elders in the village, medical practitioners and
traditional healers were consulted in the collection
and understanding of the information26.

•

Research Foundation of Science, Technology and
Ecology (RFSTE) initiated a movement called the Jaiv
Panchayat: Living Democracy in early 1999. Activists
from RFSTE and Navdanya have been interacting with
local villagers in different parts of India (their strongest
presence being in Uttar Pradesh) to constitute
informal community-level institutions called Jaiv
Panchayats, comprising volunteers from a village.The
first Jaiv Panchayat to complete the register was in
Agasthyamuni village, Garhwal district, Uttar
Pradesh, where on 5 June 1999, the CBR prepared by
the local people was presented27.

•

SRISTI (Society for Research and Initiatives for
Sustainable Technologies and Institutions) based in
Ahmedabad, has been involved in documenting
innovation developed by individuals at the village level.
The initiative is known as Honeybee Network, which
documents the elements of biodiversity as well as
their uses and in particular innovation surrounding

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

these elements. This network has been growing since
the late 1980s28.

•

Efforts of Kalpavriksh and Beej Bachao Aandolan
(Save the Seeds Campaign), Tehri-Garhwal, UP—
Kalpavriksh, in collaboration with the villagers in
Jardhar of the Tehri-Garhwal district of UP, initiated an
exercise in 1995 to document the various bioresources used by the community and conservation
practices. The members of the Beej Bachao
Aaandolan—a network of local farmers, who have
been involved for a number of years now in reviving and
spreading indigenous crop diversity, actively
collaborated with the Kalpavriksh members. By
mutual agreement between Kalpavriksh and the
villagers, it was decided that a copy of the register
would be kept in the village and another copy would be
kept by Kalpavriksh, and that all the information in the
register can be used and distributed only with the
consent and knowledge of the villagers29.

7. DOCUMENTATION OF TRADITIONAL
KNOWLEDGE
It is sometimes believed that the proper
documentation of associated traditional knowledge could
help in checking biopiracy. It is assumed that if the
material/knowledge is documented, it can be made
available to patent examiners the world over so that prior
art in the case of inventions based on such materials/
knowledge are/is readily available to them. It is also
hoped that such documentation would facilitate tracing of
indigenous communities with whom benefits of
commercialisation of such materials/knowledge has to be
shared. India has woken up to the task of protecting its
traditional knowledge from patent biopiracy. The trigger
was the successful revoking by the CSIR of patents
granted by developed countries. Protection and
preservation of traditional knowledge have been a matter
of concern to the developing countries in general and India
in particular. Grant of wrong patents at international level
happens owing to non-availability of information in a
language known to international patent examiner and
also, the information not being in retrievable form.
Therefore, need was felt to adopt a practical and scientific
approach to the problem of grant of wrong patents on our
traditional knowledge systems at international level.30 The
TKDL was the initiative to provide platform for
documentation and disclosure of Indian traditional
knowledge.

7.1 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
The TKDL provides information on traditional
knowledge existing in the country, in languages and
format understandable by patent examiners at
International Patent Offices (IPOs), so as to prevent the
grant of wrong patents. The TKDL, thus, acts as a bridge
245

medicinal plants, minerals, animal resources, effects and
diseases, methods of preparations, mode of
administration, etc.31

between the traditional knowledge information existing in
local languages and the patent examiners at IPOs. The
TKDL is a collaborative project between CSIR, Ministry of
Science and Technology and Department of AYUSH,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and is being
implemented at CSIR. An inter-disciplinary team of
traditional medicine (Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Yoga)
experts, patent examiners, IT experts, scientists, and
technical officers are involved in creation of TKDL for
indian systems of medicine. The project TKDL involves
documentation of the traditional knowledge available in
public domain in the form of existing literature related to
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Yoga, in digitised format in
five international languages which are English, German,
French, Japanese, and Spanish. Traditional knowledge
resource classification (TKRC), an innovative structured
classification system for the purpose of systematic
arrangement, dissemination and retrieval has been
evolved for about 25,000 subgroups against few
subgroups that was available in earlier version of the
International patent classification (IPC), related to

7.2 TKDL Benefits to India
Once the traditional knowledge is recorded in TKDL,
legally, it becomes public domain knowledge. Under the
patent law, this means that it is considered to be prior art
and hence, is not patentable. Such a written record, in a
form easily accessible to patent offices around the world,
would provide all such offices with a record of India’s prior
art. Patent examiners could easily check this database
and reject any patent application that might be a mere
copy of traditional knowledge. Thus, it helps in preventing
cases of biopiracy. The TKDL has a rich database of
information and proved to be extremely useful to research
and industry, both in India and abroad, providing an
impetus to invention, and the development of products
such as medicines, which would be of immense value to
all of mankind. The TKDL serves the purpose of
integrating the various documents related to traditional

Table 2. TKDL outcomes against biopiracy
Name of country

Criteria

No. of
patents

List of patents

European Patent
Office

Setting aside of decisions to grant patents /
cancellation of intent to grant patent

02

1747786, 1520585

59

1607006, 1781309, 2044850, 1889638, 1737475, 1807098,
1967197, 2065031, 2090315, 1906980, 1825845, 2015761,
1937231, 1991241, 1855701, 1906982, 2223616, 1998758
1361864, 2094287, 1959977, 2133089, 2133080, 2070545,
2101800, 1949889, 1709995, 1958641, 2116253, 1729593,
1971354, 2089505, 1942917, 2175848, 2218455, 2014295,
2008661, 1759706, 2091353, 2167072, 1789065, 1804815,
2029150, 2263481, 1140123, 1553851, 1755402, 2124983,
1604677, 2146739, 2144591, 1962875, 2266586, 2152252,
1925311, 2152282, 2152284, 1609476,

Amendment/ modification of claims by
applicants due to TKDL prior art evidence

06

1849473, 1880719, 2062883, 1795200, 2112929, 1858507

Canadian
Intellectual
Property Office
(CIPO)

Applications declared ‘dead’

08

2387703, 2579562, 2448513, 2366318, 2572031, 2616602,
2697020, 2409051

Intellectual
Property, Australia

Amendment/ modification of claims by
applicants due to TKDL prior art evidence

01

2009217410

Patent applications withdrawn

01

2009240851

Case where the examiner rejected/cancelled
the claims by utilising the TKDL
independently without the submission of the
evidences by TKDL

01

20090093450

Amendment/modification of claims by
applicants due to TKDL prior art evidence

01

20100203117

Claims rejected by the examiner due to
TKDL prior art evidence

02

20110097424, 20100203078

Applications terminated

01

GB2436063

Patents application withdrawn

United States
Patent and
Trademark Office
(USPTO)

UKPTO
246

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

knowledge in a common language and in an easy retrieval
form. It is of enormous benefit in developing the traditional
knowledge further32.

REFERENCES

7.3 TKDL Outcomes against Biopiracy

2. Berkes, F. Traditional ecological knowledge in
perspective. In Traditional Ecological Knowledge:
Concepts and Cases, edited by J.T. Inglis.
International Program on Traditional Ecological
Knowledge and International Development Research
Centre, Ottawa, 1993. pp. 1-9.

Government of India, on 29 June 2006, has approved
to provide the access of TKDL database to IPO, under
Non-disclosure Agreement, between CSIR and respective
IPO. Access to TKDL has been given to European Patent
Office (having 35 member states), German Patent Office,
Indian Patent Office and USPTO (the agreement for which
was signed in November 2009). After this, citation of TKDL
references as prior art have led to significant strides
towards achieving the goal of preventing misappropriation
of Indian traditional knowledge. The TKDL outcomes
against biopiracy have been illustrated in Table 233. The
TKDL has become a model for other countries on
defensive protection of their traditional knowledge from
misappropriation. Present status of transcription of the
traditional medicine formulation in the TKDL is given in
Table 3.
Table 3. Status of transcription of traditional medicine
Discipline

No. of books (including
volumes) used for transcription

Transcribed

Ayurveda

75

93,280

Unani

10

1,33,470

Siddha

50

16,764

Yoga

15

1,346

Total

150

2,44,860

Source: TKDL, August 2011

8. NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE COMMISSION
AND TKDL
The National Knowledge Commission, Government of
India, in December 2007, recommended that the work on
TKDL should be diversified and expanded. Further, the
Commission suggested that steps should be taken for the
use and incorporation of TKDL, with all pertinent sources
of information, into the minimum search documentation
lists of international search authorities and other offices
while processing patent applications34.

11. CONCLUSIONS
Traditional knowledge is not something new or
innovative but the distillation of practices or knowledge in
the society. India has experienced various initiatives
regarding the protection of traditional knowledge under
intellectual property rights, including the TKDL, which is a
major step to curb biopiracy and in many of these cases
the country had to fight for revocation of the granted
patents which involved huge costs and time. India has
taken misappropriations of its traditional knowledge by
developed countries through patenting system.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

1. Indigenous knowledge. http://www.worldbank.org/afr/
ik/what.htm.

3. Intellectual property and traditional knowledge. WIPO
booklet no. 2. http://www.wipo.int/freepublications/
en/tk/920/wipo_pub_920.pdf
4. Draft paper. Conference on International Recognition
of Traditional Knowledge. http://www.unctad.org/
trade_env/test1/meetings/delhi/backgroundtkjha.doc
5. Hansen, Stephen A. & VanFleet, Justin W. A
handbook on issues and options for traditional
knowledge holders in protecting their intellectual
property and maintaining biological diversity. http://
shr.aaas.org/tek/handbook/handbook.pdf
6

Varkey, Elizabeth. Traditional knowledge–the
changing scenario in India. http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/
ahrb/publications/online/varkey.htm

7. Gupta, V.K. Traditional knowledge digital library. In
Conference Proceedings of Sub-Regional Experts
Meeting in Asia on Intangible Cultural Heritage,
Bangkok, Thailand, 13-16 December 2005. http://
www.accu.or.jp/ich/en/pdf/c2005sub_reg_Ind/pdf
8. Martin van Ameijde. Biopiracy: The need for a
protective solution? http://www.jur.lu.se/Internet/
Utbildning/kurser/JCA803.nsf/43e828219552/
9. Protection of traditional knowledge: International and
national initiatives and possible ways ahead. http://
legalsutra.org/2566/protection-of-traditionalknowledge-international-and-national-initiatives-andpossible-ways-ahead/
10. India’s fourth National Report to the Convention of
Biological
Diversity,
2009
http://moef.nic.in/
downloads/public-information/in-nr-04.pdf
11. Tripathi, S.K. Traditional knowledge-its significance.
Ind. J. Traditional Knowl., 2003, 2(2), 99-106.
12. Traditional knowledge digital library. http://
indianmedicine.nic.in/writereaddata/mainlinkFile/
File316.pdf
13. Gupta, R.K. & Balasubrahmanyam, L. The turmeric
effect. World Patent Inf., 1998, 20(3-4), 185-91.
14. Bullard, Linda. Freeing the free tree: A briefing paper
on the neem biopiracy case. March 2005. http://
www.nwrage.org/content/freeing-free-tree-briefingpaper-neem-biopiracy-case
247

15. Neem tree: A classic case of biopiracy. http://
healthychildren.hubpages.com/hub/Neem-Tree-AClassic-Case-of-Biopiracy
16. Biopiracy campaign. http://www.navdanya.org/camp
aigns/biopiracy
17. Somasekhar, M. Amla turns patenters’ darling! http://
www.hinduonline.com/
18. Vandana, Shiva. Biopiracy: Need to change western
IPR systems. 2003. http://world-information.org/wio/
readme/ 992007035/1078487909
19. Biswal, Meeta & Biswal, Debidutta. Issues relating to
traditional knowledge systems and intellectual
property rights (IPRs). http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/
ARTICLE/WFC/XII/0911-A3.htm
20. Correa, Carlos M. Traditional knowledge and
intellectual property: Issues and options surrounding
the protection of traditional knowledge. http://
quakerservice.ca/wp-content/uploads/11/07/TKl3.pdf
21. Convention on Biological Diversity. http://www.cbd.int/
convention/about.shtml
22. Ragnar, Johan. Biopiracy, the CBD and TRIPS–The
prevention of biopiracy. 2004. http://lup.lub.lu.se/luur/
download?func=downloadFile&recordOId=1561387&
fileOId=1565619
23. Department of Commerce, Government of India.
Protecting traditional knowledge–the International
dimension.http://www.unctad.org/trade_env/test1/
meetings/delhi/background.doc
24. Dayma, Dinesh. Protection of traditional knowledge in
Indian Patent Act. http://www.goforthelaw.com/
articles/fromlawstu/article76.htm#_ftn17
25. Anuradha, R.V.; Taneja, Bansuri & Kothari, Ashish.
Experiences with biodiversity policy-making and
community registers in India. http://bks8.books.goo
gle.co.in/books?id=dbsqUVZ8JpIC
26. Protection of indigenous knowledge of biodiversity.
http://www.genecampaign.org/home_files/Gene_
Briefing/IK_Technical_Report.pdf
27. Jaiv Panchayat-living democracy. http://www.nav
danya.org/campaigns/jaiv-panchayat
28. Honeybee network.
boutus.php

http://www.sristi.org/hbnew/

29. WTO Committee on Trade and Environment.
Protection of Biodiversity and traditional knowledge:
The Indian experience. http://commerce.nic.in/
wto_sub/Environ/sub_Environ-W198.htm
30. Traditional knowledge digital library. Inf. Today and
Tomorrow, 2001, 20(3), 16-17.

248

31. About TKDL. http://www.tkdl.res.in/tkdl/langde fault/
common/Abouttkdl.asp?GL=Eng
32. Gupta, V.K. Documentation of traditional knowledge
for protection: Preservation and wealth creation. In
Proceedings of the International Conclave on
Traditional Medicine, 17 November 2006, New Delhi.
http://www.niscair.res.in/conclave/downloadables/
Plenary_Session_4/pdf/V_K_Gupta.pdf
33. TKDL outcomes
against
biopiracy.
http://
www.csir.res.in/External/Utilities/Frames/career/
main_page1.asp?a=tkdl_topframe.htm&b=tkdl_left.
htm&c=../../../Heads/TKDL/main.htm
34. National Knowledge Commission. Traditional
knowledge, 2005. http://www.knowledgecommissi
on.gov.in/recom
About the Authors
Dr Mangala Hirwade has passed
MLISc, NET and PhD in Library Science
and has more than 20 years of
professional experience. She has
authored five books, edited six books,
published five papers in International
journals, 27 papers in national journals, 9
chapters in books, and 51 papers in conference
proceedings. She has guided 46 MLISc projects, 33
students for M Phil, and 3 PhD. She is recipient of 2011
Emerald Indian LIS Research Fund Award (UK), Best
Citizen of India Award-2011, P.V. Verghese-Best Paper
Award-2002, ILA, New Delhi. (National Level), Granth
Mitra Puraskar-2010, Shiksha Rattan Puraskar-2011. She
is Editor of the Journal Information Age.
Dr Anil W Hirwade obtained his
doctorate in 2006 for his research on
‘Patent Sources on Internet: An
Evaluation’. He is working in Patent
Information System, Nagpur since 1985
and presently he is In-charge of National
Institute
of
Intellectual
Property
Management Library. Nagpur. He recently passed Exam
on IPR conducted by WIPO; Switzerland. He has
published four books with two on IPR-Fundamentals of
IPR and Patent Resources on Internet and has written
many papers in journals and conferences.. He is Chief
Executive of Journal Information Age. He is recognised
Research Supervisor for PhD in Library Science at RTM,
Nagpur University and YCMOU. He is an Honorary
Faculty at DLISc, RTM, Nagpur University since 2001 and
associated in various capacities with RTM, Nagpur
University, Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University and
YCMOU, Nasik.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

