DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 255-260
© 2012, DESIDOC

Open Access to Scientific Information: A Review of Initiatives
Tarveen Jandoo and Vedamurthy A.B.
The Oxford College of Science, Bengaluru-560 102
E-mail: vedamurthy15@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Open access journals are the one’s which are available online to the reader without financial, legal, or
technical barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet. Some of the scholarly
journals are subsidised, and some require payment. However, a number of challenges remain, such as high
and rising subscription prices to scientific publications, an ever-growing volume of scientific data, and the
need to select, curate, and preserve research outputs. Open access benefits researchers, innovators, teachers,
students, media professionals, and the general public. It promotes global knowledge flow for the benefit of
scientific discovery, innovation, and socio-economic development.
Keywords: Author, scholarly journals, scientific information, open access

1. INTRODUCTION
Access to scientific information is undergoing a fast
transition. What was earlier procured by arduous efforts is
now available for open access (OA). Not only synthesis
but also the dissemination and sharing of knowledge are
gaining importance. Besides the academic intent,
business goals are making OA a favoured mean to
disseminate research findings. The OA refers to reaching
for electronic forms of the articles. The OA essentially
means availability of scientific or scholarly research
literature for free access to all on the web as free online
journals and institutional repositories (IRs).
The BioMed Central has veritably described OA as the
writing being universally and freely accessible via the
Internet in an easily readable format and deposited
immediately upon publication without embargo in agreed
format in at least one widely and internationally
recognised freely accessible repository1.
The primary methods of achieving OA are publication
in OA journals, deposition of copies of articles in OA
archives or repositories (self–archiving), or a combination
of the two. These two means of OA are referred to as the
‘Gold’ (publish in an OA journals) and ‘Green Roads’ to
OA (publish in a non–OA journals but archive in an OA
archives), respectively2. The OA plays a huge role to
cultivate literacy and spread awareness.

2. TYPES OF OPEN ACCESS ARCHIVES AND
JOURNALS
The OA is typically divided into profit and non-profit
segments. The latter includes the university press,
archives, scholarly societies, etc. The former comprises
the corporate sector. This sector offers a wide range of
online journal access service with sophisticated indexing.
The best examples from the corporate sector are the
major players like Reed Elsevier, Kluwer, Springer, and
Wiley. More are increasingly being added to the list. Reed
Elsevier’s Science Direct is a proven wealth of 1,500 of its
scientific, technical, and medical journals. Similarly,
Ingenta serves around 200 publishers. This integration of
scholarly resources has profited, in part, from increasing
corporate concentration within academic publishing.
Crossref which currently involves 6,809 journals and 5.1
million records from 147 journal publishers, is a
collaborative reference linking service that enables the
readers to move from a bibliographic entry of an article to
the work cited. This has made reference searching and
citing an interesting online activity. Scholarly society is
benefitted by this ability to easily move from reference to
reference in around 7000 journals.
Other examples of OA indexing are open access
indexing services, computer corporation NEC’s Research
Index in the sciences, the National Library of Medicine’s

Received 29 July 2011, accepted on 25 November 2011, online published 18 May 2012

255

PubMed in the life sciences, and the National Library of
Education’s ERIC in education. Highwire Press being
operated by Stanford University library is a leader in
electronic journal publishing in sciences and medicine. It
has a huge repository of free articles. 125 of the 336
electronic journals it publishes offer free access to back
issues, while 15 journals offer complete OA3.

3. VALUE AND VIABILITY OF OPEN ACCESS
JOURNALS
The OA is thoroughly digital and non-commercial.
With support from grants, scholarly associations,
institutional support or author fees, OA publishing utilises
the reduced costs of publishing in electronic formats
alone to make journals and other online research
resources free to read. This has enabled easy, fast and
open sharing of scientific work. In some cases, this
approach however, has been viewed as a rebel against
inflated subscription costs for journals3.
The scholarly associations that have dominated
scientific journal publishing are faced with a new
challenge with the emergence of digital publishing. These
associations account for the majority of researchers,
reviewers, and editors engaged in their efforts to advance
the state of scholarship and research. With changing
trends, many scholarly associations have turned their
journals over to commercial publishers. Some offer
complete or partial open access to their publications. For
example, National Council of Teachers of English provides
access to Research in the Teaching of English, College
English, and its other journals, one year after publication;
and the Institute of Physics provides free access to its
journals for 30 days from the date of their publication3.
These associations are now concerned as to how to
preserve their membership rolls at a time of declining
memberships across the society. The journal
subscriptions have been a principal benefit of membership
to these associations3.

4. AUTHOR EXPECTATIONS IN DIGITAL
PUBLICATIONS
As with print journals, digital versions are increasingly
being recognised as identity of scholarly achievement4.
The OA can enable maintenance of independent journals
clearly supporting the scholarly stature. Low barriers to
entry are encouraging the emergence of independent
journals. This has been identified by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science report on
scholarly publishing5.
Publications have been traditionally described as
work for scholarly and scientific purposes, meeting the
quality standards of peer review, hence qualifying in
acceptance for publication by a peer-reviewed journal6.
256

Harnad has further remarked that making one’s
publication accessible is not the same as scholarly
publishing, thus emphasising how interests of authors are
much beyond providing free access to their work.
Authors have a quest to understand the publisher’s
role. Publishers create journals after market research for
needs. They develop online systems, manage peer review
and market the journal. Besides this, they offer content
editing, customer service, and archiving. Authors expect
to contribute to peer review as their duty to discipline7.
The OA should be able to comply with these functions to
be accepted by writers and researchers.
Copyrights have been a prime concern for authors
submitting writings and research work on OA. The
copyrights should clearly rest with the authors who
conceive and own the writing. Authors should have control
over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly
acknowledged and cited8,9. Self publishing and self
archiving are being enabled by OA. Self-archiving prerefereeing preprints, is an excellent way of establishing
priority and asserting copyright. Authors should feel
convinced about the universal global good that the OA to
journals is sure to offer. In the interest of learning, there
will be more availability of resources. Free access is
bound to hold scholarly intent in high esteem. They
should be satisfied that the primary mission of creating,
sharing, and disseminating knowledge is being met10.

5. COST ISSUES AND FINANCIAL
IMPLICATIONS OF OA PUBLISHING
The OA is not devoid of costs. Publication of the
article in a journal is only one part of the cost of research
communication; first of all there are the costs of research
and writing, then the costs of peer review, editing and
publication, and finally the costs of acquisition by the
library, management, storage, reading by the end user
and long-term preservation7.
Research leading to the writing of the paper accounts
for around 90 per cent of the total cost. This is largely
financed by public bodies. The costs of preparing,
reviewing, distributing, archiving and retrieving scientific
articles are borne by universities and public libraries. The
journal publishers incur a small fraction of the total
lifecycle cost. Their commercial interests have made
access to these publications highly restrictive and
expensive.
Electronic versions available to subscribers only have
defeated the very motive of using internet to allow easy
access. It is in legitimate interest of the researchers and
the public to have this kind of information published for
free on the internet. Global access and hyperlinking of
research publications can facilitate the dispersion of
information and knowledge11.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Commercial concerns have been rising in the past
decades. In 1960, the 300 economic journals of the time
were almost entirely non-profit, while by 1980, half of the
then 120 journals were published by commercial
concerns, and by 2000, that proportion had risen to twothird of the 300 journals12. This has been viewed with
concerns that it may dwarf the scholarly interests.
The price of academic journals has increased by large
amounts and libraries and individuals are struggling to
come up with the money to pay for information that is
essential for scholarly investigation. The electronic forms
of OA are a means to cut huge costs from the publishing
system, and by embedding the new OA regime primarily
in the non-profit sector, OA can return exorbitant profits
back to the research community.
The publishers have introduced brand journals which
are sold as electronic versions at prices which do not
differ much from the subscriptions to the paper versions.
In dealing with digital information they can effectively use
all sorts of strategies typical for e-commerce with
information goods, such as bundling and differential
pricing13. The debate is still viable if digital publishing
offers savings14.
There are varying opinions on the cost of web
publishing15,16. In selfish commercial interests, publishers
are said to claim that web publishing is almost as
expensive as ordinary paper-based publishing. They are
said to be trying to justify the increasingly expensive
subscriptions. On the contrary, advocates of free
publishing claim costs to be lower in this practice.
The cost analysis of web publishing may perhaps
need to be reviewed keeping in concern the whole
lifecycle cost of a scientific paper in the analysis.
Calculated through this approach, cost borne by
publishers are of the magnitude of 3-5 %17. However, the
copyrights for services rests with the publishers. This
differential in cost and copyrights needs to be addressed.

6. SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATION LIFE-CYCLE
MODEL AND OTHER MODELS-BRIEF
The ‘Scientific Publication Life-Cycle Model’ presents
the life cycle of a single refereed journal publication from
the research leading to it and writing it into it being read by
other researchers years later or used as an inclination for
practical implementation.
The SciX (O\open, self organising repository for
scientific information exchange) project has developed
cost and time efficient internet enabled business models
(using graphical modelling language called IDEF0) for
scientific publishing18. The unit of observation chosen in
the model is the single publication. This model elaborates
the trends of how a publication is written, edited, printed,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

distributed, archived, retrieved, and read, and how
eventually it may affect practice. The focus is on life-cycle
cost per publication. The model has an objective of trying
to optimise the total life-cycle costs, rather than the cost
of some particular stage through reengineering efforts.
Usefulness of such models rests in their application in
cost studies and their potential utility as a road map in
different OA initiatives.
Federated Initiative of GAP and Roquade (FIGARO) is
a joint initiative of two Dutch and two European universities
to set up an infrastructure for academic e-publishing in
Europe and to establish a network of content providers
making use of this infrastructure19. One of the major
objectives of this model is to help realise business process
innovation through the establishment of a collaborative
business model for e-publishing within a virtual community
of academic institutions and small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs). This model supports journals,
publication sites with or without peer reviewing (peer
reviewing may take place before or after publication);
institutional repositories and other forms of open archives;
co-publishing with traditional publishers, producing the
electronic version of a journal which is already published in
print. This explains the usefulness of the model.

7. NEW INITIATIVES IN SCHOLARLY
PUBLISHING
Scientific publication practices attract attention as
scientists derive their identity and stature from the
reputation of the journal to which they contribute. ‘Publish
or perish’ has become the adage to support the strong
proclivity of scientists to share their work and interests.
Though the desire to share and communicate in scientific
content is not esoteric, few have been anxious enough to
explore new initiatives in scholarly publications.
Fastidious practises of publication in paper print mode are
still dominant.
A small section of the scholarly community have
supported the new methods of scientific publications like
preprint repositories, OA scholarly journals and journals
offering a review process.
Archives, in both preprint and reprint forms, can be
useful reserves. Individuals can publish their work on their
personal home pages. These are called personal
archives20. Universities and institutions can collect,
preserve and provide access to the scientific output of
their institute to build an ‘institutional repository’21. These
practices put together can provide a worldwide network of
servers providing free full-texts.
Some transformations, likely in near future, include
the publication of articles as soon as they are ready to be
shared. This will drive the concept of journal issues to
become obsolete. Research data when published online
257

can be appended according to need for the same. The
publication can be enriched by multimedia22. These
together can add a new dimension to publishing.

8. INSTITUTIONAL ARCHIVES AND
REPOSITORIES
The institutional repository (IR) is a university-based
digital-asset management system10. The IR present a
rather different picture from current OA journals and
subject-specific repositories. University libraries have
considerable funds at their disposal and are used to
outsourcing part of the work in building their information
technology infrastructure. They also take a long-term
perspective in the setting up of IR. For instance, already in
the planning stages, they need to take into account the
periodic necessity to upgrade the storage media and the
storage formats. In addition to scientific publications
universities also have a need to systematically organise
the web-based educational material produced by the
faculty11.
IR or the OA archive has been described as the most
cost-effective and immediate route to providing maximal
access to the results of publicly funded research, thereby
maximising the potential research impact of these
publications20,23,24. Additionally, these have been
considered means to expand on the amount and diversity
of scholarly material that is collected and preserved, thus
enhancing teaching, learning, and research at the host
institution and beyond25. The IRs have added dignity and
repute to institutions that showcase the faculty’s
research output26. Lastly, IRs have been recognised as an
essential infrastructure for the reform of the entire
enterprise of scholarly communication and publishing27.

9. BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES IN OA
PUBLISHING
Besides the advantage of a free access, OA offers
advantages of increased research impact and easier
affordability. The latter has helped to address the serial
crisis, where the high cost of subscriptions has caused
many libraries to reduce the number of serials in their
collection28,29. Research impact is measured by citations
or downloads and this is undoubtedly increased due to
OA30,31. Online access to publications enables alerts
through various modalities that some new publication is
now available. E-mail alerts are the best and most
commonly used methods for this.
Digital sharing has proved to be a caveat to traditional
publishers and has even evolved to be a threat. The
internet earlier qualified as the first resource for getting
scientific information32, has increasingly become the sole
resource. More so it is now a favoured choice in young
researchers. Björk and Turk have studied the scientists’
preferences in the scholarly community and construe that
258

scientists prefer downloading papers from the web to
walking over to a library. They have been seen to favour
the resources that are freely available, without and with
subscription charges. The ScienceDirect is a manoeuvre
of traditional publishers that allows pay-on-demand
access to the full-texts of published papers33.
As more and more universities start planning for
repository systems they are likely to look for and explore
newer options like planning for joint national collaboration
platforms, using well-proven open source applications,
buying the software from outside information technology
consultants and outsourcing the whole service to
commercial publishers. These issues will require planning
and controlled implementation11.
There are a number of challenges in the present
developments in academic publishing. These include the
innovative use of technology; restoration of the primacy of
communication; development of new measures for the
impact of a publication in the academic community; and
development of new business models, aiming at open
access22. There are many more psychological, legal and
institutional barriers to adopt the change in the process of
publication. These have not got a welcome response from
many erudite intellectuals.

10. CONCLUSIONS
The OA is the future. It should be supported and
utilised in best practices for benefit of all. Publishing for ejournals can prove to benefit the scholarly associations.
This can be made possible by the savings realised by
dropping the print editions, direct forms of support
provided by research libraries, charging author fees and
institutional memberships, or a combination of these
methods3.
Validated models to investigate the process and
impact of studying web publishing should be developed
after consultation with scientific experts, librarians and
publishers. These models should be itemised to provide a
basis of cost analysis of this process to further facilitate
development of methods to curtail costs currently involved
in access to scientific literature on web. Reader behaviour
and economies of OA will need to be reiterated. The
overall process of scholarly communication is yet capable
of a huge significant transformation.
An unaddressed issue is to determine whether the
cost of producing a free Internet based peer reviewed
journal is substantially lower than for a traditional paper
based one. Research in this domain is desirable. Issues
like type, content, and quality of writing influence cost.
Research for cost analysis in light of these parameters is
meagre. A poor article costs the system much more
overall than does a good one. Nobody really knows yet
the cost of preserving electronic journals7. The answer to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

this question could be a major parameter for determining
whether the public authorities financing research and
library activities should start financing free scientific
publishing efforts, for instance using a business model
were a hub for running several refereed journals and or eprints archives is offering its services for free for noncommercial use.
The authorities could also change their attitude
towards the researchers that they fund surrendering their
copyright rather unconditionally to commercial
publishers. Innovative use and application of technology
will eventually enable ‘global mapping of science’22.

REFERENCES
1. Velterop, J. Open access: All use is fair use. In First
Nordic Conference on Scholarly Communication,
Lund, 2002.
2. Harnad, S.; Brody, B.; Vallières, F.; Carr L. &
Hitchcock, S. The access/impact problem and the
green and gold roads to open access. Serials Review,
2004, 30(4), 310-14.
3. Willinsky, J. Scholarly associations and the
economic viability of open access publishing. Open J.
Sys. Demon. J., 2005, 1(1).
4. Lawrence, S. Free online availability substantially
increases a paper’s impact. Nature Web Debates,
2001.
5. Frankel, M.S. Seizing the moment: Scientists
authorship rights in the digital age. Report of Study by
American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Washington, DC, 2002.
6. Harnad, Stevan. Online archives for peer-reviewed
journal publications. In International Encyclopedia of
Library and Information, edited by J. Feather & P.
Sturges. Routledge, London, 2003. http://www.e
cs.soton.ac.uk/%7Eharnad/Temp/archive s.htm
7. Morris, S. The true costs of scholarly journal
publishing. Learned Publishing, 2005, 18, 115-26.
8. Davis, T. License agreements in lieu of copyright: Are
we signing away our rights? Lib. Acq.: Pract. &
Theo., 1997, 21(1), 19-28.
9. Muir, A. Copyright and licensing for digital
preservation. Lib. Inf. Update, 2003, 2(6), 34-6.
10. Chan, L. Supporting and enhancing scholarship in the
digital age: The role of open-access institutional
repositories. Canadian J. Commu., 2004, 29, 277300.
11. Björk, B.C. & Hedlund, T. Scientific publication life
cycle model (SPLC). In From Information to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Knowledge: Proceedings of 7th ICCC/IFIP
International Conference on Electronic Publishing,
edited by S.M. de S. Costa; J.Á. Carvalho; A.A.
Baptista & A.C.S. Moreira, Universidade do Minho,
Portugal, 2003.
12. Bergstrom, T.C. Free labor for costly journals. J.
Econo. Pers., 2001, 15(4), 183-98.
13. Shapiro, C. & Varian, H. Information rules-A strategic
guide to the network economy. Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, 1999.
14. Fisher, J.H. Comparing electronic journals to print
journals: Are there savings? In Technology and
Scholarly Communication: The Institutional Context,
edited by Richard Ekman & Richard E. Quandt,
University of California Press, Berkeley, 1999. pp. 95101.
15. Odlyzko, A. The economics of electronic journals. J.
Electr. Publ., 1998, 4(1).
16. Tenopir, C. & King. D. Towards electronic journals,
realities for scientists, librarians, and publishers.
Special Libraries Association, Washington, DC,
2000.
17. Björk, B.C. & Turk, Z. How do researchers find and
retrieve scientific publications–A case study of the
impact of the internet on the construction IT and
construction management research communities.
Electr. J. Inf. Technol. Constr., 2000a, 5(5).
18. IDEF0. Integration definition for function modelling
(IDEF0). Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication, 1993, 183 p.
19. Grygierczyk, N. & Savenije, B. The Roquade project:
An infrastructure for new models of academic
publishing. In In the Digital Publishing Odyssey:
Proceedings of ICCC/IFIP Electronic Publishing’012001, edited by A. Huebler, P. Linde & J.W.T. Smith,
2001.
20. Harnad, S. For whom the gate tolls? How and why to
free the refereed research literature online through
author/institution self-archiving, now. In Workshop on
Open Archive Initiative and Peer Review Journals in
Europe, Geneva, 2001.
21. SPARC. The case for institutional repositories: A
SPARC position paper. SPARC, Washington, 2002.
22. Savenije, B. & Smith, J. Towards new models in
academic publishing. In Proceedings of 11th
Bobcatsss Symposium: Information Policy and the
European Union. Hogeschool van Amsterdam,
Nicolaus Copenicus University Torun, Poland, 2003.
259

23. Harnad, Stevan & Carr, Leslie. Integrating, navigating,
and analysing open eprint archives through open
citation linking (the opcit project). Current Science,
2000, 79(5), 629-38.
24. Harnad, Stevan. The self-archiving initiative. Nature,
2001b, 410, 1024-025.
25. McCord, A. Institutional repositories: Enhancing
teaching, learning, and research. EDUCAUSE:
Evolving Technologies Committee white paper, 2003.
26. Crow, Raym. The case for institutional repositories: A
SPARC position paper, 2002.
27. Guédon J. Open access archives: From scientific
plutocracy to the republic of science. IFLA Journal,
2003, 29(2), 129-39.
28. Mobley, E.R. Ruminations on the sci-tech serials
crisis. Issues Sci. Technol. Lib., 1998, 20(Fall).
29. Parks, R.P. The Faustian grip of academic publishing.
J. Econo. Method, 2002, 9(3), 317-35.
30. Lawrence, S. Online or invisible? Nature, 2001,
411(6837), 521.
31. Antelman, K. Do open access articles have a greater
research impact? Coll. Res. Lib., 2004, 65, 372-82.
32. Björk, B. & Turk, Z. How scientists retrieve
publications: An empirical study of how the internet is
overtaking paper media. J. Electr. Publ., 2000, 6(2).

260

33. Björk, T.Z.; Bob, B.M. & Etiel, P. The new role of
professional organisations in the management of
scientific knowledge. In Conference Proceedings of
International Council for Research and Innovation in
Building and Construction, 2002.
About the Authors
Dr Tarveen Jandoo is currently associated with Novartis
Healthcare Pvt. Ltd. as a Principal Scientific Writer. She
holds MD in Pharmacology and is a certified Medical
publication professional. She also holds certifications in
marketing, project management, and e learning. She has
over 10 years cross-functional experience in medical
writing and communications, research, academics,
clinical practice, medical operations, medico-marketing,
market intelligence, analytics, and administration. Her
interests include writing, editing, and reading.
Dr Vedamurthy A.B. is currently working as Director of
Postgraduate Studies and Professor & Head, Department
of Biotechnology at The Oxford College of Science,
Bangalore. He holds PhD degree in Biotechnology from
Gulbarga University Gulbarga. He has more than 13 years
of teaching and research experience. He published
around 25 research papers in national and international
research journals and conferences proceedings. He has
guided one PhD and around 30 MPhil students. His
research areas are isolation, purification, characterisation
of specific animal/plant proteins including secondary
metabolites.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

