DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 265-276
© 2012, DESIDOC

Information Literacy in India and Germany: University
Libraries as Activators of Life-long Learning
Neena Singh* and Andreas Klingenberg**
*GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Ranichauri, Tehri Garhwal, Uttrakhand
E-mail: nshill6@gmail.com
**Hochschule Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences, Detmold, Germany
E-mail: a.klingenberg@web.de

ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the role of university libraries in promoting and developing information skills of
students activators of life-long learning. It defines information literacy and identifies major information literacy
skills required by students, and highlights information literacy initiatives in India, particularly the role of agricultural
university libraries in imparting information literacy courses as part of the course curriculum. It also discusses
the information competency programmes of German universities and basic models of teaching information
literacy skills by subject librarians at some German universities. The difficulties faced in incorporating information
literacy into regular course curriculum are mentioned.
Keywords: Information literacy, information competence, user instruction, information skills, tool literacy

1. INTRODUCTION
Information literacy has gained importance world
wide over the last decade. It is being increasingly
realised that for an effective functioning of the
democratic world, the citizens have to be information
literate and be able to take right decisions for the
development of their society. The building of information
society demands development of skills and capacities of
individuals connected with efficient locating, access,
understanding, and using information in their day to day
work and life in general.
Information literacy forms the basis for a life-long
learning process that starts at a young age and
proceeds until post work stage where each individual
requires various kinds of information in different phases
of life. At an earlier stage, individuals acquire knowledge
through secondary and higher education. The teachers
and library professionals impart information literacy
competency through various academic programmes.
Besides formal education, they acquire knowledge
through several informal ways and update their existing
knowledge in their fields of interest. An information
literate person is able to recognise, and locate when
information is needed and is able to use information

suitably to generate wealth and welfare for themselves
and their living. The subsequent politicisation of the term
information literacy has been broadly in connection with
‘life-long learning’ agenda. However, the term ‘life-long’
has become synonymous with economic development
and social inclusion in reports and policy documents
which set out agenda for development of an equitable
information society1.
Information literacy has broader perspectives and
applications. Although information literacy embraces
related concepts like user education, library instructions,
bibliographic instructions and library research, libraries
alone cannot address information literacy. This is an
educational and societal issue, and cooperative efforts of
the government, non government organisations,
educational institutions, community information centres
and academic/professional associations are to be
involved.
Whereas historically, libraries focus on the searchprocess, information literacy also involves the basis of
every search, viz., formulating a topic and formulating the
right questions to answer the actual information need.
Information literacy also focuses on the effective use of
retrieved information.

Received 12 August 2011, accepted 22 September 2011, online published 18 May 2012

265

As libraries are involved in a number of ways in
supporting teaching and research in terms of resourcing
reading material, facilitating use of these materials, and
providing collaborative focus for partnership with other
institutions, they play an important role in promoting
information literacy of the students and staff members.
The focus of this paper is to examine the role of
academic libraries in teaching information literacy skills
to the students in Indian and German universities.

2. INFORMATION LITERACY
The first public use of the term ‘information literacy’
was done in 1974 when Paul Zurkowski suggested the
establishment of a ten year strategic framework for
achieving nationwide ‘information literacy’ in his report to
the US National Commission on Libraries and Information
Science in what is now perceived as seminal moment in
the history of information literacy. However, the
widespread use of the term ‘information literacy’ followed
after the publication of the ALA final report of the
presidential committee on information literacy in 1989
which set the agenda in the US for the activities that
followed and provided a definition of infomation literacy
which is commonly quoted in reports and papers to this
day2.
Bruce observes that it was the emergence of the
information society characterised by rapid growth in
available information and accompanying changes in
technology used to generate, disseminate, access and
manage that information, which allowed the infomation
literacy movement to take root and flourish3.
The Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL) defines information literacy as a set of abilities
requiring individuals to recognise when information is
needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate and use
effectively the needed information4.
Information literacy has its root from user instruction
or user education. In large academic institutions the
readers were oriented to the library services or user
services by guided tours to libraries or demos and written
instructions. As open stack libraries became common
with several types of publications and other technicalities
in publications like merging and splitting of journal titles,
etc., the users needed additional knowledge and skills in
retrieving the various types of literature scheduled in open
stacks of the library and in using the reference
information, especially the catalogue in an effective
manner. Consequently, a number of academic libraries
began to offer courses for library users. The advent of
internet, the World Wide Web, other electronic and digital
resources and application of information and
communication technologies in automation of libraries
and house-keeping operations has highlighted the need of
266

information literacy to a larger extent. The use of these
automated libraries and digital resources became difficult
without guidance and basic skills, therefore, user
instruction became mandatory to readers to provide
necessary skills for best exploitation of digital resources.
In a study by Ray & Day pertaining to students’
attitude towards electronic resources, it was apparent
that a large number of students were finishing the
university education without the necessary transferable
skills to cope in an information-based society5. Some of
the major information skills required by the students as
defined by SCONUL institutions in UK6 as seven pillars of
information literacy are:
(1) Ability to recognise a need for information
(2) Ability to distinguish ways in which the information
“gap” may be addressed (e.g. kinds of resources print
and non print)
(3) Ability to construct strategies for locating information:
• Articulate information need and be able to match
against resources
• Understand the principle of construction and
generation of databases
(4) Ability to locate and access information
• Develop appropriate searching techniques (e.g.
use of Boolean logic)
• Use information and communication technologies
effectively including academic networks and online
databases
• Use appropriate indexing and abstracting services,
citation indexes, etc.
• Use current awareness methods and tools to keep
up to date
(5) Ability to compare and evaluate information
• Awareness of bias and authority issues
• Awareness of peer review process of scholarly
publishing
• Retrieve information matching the information need
(6) Ability to organise, apply and communicate
information to others in ways appropriate to the
situation. For example:
• Be able to cite bibliographical references in project
reports and theses
• Communicate effectively using appropriate media
• Understand issues of copyright and plagiarism
• Be able to construct personal bibliographical system
(7) Ability to synthesise and build upon existing
information; contribute to creation of new knowledge.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

A course on information literacy integrated into the
core curriculum is perhaps the best way to provide
information skills to the university students. This will
ensure that they leave the university as information
literate citizens. Also the problems and challenges of
infomation literacy (in particular getting it embedded into
regular course curriculum) will continue to be left solely to
library professionals’ own initiatives, enthusiasm,
networking, and persistence.

2.1 Information Literacy: World Scenario
Academic institutions, especially the university
libraries, are promoting information literacy which is quite
encouraging in the developed world. In UK, the report of
National Committee of Enquiry into Higher Education (the
Dearing Report, 1998) had emphasised the importance of
skills which are key to future success of graduates on
what ever they intend to do later in life. The Committee
identified a list of four skills: (a) communication skill; (b)
numerical; (c) use of information technology, and (d)
learning how to learn7.
In US, an influential report by the American Library
Association (report of the Presidential Committee, 1989)
emphasised the need for all people to become information
literate which means that they are able to recognise when
information is needed and are able to identify locate,
evaluate, and use effectively the needed information9. A
National Forum for Information Literacy has been
established with representations from wide range of
educational organisations. The land grant pattern
universities in US already have courses on developing
information competency of students integrated into their
course curriculum. Besides there are good examples of
infomation literacy programmes at California State
University, Florida International University, University of
Wisconsin, etc. Initiatives have also been made in other
universities, viz., Syracuse University (New York),
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Yale
University, Stanford University, etc.
Australian universities also have taken initiatives
towards a strategic approach to information literacy
development. Griffith University developed an information
literacy blueprint called the ‘Griffith Blueprint’. The
document states that effective information literacy
education depends upon co-operation between
information specialists and discipline experts to achieve
curriculum innovations which foster information literacy7.
Many projects have also been under taken worldwide
on information literacy. The UNESCO co-sponsored
information literacy colloquia and meetings (Prague 2003,
Alexandria 2005 and 2006) were attended by over 100
experts from different countries. Large academic libraries
have undertaken information literacy projects to develop
information literacy skills of their students. The Library of
Chinese Academy of Sciences has done impressive work
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

on information literacy and has a wealth of experience. In
New Zealand, the Library and Information Association of
New Zealand, Aotearoa (LIANZA) has been working on the
concept of information literacy since the 1990s and
developing existing user education programmes to
achieve broader outcomes. In 1998, LIANZA developed a
task force on infomation literacy to identify core issues,
challenges and opportunities facing LIANZA in the area of
infomation literacy and how this could be accommodated
in the LIANZA structure. There have been several notable
initiatives and influences within the library profession of
New Zealand. The move from user education to
information literacy involves two pronged approach from
librarians. Internally, user education programmes had
been refined and developed and externally librarians are
looking to form partnership that will create broader
information literacy outcomes8. Understanding the
philosophy of user education and its purpose being
broadened and promoted thus moving from an internal
library focus to more collaborative approaches focused on
learner needs.
Information literacy in Germany is fast catching up
and is an important topic of discussion for the German
academic librarians. Few pioneers raised the topic in late
1990s but no active pursuance was seen in this area. The
first modular teaching approach was developed in 1996-97
at the University Library of Heidelberg. The programme
involved small teaching units (1-2 hours), complementary
online tutorials, and teaching modules integrating small
curricula9.
The year 2000 saw project-oriented approach to an
information literacy programme developed by Dannenberg
University of Applied Sciences10, Hamburg. The approach
was based on constructive and subject-oriented
pedagogy, integrating information literacy with content of
other subjects.
Other universities, for example the University Library
of Konstanz started a project in 2003 entitled
‘Informationskompetenz I’ a prototype course for teaching
information literacy at undergraduate level. Besides a set
of online tutorials using ILIAS (Integriertes Lern-,
Informations- und Arbeitskooperations System) an open
source e-learning platform was also developed. Another
project ‘Informationskompetenz II’ undertaken in 2006
was a cooperative project with Chinese Academy of
Sciences with the objective to analyse graduate
information competencies to find appropriate ways to
inform and teach them11.
Many in Germany see information literacy as a followup of the concept of key qualifications (Schluessel
qualifikationen) established by Mertens in 197412. He
described competencies every working individual should
have in addition to the specialised knowledge of one’s
subject. He marked the following key qualifications as
267

necessary; the ability to communicate, the ability to
cooperate, the ability to manage conflict, empathy, and
media literacy. The concept of key qualifications
mentioned media literacy and fundamental problemsolving ability as the most important aspects of
information literacy, long before the term ‘information
literacy’ was used in German libraries.
In Greece, according to a research by Anthi on state
of information literacy, 45 per cent of the libraries had
established special programmes for users on library
instruction. The study pointed out difficulties faced by the
libraries with regard to the information literacy programme
that included fewer staff, low budget, and lack of skilled
staff13.
From the foregoing it can be seen that the initiatives
on information literacy worldwide in the past have been
quite impressive.

3. INFORMATION LITERACY INITIATIVES IN
INDIA
Initiatives for an information literate society in India
have already been made in the year 2005 with the setting
of a National Knowledge Commission (NKC) with a
mandate to transform India of 21st century into a
knowledge society. The government has clearly
recognised public libraries as playing a pivotal role in
dissemination of knowledge. Academic libraries by virtue
of having information resources and staff trained in
managing information sources are the best centres for
developing information literacy skills of the students and
staff.
The role of university libraries has been limited to
orientation and library instruction. However, agricultural
university libraries are already ahead with their user
education programmes focused on teaching information
literacy skills to Postgraduate and PhD students.
The user education in agricultural universities of India
had its beginning from the land grant pattern colleges of
American Universities of Agricultural Sciences. The
agricultural universities in India had their roots from these
colleges and follow the land grant pattern of imparting
education. User education was considered important and
was made part of the curricula to teach the students on
use of library and its resources and to develop their
information skills.
Agriculture universities started teaching library skills
way back in 1970s with Indira Gandhi Krishi
Vishvidhalaya, Raipur (MP) being the first university
followed by GB Pant University of Agriculture and
Technology in 1976, and Marthwada Agriculture University
Maharastra. Annexure I gives the list of universities
teaching library and information skills to post graduate
268

and PhD students. These courses are generally of one or
two credit hours and integrated into the academic
curriculum.
The concept of offering user education integrated into
regular course curriculum was to make students
information literate and acquaint them with various
scientific
sources
of
information,
knowledge
classification, and retrieval techniques.
According to a study by Singh14 on user education
and information literacy programs of 19 agriculture
universities in India, the course content offered to the
students has been devised basically to develop the
information competency skills of students. The course
content has been organised into two parts. One part deals
with educating users on information retrieval techniques,
use of catalogues and OPAC, classification, arrangement
of books, use of national and international agricultural
databases, library networks and web resources; library
rules, type of libraries and its services. The other part
deals with research skills like preparing dissertation and
reports, writing scientific references, knowledge of
compiling bibliographies, technical jargons like use of
abbreviations, footnotes, etc.
Most of the agricultural universities in India follow
semester system–except the Indian Agricultural
Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, that follows
trimester system–and offers the course in the first or
second semester. In most of the agricultural universities
the course is compulsory and graded in the final
examination. The only deficiency in these courses is lack
of uniformity. While some universities have emphasised
on library and information science subject others have
given more emphasis to technical writing. Therefore, there
is a need to bring some uniformity in the course
curriculum and also update the curriculum in view of the
latest developments in libraries.
Other conventional universities in the country are yet
to come with concrete curricula-based user education
programme for developing information skills of their
students in higher education to meet the twin dimension
of competent students and the information literate
persons.
A study of 29 libraries and information centres of R&D
institutions in Bangalore found that 23 of them provided
information literacy programmes to their researchers and
scientists for optimum utilisation of library resources
although such programmes were not conducted at regular
intervals. Besides, most of the information literacy
programmes are for new users. Training for information
skills is provided by the librarians and some times by
guest speakers. All libraries felt that they had all
resources required for imparting information skills to their
researchers and staff15.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

With National Knowledge Commission (NKC)
emphasising on educating citizens to be information
literate, the libraries and information centres of traditional
or conventional universities have to be proactive in
formulating information literacy courses for their students
based on patterns from developed countries in particular
UK, US, and Australia where considerable work has
already been done in this regard.
Libraries and information centres require huge
investments and students have the right to draw
maximum benefit by exploiting the resources fully.
Information literacy courses make this possible. It is high
time that academic libraries of conventional universities
too realise their role of teaching as library educators.
However, the proposed development of the idea of
information literacy requires a collaborative and integrated
approach to curriculum design and delivery based on
close co-operation between library professionals,
department faculty, and administrative staff like college
deans, etc.
Besides the academic libraries focusing on teaching
infomation literacy to students, the efforts made by
publishers and producers of electronic resources and
library associations in promoting information literacy has
been quite encouraging.

4. INFORMATION LITERACY FOR ACADEMIC
STAFF MEMBERS
Unlike information literacy course for students in
universities and colleges there are no formal courses for
teaching/upgrading information literacy skills to teaching
and support staff. The universities and research
institutes have access to several digital resources on
consortium or individual bases. The publishers or
producers of these electronic resources train the
information professionals through user training
programmes who in turn train their students to access
and use databases effectively. Some like Indian Medlars
Centres of National Information Centre (NIC) conduct
user training programme from time to time on their
products and services like MedIND open access journal
literatures, UNcat union catalogue databases, etc.
Besides many academic staff colleges have been
established in the universities with ideas to organise
regular orientation/refresher courses for teachers and
information professionals to upgrade their skills in
changing environment. Some national institutes of
technology like IITs and documentation centres like
National Social Science Documentation Centre
(NASSDOC) and National Institute for Science
Communication and Information Resources (NISCAIR)
erstwhile INSDOC play important role in training the
information professionals in the country to acquire and
upgrade their skills on retrieval techniques from time to
time.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

5. LIBRARY ASSOCIATIONS AND INFORMATION
LITERACY
Library associations both at national and the state
level have been promoting information literacy in particular
for the working professionals. The Indian Library
Association (ILA) organised the 51st All India Conference
on Librarians, Information Literacy and Life-long Learning
in December 2005. In this Conference, ILA also
recommended to form a National Information Literacy
Mission and a National Information Literacy Task Force to
implement information literacy competency programme
throughout the country16. Another International Information
Literacy Workshop was held at the Punjabi University,
Patiala in India in October 2005, to promote information
literacy in South and South East Asia growth with support
from UNESCO and other partners. Besides Associations
of Agricultural Librarians and Documentalists of India
(AALDI) has been promoting information literacy through
various platforms. In 2010, the National Conference on
Knowledge Management in Globalised Era focused
infomation literacy as one of the important theme for
discussions.

6. INFORMATION LITERACY INITIATIVES BY
GERMAN UNIVERSITIES
Libraries in Germany also went through fundamental
change initiated by information and communication
technologies. The orientation towards user expectation
and user services had taken place in German libraries as
a result of democratic movement and educational reforms
in the seventies. The opening of formally closed stacks
and expansion of reading rooms required knowledge and
skills of retrieving literature shelved in open stacks and
using catalogue in efficient way as a result of which large
academic libraries started offering user education
courses. After acquiring some experiences it became
obvious that apart from existing expert knowledge the
librarians needed pedagogical qualifications and
organisational conditions to ensure efficient courses.
Recommendations for these tasks were developed in a
project at the end of 70’s, however, there had not been
enough resources and initiatives for a systematic and
sustainable development of teaching task. During 80’s the
activities in the field of user education were reduced in
nearly all libraries of Germany due to the reason of
missing staff resources; for systematic development of
teaching activities; neglect of users expectations and
perspectives especially in forming and providing
information concept; missing adult education course for
those willing to take pedagogical task, etc9.
At the beginning of 90’s new discussions and
activities started as a reaction to increasing demand for
support during the introduction of new electronic
information system like OPAC, bibliographical databases
on CD-ROM, etc. This led to the expansion of user
269

education courses and these were pragmatic and objectoriented. They were pragmatic because they were not
integrated in a pedagogical concept with broad education
target and object-oriented because their focus was
providing skills required to handle OPAC or a database.
Often the course structure was derived from the hand
book of the publishers or producers. These courses were
self contained entities of one or two hours without any
relation to other courses in methodology of content.
New activities were started at the end of 90’s with
focus on new pedagogic concepts and foreign
developments influenced by curriculum theory; Anglo
American models of information literacy; online learning
methods and techniques, etc. A lot of teaching activities
in German universities are now based on smaller curricula
and learning target especially in big academic libraries.
Anglo American models of information literacy are of
significant relevance for extending the content and
methodology of new approach in German user education9.
However, the discussion on information literacy in
Germany during the last few years has concentrated
almost exhaustively on teaching undergraduates due to
the reason that information literacy was quite a new topic
of discussion for German academic libraries11.
The University Library of Heidelberg developed the
perhaps the first modular teaching approach in 1996-97,
following the DYMIK (Dynamic Model of Information
Kompetenz) or literacy. The course was started following
small modular teaching unit of 1-2 h complemented by
online tutorials. The participation by students was
voluntary as the course was not integrated into regular
curriculum of faculties. The courses focused on contents
of library catalogue, internet, and databases10.
University of Applied Sciences, Department of Library
and Information Studies, Hamburg, developed the first
project oriented approach to teaching information literacy
in 2000. The approach was based on constructive and
subject centred pedagogy. The main characteristic of this
approach is the use of individual thematic problems or
interest as starting points to trigger process of learning so
the learning of competencies of information literacy can
be integrated with contents of other fields like economy or
history23.
Bibliographic instruction (BI) took place in a very tooloriented way for example at University of Konstanz.
Stand-alone sessions were offered called ‘Using the local
catalogue’ or ‘Introduction to databases’. These sessions
were not well attended by students and the libraries were
not content. This description seems to represent most
German university libraries17.
The situation changed when Bologna process (named
after the Northern Italian city Bologna) where the treaty
was signed in 1999, by Ministers of Education from 29
European states to harmonies higher education of the
270

European Union States and to allow students to switch
between counties and universities and to improve mobility
in European Higher Education. The process seeks to
harmonise the higher education system of the
participating European Union States with vision to improve
European higher learning education system by 201018.
German students had to work for 5-6 years for their
first academic degree which was a Diploma (Diploma) and
Magister (magister artium). A shorter degree course such
as bachelors and masters was not known. The Bologna
process aims to define and implement a two-level study
structure similar to the one already existing in Anglo
American world in the undergraduate level a bachelor’s
degree of three years qualifying students to enter a job
that could be followed by masters or doctoral.
The implementation of bachelor and master degrees
at universities of applied sciences in Germany has lead to
a bizarre situation: The duration of study mostly was
shortened from eight semesters (Diploma) to six
semesters (Bachelor). The aim was to harmonise courses
of study in all European countries and to make it easier for
students to change the university and to change the
country. So contents of teaching and the curricula had to
be worked over. In fact contents of the curricula were just
deleted. For instance some universities of applied
sciences deleted phases of practical learning. When at
that time librarians insisted on integrating information
literacy skills into new bachelor curricula, deciders often
rejected any suggestions. The Bologna idea of
harmonising led to studies at a lower level in general and
at a lower level concerning information literacy skills in
particular. Whereas, the need for information literacy
skills was provoked and intensified through the
development of the so called information society. Apart
from that the idea of information literacy has not yet
reached the bigger part of higher academic levels and
professors in Germany.
On the other hand, information professionals and
librarians are now discussing pedagogical issues and
didactics. Instruction and information literacy as well as
aspects of life-long learning are now part of most
information/library related studies in Germany. So there is
new young generation of information professionals and
librarians growing up with knowledge on (library) didactics
and ways of teaching and learning. Also the number of
trainings for working librarians on pedagogical issues and
didactics is increasing since the last one or two years.
And if librarians get the chance to apply what they have
learned during their studies or trainings, even mostly,
professors (who had doubts) started to recognise the
worth of information literacy–not only for their students,
but also for themselves.
After five semesters of testing and discussing, the
library of Hochschule Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Applied Sciences now achieved a first success. A
semester-long training on information literacy developed
by a university librarian is now implemented into the new
Bachelor curriculum. It is a required course every student
on landscape architecture has to complete (Annexure 2).
At the University of Konstanz, situated in Southern
Germany, senior LIS professionals, informed that the
debate on information literacy started in 2002 when first
bachelors curricula were designed and some department
requested the subject librarians for teaching. It was then
thought that, this was a unique chance to develop librarian
position towards a more research and teaching-oriented
focus and to improve libraries standing in the university.
Although, there had been some bibliographic instructions
before, a new era started at this point of time. In the last
few years the integration of information literacy in certain
undergraduate curricula has been incorporated in the
University of Konstanz. This has led to three basic
models of teaching information literacy at this level11.
(1) Ninety-minute stand-alone sessions in subjectspecific resources are still offered in most subject, but
attendance remains low.
(2) Course-integrated arrangements allow the subject
librarians to teach 90 or even 180 min sessions in a
seminar run by the faculty. This is the case in
subjects of sports science, ancient history, or political
science. The subject specialist can only show some
of the most important resources, so teaching remains
predominantly tool-oriented.
(3) A completely new approach is a subject-oriented full
semester information literacy credit course that may
be integrated in the curriculum. This model is already
followed by five of the ten subject specialist, who
cover a range of approximately 12 fields of study
(Annexure 3).
The courses in social sciences and humanities are
offered in the first year whereas in sciences, the courses
are scheduled in the 2nd or 3rd year because of the
different ways the students learn to work during their time
at university. The underlying structure of the course
agenda is similar in most courses and covers the whole
range of information literacy from research strategy via
catalogue, database, internet, and fact retrieval to evaluation
citation, bibliographic management software, etc.
The information literacy programme of the University
of Konstanz Library has been appreciated by the
university faculty and viewed as teaching support in the
field of research and information seeking skills. With this
step, the library made clear the importance of teaching
information literacy as a new task for subject librarians and
for the libraries as a whole. This has led to a certain change
over from collection development to a more research and
teaching-oriented position of the subject librarian.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Besides the undergraduate courses, the University
Library of Konstanz from 2006 started a semester long
credit bearing course for masters students of politics and
management. The course of four credits is included in the
study regulation and is mandatory for all masters’
students. The course content, for example political
science students, includes full range of basic information
literacy, viz., research strategy, knowledge of and
searching relevant information sources in political
sciences, evaluation, citation, bibliographic management
software, etc.
In 2003 the University of Konstanz started a project
‘Informationskompetenz I’, a prototype course for
teaching information literacy at undergraduate level was
developed as well as set of online tutorial using ILIAS an
open source platform. The university started another
project ‘Informationskompetenz II’, funded by DFG in
cooperation with Chinese Academy of Science to analyse
graduate information competency and to find appropriate
ways to inform and teach them19.
The situation of information literacy at the University of
Konstanz can not be generalised for all the German
universities. There are still a variety of different
approaches between universities and libraries in teaching
information literacy from stand-alone presentations to
course-embedded sessions and complete credit courses.
For example the University of Applied Sciences in
Hanover and the Hanover University (Lower Saxony) the
course for teaching information literacy has not been
integrated in the course curriculum. However, the
discussions are still in progress to include the same into
regular course curriculum of the undergraduates and post
graduates students.
The University of Applied Sciences, Hanover, offers
five credits course for engineering students recognising
the fact that Informationskompetenz (in German) or
information literacy is an important key qualification for
efficient and effective supplement to their main study
(engineering sciences) as well as central resources like
library which will help in future for job entrance and work
place11. The course content focuses on ability to
recognise the need of information, to formulate search
strategy, locate right information, evaluate, and use
effectively for problem solving (Annexure 4).
The information literacy programme of Hanover
University Library, and the National Library of Science and
Technology (the TIB), includes research strategies, tool
literacy, and resource literacy. The programme is
modular, discipline specific and taught by subject
librarians (Annexure 5). It is noted that inclusion of
information literacy into the core course curriculum is still
under active discussion with the faculty to offer through
blended learning by integrating into e-learning mode,
presently, it is not included in to the core curriculum. At
271

Hochschule Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied
Sciences the situation is different, although information
literacy is one of the key competencies for learners there
are difficulties in getting implemented into regular course
curriculums for the reasons of common consensuses
among the faculty members.

require more refinement, owing to the growth of electronic
and web-based information, the changing socio-economic
and educational demographics. The information explosion
with which students have to cope demands information
literacy. It is not sufficient for the students to be able to
use the libraries and the information they provide.

Out of nine departments the course is integrated into
only one department, i.e., of landscape architecture and
environmental sciences. The situation of information
literacy in other German university libraries are into
different phases of implementation and needs to be further
explored. The universities are in transition to
implementing the Bologna process of harmonising the
higher education system to define and implement a two
level study structure of bachelors and masters degrees to
students. As already existing in Anglo American world
some universities, for example the University Library of
Konstanz recognised the possibility of including
information literacy as a key competence at a very early
stage of the process.

In Germany, the university libraries are into different
phases of implementing information literacy course into
their under graduate and post graduate course
curriculums. While some universities, like the University
of Konstanz Library, has made clear the importance of
teaching information literacy as a new task for subject
librarians and library as a whole. This has led to a certain
change from the role of information managers to more
research and teaching-oriented position. The situation at
the University of Konstanz or Hochschule OstwestfalenLippe University of Applied Sciences cannot be
generalised for other German university libraries. Many
universities, viz., the Hanover University now Leibniz
University and University of Applied Sciences are offering
information literacy courses though not credit-based, and
are now in the process of active discussions on getting
the course integrated into the regular course curriculums.

New challenges are arising these days. The problem
of plagiarism is reinforced by the possibilities of
information technology and the internet. Students tend to
search a topic on the internet first. As we all know you will
always find ‘something’. The computer makes it then
easy to copy a text and paste it into your own writing.
Information literacy programs have to react on the
problem of copy and paste. On the one hand copyright
issues and ethic use of information have to be addressed.
That also leads to citing and formals in academic writing.
On the other hand information literacy programmes
have to teach students how to find reliable (i.e., scientific)
information and how to evaluate the found information.
And as you will always find ‘something’ on the internet,
students also need the ability to judge whether their
search results are useful for their topic or not. And they
need the persistence to go on searching if search results
are neither reliable nor useful.

7. CONCLUSIONS
Teaching information literacy is not a new role for the
library professionals in India or Germany. The librarians
have been doing so in a general way by orientation or user
instruction at the beginning of the academic session.
Although the concept of information literacy has roots
from these user oriented programmes, it has not gained
much attention or interest from the working LIS
professionals in particular the traditional or conventional
universities, and other engineering and management
institutes of India. The situation of agricultural universities
in the country is different, as these universities had their
roots from American land grant pattern universities.
Teaching library or user education had been integrated
into the course curriculums. However, these courses now
272

World wide many projects, namely, the UNESCO
programmes in promoting information literacy; the
Chinese Academy of Sciences; initiatives of Library and
Information Association of New Zealand, Griffith
University, Australia are quite impressive. In India,
researches in the area of information literacy is still in
preliminary stage. More discussions, user surveys, and
intensive researches have become inevitable to promote
information literacy movement in the country.

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to the following LIS
professionals from universities in Germany for sharing
their experience and knowledge in information literacy
and the course contents of their information literacy
programmes: Dr Prof Huper, Dean, University of Applied
Sciences, Hanover, Lower Saxony; Dr Prof Ulrich
Schomer, University of Applied Sciences, Hanover, Lower
Saxony; Mr Horst Ferber (Director Library) and Ms
Andreas Schiller (Subject Librarian), University of Applied
Sciences Hanover, Lower Saxony; Mrs Petra Hatcher
(Director Library) and Mr. Bernd Schmid-Ruhe (Subject
Librarian) University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Baden
Wurttemberg; Dr Andreas Muller, Specialist, Information
Competence, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek; and
Mrs Margaret Plank, Coordinator, Information literacy,
Hanover University Library and National Library of Science
of Technology.

REFERENCES
1. Delors, J. Life long learning for all. OECD
Publications, France, 1996.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

2. American Library Association. A progress report on
IL: An update on the American Library Association
Presidential Committee on Information Literacy Final
Report. 1998 http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/
publications/whitepapers/progressreport
3. Bruce, C. The seven faces of information literacy.
Aslib Press, Adelaide, 1997.
4. Association of College Research Libraries (ACRL).
2006. Information Literacy Competency Standards for
Higher Education. http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/
acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency.cfm
(accessed on 11 Feb 2011)
5. Ray, K. & Day, J. Students attitude towards electronic
resources. Information Research, 1988, 4(2), 1-13.
http://informationr.net/ir/4-2/paper54.html
6. Society for College, National and University Libraries
(SCONUL). Information skills in higher education:
Position paper. SCONUL, London, 1999. pp. 5-6.
7. Griffiths University. Division of Information Services.
Information Literacy Blue Print. 1994.
8. User education and information literacy in New
Zealand: A country paper. COMLA Seminar 2000:
User education for user empowerment, Christchurch,
New Zealand, October 2000. pp.19-20.
9. Homann, Benno. A new task for German libraries:
Teaching information literacy. In Information literacy in
Europe: A first insight into the state of the art of IL in
the European Union, edited by Calara Basili. National
Research Council, Rome, 2003. pp. 104-105.
10. Dannenberg, Detlev. Wann fangen sie an? Das lerns
system Inormationskompetenz (LIK) alspraktisches
Konzept einer teaching library, Bibliotheksdienst,
2006, 34(7-8), 1245-259.
11. Kohl-Frey. Oliver information literacy for advanced
users: A German perspective. Public Serv. Quart.,
2007, 3(3-4), 7-8.
12. Dieter, Mertens. Schlüsselqualifikationen Thesen zur
Schulung für eine Moderne Gesellschaft, 1974,
(Translated title: Key skills theses on training for a
modern society). http://doku.iab.de/mittab/1974/
1974_1_MittAB_Mertens.pdf
13. Anthi, Katsirikou, Instruction literacy: The state of the
art in Greece. In Information literacy in Europe: A first
insight into the state of the art of IL in the European
Union, edited by Calara Basili. National Research
Council, Rome, 2003. pp. 47-150.
14. Singh, Neena. Restructuring LIS user education
courses in universities of agriculture sciences: A
study. Annals Lib. Inf. Stud., 2006, 53(3), 134-42.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

15. Karsiddappa, C.R. & Rajgoli, I.U. In search of
information literacy programmes and practices:
Survey of selected institutions at Bangalore.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2008, 28(2), 20-38.
16. Indian Library Association. Resolutions: 51st All India
Conference on Libraries Information Literacy and Life
Long Learning, 16-18 December 2005. Indian Library
Association, New Delhi. http://eprints.rclis.org/
archive/00005896/
17. Lux & Suehl-Strohmenger. Teaching library in
Deutschland. Dinges und Frick, Wiesbaden, 2004.
pp. 36-38.
18. Reinalda, B. & Kulesza, E. The Bologna process:
Harmonizing Europe’s higher education. Budrich,
Opladen, 2005.
19. Dammeier, J. Informationskompetenz mit blended
learning:
Ergebnisse
des
Projekts
Informationskompetenz I der Bibliothek der
Universitaet Konstanz. Bibliotheksdienst, 2006,
40(3), 314-30.

About the Authors
Dr Neena Singh is Faculty Deputy Librarian at GB Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology in Uttrakhand.
She has been involved in modernising the Information and
Library System of Hill Campus of the same university,
catering to information need of Agricultural Research and
Education of Central Himalayan region for past 15 years.
She has authored more than 40 research and popular
articles in journals and books and has presented papers
in national and international conferences. She has also
been involved with professional activities of some
European countries and is closely associated with
International Association of Agricultural Information
Specialist, IAALD, Kentuky. Her areas of interest are
open access sharing of information, information literacy,
content management, and scientometrics.
Mr Andreas Klingenberg is Co-founder and Chairman of
INFOKOS (information literacy for students) Association.
He is involved in conducting workshops and vocational
training in information literacy instruction for librarians and
teachers. He was Lecturer at the Faculty of Information
and Communication of Hannover University of Applied
Sciences. From 2006 to 2012 he worked as Department
Head Librarian at Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied
Sciences. His key activities included information
services, user instruction, information literacy, e-learning,
etc. Presently, he is working as Head Librarian at the
University Library of Hochschule für Musik Detmold.

273

Annexure 1
List of agricultural universities offering curriculum based courses on teaching information literacy
Name of university

Title of the course

Year of
starting

UG/PG/ PhD

Compulsory/
optional

Credit
hours

Acharya Narendra Dev
University of Agri &
Technology, Faizabad

Use of scientific and
technical literature

-

PG & PhD

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Assam Agriculture &
Tech University, Jorhat

Technical writing and
library use (TWL)

1983

PG

Compulsory

Non credit

CCS Haryana Agricultural
University, Hisar (HAU)

Library science and
technical writing

1982

PG & PhD

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Dr Panjab Rao Deshmukh
Krishi Vidhyapeeth, Akola
Extn-613

Scientific report writing
and use of library

-

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Dr YS Parmer Univ. of
Horticulture & Forestry,
Solan

Literature and technical
writing-501

1985-86

PG & PhD

Compulsory

1(1+0)

GB Pant University of Agri
& Technology, Pantnagar

Storage and retrieval of
scientific information-610

1976

PG

Optional

1(1+0)

Himachal Pradesh Krishi
Vishwavidhalya,
PalampurIndian

Literature and technical
writing–501

1982

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Indian Agriculture Research
Institute (IARI), New Delhi

Agriculture information
system (AIS)

1982

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Indira Gandhi Krishi
Vishwavidhyalaya, Raipur

Biological literature
and reference work

1970

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi
Vishwavdhyalaya. Jabalpur

Agril information
system (AIS)

-

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Rajasthan Agriculture
University, Bikaner

Library and information
usage

-

UG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Sardarkrushinagar
Dantiwada Agril Univ.
Banaaskantha, Gujrat

Scientific and technical
writing

-

PG

Compulsory

3(3+0)

Shere Kashmir University
of Agriculture Sciences
&Technology, Shalimar

Library science &
technical writing
(LIB 601)

1999

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Sher-e Kashmir University
of Agriculture & Technology,
Jammu

Library science &
technical education

1982

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

Tamilnaidu Agriculture
University

Research methodology
& library use ABT -610

-

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

University of Agricultural
Sciences, Dharward

Introduction to library
science (Lib-14)

-

PG

Compulsory

1(1+0)

University of Agriculture
Sciences, Bangalore

Orientation course on
utilisation of library facilities

-

UG & PG

As per
requirement

-

Kerela Agriculture
University, Trissur

Use of library
RM (610)

1996

PG/UG

Compulsory

3(2+1)

Marathwada Agriculture
University, Parbhani

Scientific report
writing

1997

PG

Compulsory

-

Punjab Agriculture
University

Technical writing &
user education
(TW 501)

1978

PG

-

2(1+1)

274

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

Annexure 2
Information literacy for landscape architects at Hochschule Ostwestfalen-Lippe University of Applied Sciences (Germany)
Lesson (90 min.)

Topics covered

1.

Academic work (basis)
Define information literacy

2.

Library tour
Preparing search
Know information need
Search terms
Basic search strategies

3.

Publication types
Bibliographic data

4.

Library catalogue (OPAC)

5.

Digital libraries
Meta-search
Inter-library-loan

6.

Databases
Other specific information resources

7.

Internet searching and search-engines, specific use

8.

Choosing adequate information
Evaluation of search results
Reading techniques

9.

Mind Maps
Writing
Elements and setup of academic works

10.

Citation
Bibliographic description
Bibliography
Copyright

11.

Web 2.0

12.

Presentation

Annexure 3
Undergraduate information literacy courses at the University of Konstanz (Germany)
*

Subject

Course

Germanic studies

Every summer semester

offered

Time per week
2 hours

11

Credits
3

Romanic Studies

Every other winter semester

2 hours

3

Slavonic studies

Every other summer semester

2 hours

3

Linguistic

Every other winter semester

2 hours

3

Media science

Every other summer semester

2 hours

3

History**

Every semester

2 hours

3

Philosophy**

Every semester

2 hours

3

Politics & management

Every summer semester

1 hour

2

Economics

Every summer semester

2 hours

3

Biological sciences

Every summer semester

2 hours

2

Life sciences

Every winter semester

1 hour

1

Chemistry

Every winter semester

1 hour

1

*The different number of credits is based on decisions of the respective departments. As the information literacy course have approximately the
same workload per weekly hour, the idea of measuring workload with credits is somehow contradicted.
**Mandatory courses

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

275

Annexure 4
Information Kompetenz (Literacy) for Engineering Science Students, University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Hanover
Course No. (M-H-48) credits 5(2+2+1)
Information Kompetenz-I :

2 credits

Aim and objectives:
To develop students skill on competencies to search and acquire the information in particular subject its technical and economics aspects, and to be
able to use it effectively on concrete questions.
1. Structure of information markets
2. Knowledge about producers of databases
3. Information acquisition, document delivery
4. Searching information in library
5. E-journals, full text, search engines and portals
Information Kompetenz-II: 2 credits
Aim and objectives:
To develop students skills that they are able to detect and identify special media norms, standards, patents and information sources of firms, sources
of supply and are able to integrate in their research, publication and thesis work.
Contents:
1. Knowledge about special media norms, standards, patents, trademarks
2. Type of information, data, information on firms, products, and congresses
3. Search strategies and how to differentiate
4. SDI services, different forms of information
5. Management of literature and publications
Information Kompetenz-III: 3 credits
Aim and objectives: 1 credit
To provide practical application of knowledge gained from lectures and theory, from I and II.
1. Practice in searching bibliographical information and facts on concrete questions in the field of engineering sciences and economics.

Annexure 5
Information Literacy Programme at National Library of Science and Technology and the University Library of Hanover
Information literacy includes research strategies, tool literacy, and resource literacy
(I)

For freshman-objectives and contents

1. Become familiar with the library
2. Use the library home page effectively
3. Use of catalogue to find resources
4. Know how to conduct a search using author, title, keyword and subject identify location of books/media
Activities
1. Visit of Library and familiarity with various services (45 min)
2. Practice in performing searches and use of catalogue with search examples
3. Online tutorials in order to reflect topics and home
(II) For students of BA-contents
1. Visit of library (optional)
2. Use of the home page to find relevant articles
3. Select appropriate databases for topic or subject
4. Be able to develop search strategies using Boolean logic AND, OR, NOT, truncation etc.
5. Identify synonyms
6. Practice in performing searches and use of catalogue with online tutorials.
7. Online quiz
(III)
For students in MA/MSC–contents
1. Improve research strategies
2. Conduct an advance search
3. Utilise evaluation criteria on retrieved resources
4. Order resources not owned by the library
5. Demonstrate awareness of the scholarly communication process
6. Demonstrate awareness of copy write problems
7. Online quiz
* The National Library of Science and Technology, and University of Hanover Library are merged.
276

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

