DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 3, May 2012, pp. 277-284
© 2012, DESIDOC

Establishment of Institutional Mechanism for Building
National Repository in Health Sciences
Surinder Kumar
National Informatics Centre, A-Block, CGO Complex, New Delhi-110 003
E-mail:suri@nic.in

ABSTRACT
National consolidation of published and unpublished literature in the field of biomedical sciences can play
a major role in scholarly communication to help the end users in providing research published in the country.
Institutional repositories are a good approach for a cost-effective publishing with a cooperation and participation
of each institution for capturing, preserving, managing, and nurturing the discussion. In turn, metadata can
be harvested centrally to access the digital information of common interest whereas individual libraries should
able to preserve digital assets. Institutionalisation mode has been recommended for building national digital
repository system for the country. The public funding should be provided to apex body so as to formulate
the requisite policies for the spread of open access movement in the country and also formulate a long term
sustainable model for building national level system in the country.
Keywords: Institutional repositories, health sciences, intellectual property rights

1. INTRODUCTION
There has been scholarly communication, for
centuries, collecting and providing access to physical
copies of texts. However, in the first decade of 21st century
it has been moved to digital access to texts and various
other media. The changing economics of purchasing,
serving, and storing has resulted in a complex landscape,
where secondary storage facilities are needed to
accommodate the growing volume of digital information1.
The national consolidation of published and un-published
literature, particularity in biomedical field is very important
to sharing the cases studies, case conference, research
reports submitted to funding agencies and a typical
discussion to help the socio-biological conditions of
respective countries including the teaching, research, and
scholarship. Institutional repositories (IRs) are a good
approach for a cost-effective publishing with a cooperation
and participation of each institution for capturing,
preserving, managing, and nurturing the discussion. In
turn, it can be used centrally to access the digital
information of common interest whereas individual
libraries should able to preserve digital assets. It requires
efforts from the various stake holders such as faculty,
administration, scholarly societies and publishers to
address the common problems. Thus, the economically
sustainable development, and maintenance of high-

quality and readily accessible research collections
should become possible.

2. CURRENT SCENARIO OF INSTITUTIONAL
REPOSITORIES
In current scenario of IRs and National service
providers in the country, there is a need to look at more
robust and sustainable model for providing seamless
access to large amount information available in 62 IRs in
the country. There are number of initiatives in development
of building National level system such as Cross Archive
Search Services of Indian Repositories (CASSIR) (http://
casin.ncsi.ernet.in) of Indian Institute of Science (IISc) is
one of the largest service providers harvesting data from
22 IRs in the country. However, the development of
CASSIR is project-based not serving the national
requirement as it does not have any defined policy for
harvesting data from the repositories. There are other
service providers which are catering the need of subjectbased harvester and yet to reach the critical mass in
terms of articles harvested. The present models except
Open J Gate (http://www.jgate.com), which is running on
a purely advertisement and company’s and license fee
model, and OSSD repository is a collaborative and
institutional model in the development of Mycobacterium
Tuberculosis (MBT) repository, evolved as a national level

Received 17 October 2011, revised 09 December 2011, accepted on 02 January 2012, online published 18 May 2012

277

system from public-funded system. The public-funded
model is suitable for India, which would slowly become
self-sustainable and become a robust and sustainable
model for providing seamless access to large amount
information on particular focused topic (like information
bank) for information available in health sciences
institutes in the country.
The present study has evolved a model with an
institutionalisation called national digital repository
system (NDRS) for intellectual capital through
cooperative collection, storage and management
initiatives with public fund at the initial phase and later as
participatory model that can shape and support national
consolidation in the country.

3. INSTITUTIONALISING OF NDRS
Institutionalisation
requires
in
driving
the
organisational and financial infrastructure that supports
and sustains its present activities and operations. The
organisational, governance, and financial systems have
some traits in common, but depend on the relationships
between the IRs and NDRS2. It should have the following
functions:

•

It should be developed and run by an independent
advisory or governing board to be managed by
professional bodies. It would oversee general policy
matters, such as the kinds of materials accepted,
allocations of infrastructure as a facility, and the
apportionment of individual IRs as share of operating
costs. Such board also guides general investment
and budgetary strategy and future development of the
national level repository.

•

It should also look after the management operation
such as scheduling, workflow, logistics, and
production of NDRS.

•

It should be funded by national apex bodies for the
initial establishment, then managed and operated by
a single institution/university so as to provide services
to end users on a fee or no fee basis. The financial
arrangements underlying creation and maintenance of
the individual repositories vary depending upon the
financial strength of the institutes.

•

It should follow publishing trend particularly in the
open access initiatives to achieve greater efficiencies
in storage, service and preservation.

It is proposed to maintain cooperatively managed
repositories as a central facility backed by institution
repositories to serve the community at large as archival
repositories, and it would ensure preservation as the key
to safeguarding the intellectual and cultural heritage of the
country. The NDRS can adopt any one of the following
models3:
278

3.1 Consortium Repository Model
The consortium model (or shared model) is one in
which a group of institutions, generally without individual
pre-existing repositories, come together to develop a
single instance of a repository to house content from all
participating institutions. The example used for this model
is Washington Research Library Consortium (WLRC)
(http://www.wrlc.org/ in the USA with its online repository
‘ALADIN Research Commons (ALADINRC)’ and White
Rose Consortium in UK with its online repository ‘White
Rose Research Online (WRRO). It provides access to
each institution’s scholarly output to all member
institutions. It is a voluntary where anyone can join, based
on the policy of the consortia. In consortia model, usually
successful, governance is through an independent
organisation (not-for-profit organisations) can be formed
by including the participating IRs for policy and
programmatic direction from the consortia’s governing.
Representation of the institution administration level is
also likely to shape the repositories’ programmes around
the larger agendas of the participating institutions. The
operations of consortia repositories are to be placed
under one of the consortium member libraries. In
arrangements where one consortium plays a greater role
in operation of the repository than others do, some might
fear that the interests of that institution would prevail over
those of the others or of the consortium at large. In
practice, however, strong, formalised governance and
financial policies and procedures can level the playing
field. Administrative mechanisms require that policy and
programme decisions be unanimous, strengthening this
assurance1.

3.2 Platform Model
Brown3 defined platform model as one in which a
group of institutions, again usually without pre-existing
repositories, collaboratively develop a customised,
customisable version of a software platform which is then
used as the basis for repositories at each participant
institution or hosted centrally. The example used in this
model is Shodhganga (http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in)
developed by INFLIBNET for e-thesis which is hosted
centrally. The funding is providing by UGC to each
participating university and software used is DSpace. It
has kept the provision of harvesting data from the
associative OAI-PMH compliant repositories. It provides a
single point access to all the resources of all the
participating organisations. It has minimum development
cost at the part of organisations. However, it requires
greater coordination among partners.

3.3 Proprietary Repository Model
The proprietary repository model (PRM) depends on
one institution (host), where it takes full responsibility of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

establishment of facility and some of the heads of the
participating institution will be part of the governance and
operate independently by the host organisation. Host
institution provides the fund as part of the central
institutional budget. The facility is part of the institutions
effort to coordinate and traditionally act independently.
For the benefit of having good IRs, host can have
coordinating committee for services and functions
selecting representative from all of the participating IRs.
For example, Open Repository is a hosted solution from
BioMed Central that builds and maintains customised
DSpace repositories on behalf of institutions and
organisations. This allows an institution to preserve and
showcase its intellectual output to a larger and
unrestricted audience1.
Capital and operating fund, in proprietary model, can
be supplemented by the fee derived from various
repository-related activities, as a set annual payment,
based on the amount of material stored and transactionbased fees for collection-related services. The IR may
store materials at the repository on cost-recovery basis.
Such materials include institute records, artwork, special
materials, scholarly publication, and other learning/
course materials. Direct costs are recovered through
charges for accessioning, retrieval storage and
administration3.
The proprietary model usually provides service-based
fee-for-service basis for its storage and affiliated services
are more akin to a landlord-tenant relationship than like
relationship model or between repository and consortium
members. The depositing organisations are normally not
eligible to participate in governance of the facilities, and
they do not have any significant investment in the welfare
of the repository. Under such arrangements the ‘tenants’
are not likely to be strongly motivated to support
necessary capital improvements or other measures that
advance the facility’s broader, long-term goals.

3.4 Aggregation Model or Participatory
Institution Model
In aggregation model or participatory institution
model, the institutions come together to create a search
aggregator to harvest content from their repositories and
present it via a single search interface to maximise the
impact of the harvesting system. It is mandatory for the
member institutions to have their repositories to be part of
a harvesting system. The CARL metadata harvester and
search engine4 and the Dutch Digital Academic
Repositories (DARE) (http://www.darenet.org) are the
example of PIM. The PIM model will have its National
Advisory Board (NAB) for policy and programmatic
direction, which comprises representation from
participatory IRs, experts in the subject, technologists,
finance representative from the funding apex body and
NDRS administrator as Member-secretary. The NDRS
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

board will have input from the institutional level committee
(ILC) to enable cooperative-management, collectionsharing initiatives and ensure the collective interest of the
IR and to maintain governance and budgetary control. The
operation of the IRs is delegated to individual institutions.
The NDRS exercises a more direct measure of control
over the facilities than it does over the individual IR. An
apex body keeps direct accountability because the
facilities represent significant capital investments that
benefit more than one IRs within the system. At the IR
level, there will be an administrative body, within the
organisation hierarchy, ILC, that lies beneath the
management of the institution and individual IR level. The
purpose of the committee is to bring the interests of the
individual participating IRs and other stakeholders to bear
on shaping the programmes of the repositories. The ILC is
composed of the IR administrators, a representative of the
academic activities of the institutions and a representative
from the NDRS for better co-ordination, where ILC
develops policy and programmes2. Funds for capital
expenses are from the apex bodies, and most of the
operating funding come from the participating respective
institutional repositories of the respective subject groups,
for example (medical subject) funding is from Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Director-General of
Health Service (DGHS), where National Informatics
Centre (NIC) serves as technology partner. As the
intellectual materials are considered as public good, it is
suggested that the total project should be fully-funded by
the Government of India, and at institutional level to be
supported by respective institutions wherever mass
repositories are shifted to central facilities through their
respective institutions.

4. SUITABLE INSTITUTIONALISATION
MODEL FOR NDRS
The present study recommends PIM, which will have
its own participatory policy and programmatic direction,
as it provides opportunity for representation from
participatory IRs, scholarly contributors in the subject,
technologists, finance (representative from the funding
apex body, and NDRS administrator as Membersecretary. It would enable cooperative-management, and
collection-sharing initiatives, ensure the collective interest
of the IR, and maintain governance and budgetary control
over them. The operation of the IRs is delegated to
individual institutions. The NDRS exercises a more direct
measure of control over the facilities than over the
individual IRs. An apex body (as an initial funding agency)
keeps direct accountability as the facilities represent
significant capital investments that benefit more than one
IRs within the system. It also has control and policy input
from the IRs and involve a representative of the academic
activities of the institutions for better co-ordination. Funds
for capital expenses are from the apex bodies, and most
of the operating funding come from the participating IRs of
279

the respective subject groups. Also, it will be part of
technology partners with the respective institutions.

resources and offer a shared space; subjected to
common standards and managed by a single
organisation. It should support a certain degree of
interdependence and cooperation among the
participating repositories with respect to the
preservation at system level and at aggregated
holdings and shared corpus of research materials. It
should work by systematising and coordinating
responsibilities seek rationalisation and achieve
economies by aggregating from among the
participating institutions individual repository6.

4.1 Objectives of Proposed NDRS
The proposed NDRS should have the following
objectives:

•

•

•

•

•

280

It should keep track of the current demands, and
publishing trends (particularly the OAI) to achieve
greater efficiencies of storage, service, and
preservation. It is proposed with intention to maintain
cooperatively managed repositories, as a central
facility, backed by IRs to serve the community at large
as archival repositories, it would ensure preservation
as the key to safeguarding the intellectual and cultural
heritage of the country, that may be of value for
scholarship.
It may serve as secondary storage, as an absolute
need, in keeping the requirement of digital space and
expertise, where it can optimise for preservation. It
should also have defined the kind of materials that
should go into these repositories; how they are to be
organised, governed, and sustained; and how
collaborations among IRs, between IRs and scholars
should be nurtured. In fact, the scholars are looking at
repositories to serve as an aggregated materials
based on subject or discipline, simultaneously and
over time, creating repositories of archival collections
that collect on behalf of an entire nation.
It should hold new collaborative solutions, as webbased digital library collaboration, for new forms of
cooperation. Nonetheless, it has to build sustainable
repository collections to fulfill the crucial societal
roles or heritage collections. The study proposed that
there should be an agreement on core attributes of
repositories, protocols for governing, management
and preservation, and how to make such information
widely accessible. It should also serve as an archival
back-up collection that will be used for disaster
recovery.
It is about creating a network of IRs, not like libraries
that ends in general agreement and backed away from
depositing copies. It should require a ‘strong interinstitutional culture’ on a long-term commitment that
can achieve scales of economy and improved
stewardship. Repositories should go beyond the mere
sharing of storage space to the sharing of
management and access. It should be achieved
through building trust and transparency among
member repositories and in providing its operation,
access and preservation5.
It is largely the products of inter-institutional efforts to
accommodate digital-based materials and costeffective solutions to collections storage; pool

•

It should also explore the extent to which the
repositories represent an emerging architecture,
whereby the participating IRs might move beyond
serving their communities and participate in a national
network for cooperative preservation.

4.2 Policies for Selection of Materials
It is the institutions’ policy (at IR level) to decide the
selection of certain categories of materials and should
adopt the following guidelines7:

•

Repositories also provide an economical and
practical means of storing problematic bodies of
material, such as materials having access restrictions
and have collection-level control.

•

The NDRS actively manage the intake of materials to
achieve goals that go beyond merely providing place
storage towards proper access providing expertise.

•

Rationalisation will be undertaken by involving
coordinated collection responsibilities, negotiating
collectively
electronic-journal
licensing,
and
assembling shared collections of record.

4.3 Withdrawal Items from NDRS
The NDRS to consider relatively stable and encourage
the idea that materials moved to the facilities are intended
for permanent storage, with the principle that minimum
maintenance and traffic promote cost-effective
operations. Policies governing the removal of materials
from storage by IRs may vary, some repositories maintain
‘one-way door’ policies; however, under certain
circumstances, permit materials to be removed and
reintegrated. The NDRS keep consideration to change on
par with the technological changes whenever it needs to
reconsider policies for adapting technologies

4.4 Implications for Collective Management
The NDRS has to realise economies in the care and
administration as common facilities, subjecting the
collections to many of the same procedures and
conditions of service, so as to achieve a high degree of
coordination among IRs. The responsibilities lies in
managing the collections as a single entity with respect
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

to access and control, even though IRs may retain
ownership of them.

4.5 Collection Ownership
There are important differences between common
management of collections and shared ownership. For
example, IRs retain the right to withdraw their materials
from the repository. Ownership of collectively managed
materials nonetheless continues to be a volatile issue,
but within the context of the repositories, the practical
distinction between shared management of a body of
materials and actual ownership can become difficult to
make.

followed so as to provide the service for a longer period of
time. Digital preservation requires new workflow, new
skills, and close cooperation across different professions
ranging from traditional preservation management to
computing science.
Joint Information System Committee (JISC) (http://
www.jisc.ac.uk),
RLG-OCLC
(http://www.oclc.org/
research/activities/past/rlg/trustedrep/repositories.pdf)
and OAIS model provides framework to implement
preservation strategy and IRs software a mean to
implement this preservation strategy. It is advisable to
follow the standard guidelines developed from these
organisations.

4.6 Intellectual Property Rights and NDRS

4.7 Architecture of Proposed NDRS Model

Long term preservation helps authors more
confidence in the future accessibility and more incentives
to deposit the content and is one the challenge for IRs,
keeping in view of changing hardware and software/file
format. It is difficult to determine the cost of preservation.
Hence the NDRS expects institution repositories that it
must have policy in terms of content management, rights
management, long term preservation policy, etc.

The architecture of NDRS consists of three layered
architecture comprised of the data providers (content
layer), service providers (aggregation layer) and interface
layers. The content layer is a distributed institutional
repository which is OAI-PMH compliant exposed
metadata to be used in central metadata repository in
aggregation layer8. It has been depicted in Fig.1.

The access to materials on the IRs is cost free at the
users level and hence the understanding intellectual
property is important for creating and disseminating
content on NDRS. As OA repositories of scholarly
resources are available to all free at the point of use
therefore intellectual property issues are to be carefully

The aggregation layer has main components of OAIPMH harvester and the central metadata repository. The
OAI-PMH harvester harvests and aggregates metadata
records from OAI-PMH data providers. Harvested records
are aggregated and stored in the metadata repository
which may serve as a base on which various services can
be developed subsequently. The interface layer provides

Figure 1. Proposed architecture of NDRS.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

281

both user-oriented services as well application-oriented
services. User services include conventional services
such as browse and search services. Application-oriented
services are based on interoperability interfaces which
support machine-to-machine or application-to-application
data exchange or service interactions. The RSS service
interface will publish newly added records as RSS feeds
to support RSS service; OAI-PMH interface is used to reexposing harvested metadata records is used to reexposing harvested metadata records to enable data
sharing to other service providers globally. SRW/U
interface is a standard API search engine used as an
interface to repositories9. Further, it is suggestive that
portal-in-a-browser model for NDRS may be adopted.

continued to diminish, it has become feasible to
harvest metadata and the associated digital objects,
both documents and ancillary data. This process has
been facilitated by the emergence of a protocol for
metadata and digital object harvesting related to the
OAI-PMH. In future, full-text could also be harvested
and used to support value-added services; therefore,
NDRS can be also used as the basis for preservation.
However, to provides rights over OAI-based full-text,
authentication and authorisation services may also
implemented over NDRS14.

•

4.8 Proposed Services of NDRS
The major goal of NDRS is to link repositories in such
a way that services can be built upon them that provide to
value and utility to the user. Apart from browse and search
facilities, following services are proposed to be made
available to end users:

•

It should integrate name authority, citation analysis
and automated subject classification services into
their application software. These should be
incorporated so as to provide consistency and
uniformity of data11.

•

Metadata encoding transmission services (METS)
wrapper should be used with the descriptive metadata
expressed using the DC Library Application Profile. It
will help in digital preservation of these resources for a
long time and METS should be adopted as national
standard for preservation of digital objects in the
country12.

•

Regard to the poor quality of metadata, it is possible
to develop middleware programme to analyse the
harvested records in number of ways. For example, for
file format, NDRS should build a list of possible file
formats used by various data providers and identify
risks associated with by proprietary or obscure
formats. Also in case of type field which is mostly
interpreted in a wrong way, strategy should be evolved
to get suitable data from data repositories13.

•

Persistent identifiers would be evolved either using
open source like PURL or commercial handler so that
each resource should be identified with persistent
identifiers.

•

Some features such as personalisation, annotation,
alerting and linking to related documents in search
results should be developed.

•

In the beginning, it has been proposed that NDRS
harvests only metadata from the member institutes.
As bandwidth is increasing and storage costs have

282

The OA movement and the OAI are both rooted in
cooperative and collaborative philosophies. Therefore
cooperation and collaboration would be important
keys to the development of future information
environment, therefore, policy administrators and
developers need to work together.

5. RECOMMENDATIONS
There are many technical, social, and expertise
issues required for establishing IR such as selection of
hardware, communication bandwidth, suitable software,
international standards and documentation, including
operational aspects like loading software, uploading data,
set-up test server, manage process, maintenance and
load material advocacy and preservation.
•

The NDRS has to provide consultancy and training
about all the aspects both at national as well as
institution level, particularly for health science
institutions in the country. Considering the number of
health science institution, at various levels (research
down to college level) in the country, it becomes
necessary to establish a national body in the line and
pattern with JISC (http://www.jisc.org) in UK to provide
advisory as well as technical services to individual
repositories.

•

A few health sciences institutions in India have IRs
and there is a need to motivate and guide majority of
other health sciences institutions to establish an
interoperable IR and encourage authors to deposit the
full-text of their research output to IRs.

•

There is a need to create awareness and educate the
authors about the copyrights, so that they can
withhold rights to submit their publication to IRs and
the institutions should make it mandate to submit
their publication to open access publications.

•

Research councils/apex bodies/funding agencies
(such as ICMR, DSIR) have to adopt policies on
mandating OA in all institutions, under their funding
purview like in National Institute of Health (NIH) and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute in the USA,
Wellcome Trust and the Research Councils, UK in the
UK and the European Research Council.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

•

Health science academies (like Neurological Society
of India and others) should play an active role in
building open access culture, with active support of
National Knowledge Commission.

•

The unique chance of health sciences institutions is
that there are many case discussion reports which
trigger research to incorporate in IRs as an
unpublished works.

6. CONCLUSIONS
The main principle of proposed NDRS model is to
achieve more economical and robustness of the services
including storage and retrieval. As per the study, majority
of the existing IRs are suffering due to lack of requisite
storage space, experts, and expertise. Therefore, NDRS
should have responsibilities to provide technical supports
like installation of IR software, training, guidelines in the
use of application and customisation through formal and
informal channel of communication. The goal of NDRS is
to develop a linking model of OA repositories together
effectively, and permit service providers to develop their
offerings over the whole corpus of OA materials. As the
scholarly communication is moving towards barrier free
access to information, NDRS should able to support
world-class teaching, research and scholarship in a costeffective way.
In building intellectual capital, through cooperative
collection, storage and management initiatives, it is
required to institutionalise for proper governance and to
mobilise required fund, manpower, experts and expertise
in cooperative and collaborative mode. There are many
model suggested in the study they are establishing like
an institution such as shared model or consortium
repository model (CRM), platform model, aggregation
model or participatory institution model (PIM) and
proprietary repository model (PRM).
The NDRS is proposed as a PIM, having its own
participatory policy and programme direction, where it
provides opportunity for representation from participatory
IRs, experts/scholarly contributor in the subject,
technologists, finance representative from the funding
apex body and NDRS administrator as Membersecretary. Proposed NDRS should have its own
objectives, policies for resource selection and
management, withdrawal items from repositories,
collection ownership, intellectual property rights,
architecture, and type of services to be introduced and
updated from time to time.

REFERENCES
1. Reilly, B.F. Developing print repositories: Models for
shared preservation and access. CLIR, Washington.
2003. http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub117/conten
t.html (accessed on 15 September 2011).
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

2. Reilly, B.F. Underlying organisational and funding
models. In Developing print repositories: Models for
shared preservation and access. CLIR, Washington,
2003. http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub117/conte
nts.html (accessed on 15 September 2011).
3. Brown, J. Comparing consortial repositories: a modeldriven analysis. http://eprints.ucl.ac.uk/18977/1/
18977.pdf (accessed on 15 September, 2011).
4. Jordan, M. The CARL metadata harvester and search
service. Library Hi Tech, 24(2), 2006.
5. Reilly, B.F. Foreword. In Developing print repositories:
Models for shared preservation and access. CLIR,
Washington, 2003. http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/
pub117/contents.html (accessed on 15 September
2011)
6. Reilly, B.F. Introduction: Purpose of the study. In
Developing print repositories: Models for shared
preservation and access. CLIR, Washington, 2003.
h t t p : / / w w w. c l i r. o r g / p u b s / r e p o r t s / p u b 11 7 /
contents.html (accessed on 15 September 2011).
7. Reilly, B.F. Regional repository policies: Selection
and management regimes. In Developing print
repositories: Models for shared preservation and
access. CLIR, Washington, 2003. http://www.clir.org/
pubs/reports/pub117/contents.html (accessed on 15
September 2011).
8. Zhu, Z.; Ma, J.; Lu, L.; Liu, W. & Wu, D. Development
of an institutional repositories network in Chinese
Academy of Sciences. In 2nd IEEE International
Conference on Information Management and
Engineering (ICIME), Chengdu.
9. SRW/U.
OCLC.
http://www.oclc.org/research/
activities/srw/default.htm
(accessed
on
15
September 2011).
10. Swan, A. & Awre C. Linking UK repositories:
Technical and organisational models to support useroriented services across institutional and their digital
repositories: Scoping study report: Appendix. JISC.
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/uploaded_documents /
Linking_UK_repositories_appendix.pdf (accessed on
15 September 2011).
11. Jordan, M. The CARL metadata harvester and search
service. Library Hi Tech, 24(2), 2006
12. Swan, A.; Needham, P.; Probetes, S.; Muir, A.;
Oppenheim, C.; O’Brien, A. & Rowland, F. Developing
a model for e-prints and open access journal content
in UK further and higher education. Learned
Publishing, 2005, 18, 25-40. http://eprints.ecs.sot
on .ac.uk/11000/1/Eprints_LP_paper.pdf (accessed
on 15 September 2011).
283

13. Martin, R. ePrints UK: Developing a national e-prints
archive. Ariadne, 35. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/
issue35/martin/ (accessed on 15 September 2011).
14. Kumar, S. & Karisiddappa, C.R. METS: Metadata
standards for digital preservation in the context of
institutional repositories. In Digitisation and Metadata
Standards, DESIDOC, 2009.
About the Author
Mr Surinder Kumar is working as Senior Technical
Director at National Informatics Centre (NIC), Department
of Information Technology, New Delhi. He joined NIC in

284

1989 and worked on development of National databases
such as ‘IndMED’, medIND, UNcat, and Union Catalogue
of Biomedical Serials in India. He is also involved in
imparting training to medical librarians and professionals
from 1989 onwards. He has conducted several workshops
on: CDS/ISIS (with NISSAT), information retrieval (with
ILA, SIS and DELNET), and DSpace (with TERI, DELNET,
Delhi University and others). He has been working on
developing repository of the official debates of Rajya
Sabha using DSpace containing around 4.5 lakh records.
He is working on number of digitisation projects to the
Government of India. He has published 35 research
papers in various National and International journals and
proceedings.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(3)

