DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 293-301
© 2012, DESIDOC

Digital Preservation of Electronic Resources
Ramesh C. Gaur and Manorama Tripathi*
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Meharuli Road, New Delhi-110 067
E-mail: rcgaur@mail.jnu.ac.in; rcgaur66@gmail.com; *manoramatripathi2@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Due to huge advances in information communication technologies (ICTs), there has been an astronomical
growth of e-resources—e-journals, e-books, online databases and so on; libraries spend phenomenally on
acquisition of these e- resources as these are very popularly used by the students and researchers.
Unfortunately, this growth is accompanied by many threats. Digital content (of the e- resources) is fragile and
not durable. Its accessibility and use by future generations depends on technology which very rapidly evolves
and changes. Hence, ensuring access of e-resources for future generation of users is a big challenge for
libraries. The present paper highlights various problems of digital content and elaborates how digital preservation
is more demanding and challenging than preserving print copies of journals. It also gives a bird’s eye view
of various projects initiated for archiving digital content of scholarly journals.
Keywords: Digital preservation, e-resources, digital archiving, digital library, electronic resources

1. INTRODUCTION
In the recent past, the libraries, worldwide, have
increased
their
expenditure
on
e-resources
phenomenally. An ‘electronic resource or e-resource is
defined as any work encoded and made available for
access through the use of a computer. It includes
electronic data available by remote access and direct
access (fixed media). Remote access (e-resources)
refers to the use of e-resources via computer networks.
Direct access refers to the use of electronic resources via
carriers) e.g. discs, cassettes, cartridges) designed to be
inserted in to a computerised device or its auxiliary
equipment1.
The trend to procure and maintain e-resources has
grown exponentially among the libraries. This is due to
the change in the information seeking behaviour of
students, researchers, and faculty members. They are
showing greater interest and reliance upon e- resources;
and libraries and publishers cater to their requirements by
providing the same. This has been substantiated by many
survey findings. The users are often content with the
information which they locate online—this information
may not be exactly what they want, but they are certainly
saved from visiting the physical library. The users are
highly dependent on these e-resources and this
dependence will grow in future too.
Received 27 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

At present, though most of the print journals have their
print counterparts too. A British Library commissioned
study by Electronic Publishing Services Ltd. has declared
that half of all serial publications would become online by
20163. The new generation students (or netizens as they
are popularly called) are more comfortable in online
environment for information seeking. Zogby International
as mentioned by Kirchhoff4 has highlighted that a majority
of students (18-24 year) are prepared to give-up television
but not the Internet. Further, they are not only consumers
of digital content; they, also known as millennials,
generate it too by interacting with text, computers, and
multimedia5.

2. PROBLEMS OF DIGITAL CONTENT
This all pervasiveness of digital world raises a serious
question-how will access to all the e-resources
subscribed by libraries be ensured over longer period of
time? It is well known that an unprecedented amount of
information is available on the web which is growing at an
amazing rate. In some cases, the web is the only medium
where such information is recorded. But it is ephemeral
medium—its contents are ever changing; new information
is rapidly replacing old information; this results in
disappearance of large number of web pages and loss of
cultural and scientific data on a regular basis. It is widely
known that the digital material is fragile and its
293

accessibility and use depends upon the technologies that
change and evolve very frequently and continually. There
may be hardware and media degradation, hardware and
software malfunction, operational errors, security
breaches and malicious changes which may render
information and content inaccessible after some time.
Everyone is well aware that in the traditional
environment of print resources, preservation is never that
a serious concern, as under normal conditions of
temperature and humidity, print resources can be easily
stored and maintained for future use. It is an issue of
concern when print resources, which are 100 years or
more old are to be stored and maintained for posterity6.
But in digital environment, the scene is completely
different. Chaudhary7 has noted that, “…the rapid
developments have a negative impact; technology
becomes outdated too fast…This will continue to happen
in future. Therefore, we have to be very careful in
preserving digital information resources; and this looks to
be a continuous problem”7.
Banach have observed that the rate of change in
computing technologies is such that information is
rendered inaccessible within a short span of time7.While
technology introduces and evolves portable and compact
forms of storage, the life span of the medium is
remarkably reduced from several hundred years in case of
stone carvings or tablets to just a few days. Greenfield8
has remarked that, “Books boot instantly, and have a very
high-contrast/high-resolution display; they offer fast
random access to any page, with instant visuals and
tactile feedback; they are easily annotated with no need
for batteries or maintenance; finally, they are robustly
packaged. By contrast, laptop meets none of these
specifications. The only disadvantage of books is that
they convey static information, whilst computers give
changing information.”
An article in The Economist9 highlights the
vulnerability of digital content. ‘The Doomsday Book’
which has details of 13,418 places and112 boroughs of
England and Wales was written in 1086 and is still
available in the National Archives, London. But a new
survey which was commissioned for the 900th anniversary
of ‘The Doomsday Book’ was recorded on12-inch laser
disc, is no longer available as this hardware is obsolete
now. The digital era brought with it the promise of infinite
memory, increased computing power and accessibility
forever. But digital data has a short span of life. Accessing
digital content on storage media requires hardware which
has short life—commercially and operationally; for
example, a scratch on DVD can make its contents totally
inaccessible. This is known as hardware dependency10;
software also has limited life span; and operating system
often cannot identify and open unrecognised file formats.
When software is 10 years old, running it usually requires
hardware emulation.
294

3. NEED FOR PRESERVATION OF EJOURNALS
Since the e-journals have become the mainstay of the
academic libraries’ collection preservation and the
archiving is very much essential to ensure seamless,
uninterrupted access to them in future. The generation of
new scientific knowledge is not possible, until and unless
access to already generated knowledge of past is made
possible. The faculty members, researchers, and
students are highly dependent on e-resources for their
research work. In traditional environment, libraries are
maintained as proper physical infrastructure, including
brick and mortar building with racks and shelves for
ensured maintenance and access of back files of journals
for years together for the user community. In online
environment, libraries have access to journal content, but
the access is not ensured for various reasons—the
publisher may go out of business, the physical
infrastructure may collapse due to vagaries of nature,
publisher may cease publication of journal. When libraries
subscribe to e-journals, they do not have copies of
content at their sites; they get access to content of
journals, for limited period, held at remote servers of
publishers. Once the subscription is dropped (or
publication becomes a ceased one), libraries are deprived
of back issues of journals.
This uncertainty of continuing access is a major
hurdle which prevents libraries from moving to electronic
only subscriptions11 So libraries need to archive electronic
journals before they can completely shift to e-journals
only12. Since the libraries spent a substantial part of their
budget on e-journals, they must protect the investment
they make on e-resources13. Hence, digital archiving of
back files of journals is very important in order to provide
seamless access to the digital content to the future
generations. The aim of archiving or digital preservation is
to make available the e- resources accessible and usable
to the posterity. The statement, “Urgent action needed to
preserve scholarly electronic journals” endorsed by
Association of Research Libraries and many others
advocates that, “Libraries must invest in a qualified
archiving solution. A library may itself operate qualified
archive…otherwise research and academic libraries may
collaborate in the form of an insurance collective or mutual
assurance society. Such an entity may be governed in a
variety of ways but libraries would exercise their
preservation obligations in part by paying fees to support
the archive”14.

4. DIGITAL PRESERVATION: MEANING AND
PURPOSE
Digitisation is being carried on large scale, worldwide
to facilitate and ensure wider dissemination and access of
information. Universities, worldwide, spend huge amounts
of money on digitisation for long-term gains ensuring
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

access for long duration. So preservation should be
considered an inherent part of digitisation activities. This
has been stressed upon by Chowdhury15.
Preservation is the process of ensuring sustainable
access over time to critical scholarly and heritage
content. Digital preservation projects are those which can
guarantee both preservation and access to significant
digital content in future. The preservation of digital
resources is all about evolving ways to maintain digital
heritage-cultural, social, and scientific, whether it exists
in the form of e-journals, database records, websites, emails, digital images, audio-visual materials, interactive
programs and so on. Libraries, on a regular basis engage
with a wide variety of these resources and know it very
well that these resources become inaccessible and are
lost forever if computers change or links break 16.
According to Jantz & Giailo17 digital preservation
encompasses activities which are necessary for longterm maintenance of a byte stream including metadata)
sufficient to reproduce a suitable facsimile of the original
document; and for the continued accessibility of the
document contents through time and changing
technology. The Digital Library Federation18 has defined
preservation of e-journals as:
“Preservation of electronic journals is a kind of
insurance, and is not in and of itself form of access. It is a
way of managing risk: first, against the permanent loss of
e-journals, and second, against having journal access
disrupted for a protracted period following a publisher
failure.”

4.1 Archiving—Print Journals vs E-journals
A printed journal is a physical object; whereas an ejournal is not a physical but a logical object stored on a
physical medium. A printed journal presents the
information so that it is immediately accessible to the
human eye and can be read directly. To view an e-journal
specific functionality enabled by software and hardware is
required.
Poynder19 has described the difference as: Unlike
paper or microfilm where meaning is transparently
inscribed on the surface of the medium-digital documents
are opaque bit streams only understandable to humans
when interpreted by a machine. The hardware and
software to do this interpretation, however is constantly
superseded. There have, for instance, been more than
200 digital storage formats alone deployed since 1960s,
with none lasting more than 10 years.
The digital publication deteriorates much faster than
paper. The format of the digital object may be damaged or
lost and thus become irretrievable. But even before that
happens, the technology used to store the publication is
likely to become obsolete. Another threat is the loss of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

the functionality needed to interpret, display and use
information contained in the digital object; without this
functionality—the provision of specific hardware/software,
the information will not be available even if the bit stream
of the digital object has been preserved.
In the print environment the methods of appraisal,
accessioning, organising, describing, preserving are
clearly defined for archiving and preserving, these are not
so for digital preservation. It is a very complicated process
and requires lot of innovations in institutional and
business models, technology infrastructure, social and
legal frameworks20. Preservation of e-journals is
“particularly challenging due to extensive diversity and
complexity of data structures in use over time and across
the publishing community”21. The archival holdings may
be accessed infrequently-several cycles of technology
evolution may occur in between accesses to digital
content, thereby causing corrupted files to remain
unnoticed for long. Besides, the digital content may have
to undergo quite a number of migrative transformations
due to format obsolescence. These transformations and
upgradations may change the digital content in different
ways. The ways for checking integrity of the content of
digital objects is based on some type of cryptographic
techniques; most of these techniques become less
effective with time and need to be replaced with stronger
techniques.
The present status of archiving of e-journals is
reflected as: “As the creation and use of digital
information accelerates, responsibility for preservation is
diffuse, and the responsible parties-scholars, universities
and college administrators, research and academic
libraries and publishers have been slow to identify and
invest in the necessary information to ensure that the
published scholarly record represented in electronic
formats remains intact over the long-term”22.
Since digital preservation poses lots of problems due
to fast pace of technology development, fragility of digital
information and computing infrastructure, a welldeveloped strategy needs to be formulated to attend to
the following requirements:

•

Encapsulation of information of content, context,
structure of digital object in order to enable long term
maintenance

•

Efficient management of evolution and up gradation of
hardware and software with proper handling of
technology obsolescence

•

Effective recovery mechanism from technology
degradation or failure or natural disasters-fire floods,
earthquakes, human-induced operational errors

•

Effective ways to ensure the authenticity and integrity
of content and structure of archived information
295

•

Ability for information discovery and content access
and preservation with an automatic enforcement of
authorization and IP rights

•

Scalability in terms of ingestion rate, capacity and
processing power to manage and preserve large scale
heterogeneous collections of complex objects23.

5. ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
5.1 Selection of Content
There are an ever growing number of journals. So it is
essential to decide upon the preservation priorities. The
decision can be made after discussions with libraries,
publishers, users, research scholars and faculty
members. At this stage various issues have to be taken
care of like-what content of the journals should be
archived? E-journals have content like editorial boards,
rights and usage terms, copyright statement, journal
description, advertisements, reprint information, editorial,
errata, conference announcements, various kinds of
digital files . Some information is ephemeral and does not
have long lasting value; decision needs to be taken about
what has to be archived and maintained. Besides, the
digital content may be in a variety of formats which may
affect the maintenance cost. An archive may decide to
normalise digital objects in some preferred formats.
For example, an archive may store all raster images in
TIFF and convert JPEG or GIF image into that format.
Controlling the number of file formats will lessen the
complexity of format monitoring and migration. The
publishers encode content in SGML or XML; besides
publishers create their own DTD to suit their needs. While
archiving, all marked up documents can be normalised
into a common DTD. This will lessen the complexity of
documentation, migration and interface software24.

5.2 Use of Metadata
Archiving of journals’ content also entails recording of
vital information for using the data stored in the archivemetadata plays an important role in this regard. It helps in
documenting the technical processes associated with
preservation, specifies rights management information
and establishes identity and authenticity of digital
content.
Clifford Lynch24 has described the functions of
metadata in a digital archive, “metadata accompanies and
makes reference to each digital object and provides
associated descriptive, structural, administrative, rights
management and other kinds of information. This
metadata will too be maintained and will be migrated from
format to format and standard to standard, independent of
the base object it describes.” It is still not clear that how
much preservation metadata is adequate enough for
archiving of electronic journals’ content. A consensus
296

needs to be reached among archiving community on what
metadata is required. It has been suggested that no
single existing metadata scheme can serve the purpose
in archiving; a combination of METS (Metadata Encoding
and Transmission standard) PREMIS and MODS
(Metadata Object Description Schema) should be used to
represent information packages in e-journal archival
systems.25

5.3 Strategies for Preservation
There may be following different option for preserving
digital content for future use:

•

Medium refreshing–It is copying digital files from one
storage medium to another medium.

•

Data migration–It is transfer of digital materials from
one hardware/software configuration to another.

•

Technology preservation–It means preserving an
information object together with all of the hardware
and software needed to interpret it.

•

Software emulation–It helps in imitation of another
software to accept same data, execute same
programme and achieve the same results as that of
imitated system26

5.3.1

Continuous Management and Maintenance

Digital preservation work is constant; it should not be
taken up in fits and starts. It requires continuous and
active management; the digital archive requires
continuous regular maintenance to keep it secured,
including regular processes to check the fixity of files–find
out if the content is corrupted and needs to be repaired, to
ensure replications.

5.3.2

Financial Constraints

The libraries may find it difficult to convince authorities
for release of funds for digital archiving. They may lack far
sight to invest in digital archiving; rather they may prefer to
invest in widening their resources. The administrators,
policy makers need to be more sensitive and understand
the importance of archiving activities. A percentage of total
library budget should be allocated for archiving
programmes.

5.3.3

Collaborative Efforts

Archiving initiatives/organisations should work in
network. Collaborative efforts will help in sharing of
resources and developing common finding aids, metadata
tools, software, access mechanism and registry services;
this will be definitely cost saving in nature. Granger27 has
very aptly remarked, “…digital preservation indicates the
positive need for collaboration amongst interested parties
and institutions. It should be obvious that such
collaboration is likely to facilitate cost savings, either by
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

economies of scale or by other means.” Besser28 also
emphasises that collaboration is an important component
of national preservation plans .Coordination in content
selection, documentation of standards and best practices
will help all the participants. For example, the Los Alamos
National Laboratory Research Library has shared its
customised version of access software with OhioLINK
EJC and the Ontario Scholars Portal; Kopal of DDB and
KB e-Depot use IBM’s DIAS (Digital Information Archiving
System) software. It has been designed to store digital
information, preserve and make it available in a usable
fashion for 100 years or so29. The content delivery
infrastructure of JSTOR is being used by Portico. The
LOCKSS Alliance and CLOCKKS use the same software.
The libraries should take efforts in developing a registry,
which should record the details of various archived
journals and their archiving projects such as ROAR
(Registry of Open Access Repositories) and ROARMAP
(Registry of Open Access Repositories Mandatory
Archiving Policies)30
Kenney31, et al. have identified seven indicators for ejournals archiving programmes:

•

A clear mission and necessary mandate for long term
archiving.

•

Negotiate all rights and responsibilities necessary to
fulfil its obligations over long periods

•

Clarify about which scholarly publications it is
archiving and for whom.

•
•

Offer well defined archiving services

•
•

Make preserved information available to libraries
under certain conditions.
Organisationally viable.
Work as a network.

6. ROLE OF NATIONAL LIBRARIES, LIBRARY
CONSORTIA AND OPEN ACCESS
REPOSITORIES IN PRESERVATION
The national libraries may serve as legal deposit
centers for electronic journals. Germany has enacted law
that mandates deposit of German publications to the
National library. The British Library, Library and archives
Canada have designed electronic–deposit repositories.
The legal deposit may not be the panacea for archiving ejournals; it will help considerably in developing standard
submission formats for e-journals’ content32.
In UK, the Welcome Trust and the Medical Research
Council have mandated that the final copies of all
research which they fund be deposited to UK Pub Med
Central. Research Councils, UK has advocated and
encouraged all other research councils to consider
submission of funded research to open access
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

repositories33. In USA, efforts have been taken to mandate
the deposit of copies of all NIH funded research in open
access repositories34. In India too, UGC has mandated
electronic submission of theses and dissertations and
asked the universities to set up ETDs and provide open
access to them. But certainly these open access
repositories and ETDs cannot replace electronic journals’
content archiving. The main thrust of open access
repositories and ETD archives is to populate them and
provide access to the information; these do not aim for
long term preservation. Indian libraries have at their
disposal largest collection of e-resources subscribed
through various consortia such as Indian National Digital
Library in Engineering Sciences and Technology
(INDEST) consortium35, Digital Library Consortium36,
Department of Atomic Energy, DRDO, CSIR, and FORSA.
Even the libraries in remote parts of India are having
access to e-resources. So these consortia can play an
active role in preservation of e-resources.

6.1 Open Archival Information System (OAIS)
OAIS is a reference model for archiving communities
and most of the archiving projects are based on OAIS
model37. (PANDORA, LOCKSS, Chronopolis project,
etc.). It specifies how digital assets should be preserved
for users from the moment digital content is ingested in to
digital storage area, through various preservation
strategies to the creation of dissemination packages for
end users. The OAIS model was adopted as an ISO
standard (ISO14721:2003 OAIS). This model comprises
four components-producers, consumers, management
and the archive. The producers generate the information
and submit it to the archive for preservation. The
consumers use the preserved information. The
management is responsible for laying down explicit
policies and objectives of the archive. It is not responsible
for day to day administration of the archive. This
management is accomplished by a functional entity
within the archive itself38.

6.2 Major Digital Archiving Projects
6.2.1 Portico (http://www.portico.org)
Portico is a digital preservation service provided by
ITHAKA, a not-for-profit organisation with a mission to
help the academic community use digital technologies to
preserve the scholarly record and to advance research
and teaching in sustainable ways. Portico was started in
2002 to create a sustainable digital archive; it has
collaborated with 151 publishers (on behalf of over 2000
societies and associations) and 741 libraries to archive
13,690 and 129,890 e-journals and e- books. The
participating libraries are supposed to get access to dark
archives after ‘trigger event’’ occur. These may include:

•

Cessation of a publisher’s business
297

•
•
•
•

Discontinuation of a title
Non availability of back issues
Vagaries of Nature
Failure of delivery mechanism of publisher

6.2.2 LOCKSS (http://www.lockss.org)
The LOCKSS (Lots of copies keep stuff safe)
programme, started by Stanford University Libraries, is an
open source digital preservation system. The participating
libraries acquire digital content in their local LOCKSS
Box. Through a LOCKSS distributed network, libraries
cooperate with each other to ensure their preserved
content remains authentic and authoritative. This
collaboration measures and validates the integrity of the
participating libraries’ holdings. When the publisher’s web
site is unavailable for any reason, content is served from
the library’s ‘LOCKSS Box’ guaranteeing immediate and
continuous access.
The LOCKSS delivers a copy of the original
publication to authorised users in real-time, whenever it is
needed. Since LOCKSS preserves the original publisher’s
copy of each item, it ensures that the most authoritative
version persists forever. At present, the LOCKSS has
more than 9000 e-journal titles from 510 publishers.

6.2.3 CLOCKSS (http://www.clockss.org)
The CLOCKSS (Controlled Lots of Copies Keep Stuff
Safe) is a not-for-profit joint venture started by libraries
and publishers to ensure long-term access to scholarly
publications in digital format. At present, there are 164
libraries and 88 publishers who have entrusted their
content to CLOCKSS for long-term preservation.
The CLOCKSS archive provides this assurance via its
secure network of content that can be accessed only after
a rigger event has happened. CLOCKSS is unique
because it commits to make all content from the archive
freely available to the world after a trigger event has
happened.

6.2.4 PANDORA (http://pandora.nla.gov.au)
PANDORA (Preserving and Accessing Networked
Documentary Resources of Australia) is an archive of
copies of significant Australian online publications and
web sites issued on the Internet. The National Library of
Australia and its partners are building the archive to
ensure long-term access to significant Australian
documentary heritage that is published online. PANDORA
has been placed on the Memory of the World Australian
Register in August 2004.The NLA selects e-journals from
the Australian Journal Online database for preservation in
PANDORA.
298

E-journals are one of the six categories of online
publications included in PANDORA which lists more than
2000 journals published in Australia.

6.2.5 KOPAL (http://kopal.langzeitarchivierung.de/
index_ziel.php.en)
It is a cooperative development of long term digital
archive of German National Library and Universitaets
bibliothek, Gottingen. The goal of this project is to develop
a technical, organisational solution to ensure long-term
availability of electronic resources. It preserves bit
streams of digital documents follows three steps of
storage, migration, and emulation.

6.2.6 PubMed Central (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/)
It is a free archive of biomedical and life sciences
journal literature at the US National Institutes of Health’s
National Library of Medicine (NIH/NLM). In keeping with
NLM’s legislative mandate to collect and preserve the
biomedical literature, the PMC serves as a digital
counterpart to NLM’s extensive print journal collection. It
was launched in February 2000, and is managed by
NLM’s National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI). As an archive, PMC is designed to provide
permanent access to all of its content, even as
technology evolves and current digital literature formats
potentially become obsolete. NLM believes that the best
way to ensure the accessibility and viability of digital
material over time is through consistent and active use of
the archive. For this reason, free access to all of its
journal literature is a core principle of PMC. It provides
access to more than 250 journals from 50+ publishers. It
retains all perpetual rights to archive all submitted
materials and aims at maintaining the long-term integrity
and accuracy of the contents.

6.2.7 Ohio LINK (Library and Information Network)
It is a consortium of 88 Ohio colleges and universities,
and the State Library of Ohio. OhioLink’s e-services
include a multi-publisher E-journals publisher Centre
which was launched in 1998 provides access to more
than 7000 scholarly journal titles from 40+ publishers
across different disciplines. Ohio LINK has declared its
intention to maintain the EJC content as a permanent
archive and has got perpetual archival rights in its license
agreement.

6.2.8 e-Depot System (http://www.kb.nl/hrd/dd/
index-en.html)
The Koninklijke Bibliotheek (National Library of the
Netherlands) (KB) is the first national library in the world
to start and own an operational system for the deposit and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

long-term preservation of digital publications40. In 1994,
the KB took the decision to include e-publications in its
depository collection (e-Depot). Since then, research and
development on long term digitization and archiving has
been an important activity of KB. The e-Depot, an intrinsic
part of Dutch National Library aims to ensure long term
preservation of digital objects. The KB has developed a
specific workflow for archiving e-publications. Elements of
this workflow are: accept and pre-process; generate and
resolve identifiers; search and retrieve publications; and
identify, authenticate and authorise users. The technical
heart of the e-Depot system is IBM’s DIAS (digital
information and archiving system). The KB ensures,
libraries, publishers and end users that the information
stored in the archive will outlast the transience of digital
documents. In addition, the e-Depot offers publishers a
durable check on archived formats as well as guidance on
how to create the most durable electronic publications.
The library has entered in to an agreement with 30+
publishers and libraries to archive the scholarly content.
As of November 2007, the Depot has ingested more than
10 million digital objects; most of them are publications
by international publishers.

6.2.9 National Digital Information Infrastructure and
Preservation Programme (http://www.digitalpr
eservation.gov/about/backgroundhtml)
The National Digital Information Infrastructure and
Preservation Programme (NDIIPP) of Library of Congress
aims at collecting, preserving, and making available
significant digital content for current and future
generations. Library of Congress through this programme
has collaborated with various libraries and organisations
for preserving at risk digital content, into over 1400
collections, and built a distributed digital preservation
infrastructure.

6.2.10 Data-PASS (http://www.data-pass.org/)
Data-PASS (Data Preservation Alliance for the Social
Sciences) is a project supported by NDIIPP, of five major
US Social Science data archives. It ensures that all at
risk social science data are identified, acquired, archived
and preserved for future use.

6.2.11 Chronopolis Project (http://chronopolis.sds
c.edu/)
The Chronopolis project provides long-term archiving
and preservation services for digital content provided by
the California digital Library and the Inter-University
consortium for Political and Social Science (ICPSR).
Under this project, some core archiving and preservation
tools and services have been developed under a
framework, popularly called ADAPT-approach to digital
archiving and preservation technology. This model is
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

based on a layered, digital object architecture which
includes a set of modular tools and services, built on open
standards and web technologies. The project also
borrows from open archival information system (OAIS)
reference framework.

6.2.12 MetaArchive (http://MetaArchive.org)
MetaArchive began in 2004 as a venture led by Emory
University with Georgia Technical University, University of
Louisville, Virginia Technological University, Auburn
University, Florida State University, and Library of
Congress. It supports, promotes, and extends
collaborative approach to distributed digital preservation
practices.

6.3 Commercial Publishers
The leading e-journal publishers such as Elsevier,
Nature, Springer, Taylor and Francis Blackwell and so on
so forth have already initiated efforts and signed
agreements to archive the contents; smaller publishers
will sooner or later follow suit. Oxford journals have
participated in a wide range of digital preservation
activities. It has made agreements with KB of Netherlands
and Portico; and participates in LOCKSS Alliance.
Elsevier has established official archives with independent
third parties. It means that there are contractual
relationships to preserve e-journals in perpetuity and
make them available internationally in case of trigger
events. The KoinklijKe Bibliotheek, National Library of
Netherlands is the official digital archive for Elsevier
journals. KB receives all Elsevier publications, including
back files on regular basis.

7. CONCLUSIONS
The libraries have been slow to initiate action to
preserve scholarly journals’ content as they have other
pressing needs and requirements to attend to. All
stakeholders–librarians, publishers, administrators,
policy makers and funding bodies should get together to
initiate and develop a strategy for preserving electronic,
scholarly journals’ content for posterity. They need to take
responsibility for their own archiving activities for
preservation of e-journals’ content. Libraries should take
measures for ensuring the safety, longevity, and
accessibility of collections and should be least dependent
on vendors and external service providers. Concerted
efforts should be taken to enact legal deposit law which
would go a long way in preserving digital content of
scholarly journals. The National Library of the country
should take the lead in this venture of preserving ejournals’ content.
Time seems right for Indian libraries to explore various
options to create models for digital preservation of eresources subscribed by them. The various consortia of
299

the country—INDEST, INFLIBNET should initiate digital
preservation projects which may be modelled on LOCKSS
and CLOCKSS. The consortia may negotiate with
publishers to set up local server in order to meet the
needs of Indian libraries.

14. Waters, D. Urgent action needed to preserve
scholarly electronic journals. Digital Library
Federation,
2005.
http://www.diglib.org/pubs/
waters051015.htm (accessed on 21 June 2012).

1. http://www.loc.gov/ac/devpol/electronicresources.pdf

15. Chowdhury, Gobinda. From digital libraries to digital
preservation research: The importance of users and
context type: Literature review. Journal of
Documentation, 2010, 66(2), 207-23.

2. EPIC Faculty Survey, 2003. http://www.epic.columbi
a.edu/eval/find07/find07.html

16. Woodyard-Robinson, Deborah. Introduction. Library
Trends, 2005, 54(1), 1-5.

3. Kenney, A.R.; Entlich, R.; Hirtle, P.B.; McGovern,
N.Y. & Buckley, E.L. E-journal archiving metes and
bounds: A survey of the landscape. Council on Library
and Information Resources, Washington, DC, 2006.
http://www.clir.org/pub/abstract/pub138abst.html
(accessed on 21 June 2012)

17. Jantz, R & Giarlo, M.J. Digital preservation:
Architecture and technology for trusted digital
repositories. D-Lib, 2005, 11(6). http://www.dlib.org/
dlib/june05/jantz/06jantz.html

REFERENCES

4. Kirchhoff, Amy J. Expanding the preservation
network: Lessons from Portico. Library Trends, 2009,
57(3), 476-98.
5. Lippincott, Joan K. Information commons: Meeting
millennial needs. J. Lib. Admin., 2010, 50(1), 27-37
6. Chowdhury, Gobinda. From digital libraries to digital
preservation research: The importance of users and
context type: Literature review. Journal of
Documentation, 2010, 66(2), 207-23.
7. Meghan Banach &Yuan Li. Institutional repositories
and digital preservation: Assessing current practices
at research libraries. D-Lib Magazine, 2011, 17(5/6).
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may11/yuanli/05yuanli.html
(accessed on 21 June 2012).
8. Greenfield, Susan. Tomorrow’s people. Allen Lane,
London, 2003. pp.15
9.

http://www.economist.com/node/21553410

10. Bailery, Jefferson. Apocalypse bit: Disaster
mythology and digital preservation. http://blogs.lo
c.gov/digitalpreservation/2012/05/apocalypse-bitdisaster-mythologies-and-digital-preservation/
(accessed on 21 June 2012)
11. Hockx-Yu, Helen. Digital preservation in the context
of institutional repositories. Program: Electr. Lib. Inf.
Sys., 2006, 40(3), 232-43.

18. Digital Library Federation. http://www.diglib.org/
forums/2011forum/
19. http://richardpynder.co.uk/elephants_and_dung.htm
20. Jaja, Joseph & Song, Sangchul. Robust tools and
services for long term preservation of digital
information. Library Trends, 2009, 57(3), 580-94.
21. Kirchhoff, Amy J. Expanding the preservation
network: Lessons from portico. Library Trends, 2009,
57(3), 476-98.
22. http://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/pub138/metes.html/
conclusion.html
23. Fleker, Dale. Preserving scholarly e-journals. D-Lib
Magazine, 2001, 7(9). http://www.dlib.org/dlib/
september01/flecker/09flecker.html
24. Serial conversations: A man for all reasons: An
interview with Clifford Lynch by Hepfer, Head,
Collection Management Services, Health Sciences
Library, State University of New York, Abbott Hall,
Buffalo, NY 14214-3002, USA. old.cni.or g/staff/
cliffpubs/Serials_Review_Inter view.doc.
25. Dappert, Angela & Enders, Markus. Using METS,
PREMIS and MODS for archiving journals. D-Lib,
2008, 14(9-10). www.dlib.org/dlib/september08/
dappert/09dappert.html (accessed on 21 June 2012)

12. Digital Library Federation. http://www.diglib.org/
forums/2011forum/

26. Day, M. Digital. Preservation and long term access to
the content of electronic serials In E-serials;
publishers, libraries, users, and standards, edited by
W. Jones. Haworth Information, Binghamton, 2003.
pp. 167-95

13. Kirchhoff, Amy J. Expanding the preservation
network: Lessons from portico. Library Trends, 2009,
57(3), 476-98

27. Granger, S. Digital preservation and deep
infrastructure. D-Lib Magazine, 8(2). http://
www.dlib.org/dlib/february02/granger/02granger.html

300

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

28. Besser, Howard. Collaboration for electronic
preservation. Library Trends, 2007, 56(1), 216-29.

33. http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/About-us/Policy/Policyand-position-statements/WTD002766.htm

29. http://www-935.ibm.com/services/nl/dias/is/implem
entation_services.html.

34. http://libraries.mit.edu/sites/scholarly/publishing/res
earch-funders/#NIH

30. http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programme
s/preservation/ejournalregstudy.pdf
31. Kenney, A.R.; Entlich, R.; Hirtle, P.B.; McGovern,
N.Y. & Buckley, E.L. E-journal archiving metes and
bounds: A survey of the landscape. Council on Library
and Information Resources, Washington, DC, 2006.
http://www.clir.org/pubs/abstract/pub138abst.html
(accessed on 21 June 2012).
32. Steenbakkers, Johan F. Digital archiving in the
twenty-first century: Practice at the National Library
of Netherlands. Library Trends, 2005, 54(1), 33-56.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

35. http://paniit.iitd.ac.in/indest/UGC-INFONET
36. http://www.inflibnet.ac.in/econ/
37. http://www.oclc.org/research/publications/archive/
2000/lavoie/
38. www.paradigm.ac.uk/workbook/introduction/oa
is.html
39. http://www.ithaka.org
40. Hobbs, Graham. Taylor and Francis and the
Koninklijke Bibliotheek sign agreement. Editorial
Bulletin, 2005, 1(1). http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1080/17521740701694981

301

