DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 302-305
© 2012, DESIDOC

Tailoring Digital Preservation Services for Practice:
Workflow Development and Cost Modeling
Reinhard Altenhöner
c/o Deutsche Nationalbibliothek/Director IT
Adickesallee 1, D-60322 Frankfurt am Main
E-mail: r.altenhoener@dnb.de; http://www.dnb.de

ABSTRACT
The introduction of digital preservation services into the operations of institutions where existing workflow
processes are established affects the process infrastructure in many ways. This leads in itself to mutual
adaptation needs. If not only internal but also external organisational units are involved and that is often
unavoidable in a complex process such as the long-term preservation-the importance of a comprehensive
service including an advanced organisational solution and a cost model is striking. Against this background,
it is necessary to bring together technology and organisation and to anchor in a holistic approach operational
aspects of digital preservation and its organisational embeddedness in institutions. Of course needs that are
stated in a theoretical manner require practical implementation. Reflecting the history of workflow implementation
in the German National Library some central needs and results from these experiences are presented. The
new workflow for mass ingest of digital publications integrates requirements from the digital preservation unit
in the broader scope of ingest routines and showcases the demand for modular and generic components,
which can be integrated in the IT-infrastructure of a library. Results from the project DP4lib show in addition
how a service-oriented infrastructure for digital preservation services can be established. By implementing
the project was learned that much more important than technical tools is the workflow-related work, and here
especially quality assurance, verifiable processes, predictable costs, reliable reporting, and documentation
of history.
Keywords: Digital preservation, workflow management, process management, service management, long-term
archive, national libraries, ingest

1. INTRODUCTION
In the last decade, an increasing relevance has been
attributed to digital preservation in the portfolio of cultural
heritage organisations. This is especially true for those
organisations that have a legal mandate to archive and
preserve (specific collections of) digital objects. This type
of institution takes over responsibility for the long-term to
guarantee the accessibility of historic material in a
perspective of 50 years or more. In a cooperative
information infrastructure, a specific layer as a safe place,
taking on the function of a last resort in the whole
landscape is needed. This causes a set of requirements
for cultural heritage organisation, which often becomes
responsible for these kinds of tasks.
The example of the German National Library (In
German: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek=DNB) illustrates
the specific challenges, which have to be addressed
Received 1 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

seriously which is ased on a new law, which states in its
essence, that the library is responsible to collect and
preserve digital publications, the library was obliged to
enhance its capacity generally and to change its workflow
organisation within a relatively short period of time.
Following the way of these developments, this paper
presents some insight views and basic results from the
different processes which were started to introduce digital
preservation in the library workflow organisation. These
different tracks of experiences encouraged the library to
initiate the project DP4lib1and to invest further efforts to
improve the achievements so far extended to other
institutions.

2. GERMAN NATIONAL LIBRARY
Understanding the situation, be prepared
2006, when the new law for the German National Library
302

was adopted, the library could ground the needed actions
on a lot of preparatory work made in the years before.
Beginning in the 90s, the library had started
preliminary, project-based initiatives to extend know-how
and to implement dedicated new services and specific
routines to collect special types of digital objects.
Although, not specifically targeted to digital preservation
demands, this helped to understand the needs and
specific requirements for the collection of digital objects.
Most of the solutions created in these days were specific
in the sense that they were implemented for specific type
of objects, e.g., a solution to harvest newsletters or a
dedicated project to ingest the production especially of ejournals of the publisher Springer. In another project, a cooperational network to encourage and collect e-theses
and dissertations was implemented. It resulted in a lot of
experience in the area of metadata, data enrichment and
workflow development. A growing need was recognised
concerning the infrastructure to identify digital objects in a
persistent and unique way; so the DNB initiated a URNbased persistent identifier service that resolves today
more than 7 million unique object identifiers. So the
infrastructure in general, seems to have grown steadily
with the requirements.

2.1 Challangers and Solutions
On closer inspection, however, the fact that many of
the applications were implemented separately and
differently for specific classes of objects has proved to be
a problem. What does this mean practically? Several of
these individually established workflows were not
integrated on an organisational and technological level,
which means that they worked successfully for small
number of objects, but they were not designed to process
large numbers of objects and do not allow to incorporate
more employees without specific IT-skills. In addition
another property of these tools caused difficulties: Special
attention had been paid to the question of how the objects
were accessed and this led to some different and
‘competing’ interface-solutions. Another important aspect
was entirely absent: the validation and technical analysis
of the objects on their format and data integrity was
missing in the ingest routines.
In essence, it was largely independently created
software solutions that encompassed the entire range of
collection of objects, from the development/description to
validation of objects and their archiving. At the latest when
the law went into force it was clear, however, that this
implementation approach could not be promising. In
particular, the large amount of objects and the attendant
need to integrate existing staff in large numbers led to the
realisation that a fundamentally new approach was
needed. Associated with it, it also became clear that the
maintainability of countless individual routines quickly
pushes its limits and does not provide sufficient
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

guarantees for the safe operation. This, however, affected
not only the development of IT-based services
themselves, but especially the new and improved working
procedures of DNB.

2.2 Long-term Archiving System
All these activities were started to address the legal
obligation to collect, to index and to offer access to the
digital objects. But the challenge to address the need of
digital preservation was unanswered yet. So in 2004 the
development of a long-term archiving system was begun,
leading in 2006/2007 to an extended prototype solution
called kopal1. Kopal means ‘Kooperatives Archivsystem
für die Langzeitarchivierung digitaler Objekte’, In English:
Co-operative Development of a Long-term Digital
Information Archive2.
The development was based on a commercial asset,
developed by IBM and founded on IBM standard software,
called DIAS (Digital Information Archive System). On top
of it a specific metadata handling was implemented with
specific focus on technical metadata4,5 including
dedicated methods for object integrity and controlling.
This system was defined for a defined set of types of
digital objects ready to become ingested into the longterm-archiving system. Of course the objects had to be
validated whether they were technically fit and logically
consistent. This happened in dedicated routines in the
pre-ingest area, addressed in an open source library
called koLibRI (kopal Library for Retrieval and Ingest)6.
Except for this Java-based software library, which could
be changed and adapted to different usage scenarios of
DNB, the DIAS solution is a ‘black box’ in the sense that
IBM has the complete responsibility for further
development of the software, for change management and
error-handling as far as this relates to the software. In
addition, first steps have been implemented to obtain data
from the archive for the planning and implementation of
policies on migration in practice.

2.2.1

Reviewing of Archiving System

But these principal limitations were not the main
issues which occurred by transferring the different
routines in an enhanced practice: The existing workflow
routines to collect objects from the original producer or
publisher were not able to verify the technical quality of
digital objects. Existing workflow-routines to handle the
digital objects were as noted created as an independent
workflow within the digital-preservation system and they
started after the identification and physical collection of
objects. Facing the challenge to process big amounts of
data and on the other hand to optimize facilities to handle
different (and new) types of objects and easy ways to
configure and enhance workflow routines, it came out that
DNB had to start a new development process to review
the workflow. So two core tasks could be identified:
303

•

Scaling and flexibilisation of ingest routines

•

Practical integration of the kopal-solution into the
workflow-organisation of DNB.

(a) A dedicated concentration on technical workflow
development.

The situation of DNB is not exceptional for cultural
heritage organisations. Many archives are fighting with
this kind of hurdles and this is a fundamental problem for
the introduction of IT-based solutions into the workflow of
libraries (or cultural heritage organisations) in general.
The IT-based systems like library management solutions
and even digital preservation systems arise as complete
solutions including an interface to access archived
materials ‘first-generation systems’. Or they arise as
extensions of existing repository-solutions, where certain
functions are specifically expanded. An open, modular
solution that offers the opportunity for a full integration in
an existing IT-infrastructure is still rare.

(b) Extension of digital preservation to other partners in
order to share experience and to offer customisable
and flexible services.

3. EXPERIENCES, NEEDS AND ANSWERS

Besides the creation of metadata and object quality
management policy, the transfer of objects and metadata
in to the DNB has been addressed: Currently DNB
provides three interfaces for delivery: a web form for single
objects and two automated methods, one to push and one
to pull objects. The push method uses a delivery account
(called ‘hot folder’), the transfer is handled by using SFTP
or a WebDAV interface (Fig.1). Each delivery package is
a single transfer container, in which both the object
(optionally also composed of many files) and an
associated set of metadata are zipped. The pull method is
based on the OAI Protocol for Metadata Harvesting in

Two main initiatives launched were:

At the beginning of the initiative, fundamental question
had to be answered: Are there any restrictive stipulations,
which have to be considered under the new law7? This
question was answered quite simply: The law, addresses
these points very open and explicitly, allows both pushand pull-routines; so the further steps weren’t restricted.
The mandate covers both Internet publications with
printed versions and corresponding such as e-books and
e-journals, and web-specific media works such as Web
pages. Even the collection of music files is in-scope.

The implementation of automated routines is founded
on three basic requirements:

•

Use of standardised metadata formats for the
specification and verification of electronic resources in
the catalogue or search system

•

Definition of quality levels for file formats from the
perspective of digital preservation

•

Definition of transfer interfaces to receive the objects
and the metadata from the producers

Figure 1. DNB interfaces.
304

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

combination with a transfer URL submitted within the
metadata.

REFERENCES
1. http://kopal.langzeitarchivierung.de/index.php.en
2. Reinhard, Altenhöner & Steinke, Tobias. Kopal:
cooperation, innovation and services: Digital
preservation activities at the German National Library.
Library Hi Tech, 2010, 28(2), 235.
3. Reinhard, Altenhöner. The German National Library

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

and
digital
preservation:
Challenges
and
opportunities. World Digital Lib., June 2010, 3(1), 1-9.
4. http://kopal.langzeitarchivierung.de/index_objekts
pezifikation.php.en
5. http://kopal.langzeitarchivierung.de/index_sta
ndards.php.en (accessed on 25.2.2012).
6. http://kopal.langzeitarchivierung.de/index_softwa
re.php.en (accessed on 25.2.2012).
7. http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/dnbg/index.html

305

