DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 306-312
© 2012, DESIDOC

In Search of Simplicity: Redesigning the Digital Bleek and Lloyd
Lighton Phiri and Hussein Suleman
Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town
Private Bag X3, Rondebosch, 7701, Cape Town, South Africa
E-mail: lphiri_hussein@cs.uct.ac.za

ABSTRACT
The Digital Bleek and Lloyd is a collection of digitised historical artefacts on the Bushman people of
Southern Africa. The underlying software was initially designed to enable access from as many people as
possible so usage requirements were minimal – it was not even necessary to use a web server or database.
However, the system was not focused on preservation, extensibility, or reusability. In this article, it is argued
that such desirable attributes could manifest themselves in a natural evolution of the Bleek and Lloyd software
system in the direction of greater simplicity. A case study demonstrates that this is indeed feasible in the case
of the Digital Bleek and Lloyd and potentially more generally applicable in digital libraries.
Keywords: Digital libraries, digital preservation, developing world, Digital Bleek and Lloyd

1. INTRODUCTION
Storage of information in digital form is increasingly
becoming popular due to the flexibility and cost-effective
nature of storage media. This data proliferation of both
born-digital and digitised information has effectively
increased the amount of digital information that is at risk
of loss due to obsolescence of hardware and software,
and physical damage. The process of managing this
content and its associated representations over time to
guarantee their long-term usability is known as digital
preservation. It collectively requires the establishment
and implementation of a reliable preservation policy and
well-coordinated procedures to ensure that the digital
objects are preserved against hardware and/or software
obsolescence, media failure, and any other potential
physical threats posed on the digital objects1.
The preservation of digital information requires
constant attention due to the fast pace at which
technology is advancing and because of the delicate
nature of digital storage media that is used to store digital
content. A typical digital preservation procedure involves
activities such as: regularly backing up of data to a
different location to ensure its availability in the event of a
disaster; refreshing of media by copying the digital
information from one media to another; migration of digital
content after a change in hardware and/or software
technology used; and development of disaster recovery
Received 1 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

plans. However, in most developing countries, data
producers such as cultural heritage organisations pay
insufficient attention to issues surrounding digital
preservation. Their digital collections are often stored in
digital library and content management systems that are
primarily set up for management of assets and external
visibility. Activities such as migration to other platforms
are assigned a lower priority. In this article, it is argued
that a change in the fundamental architecture of the digital
library system can potentially improve the preservability of
a collection. Simpler architectures for digital library
systems may also make it easier to interconnect
systems and extend or modify the features of a specific
system. In developing countries, extensions and
modifications are relatively rare, given the lack of human
and machine resources. Reducing the resource
requirements may result in more digital library systems
with improved services. Thus, this article presents some
elements of an alternative architecture for digital library
systems that is arguably easier to manipulate and
therefore supports more use cases and long-term
preservation.
In earlier work2, some issues were highlighted that
hinder widespread preservation projects in Africa. A
number of possible techniques and solutions currently
adopted in African projects to preserve heritage were also
presented. Overall, simplicity is proposed as a potential
key criterion for building lightweight systems that are
306

easy to maintain and migrate, effectively reducing overall
maintenance costs. To further investigation on simplicity,
a recent project3 involved building a prototype lightweight,
distributable, generic repository management and access
system. The design approach centred on simplicity is
potentially useful in areas with limited resources and/or
expensive internet bandwidth.
This article focuses on a case study where the Digital
Bleek and Lloyd collection was transformed into a simpler
form to gain all the potential advantages listed earlier.

2. RELATED WORK
The 1996 Task Force Report 4 on Archiving of Digital
Information initiated formal research in digital
preservation. It is particularly important because it
identified the core challenges of digital preservation for
organisations that manage digital collections. A number of
initiatives have since emerged to support digital
preservation. The Open Archival Information System
(OAIS) reference model5 provides a formal and
comprehensive overview of digital preservation and was
approved by the International Standards Organisation
(ISO) as the ISO 14721 standard. It has since been used
as a basis for most tools that currently facilitate
preservation. Preservation Metadata: Implementation
Strategies (PREMIS) is a working group, composed of
international experts in metadata to support digital
preservation activities6. PREMIS is essentially a
metadata community initiative that recommends best
practices for preservation metadata. The PREMIS
working group published a data dictionary and an XML
schema to support the implementation of the data
dictionary in digital archiving systems. The National
Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation
Programme (NDIIPP) is a programme, led by the Library
of Congress, to archive and provide access to digital
resources. The NDIIPP is a precursor to the National
Digital Stewardship Alliance (NDSA), an organisation
focused on improving preservation standards and
practices7.
In the repository software development community,
some projects have emerged as enablers of distributed
preservation. Lots Of Copies Keep Stuff Safe (LOCKSS)
is an international community initiative that provides
libraries with digital preservation tools and support to
facilitate the preservation of authorised copies of digital
content8. DuraCloud is a managed cloud service that
provides organisations with the necessary cloud
subscription services to make it possible to safely store
digital content in the cloud by easily multiplexing digital
content storage with different providers 6‘. MetaArchive is
a distributed alliance of university libraries, archives and
research centres that works towards supporting
distributed digital preservation practices. The
MetaArchive corporation uses a technical framework that
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

is based on the LOCKSS software to ingest digital
content into the geographically distributed network9.
However, these hosted services require payment of
subscription fees periodically and work on the
assumption that participating organisations have
adequate Internet bandwidth.
Standalone repository software tools are commonly
used to facilitate digital preservation. Greenstone10 and
Omeka12 are commonly used by cultural heritage
organisations for creation of digital collections.
Greenstone is particularly popular in developing countries
due to its ability to create digital collection archives that
can potentially be distributed on a CD-ROM. DSpace13
and EPrints14 are popular among academic institutions
where they are commonly used to build institutional
repository systems. However, the downside of using such
standalone tools is that the preservation and extensibility
features built into them require individuals with full
developer-level knowledge of the software packages.
In contrast, the Library of Congress developed the
BagIt specification that specifies a hierarchical file
packaging format for storage and transfer of digital
content15. The packaging format is specifically designed
to facilitate the storage and transfer of digital content for
long-term preservation. The specification has resulted in
the development of a number of utility tools that are used
to facilitate digital preservation16. This concept of flexibility
applies equally well to services as it does to data. The
Dienst17, ODL18 and OpenDLib19 projects all sought to
decrease management and effort, without compromising
on features, by introducing flexible Web-based
component architectures. In these cases, systems were
created by interconnecting a suite of simple components
to provide the necessary level of complexity of a fullfledged digital library system.
The projects described above demonstrate the
feasibility of preservation-oriented data stores and flexible
service architectures, both premised on simplicity as an
architectural principle. This article now merges, extends
and generalises these ideas to create a minimal
framework for simple digital library systems/collections,
operationalised in the Digital Bleek and Lloyd collection.

3. CASE STUDY: DIGITAL BLEEK AND LLOYD
COLLECTION
The Bleek and Lloyd collection is a 19th century
compilation of notebooks and drawings comprising of
linguistic and ethnographic work of Lucy Lloyd and
Wilhelm Bleek on the life of the |Xam and !Kun Bushmen
people of Southern Africa. In 2003, the Lucy Lloyd Archive
and Research Centre at the University of Cape Town
embarked on a large scale digitisation project and all the
artefacts were scanned and corresponding representation
information were generated.
307

The scanned images formed the basis for the
implementation of a digital library system to store,
manage, and preserve digital objects, effectively making
the digital collection accessible online. Explicit user
requirements necessitated the implementation of an XMLcentric solution that is accessible on a wide range of
storage devices (CD-ROM drives, USB drives, and local
network drives), is hardware independent and also
requires minimal software installation. The collection is
web-based and accessible online20, as shown in Fig. 1.
The implementation of the digital collection was based on
pre-generated hyperlinked static XML pages from XML
source data using XSLT. An Ajax-based search
component was integrated with the static pages, coupled
with a JavaScript routine to perform query
operations21.The collection’s repository architecture was
recently redesigned to facilitate the long-term
preservation of the digital content and also to easily
integrate the system with new collections of recently
digitised content and new services.

objects. The repository stores both the digital content and
metadata objects on the filesystem, using a hierarchical
filesystem structure, with the metadata objects stored in
XML plain text files.

3.2 Collection Overview
Table 1 presents an overview of part of the Bleek and
Lloyd collection; more content is still being digitised and it
is anticipated that these digital objects would eventually
have to be integrated with the current digital collection.
Table 1. Overview of the Bleek and Lloyd collection
Collection

theme

Historical artefacts; museum objects

Material type

Digitised

Collection size

6.2 GB

Content type

image/jpeg

Total number of digital objects

18,924

3.3 Data Model
The digital objects–digital content and metadata
objects–are both contained in the filesystem, within
hierarchical container structures–filesystem directories.
The hierarchical structures conform to the original
collection structure that implicitly defines the relationship
between the actual digital content and collection types.
Figure 3 shows part of the books collection structure of
the Bleek and Lloyd collection. The hierarchical structure

3.1 High-level System Architecture
The high-level architecture of the system, (Fig. 2), is
composed of three main layers: the client layer is made
up of the user interface through which end-users interact
with the system; the service layer is composed of
services that facilitate discovery of information; and the
repository layer is used as a storage facility for the digital

Repository

Services

Client

Figure 1. Digital Bleek and Lloyd collection.

HTML

Search

Digial
Content

Browse

Index

Filesystem
Metadata

Figure 2. Digital Bleek and Lloyd system architecture.
308

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Figure 3. Repository hierarchical directory structure.

is important as it helps to preserve the semantics of the
digital content. It also helps in the overall management of
the as bulk actions can be performed on objects
contained within the same container. The other advantage
of using a hierarchical model is that it implicitly defines
relationships between repository disparate objects; in the
case of the digital Bleek and Lloyd collection, it defines
the relationship between actual digital content (e.g.
images) and virtual objects (e.g. stories).

3.4 Digital Objects
The metadata objects are stored as plain XML text
files on the filesystem, alongside the corresponding
objects that they describe. The XML text files are
encoded using qualified Dublin Core22.
This design strategy helps to simplify the preservation
of the collection by making is easy for the collection to be
migrated to other hardware and/or software platforms. The
use of plain text files as storage for metadata, as opposed
to the traditional mode of using a database, is especially
useful as it makes it possible for the digital objects to be
easily moved to any type of hardware or software platform
with very little effort. The use of the ‘Copy’ utility command
present in virtually any operating System is sufficient to
move the entire collection. The explicit use of Dublin Core
as the metadata scheme ensures conformance to
international standards and widespread understanding of
the metadata. Physically storing metadata files with the
actual objects makes it easier for the representation
information to be moved together with the objects when
moving to a different hardware and/or software platform.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

There are three distinct types of metadata objects:
Container metadata objects define the composition of a
directory that can be composed of other container
metadata objects and/or digital content; virtual objects
help define the semantics of the images and collection as
a whole by describing the logical association of the
images and collection; and digital content metadata
objects describe the actual images. The container-based
metadata files are a manifest of the objects contained
within them. Figures 4, 5 and 6 show sample metadata
files for container objects, virtual objects and digital
content objects respectively.

3.5 End User Access
The collection front-end makes use of staticallygenerated Html files, with an Ajax-enabled search feature
for online/off-line searchability of information. It is
generated by applying XSLT style sheets to all the
collection metadata objects. This technological decision
removes the dependency of a web server and/or
application server for rendering of the collection content.
The only software component that would inevitably be
required is a web browser, effectively making it possible
for the collection to be stored and accessed from other
hardware storage devices such as CD-ROMs, USB
drives, and local network drives.

4. DISCUSSIONS
The simple techniques and solutions used to redesign
the digital Bleek and Lloyd collection have obvious
advantages, particularly to organisations with limited
309

<?xml version=”1.0", encoding=”UTF-8"?>
<resource xmlns:dc=”http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/”
Xmlns:dcterms=”http://purl.org/dc/terms/”>
<dc:title>BC_151_A1_4_002</dc:title>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_FRCOV.jpg</dcterms:hasPart>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_IFCOV.jpg</dcterms:hasPart>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_FRCOV.jpg</dcterms:hasPart>
:
:
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_00428.jpg<?dcterms:hasPart>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_IBCOV.jpg<?dcterms:hasPart>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_BKCOV.jpg<?dcterms:hasPart>
<dcterms:hasPart>A1_4_2_SPINE.jpg<?dcterms:hasPart>
</resource>

Figure 4. Sample container object XML metadata file.

<?xml version=”1.0", encoding=”UTF-8"?>
<resource xmlns:dc=”http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/”
Xmlns:dcterms=”http://purl.org/dc/terms/”
Xmlns:bl=”http://lloydbleekcollection.uct.ac.za”>
<dc.identifier>32</dc:identifier>
<dc:title>Sun, Moon, and Stars<dc:title>
<dcterms:contributor>||kabob (Jantje) (II)</scterms:contributor>
<dc:subject>Celestial bodies and aeroscopy</dc:subject>
:
<dc:description>…</dc:description>
<dcterms:created>1871</dcterms:created>
:
<dcterms:requires>A1_4_2_00377.jpg</dcterms:requires>
<dcterms:requires>A1_4_2_00378.jpg</dcterms:requires>
</resource>

Figure 5. Sample virtual object XML metadata file.
<?xml version=”1.0", encoding=”UTF-8"?>
<resource xmlns:dcterms=”http://purl.org/dc/terms/”>
<dcterms:requires>wilhembleeknotebooks/2</dcterms:requires>
</resource>

Figure 6. Sample digital content XML metadata file.

resources. The solution allows for the seamless moving of
the collection to any hardware and/or software platform
and allows for the recreation of the collection in disaster
recovery scenarios. The advantage of this is a costeffective preservation strategy resulting from reduced
reliance on expensive, technically-inclined, human
310

resources; and a simplified migration process that any
computer novice would be capable of performing.
The use of plain text for storage of metadata, as
opposed to using a database, facilitates the portability of
system. The filesystem is a very efficient place to store
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

data; in fact, that is where many databases store their
data files. Most importantly, however, the digital collection
uses the simplest possible retrieval mechanism (the
reading of a file in a directory location) and the data is
seldom modified. The use of the filesystem for storage of
the metadata makes it the optimal storage location.
Hardware and software obsolescence could easily be
overcome as the collection can easily be migrated to a
different platform. Additionally, plain text files are highly
like to be supported in future software versions. There is
no guarantee that most of the currently existing
proprietary database formats will be supported in the near
future or if future software versions will be backwards
compatible, but the text files in hierarchical directories are
probably going to be understandable.

A comprehensive evaluation of such an approach is
also required to identify the advantages and
disadvantages that such solutions have when compared
to well-established architectural patterns. It would
particularly be useful to establish the scalability of simpler
architectures. A number of existing solutions are
implemented with out-of-the-box support for essential
features like extensibility and interoperability. It would
thus be imperative to explicitly support such features. It
may also be necessary to explicitly integrate the current
solution with tools and services that facilitate
preservation, such as content conversion, logging and
integrity checking.

The major challenge, however, would be to explore the
scalability of such simple techniques when applied to
large and complex collections. Another challenge is
perhaps the use of static HTML files. The static collection
necessitates complete regeneration of the entire digital
collection when additional content is added to the
collection. This is clearly not optimal as it would make it
challenging to operate constantly changing collections.

1. RLG/OCLC Working Group on Digital Archive
Attributes. Trusted digital repositories: Attributes and
responsibilities. Mountain View, CA, 2002.

5. CONCLUSIONS
Simplicity in the design of digital library systems is
arguably a better bet for preservation of crucial cultural
heritage collections. At the same time, simple
architectures can support extensibility and flexibility of
services. These ideas were tested by converting the
Digital Bleek and Lloyd to conform to these principles.
The new system is wholly a replacement for the prior
system, but with a digital object structure that enables
simpler preservation over time and enables easier
integration of new services. Thus, as a proof-of-concept, it
has been shown that it is possible to create a productionquality digital library system based on fundamental
notions of simplicity.
This is, however, only a first step in providing sufficient
evidence that a simpler architectural design will work for
digital library systems in general.

6. FUTURE WORK
This simple approach to the architecture of digital
library systems can be extended and generalised
further.For the most part, the solution presented is
somewhat specific to the Bleek and Lloyd collection;
there is thus a need to generalise this approach to make it
applicable to a wide range of collections. This would
require formally identifying design decisions that may
inevitably result in a simple, lightweight system that is
easy to manage. This is particularly important as it would
highlight how simple repository storage and service
architectures can be designed.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

REFERENCES

2. Suleman, H. An African perspective on digital
preservation keywords motivation for preservation why
an African perspective. Africa, 2008, 1-9.
3. Suleman, H.; Bowes, M.; Hirst, M. & Subrun, S.
Hybrid online-offline digital collections. In
Proceedings of 2010 Annual Research Conference of
the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and
Information Technologists (SAICSIT’10), ACM Press,
2010. pp. 421-25.
4. Waters, D. & Garret, J. Preserving digital information.
Report of Task Force on Archiving of Digital
Information, 1996.
5. Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems.
Reference model for an open archival information
system (OAIS). Issue, Washington, DC, 2002.
6. PREMIS Editorial Committee. PREMIS data
dictionary for preservation metadata. Preservation,
2008.
7. Library of Congress. Digital preservation (Library of
Congress), 2012. http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/.
8. Maniatis, P.; Roussopoulos, M. & Giuli, T. The
LOCKSS peer-to-peer digital preservation system.
Computer Systems, 2005, 23(1), 2-50.
9. DuraSpace. DuraCloud. 2012. http://duracloud.org/.
10. Skinner, K. & Gore, E. The MetaArchive cooperative:
Chronicles in distributed digital preservation. In
Proceedings of 2010 Roadmap for Digital
Preservation Interoperability Framework Workshop.
ACM, 2010. pp. 8.
11. Bainbridge, D.; Buchanan, G.; Mcpherson, J.; Jones,
S.; Mahoui, A. & Witten, I.H. Greenstone: A platform
311

for distributed digital library applications. In
Proceedings of 5th European Conference on Research
and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, 2001.
pp. 137-48.
12. Kucsma, J.; Reiss, K. & Sidman, A. Using Omeka to
build digital collections: The METRO case study. DLib Magazine, 2010, 16(3/4).
13. Tansley, R.; Bass, M.; Stuve, D. & et al. The DSpace
institutional digital repository system: Current
functionality. In 2003 Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries. IEEE Comp. Soc., 2003, 87-97.
14. Gutteridge, C. GNU EPrints 2 Overview. In 11th
Panhellenic Academic Libraries Conference, 2002.
15. Boyko, A.; Kunze, J.; Littman, J.; Madden, L. &
Vargas, B. The BagIt file packaging format (V. 97), 26.
http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-kunze-bagit06.txt. (accessed on 7 September 2011)
16. Library of Congress. NDIIPP partner tools and
services inventory, 2012. http://www.digitalpreserv
ation.gov/tools/.

312

17. Lagoze, C. & Davis, J.R. Dienst: An architecture for
distributed document libraries. Commu. ACM, 1995,
38(4), 47.
18. Suleman, H. & Fox, E.A. A framework for building
open digital libraries. D-Lib Magazine, 2001, 7, 12.
19. Castelli, D.; Pagano, P. & Thanos, C. OpenDLib: An
infrastructure for new generation digital libraries. Inter.
J. Digit. Lib., 2004, 4(1), 45-47.
20. Centre of Curating the Archive. The Digital Bleek and
Lloyd. http://lloydbleekcollection.cs.uct.ac.za/.
21. Suleman, H. Digital libraries without databases: The
Bleek and Lloyd collection. In Proceedings of
Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
Libraries: 11th European Conference (ECDL 2007),
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. pp. 392-403.
22. Weibel, S.; Kunze, J.; Lagoze, C. & Wolf, M. Dublin
Core Metadata for Resource Discovery. Internet
Engineering Task Force RFC 2413, 1998. http://
www.hjp.at/doc/rfc/rfc2413.html.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

