DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 313-320
© 2012, DESIDOC

Investing in Future: Digital Information Preservation
Proposal of Public Policies for South America
Susana Finquelievich and Elida Rodríguez
CONICET, Research Institute Gino Germani, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina
E-mail: sfinquel@gmail.com
National Institute of Social Services for the Elderly, PAMI, Argentina
E-mail: rodriguezbizole@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
The goal of this paper is to identify the current policies for the preservation of digital information in South
America, and to contribute proposals for the development of national and macro-regional strategies and
policies. This document is based on a collaborative research, carried on by way of a survey of relevant
publications, both locally and internationally, completed with interviews with key informers. The research has
implied reviewing relevant existing documents in the field of information society planning, legislation, policies
and declarations; diverse countries’ expertise in the field of information society planning and legislation regarding
the preservation of digital information (explicit national digital agendas; national, regional and local information
society policies; national and regional legislative measures; etc.); and relevant national and international documents
in the field of preservation of digital information planning, legislation, policies and declarations.
Keywords: Digital information, preservation, public policies, South America, Argentina, legislation

1. NEED FOR DIGITAL PRESERVATION
POLICIES
The colossal growth in the construction and
dissemination of digital objects by governments, authors,
publishers, corporations, academicians, and others, has
highlighted the speed and ease of short-term
dissemination. Nevertheless, little concern has been paid
yet to long-term preservation. Digital information is
characteristically more delicate and insubstantial than
traditional technologies such as paper, photographs, or
microfilm. It is more easily corrupted or altered, without
detection. According to Russon1, digital storage media
have shorter life spans and require access technologies
that are changing at an ever increasing pace. The time
frame between the creation of the object and the need for
its preservation becomes shorter. The scientific and
technical community risks the loss of valuable information
without an adequate infrastructure for digital archiving and
preservation.
According to a definition provided by the National
Archives of Australia, the term ‘preservation’ includes all
actions that can be taken with the aim of ensuring the
Received 1 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

current and long-term survival and accessibility of the
physical form, informational content and relevant
metadata of archival records, including actions taken to
influence records creators prior to acquisition or
selection.
According to the document (UNESCO, 2006), ‘Digital
preservation’ can be defined as the process and activities
which stabilise and protect reformatted and digital
authentic electronic records in forms which are
retrievable, readable and usable over time (NARS, April
2004). Digital preservation involves a number of organised
tasks associated with a variety of technical approaches or
strategies for ensuring that digital resources are not only
stored appropriately, but also adequately maintained and
thus consistently usable over time (UKOLN, 2004). It
involves the processes of maintaining accessibility of
digital heritage materials over time, for as long as they are
needed12.
Quoting IFAP–UNESCO: “In a world increasingly
being shaped by digital technologies, the traditional
guardian institutions (libraries, archives and museums)
are challenged to keep pace with the rapid growth in
313

information. They also face a new challenge–as
technology advances the stability and lifespan of
documents is considerably decreasing. If nothing is done,
many important documents in electronic format will not
survive or will become completely inaccessible within a
very short time. The result will be a permanent loss to
humankind´s collective memory. This challenge needs to
be tackled urgently, and the costs of preserving digital
information should not be underestimated–these far
exceed the preservation costs experienced to date with
five millennia of traditional documents. Digital preservation
also contributes to at least two other IFAP priorities–
information for development and open and multilingual
access to information. Digital technologies open up
access to information and knowledge in democratic
dimensions that has never been experienced before”.
Digital preservation is a way of preserving living memories,
customs, cultures, and identities.
Participants to the International Conference
‘Preservation of Digital Information in the Information
Society: Problems and Prospects’ held in Moscow on 3-5
October 2011 unanimously approved the Conference final
document– the Moscow Declaration on Digital Information
Preservation. The Declaration highlights the importance of
the issues raised at the conference and offers a set of
measures and efforts to be taken in such spheres as
politics, awareness-raising and education, scientific
research, economics, ICT industry, partnership and
coordination. According to the Moscow Declaration, “The
conference showed that traditional keepers of analogue
information–libraries, archives, and museums–are still
unable to cope with the tasks of digital information
preservation. In fact, they are the ones to raise the alarm.
Policy-makers do not possess due understanding of the
necessity of creating a new infrastructure for the
preservation of digital information, probably on the basis of
the infrastructure of information preservation on traditional
carriers by modernising and strengthening it”.
The debates made it clear that most countries of the
world have neither regulatory framework, which would
oblige relevant institutions and structures to be engaged
professionally in the process of information preservation in
digital format, nor drawn up distinct policies that might
lead to the creation of such a framework. However both
developed and developing countries are trying to
determine what exactly should be preserved, and for what
reasons, who, where and when should do it, by which
means and to what extent. The Conference´s participants
concluded that it is essential to take urgent measures on
political and practical levels. They remarked that
otherwise it is probable that vast amounts of digitised
information are lost either because the processes of its
digitisation were not appropriately provided, or it was not
catalogued in time and in the right way and therefore may
not be found, or it was improperly preserved; and huge
314

amounts of network and other information were not
collected and were therefore forever lost. For that reason
many world experts define the time to come as
‘information dark ages’, using terms like ‘digital
Alzheimer’, ‘digital amnesia’ and so on’8.
The authors of this paper believe that digitalising
information, or digital storing, cannot be mistaken for
digital preservation. The risks of losing vital information
increase not only with every technological change, but
also with political vicissitudes, and changes in the user
community. Which policies, strategies, rules and
proceedings are feasible in order to guarantee the
preservation, availability, and use of information in the
medium and long term?13.
A National Policy for Information Society (NISP) can
be defined as a roadmap, a national, regional, or local
plan for the inclusion and appropriation, by Governments,
institutions, communities and individuals, of the benefits
derived from the construction of an Information Society.
The NISP is a highway, not a harbour. It is a process, a
collaborative, open, and permanent building task. In order
to travel this highway, it is necessary to envision it, to plan
and build it, to make it travelable for all the citizens3.
A digital preservation policy would state the principles
and long-term direction that would guide preservation
strategies and actions, and would set clear priorities. In
terms of the South American context, a national and
macro-regional digital preservation policy would reinforce
mutual efforts of governments to preserve materials which
document our laws, public administration actions,
science and technology efforts, and cultural heritage. It
would define organisational roles and (funding)
responsibilities. The roles of established memory
institutions, such as libraries, archives and museums,
would also be addressed.
According to Voutssas14, the quantity of digital information
has increased geometrically without proper knowledge,
theories, strategies, policies and proceedings to preserve
it. Developed countries and regions have started to
generate this knowledge and know-how, as well as setting
the basis to manage their digital collections within
libraries, archives, and other organisations with the aim to
preserve them in the long-term. However, the state of
affairs is drastically different in Latin America, where
limited research and projects on digital preservation are
found.
This paper has been written as a series of questions
and answers that deal with the subject of policies for
digital material preservation in South America (with a
particular mention to Argentina), the social agents that
have developed actions in this area, and proposals
towards the development of national and macro-regional
preservation plan strategies and policies.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

2. DO SOUTH AMERICAN DIGITAL AGENDAS
CONSIDER POLICIES FOR DIGITAL
PRESERVATION?
As stated by Voutssas14 the issue of the long-term
reliable preservation of digital document collections is not
just a technology problem, but a much more complex
one. Further and deeper study is required to develop a
practical strategy and/or plan for the region. Most NISPs
in South American countries do not set policies for digital
material preservation, though it is expected that the
processes of updating these NISPs will. Nonetheless,
some countries, such as Brazil and Colombia, participate
in Inter Pares, an international project2 supported by the
British University of Columbia and The Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada’s
Community-University Research Alliances (SSHRCCURA).
Policies for the storing of digital material are
assumed, often jointly, by South American libraries,
museums, and universities, but governments have not yet
arrived to formulate multisectorial or macro-regional joint
preservation policies. However, the issue is currently
being discussed at the Union de Naciones
Suramericanas, Unasur (Union of South American
Nations), the Regional organisation that includes12 South
American countries, due to an Argentine initiative.
Another macro-regional agenda is eLAC 2007, the
Regional Action Plan for the information society, which
was officially approved at the Regional Latin American and
Caribbean Preparatory Ministerial Conference for the
World Summit on Information Society on June 10, 2005 in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It is based on constant dialogue
and cooperation among all the Latin American and
Caribbean countries, and leading to the adoption of a
common policy agenda. Regarding the preservation of
electronic information, OLAC 2007 proposed in its Article
15.5: “Promote the adoption of information security and
storage models at all levels of government with a view to
engendering trust in the digital information managed or
provided by the State”.

3. ANTECEDENTS IN SOUTH AMERICA
REGARDING DIGITAL PRESERVATION
One of the first events to raise the problem of
preservation of the digital heritage was an expert
consultation for Latin America and the Caribbean that
UNESCO organised in November 2002 in Managua,
Nicaragua. Its results would be the regional input to the
Charter on Digital Heritage that UNESCO was organising.
In that opportunity, UNESCO´s expert Dr Isidro
Fernandez Aballi discussed the huge quantity of
information which exists in digital format, and which
disappears in cyberspace, without being transferred to an
updated, more durable support.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

On 1 June 2007, the Ibero American Chat of Electronic
Government3 (CIGE) was approved by the Ibero American
Conference of Ministers of Public Administration and
State Reform in Pucón, Chile, and adopted by the XVII
Ibero American Summit of Government and State Chiefs
(Santiago de Chile, 10 November 2007). Among the
Electronic Government Principles stated in paragraph 24,
the CIGE enunciates:
Principle
of
technological
adequacy:
the
administrations will choose the most adequate
technologies to satisfy their needs. It is recommended
the use of open standards and free software based on
reasons as safety, security, long term sustainability, and
to prevent the privatisation of public knowledge (…)”.
Moreover, there are a number of initiatives undertaken
by ‘memory guardian institutions’: museums, libraries,
and universities. One of them is the Latin American and
the Caribbean Network of Social Sciences Virtual
Libraries (Red de Bibliotecas Virtuales de Ciencias
Sociales de América Latina y el Caribe4), created by the
Latin American Council of Social Sciences (CLACSO). Its
Virtual Reading Room features more than 4000 complete
texts of books, papers, documents, and journals. 168
research centers (54 % of them are universities) in 21
countries contribute their publications. Copyrights remain
in the hands of the authors and the original editors, with a
Creative Commons license for their dissemination with
academic goals.
In Brazil, SciELO (Scientific Electronic Library
Online) is a model for cooperative electronic publishing of
scientific journals in the internet. It was generated through
cooperation between the Foundation for Research
Support of the Sao Paulo State (FAPESP, Fundación de
Apoyo a la Investigación del Estado de São Paulo),
BIREME (Biblioteca Virtual em Saude, Virtual Health
Library) the Latin American and Caribbean Information
Center on Health Sciences, as well as national and
international
institutions
related
to
scientific
communication and publishing. SciELO was specifically
designed to respond to the needs of scientific
communication in developing countries, ensuring visibility
and universal access to scientific literature, contributing
to overcome the phenomenon known as ‘lost science’.
From June 1998 onwards the project has been regularly
operating, including new journals, incorporating other
countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and
Venezuela, and planning to incorporate Bolivia, Paraguay,
Perú, and Uruguay.
‘Memoria chilena’ (‘Chilean memory’, http://
www.memoriachilena.cl), is the Chilean cultural portal. It
was created by the Chile National Library, and the
Direction of Libraries, Archives and Museums (DIBAM) to
“disseminate through the internet the Chilean national
heritage, contributing to the recuperation, preservation
315

and strengthening of the historical memory, and making it
available to the whole world. Memoria Chilena possesses
diverse kinds of digitalised information: Books, journals,
newspapers, in their original editions, photographs,
drawings, pictures, engravings, manuscripts, articles,
fragments, and letters, sound registers, maps, plans,
partitions, and press files. Digitalised documents have a
presentation page, and catalogue information. They also
feature metadata in XML/RDF format, according to the
Dublincore standards.
Most ongoing experiences have been generated by
universities, libraries, and research centers. The subject
of preserving digital information is absent from most digital
agendas. However, in the Uruguay Digital Agenda
(Agenda Digital Uruguaya), the goal 6 makes an explicit
reference: ‘To preserve the cultural common property in a
diverse nation, within the frame of the Bicentennial”. This
goal proposes the following targets:
(a) To extend the Digital Museums Project to all the
museums in the country by year 2015, including nontraditional museums, as the word´s archive
(b) To habilitate the electronic access to the National
library system in the same period.
(c) To start the process of digitalising the collections of
the National Library, The Nation General Archives, and
four other libraries, all of them key institutions for the
progress of research in Uruguay, for the 2011-2015.

4. ARGENTINA ADVANCES PROTECTION OF
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURES AND
DIGITAL PRESERVATION
From 2009 to 2011, the Under Secretariat of
Management Technologies in the National Cabinet of
Ministers has reinforced the Argentine participation in the
Meridian Process5, in order to establish the necessary
mechanisms to guarantee the protection of the
information´s critical infrastructures, as well as long term
preservation of digital information. This is particularly
relevant within the context of the governmental actions on
digital inclusion, such as Argentina Conectada and
Conectar Igualdad, which are providing the whole country
with optic fiber connections. As a consequence of this
work, the Ministers’ Cabinet created the National
Program of Protection of Critical Infrastructure of
Information and Cyber Security, by the Resolution JGM
N° 580/20116, within the National Bureau of Information
Technologies - ONTI.
Argentina has developed the ArCERT Program
(Coordination
of
Emergencies
in
Argentina’s
Teleinformatic Networks), while supporting Latin
American countries (México, Belize, Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panamá, República
Dominicana) which are developing policies for information
316

protection and preservation. Argentina is currently
encouraging the creation of a macro regional network for
to transfer and share information and knowledge on
information preservation policies, with the goal to
strengthen the public administrations’ information
systems.
The First International Congress for the Protection of
Critical Infrastructures7 took place in 14 March 2011, in
Buenos Aires. The Congress, which gathered argentine
and international experts, showed the Argentine
government and corporative sector´s interest in working
jointly to generate a conscience for the protection if the
critical and cyber security structures, as well as to
consolidate future actions, strategies, and policies. The
proposals for a policy on the preservation of digital
information stated that such policy should be coordinated
by the national governments, its design should include
representatives from the corporative sector, universities
and ‘memory guardian public equipment’, and it should
not be the work of isolated countries, but that public
strategies on these issue should have a macro regional
scope.

5. ARGENTINE INITIATIVES TOWARDS THE
DIGITAL PRESERVATION
A few examples in the universe of digital repositories
and libraries are being mentioned here. As a whole, 15
repositories have been identified in Argentina. In the
Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR, 2008),
Argentina is represented by three reservoirs: SciELO
Argentina (registered in 2000), Revista Cartapacio de
Derecho published by the Universidad Nacional del
Centro (registered in 2004), and the CLACSO Network of
Social Sciences Virtual Libraries of Latin America and the
Caribbean (registered in 2008). In the Directory of Open
Access Repositories (Open DOAR, 2008), Argentina is
represented by other three repositories: The Digital
Library for Identity, the Academic Memoir of the Faculty of
Humanities and Educational Siences of the National
University of La Plata, and the Service for the
Dissemination of Intellectual Creation, SeDiCI (registered
in 2008), also from the National University of La Plata.
It is worth mentioning the Project ECO-PORTAL
MERCOSUR (Institutional Repositories for the Academic
Intellectual patrimonies of the Faculty of Economic
Sciences, University of Cordoba), started in 2008. It
gathers the research works that were disseminated in the
Internet, and offers the academic community a tool to
publish their academic work.
Moreover, in the National Congress, in September
2011 took parliamentary state a law project regarding the
creation of institutional, open access digital repositories,
in which the public institutions and organisations
integrating the National Science, Technology and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Innovation (SNCTI), and funded by the National State,
must deposit the scientific and technological production
resulting from the work of their researchers, technologist,
post doctorate fellows, and postgraduate students.

6. CRITERIA FOR DIGITAL PRESERVATION
Preserving digital information means to decide which
information is to be preserved, and which has to be
discarded. Which are the criteria that will guide these
decisions? ‘Funes the Memorious’ (original Spanish title:
Funes el memorioso) is a short story by Argentine writer
Jorge Luis Borges, published in 1942. It tells the story of
Ireneo Funes, a poor, ignorant teenage boy who lives in
Fray Bentos, Uruguay, in 1884. Since a fall from a horse
that had left him crippled, Funes perceives everything in
full detail and remembers it all. He is incapable of platonic
ideas, of generalities, of abstraction; his world is one of
intolerably uncountable details. The fact that Funes
remembers absolutely everything, that his memory
occupies his brain, makes him incapable of
conceptualizing and generalizing. One of the issues of the
preservation of digital information is that if we lose our
memories, we lose our identities. But if we preserve all the
information, we will be invaded by it. The question, then, is
to decide which information is to be preserved at each
technological turning point, and which will be discarded.
Digital preservation is a complex problem. Here
talking about the set of processes and activities that
ensure continued access to information and all kinds of
records, scientific and cultural heritage existing in digital
formats, and for long periods of time is being talked. This
includes the preservation of materials resulting from
digital reformatting, but particularly information that is
born-digital and has no analog counterpart. In the
language of digital imaging and electronic resources,
preservation is no longer just the product of a program but
an ongoing process. In this regard the way digital
information is stored is important in ensuring its longevity.
The long-term storage of digital information is assisted by
the inclusion of preservation metadata.
Thibodeau11 states that probably, the only valid
prediction on the future of information technology is that it
will continue to change constantly. Every preservation
system conceived as a final solution, even if it seems to
solve all the problems of fragility and obsolescence of the
tools known until then, will become inevitably obsolete in
a relatively short period. This is why any decision about
digital preservation should include the capacity to
accommodate to fast technological changes, and to
incorporate the new products generated by information
technology. The only relatively durable factor in a digital
preservation solution is the adopted conceptual scheme:
the criteria and strategy that will be used.

preservation as an institutional responsibility, with multi
stakeholder participation, political support, and a firm
engagement from all the participant agents. According to
Serra and Serra10 , the definition of a preservation plan has
to find answers to the following questions:
(a) which information is to be preserved, and why?
(b) Where is it going to be preserved?
(c) Until when is this information going to be kept?
(d) How will it be possible to find it later?
(e) What actions are necessary to keep these materials
unaltered?
(f) Which measures have to be taken to avoid
obsolescence?
The Argentine National government´s strategy has
chosen to create and select digital collection with
duration according to its administrative and cultural
importance. Work is being developed to establish a welldefined preservation policy, establishing which
information is to be preserved, and though which norms
and procedures. This policy has to be periodically revised
and updated, to define the new technological supports, to
improve the preservation methods, and to redefine the
sets of object to be preserved. Since some information
packages or objects are more durable than others, these
periods of preservation should also be periodically
assessed and updated.
According to Bia & Sanchez1, the evaluation of
electronic documents and objects provides two main
advantages:
(a) It avoids costly migration methods for documents
meant for short term preservation. The identification of
such documents previously to taking decisions about
technical migration and recopying allows reducing
costs and technical difficulties.
(b) It allows advancing in the transference of the
electronic documents destined to long-term
preservation to historical archives, when the office or
department that produces them cannot assume the
costs of implementing a policy for digital preservation.
Governments should generate, implement and
coordinate the policies and strategies regarding digital
preservation, but it should be an open process that
includes multistakeholder participation. Other agents,
such as enterprises specialised in information
preservation, science and technology institutions,
universities, libraries, museums, technicians, and NGOs,
data storing centers, among others, should be able to
contribute their experiences, know-how, and opinions.

The Argentine digital preservation strategy conceives
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

317

7. CONCLUSIONS
It appears that South American countries have
advanced in digitalising their vital information, but public
policies and strategies for the medium and long-term
preservation of information are still to be designed and
implemented.
South American countries focus most of their
initiatives on the preservation of the cultural heritage and
assets through the digitalisation of paper-supported
documents. However, as mentioned before, digitalising
information, or digital storing, cannot be mistaken for
digital preservation. The dangers of losing vital information
rise not only with every technological evolution, but also
with political changes. Digitalising information does not
imply per se the preservation of knowledge. In order to
ensure this preservation it is necessary to implement
clear and unambiguous policies of long term digital
preservation, based on solid conceptual and
methodological approaches. These policies and
strategies should ensure the digitalised information’s
maintenance, visualisation, access, recuperation, and
use in a simple, user-friendly, consistent and reliable way.
The lack of such policies could generate unnecessary
waste of financial resources, and dubious results.
The region´s countries must take a leap to define new
policies and strategies in order to protect digital
information. These policies should include general –and
preferably regional-criteria regarding best practices of
digitalization and preservation, as well as alternatives and
solutions allowing access to the stored documents and
collections, since it is difficult to build capacities for digital
preservation in systems which were not designed
considering these requisites. In order to become ICT
‘model users’, governments should consider key aspects,
such as the systems maintenance, protection, long-term
conservation, and access to digital contents. South
American governments should also encourage research
on international best practices for the management and
preservation of digital information.
There is a basis of existing partial legislation and
policies, which can be used to draft a national long-term
preservation policy for South American digital materials.
The South American Government’s e-government policy
can be used as a point of departure, but needs to be
urgently updated with reference to the establishment of edepositories. Some academic institutions, particularly in
Brazil, Colombia, and Argentina, have well-established edepositories. There is a pressing need to work together in
regional institutions such as Mercosur and Unasur. A
national long-term digital preservation policy is needed for
South America with the purpose of enabling cooperation
between major stakeholders and to be discussed on the
political agendas of Government. Much debate is still
required on the following elements:
318

•

Ensure political security against loss, access denial
or falsification

•

Provide open, easy digital access (with the exception
of externally sensitive, legally protected data)

•

Use open, standard and non-proprietary formats;
make regular migration to current formats

•

Retain formal and semantic content of documents

•

Context retention: references and cross links to other
documents

•

Ongoing translation into appropriate specialist
language of the time

•

Rules for selection of sources (based on content,
expected impact, future users) regardless of type of
object, distribution or publication method, publishing
house, author category or document type.

Technological issues are not the most important.
Many experts believe that the main defy faced by
preservation is located in the institutional area (the design
and implementation of public policies), the economic area
(the adequate funding to develop such policies), and the
legal framework (clarifying intellectual property issues,
and defining who have the legitimate right to exploit and
access these digital contents).
Policies, research, planning, initiatives and
appropriate execution regarding the preservation of digital
information are still inadequate in South American
countries, therefore endangering massive amounts of
digital information, both for the short term and for future
generations. One of the main challenges regarding
strategies and policies is making South America
governments aware of the urgent need to include the
preservation of digital information in their National Digital
Agendas, as well as in regional policies, among other
goals, to register and preserve the diverse stages if the
public policies and strategies for building feasible
information ocieties. A relevant problem is that the
responsibility of the preservation of digital information is
uncoordinatedly distributed among diverse social agents.
Experts usually propose campaigns of sensitisation
and information of civil servants as a driving factor that will
determine a positive change of attitudes towards digital
preservation. It is generally believed that individuals and
public administrations do not generate actions regarding
the preservation of digital material because they are not
provided with the adequate information and that when they
receive this information, they will change their attitudes
and become proactive agents of the cause of long-term
digital preservations. This implies assuming a priori that
individuals and groups which are taught to identify and
acknowledge the relevance of digital preservation will
change their attitudes towards this issue, and will even
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

generate creative solutions and strategies. Nevertheless,
while the dissemination of information remains a valuable
tool, it is not enough, by itself, to generate behavioral
changes. Which factors do engender such necessary
changes in attitudes, policies, and strategies? We believe
that it is not enough to sensitise the public administration
using reasonable, politically correct arguments informing
about an obvious problem, that entrails present and future
dangers about collective memory and identities. The fact
that the loss of collective memory through the successive
losses due to the lack of policies, and of consequent and
consecutive losses at each technological turning point,
can be perceived by public administrations as a relevant
problem is based on the ethic foundations and principles
that the diverse types of social actors use to assess and
decide action priorities, in individual as well as in
collective ways.
This is a complex issue, in which individual and
collective behavioral patterns are clearly determinate by
institutional cultures and bureaucratic rules that frame,
and may encourage or inhibit each course of action. This
is the main reason why it becomes absolutely necessary
to integrate the issue of preservation of digital information
to South American National Digital Agendas, as well as to
generate an active debate at Unasur and Latin American
level.

•

Ensure that the digital materials kept as file
documents are adequately identified and are stable
and fix, in content as well as in their form

•

Guarantee that digital materials are classified in
logical aggregations

•

To use authentication techniques which promote the
maintenance and preservation of digital materials

•

Create and periodically update norms, legal
frameworks, and procedures for long term
preservation of digital materials, as well as to protect
digital materials from non-authorized interventions

•

Assess documents and digital materials to determine
the periods of their preservation.

•

Make campaigns to sensitise the population about
the value of digital preservation

•

Criteria used when it is decided to transfer documents
form paper or film to digital materials are valid only
within the context in which these criteria were
adopted. Prospective studies could help when
deciding which digital materials will be most useful for
future generations

•

Choice of the stocking technologies should be careful
and constantly updated, since there is no physical
device that can guarantee the perpetual life of the
digital contents

•

Intellectual property costs (copyright) in the
digitalisation processes are relevant when deciding
the policies and projects, and should be considered
when making the selection of the materials to be
preserved

•

It is necessary to elaborate legislative actions to
protect information resources; an option could be the
open knowledge licenses, such as Copyleft, Creative
Commons, among others, as well as to clearly
explicit the limitation for the use of digital contents

•

Quality is a significant element. It is necessary to
capture the best intellectual and visual contents, and
then to choose the forms to present these contents to
the users in the way that responds better to their
needs

•

Selected digital resources should be apt to work in
diverse types of informatics platforms.

•

Responsible agent is the State through its cultural
institutions such as: Secretaries of State, Ministry of
culture, national libraries, etc. The second
responsible agents should be the institution that
sponsors the development of universities, research
centers, libraries, etc. These organisations have to
emphasise that all digital development project is

These policies and strategies could consider the
following issues, among others:
•

Providing ample information, seminars, conferences,
virtual courses, and publications on international best
practices on the subject

•

Promote research about digital preservation

•

Enhance the importance of raising awareness about
digital preservation in South America to guarantee
availability in the future

•

Generate multistakeholder spaces for participation
and actions

•

Identify and empower the individuals and groups that
have generated positive changes in strategies and
actions regarding the preservation of digital

•

Facilitate the international mobility and learning
exchanges of public administration members
concerned with the preservation of digital materials

•

Creating multistakeholder agencies to make de
fundamental decisions about short, medium and long
term preservation of digital materials

•

Inform and sensitise the diverse social agents about
the importance of the preservation of digital materials

•

Engage the compromise and involvement of the
enterprises that deal with information preservation

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

319

accompanied by a digital preservation policy to
ensure the preservation of the institutional
developments.

REFERENCES
1. Quero, Manuel Sánchez & Platas, Alejandro Bia.
Desarrollo de una política de preservación digital:
tecnología, planificación y perseverancia. Biblioteca
Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, Universidad de Alicante,
Spain. 2002. ISBN 84-688-0205-0. pp. 41-50.
2. International Federation of Library Associations and
Institutions (IFLA). Guidelines for digitization projects
for collections and holdings in the public domain,
particularly those held by libraries and archives.
2002. http://www.ifla.org/VII/s19/pubs/digit-guide.pdf
3. Finquelievich,
Susana;
Rozengardt, Adrian;
Davidziuk, Alejandra & Finquelievich, Daniel. Public
policies for information society. A template. IFAP–
UNESCO, 2010. http://works.bepress.com/susana_
finq uelievich/3
4. Finquelievich, Susana; Brys, Carlos & Rodriguez,
Elida. Live Memory. Digital information preservation:
Proposals for Public Policies for South America, with
focus on Argentina. Paper presented at the
Conference on Preservation of Digital Information in
the Information Society, 3-5 October 2011, organised
by the Russian Chairmanship of the Intergovernmental Council, UNESCO Information for All
Programme, Moscow.
5. Fernandez Aballi, Isidro (Ed). Building national
information policies: Experiences in Latin America,
UNESCO. Information Society Division, Kingston,
2007. pp. 20-27. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/
0015/001528/152806m.pdf
6. Fyffe, Richard, et al. Preservation planning for digital
information. Final Report of HVC2 Digital Preservation
Task Force. University of Kansas, 2004.
7

Hedstrom, Margaret, et al. Invest to save. Report and
Recommendations of NSF-DELOS Working Group
on Digital Archiving and Preservation. National
Science Foundation & European Union, 2003.

8. IFAP Russian Committee, UNESCO: Moscow
Declaration on Digital Information Preservation
adopted by International Conference, organised in the
framework of Russian Chairmanship in UNESCO
Information for All Programme, Moscow, 13 October
2011. http://www.ifapcom.ru/en/news/1257
9. Russon, David. Access to information: Now and in the
future. Science for the XXI Century, Forum I: I.6
Sharing Scientific Knowledge, UNESCO, Budapest,
Hungary, 2004.
320

10. Serra Serra Jordi. Estrategias de preservación de
documentos electrónicos: el nacional archives and
records administration and el public record office.
Facultat de Biblioteconomia i Documentació,
Universitat de Barcelona. Actas de las V Jornadas de
Archivos Electrónicos. Archivo Municipal, Priego de
Córdoba, 2002.
11. Thibodeau, Kenneth. Building the archives of the
future: Advances in preserving electronic records at
the National Archives and Records Administration. DLib Magazine, February 2001, 7(2).
12. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO). Guidelines for the
preservation of digital heritage (Prepared by National
Library of Australia). 2003. http://unesdoc.une
sco.org/images/0013/001300/1300 71e.pdf
13. Voutssas, Juan. Digital preservation I Mexico: An
overview. In Encuentro de Mexicanistas, Belgium, 2022 September 2010.
14. Voutssas, Juan. Long-term digital information
preservation: Challenges in Latin America. Aslib
Proceedings, 2012, 64(1), 83-96.
About the Authors
Ms Susana Finquelievichis is an Architect, Master in
Urbanism at Université Paris VIII, France, and PhD in
Urban Sociology, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences
Sociales, France. She is Senior Researcher at the
National Council of Scientific and Technological Research
(CONICET, Argentina) with specialisation on Information
Society issues. She is Director of the Research Program
on Information Society, at Research Institute Gino
Germani, University of Buenos Aires and President of
LINKS, Civil Association for the Development of
information society. She has authored and co-authored 14
books on diverse aspects of information society. She is
Consultant to UNESCO, IDB, PNUD, etc.
Ms Elida Rodríguez is working at the National Institute
of Social Services for the Retired, PAMI, implementing
electronic government. She has worked as Director of
ONTI, Undersecretariat of Technologies of administration,
Secretariat of Gabinete and Public Administration,
Coordinator of the Multisectorial Group for the Design of
the Digital Agenda Argentina and the Design of the
Strategic Federal Plan of Electronic Government,
Consultant at the PNUD to evaluate the project
‘Promotion and Development of the Electronic
Government in Argentina’, Coordinator of the project
‘Model of Strategic Planification of Electronic Goverment’
Program Urb-al Ii, European Union. She is responsible of
the design and implementation of the Provincial Plan:
‘Towards the digital government’, Mendoza.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

