DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 327-334
© 2012, DESIDOC

Implementing Open Archival Information System Model for Digital
Preservation at Indian Institute of Geomagnetism
Smita Chandra* and Pratibha A.Gokhale**
*Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Kalamboli Panvel Highway, New Panvel, Navi Mumbai-410 218
E-mail: smitac@iigs.iigm.res.in
**DLIS, Jawaharlal Nehru Library, University of Mumbai, Vidyanagari, Santacruz(E), Mumbai-400 098
E-mail: pratibha_gokhale@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
The Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference model ensures that an organisation charged with
the task of preserving information (here, digital information) makes it accessible to the designated community
in the long-term. It elucidates the functions and processes so as to promote interoperability amongst digital
libraries, archives and other institutions and provides a framework for describing and comparing different
long-term digital preservation strategies and techniques. This paper discusses what it means to be OAIS
compliant for the pilot institutional repository at the Indian Institute of Geomagnetism (IIG). It maps the six entities
of an OAIS-compliant repository (Ingest, archival storage, administration, data management, preservation
planning and access) onto a pilot institutional repository (IR) structure of the IIG. It discusses the policies and
procedures required for effective OAIS implementation within the IIG institutional repository and ways to
effectively develop these based on experiences from abroad. The paper further assesses how the institute’s
operational structure can be informed by the OAIS and vice versa. It establishes the role of the preservation
service provider for the IIG IR, and explores the potential for interaction between IIG and such service providers.It
identifies the rights and responsibilities, services and actions, and apportions these between the IR and the
third-party preservation repository service. It identifies the tools and develops the processes to implement
the preservation services and actions. It is expected that this study can be of use to other organisations that
might want to undertake implementation of the OAIS reference model.
Keywords: Open archival information system, digital preservation, institutional repository

1. INTRODUCTION
The Open Archival Information System (OAIS)
reference model ensures that an organisation charged
with the task of preserving information (here, digital
information) makes it accessible to the designated
community in the long term. It elucidates the functions
and processes so as to promote interoperability amongst
digital libraries, archives and other institutions and
provides a framework for describing and comparing
different long-term digital preservation strategies and
techniquesby including terminology and concepts, for
describing and comparing architectures and operations of
existing and future archives1.
The reference model addresses a full range of archival
information preservation functions including ingest,
archival storage, data management, access, preservation
Received 1 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

planning, and dissemination. It also addresses the
migration of digital information to new media and forms,
the data models used to represent the information, the
role of software in information preservation, and the
exchange of digital information among archives. It
identifies both internal and external interfaces to the
archive functions, and identifies a number of high-level
services at these interfaces. It provides various illustrative
examples and some ‘best practice’ recommendations. It
defines a minimal set of responsibilities for an archive to
be called an OAIS, and it also defines a maximal archive
to provide a broad set of useful terms and concepts.
With this brief view of the OAIS reference model, this
article aims to theoretically verify the argument that the
pilot institutional repository (IR) at IIG complies with the
OAIS reference model, by mapping the mandatory
responsibilities and the OAIS functional entities onto the
327

services and architecture of the pilot repository. It
assesses how the institute’s operational structure can be
informed by the OAIS and vice versa, and establishes the
role of the preservation service provider for the IIG IR, and
explores the potential for interaction between IIG and
such service providers.

2. OAIS COMPLIANCE
The term ‘OAIS-compliant’ is a common term used in
reference to a digital archiving system. The OAIS
standard states that an OAIS-compliant digital archive
implementation supports the OAIS information model
and/or the OAIS functional model (OAIS Chapter 2.2)1. It
is also committed to fulfilling the responsibilities listed in
chapter 3.1 of the reference model, as also described in
chapter 2, section on ‘OAIS mandatory responsibilities’.
The reference model finally notes that the standards and
other documentation that purport to conform to the OAIS
reference model must incorporate relevant OAIS
terminology and concepts, applied according to the
interpretation and context defined in the reference model.
As noted by Lavoie2, the OAIS standard does not,
however, assume or endorse any specific computing
platform, system environment, system design paradigm,
system
development
methodology,
database
management system, database design paradigm, data
definition language, command language, system
interface, user interface, technology or media required for
implementation. The CCSDS reference model for an OAIS
system provides a theoretical framework for developing
and maintaining a strategy to ensure long-term
preservation of objects within a digital repository. As such
the OAIS reference model gives archives a conceptual
flexibility. Such a framework therefore often results in
ambiguity because the reference model is a conceptual
framework rather than a concrete implementation and
thus proves to be difficult over how the digital preservation
community can endorse the certification of a digital
repository as being ‘OAIS compliant’. Conformance to the
reference model can imply an explicit application of the
OAIS concepts, terminology, and the functional and
information models in the course of developing a digital
repository system architecture and data model, but it can
also mean that the OAIS concepts and models are
‘recoverable’ from the implementation; in other words, it is
possible to map the various components in the archival
system to the corresponding features of the reference
model. To test the OAIS compliance, the first step was to
have an IR developed to satisfy the same, therefore, the
pilot repository for IIG was developed.

3. PILOT INSTITUTIONAL REPOSITORY FOR
IIG
It was decided by the members of the library
committee to have a pilot IR for IIG, as running a pilot
study would help to:
328

•

Identify the hardware and software requirements

•

Identify the skills and expertise available or that
needs to be developed amongst the staff

•

know ways of organising the content

•

establish the service model for IR that addresses
digital preservation

DSpace was chosen as the IR software for IIG for a
number of reasons:
(a) DSpace open source platform is available for free to
anyone and can be downloaded.
(b) It allows any organisation or individual to use, modify,
and even integrate the code into their commercial
application without paying any licensing fees.
(c) DSpace is deeply informed by the OAIS reference
model3.
(d) Where possible, DSpace has adopted the OAIS
model and vocabulary to articulate DSpace design
objectives and terminology.
(e) DSpace platform provides the tools for the IIG
institutional repository to administer digital
preservation within the archive, as well as to accept
submissions from producers and allow access
appropriately to the IIG communities.
A survey of literature led to the decision that as IIG
takes responsibility for managing its digital collections
through its IR (here, a pilot study), collaborative long-term
digital preservation and access strategies would be
advantageous. Collaboration between institutions is
essential, and this collaboration requires both
organisational and technical investments. Not only a precoordinated technological solution, but also strong, longterm inter-institutional agreements must be put in place,
or there will be insufficient commitment to act in concert
over time.

4. DISTRIBUTED DIGITAL PRESERVATION
SERVICE
The OAIS reference model provides a framework in
which preservation services in terms of IR can be
constructed. At a very general level, it can be seen that IR
provide a similar range of functionality as found in OAISinput and output, data management, and storage. The
OAIS imposes more formality and discipline on these
processes for the purpose of long-term preservation.
Thus, deposit becomes, ingest, and are concerned with
archival storage, all enveloped by preservation planning,
administrative and management roles. Hitchcock4
proposes the following three models for digital
preservation that provides IRs the flexibility in managing
preservation risks.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

•

Preservation Service provider model (service provider
is OAIS)

•

Institutional model (institution is OAIS), here an
institution may incorporate more than repository

•

Software model (repository is OAIS), preservation
features are built into the IR software.

This categorisation established the need for a
disaggregated or distributed digital preservation service.
Preservation service is the generic term used to describe
third-party institutions responsible for active preservation.
The preservation service should possess relevant
knowledge and capacity to convert the disaggregated
model into a practical implementation. It is primarily
responsible for the construction and maintenance of the
archival version of the e-print and the creation of
supplemental metadata. The words ‘disaggregated’ and
‘distributed’ are synonymous when referred to in terms of
third-party preservation service provider. Guide to
Distributed Digital Preservation5 defines distributed digital
preservation service as ‘the distribution, management,
and maintenance of digital information over a wide
geographical area and over a long period of time—
maintaining its viability, authenticity, and accessibility
across changing technologies, formats, and user
expectations’.
The role of the preservation service provider model
was identified for the IR for IIG due to the following
reasons:
(a) The range of services offered by the third-party
distributed preservation service provider is greater and
more flexible than the institutional or the software
model of OAIS for digital preservation.
(b) Distribution ensures more security, as content is
distributed to locations over time.
(c) In the service provider model, the IR could be OAIS
compliant, but it need not necessarily be if the service
provider delivers that compliance.
(d) Compliance to OAIS standards needs technical
expertise for various procedures, like for mappings
various metadata schema like METS object model
onto the DSpace object model or for monitoring
technology which is a part of the preservation planning
entity in the OAIS model. This requires a certain level
of technical expertise and familiarity with
programming languages, that staff handling the IIG
lack. Such a lack of expertise could be compensated
for such third-party distributed preservation services.
(e) Costs associated if any with this model of digital
preservation would be affordable, as it is perceived
that such a model allows a cooperative approach
amongst a range of existing institutions to build up
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

their capacity to ensure the viability of data over long
period. This would allow costs to be sunk or shared
amongst the cooperatives.
(f)

Such an effort would result in the standardisation of
preservation practices across multiple repositories.

(g) It would also help in the reduction of possible
duplication of effort by different repositories.
To implement the distributed model, the IR and the
third-party preservation service provider must clarify the
terms of their agreement. Just like the SHERPA-DP6, it is
envisaged that the following three parties will perform
specific functions within the disaggregated model:

•

Institutional Repository of IIG--This is the institutional
archive responsible for managing the ingest process
and provide access to digital content.

•

Preservation Service--An external organisation
allocated to implement the technical infrastructure
and preserve digital content in the long-term.

•

Repository Advisory Board--A group, composed of
advisors from different organisations that will provide
advice and recommendations to the preservation
service.

5. MAPPING OAIS CONFORMANCE
Having established the reasons for choosing
distributed digital preservation service for the IIG pilot IR,
specifications for compliance by the IIG IR and the thirdparty distributed preservation service provider was studied
in detail, such that the IR of IIG can be entirety regarded
as an OAIS. The SHERPA-OAIS model was modified to
suit the requirements at hand. The preservation service, to
be provided by the third-parties is best viewed as a
combination of certain aspects of the OAIS ingest and
archival store functions (Fig. 1).
At a high-level, the progress of an information
package within the distributed OAIS model will consist of
six broad stages:
(1) The depositor (OAIS producer) submits a submission
information package (SIP), consisting of an e-print
and associated metadata to the institutional archive.
(2) Repository staff refines the resource discovery
metadata that accompanies the e-print, as defined by
internal archive specifications.
(3) On a pre-determined schedule, the updated SIP is
transmitted to the preservation service, the
preservation service updates the SIP according to the
specification provided by the IR of IIG.
(4) Preservation service also generates an archival
information package (AIP) intended for preservation.
329

Figure 1. Adapted from the SHERPA-DP OAIS compliant model.7

(5) AIP is stored within the Archival Store at the thirdparty distributed preservation service and an
appropriate backup strategy is implemented.
(6) IR of IIG generates a dissemination version intended
for use by the OAIS designated community and make
it available via their search catalogue. A user is able to
request and download a copy of the dissemination
information package.
The conformance of IR of IIG to the OAIS reference
model will result in the implementation of each of the six
OAIS functional entities in one form or another, in the
course of developing is archival system.

5.1 Mapping OAIS Mandatory Responsibilities
The following mandatory responsibilities are listed by
the OAIS. Details of the compliance to these
requirements by IIG are.
(a) Negotiates for and accepts information from
producers: The IIG library collects e-resources based
on the digital collection development policy. The
depositors are required to read the submission
guidelines, which contains information about the type
of materials to be deposited, who can deposit it, the
supported file formats, the metadata policy, the take
down policy, etc. Further, data depositors complete
and sign a Deposit Form, which elicits information
about the intellectual characteristics of the collection
being deposited. The Copyright information of major
330

publishers for the collections at IIG, gives further
assurance that confidential information has been
removed and that the proper approvals have been
sought and granted.
(b) Obtains sufficient control for preservation: The
Submission or Deposit Form asks the depositor to
attest to the fact that he or she has copyright to the
collection being deposited and thus has the authority
to grant approval to the institute to redistribute the
data. This form also obtains permission for the
institute to migrate or transfer content for preservation
purposes, as also to catalogue, enhance, validate and
document the data collection. The IIG will make sure
that the agreement with other organisations or
external parties ensures that it does not have to
preserve all the common representation information
related to its content information objects.
(c) Determines designated consumer community: The
library continuously assesses its current and
potential user community. Feedback of staff,
scientists and students is continuously taken face-toface, on their experiences with the library, the
collection housed within it and their expectations.
(d) Ensures
information
is
independently
understandable: The staff and scientists of IIG will
evaluate each data collection to determine what kinds
of explanatory or descriptive information need to be
provided to use the data most effectively. The institute
has the technical expertise to provide support to
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

users of the data and it should avail this support.
Acknowledging the fact that no file format or physical
storage media lasts forever, the IR at IIG to collect
data in open and standardised file formats and would
follow data migration and media refreshment
strategies. All these are reflected in the Digital
Preservation Policy developed for this purpose.
(e) Follows established policies and procedures: The
digital preservation policy document has been
scrutinised by the scientists of the Institute. The
Institute will monitor its digital preservation policy as
necessary to account for technological shifts,
changes in perceived best practice and the nature of
IIG library holdings.
(f)

Make information available: The IIG will provide the
designated community with access to its information
and data holdings via the IR website. Restricted data
will be made available through separate means or a
policy decision can be taken to have tighter access
constraints and made available for analysis only onsite. The goal is to provide access, even when there
are stringent constraints on information use. IIG has
no formalised policy on dissemination of its holdings.
The access policy illustrated in its collection
development’ policy and illustrates basic access
mechanisms employed by the IIG library, these can
be further elaborated for the IR for IIG.

5.2 Mapping OAIS Functional Entities
The OAIS functional model comprises of functional
entities which form a collection of six high-level services
that fulfill the OAIS’s dual role of preserving and providing
access to the information in its custody. The conformance
of IR of IIG to the OAIS reference model will result in the
implementation of each of the six services or functional
entities in one form or another, in the course of developing
is archival system.

5.2.1 Ingest
The IIG Ingest procedure are drawn on the lines of the
AHDS Archive Ingest Procedures Framework8 and the
Tufts and Yale Ingest Guide for University Electronic
Records9. It is based on the presumption that a producer
will create, acquire, organise and manage records in a
recordkeeping system. Here the IR of IIG will ingest some
of those records into a separate preservation system that
a neutral third party administers. Following are the steps
followed for ingest by the IIG institutional repository.

how the archive will execute transfer, validation, and
transformation of these records.
To begin with the repository or the information
producer get into contact with the other. Information about
the information producer is collected and documented.
The repository and the producer come to an agreement
regarding which records the repository will consider for
accession. This step also determines if the producer has
proper custody of the records under consideration. The
administrative module of DSpace is responsible for
identity management here, along with this IIG would
maintain an activity log of all contacts made and each
step followed.
Once the repository has confirmed it is working with
the proper custodian, it will conduct a survey of the
records to assess their continued value and authenticity.
Such an authenticity check confirms whether the records
intellectually belong in the repository, asking if it should
accession the records. The repository then appraises the
formats of the records that it should accession into the
third party preservation system and determines if any of
these records are in formats that are not one of the
formats that the preservation system supports. The
repository then determines if it will:
(a) Transform the records into one of the existing
preservation formats, and
(b) Transform the records into a new preservation format.
The copyright status of the records is determined to
see if it already has the copyright of the records, or needs
to obtain the copyrights agreement for the records in an
ingest. After this the repository determines if the active
recordkeeping system, DSpace, managing the records in
the ingest allows, or is capable of enabling, a trustworthy
transfer of records to the third-party preservation system
or archive in a feasible, scaleable manner. Measures to
enable a trustworthy transfer may range from building
special tools to undertaking a software re-engineering
project. Even if the records are authentic and are stored in
acceptable record types and formats, and even if there are
no problems with copyrights, or access rights, it may still
simply be too difficult or expensive to facilitate a
trustworthy transfer from DSpace to the third-party
recordkeeping system.

Section A: Negotiate Submission Agreement

The repository excludes from ingest the records that it
and the producer cannot or are not willing to make the
effort to transfer to the third-party preservation repository
in a trustworthy manner. All these are noted and/or
accordingly modifiedin the Survey Report of records.

This stage describes the actions needed by the
producer and the repository to generate a Submission
Agreement. This agreement defines the nature and scope
of the records to transfer to the preservation system and

The repository then assesses itself if it can
accession, manage, and preserve the records it should
accession in the third-party preservation system, either
on it own, or with help from the producer, allow the third-

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

331

party preservation services to do so on its own. This
assessment is based on the information collected in the
survey report. The repository must determine if its
existing resources for preservation formats, record types,
creator records, security procedures, and system
capabilities meets the needs of preservation of the various
records deemed for preservation. It then determines if it
should modify or add to its resources to meet those
assessments or if it should reject or modify the scope of
the records involved in the ingest process. The repository
then with the help of the third-party preservation service
provider adds description of Metadata Encoding Rules,
Transfer Procedures and Schedules, and Validation
Procedures to the Submission Agreement. Then the
repository and producer work on finalising the Submission
Agreement, until they both agree to endorse it. Figure 2
below encapsulates the complete process of negotiating
a submission agreement.
Section B: Transfer and Validation
This section describes the actions needed for the
repository and the producer to deposit records into a thirdparty preservation system. The producer creates a SIP of
the records submitted to the repository, with the help of
the third-party preservation service provider according to
the terms of the Submission Agreement. The producer will
then transfer the SIP to the repository.
Validation is a quality control check to ensure
minimum standards on the objects being entered into the
digital archive. The minimum standards for the IIG digital
archive are:

•
•
•
•
•

All expected objects are present
SIP encapsulation is correct
All of the mandatory metadata is present
Content is in an approved long-term preservation
format
Objects are not infected with viruses.

During this part, the repository validates the SIP and
its record components received from the producer. The
repository checks that the SIP and its components are
well-formed and whether they contain viruses. It also
validates that the producer was authorised to transfer the
SIP. If the SIP fails any of these validations, the repository
rejects the SIP and notifies the producer to generate
another SIP. The repository then attaches to the records
metadata it can automatically infer from the Submission
Agreement. The third-party preservation service provider
turns the records involved in an ingest into AIP according
to the rules and procedures specified by the Submission
Agreement of the IR of IIG. The third-party preservation
service provider conducts a final appraisal of the records
involved in ingest. It ensures that the records in the newly
formed AIPs have the proper metadata associated with
332

them. If the AIP does not contain the correct records, the
repository rejects the records and notifies the producer to
generate a new SIP for the affected records. If the records
in the AIP do not have the proper metadata, the archive
makes sure the metadata is enriched by the third party.
The third-party preservation service provider deposits the
AIPs it has formulated during ingest into its preservation
system. Then it formally notifies the producer that it has
accepted and accessioned the records the producer
transferred to the repository in a SIP or SIPs. This is the
moment of formal transfer from the repository to the thirdparty preservation service provider.

5.2.2

Archival Storage

The IIG third-party preservation service provider will
undertake the complete responsibility of archival storage
of the AIPs including providing the specified hardware as
the main preservation file system, appropriate storage
capacity and drivers. It is IIG third-party preservation
service provider’s responsibility to ascertain error
checking, disaster prevention and a range of backup and
recovery measures to such a preservation system. It is
advisable for the IIG third-party preservation service
provider to have a Disaster Recovery Planning Guide. The
IIG will rely on advanced technology from its preservation
service provider for storage management and media
checking regime, but will also use a policy of multiple
copies of every AIP to reduce the risk of data loss.

5.2.3

Data Management

Metadata management is carried out within the
DSpace software itself. Basic information about each SIP
is captured at Ingest within DSpace, that also has the
facility to enhance extremely detailed metadata,
outputting the results as standard XML files. Any paper
documents relating to a SIP will be digitised and attached
to the AIP. Reports from the DSpace can be generated to
show what records have been accessioned, their status,
the XML metadata for each record, etc. More specific
reports can be hand-crafted through direct SQL queries
and scripts to read the XML.

5.2.4

Administration

The Institute will appoint and delegate responsibility
for the service administration that would take care of the
strategic, financial and personal elements of the
organisation. While the administration function can be
clearly vested in the Director, who will maintain direct
financial control, the specific functions can be spread
across the organisation. Submissions to the IR of IIG can
be reviewed and approved by the committee that will be
scheduled to meet fortnightly and review all new
acquisitions or submissions that have been received in
the period since the last meeting. When need arises
expertise can be sought from the relevant subject
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Negotiate
Submission
Agreement

Step 1. Establish relationship

Step 2 : Define project

Step 3 : Collect information
about records

Step 4 : Assess

Step 5 : Assess copyright

Step 6 : Assess third-party recordkeeping system

Step 7 : Assess

Step 8 : F inalise submission
agreement
Figure 2. Negotiating a submission agreement.

experts. The appointed committee will develop all the
management policies and issues that relate to the
acquisition function of the archive. As a matter of
principle, the IIG Institutional Repository can aim to apply
open standards. A work plan will be created for each
‘accepted’ submission specifying that:

Submission Agreement, which will be handled by the
library acquisitions staff. This section will work closely
with data depositors to provide guidance and advice with
regards to data creation and deposit

•
•

The third-party distributed preservation service
provider must monitor and take help of the international
community on the preservation of digital objects. The
preservation service will monitor technical developments
in the digital preservation community in file format
characterisation, automated risk assessment, and
migration as a mode of format preservation. The
preservation service provider will monitor the status of
formats for which instances exist in the archive. The IIG
third-party preservation service provider will develop,
review and implement various preservation strategies that
best suits the institute.

All files will be preserved in their original format
All files will be converted to the appropriate
preservation format, if necessary

•

Additional data formats or versions in which the data
and documentation will be made available

•
•

Composition of the user guide for each resource
Level of validation, cataloguing and indexing, and
additional documentation that needs to be created, if
any.
At the submission stage, there will be formally signed

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

5.2.5 Preservation Planning

333

5.2.6

Access

The management of IIG’s DSpace catalogue will be
done by the library staff engaged in archiving, who will be
responsible for structure and quality control. Catalogue
records are created during ingest processing, when the
main metadata record is generated. Fundamental
authorisation takes place via the DSpace software that
grants permission to access the resource or not.

6. CONCLUSIONS
Thus, the compliance testing of the pilot IIG
institutional repository against the OAIS mandatory
responsibilities results in a good match of expectations of
the institute. It resulted in the development of a regulatory
framework to ensure long-term preservation of digital
objects within the IR of IIG. It successfully identified the
need and role for a third-party third-party distributed
preservation service. The various policies, guidelines and
agreements developed during the course of the study, like
the collection development policy, the submission
agreement and the submission guidelines, etc., when
exercised would result in a strong control over the
producers of material that is handed over to the archive.
The OAIS model frequently points to the strong link
between the user community and the way the material in
an archive should be described and preserved. To this end
with limited user groups, data contained in the
institutional repository will not be subject to many uses.
The IR of IIG has an identifiable and relatively
homogeneous user community. The collection within the
IR of IIG will not be large enough to solicit different
preservation strategies. The designated community
concept assumes an identifiable and relatively
homogeneous user community, which is supported by the
limited user group of the IR of IIG.
Amongst operating archives, mapping OAIS
conformance reveals the biggest discrepancy often to be
the understanding of the producer and the designated
consumer community. While in an ideal world the archive
would exercise strong control over the producers of
materials that is handed over to the archive-digital
preservation is said to begin with the creation of the object
that is to be preserved and archival requirements should
be considered at the time of creation of a digital object. An
in situ digital repository like the pilot institutional

334

repository of IIG endowed with the responsibility of
conformance to the OAIS would address this issue right
at the stage of creation of the digital object.

REFERENCES
1. Reference model for an open archival information
system (OAIS). CCSDS 650.0-B-1, Blue Book,
January 2002. http://public.ccsds.org/publications/
archive/650x0b1.pdf
2. Lavoie, Brian F. The open archival information system
reference model: Introductory guide. 2004. http://
www.dpconline.org/docs/lavoie_OAIS.pdf
3. Tansley, Rovert; Bass, Mick & Smith, MacKenzie.
DSpace as an open archival information system:
Current status and future directions. In ECDL 2003,
LNCS 2769, edited by T. Koch & I.T. Solvberg.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003, pp.446-60.
4. Hitchcock, Steve; Brody, Tim; Hey, Jessie M.N. &
Carr, Leslie. Digital preservation service provider
models for institutional repositories: Towards
distributed services. D-Lib Magazine, 2007, 13(5/6),
h t t p : / / w w w. d l i b . o r g / d l i b / m a y 0 7 / h i t c h c o c k /
05hitchcock.html
5. Skinner, Katherine & Schultz, Matt. A guide to
distributed digital preservation. 2010. http://
www.metaarchive.org/sites/default/files/GDDP_Edu
copia.pdf
6. Sherpa-DP. http://www.sherpadp.org.uk/
7. Knight, Gareth. Sherpa-DP OAIS Report: An OAIS
compliant model for disaggregated services. 2005.
http://www.sherpadp.org.uk/documents/sherpa-dpoais-report.pdf
8. Ruusalepp, Taivo. AHDS archive ingest procedures
framework,
2003.
http://www.ahds.ac.uk/
preservation/ingest-procedures-review.pdf
9. Tufts and Yale Ingest Guide for University Electronic
Records. Fedora and Preservation of University
Electronic Records: 2.1 Ingest Guide. 2006.
10. http://dca.lib.tufts.edu/features/nhprc/reports/ingest/
index.html

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

