DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 335-338
© 2012, DESIDOC

SpaceGL: An Indian Portal for Space Science Grey Literature
Md Nurul Alam*, Pragya Pandey*, and Chaitali Dutta**
Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad-380 009
E-mail: alam@prl.res.in; praggyap@prl.res.in
**West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, Kolkata-700 091
E-mail: contactcdhere@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
This paper aims to present an experimental prototype model developed using DSpace for the design of
a web portal which provides access to space science grey literature. Grey literature is that which is not
readily available as other information and which is difficult to identify and access. The system is based on
open source software (Java SDK, Apache, Tomcat, Apache Ant, PostgreSQL, and Dspace). SpaceGL is an
important and ground-breaking example of an alternative method of delivering current research results to many
potential users. It can act as a central hub which collects and disseminates space science grey literature
produced in India through a single user interface. It can also be a showcase which provides continuously
updated information on space science-related projects, initiatives, and events etc. produced in India. This
experience shows that development of institutional repository system (SpaceGL) resting on open source
software, framework and application program interfaces could lead to impressive results, in a short amount
of time and with minimum of investment. In spite of being a prototype model, the SpaceGL aims to benefit from
nation wide exposure on full-fledged development.
Keywords: SpaceGL, Dspace, space science, portal, digital library, electronic archive, grey literature

1. INTRODUCTION

2. BACKGROUND

Grey literature is generally considered as an
important source of up-to-date scientific findings by many
authorities. At the same time it is relatively difficult to
locate and even more difficult to access. Thus, it may be
supposed that all bodies funding research and
development should eagerly support tools increasing the
accessibility of grey literature to reduce the probability of
‘reinventing the wheel’ and to improve the efficiency of
invested public assets. A range of important types of grey
literature has no legislative support and, thus, their
accessibility is only dependent on the willingness of
individual institutions and their awareness of the utility of
cooperation among institutions1. Scientists and
researchers find information hidden in the form of grey
literature quite useful, but this information is neither easily
available nor easy to identify or access, keeping this
aspect in view a conceptual prototype model using
DSpace software has been developed for the design of a
web portal of space science grey literature in India. This
paper enlightens the model with its potential services and
features.

The emergence of digital collections and the
increasing amount of digital grey literature challenges the
library’s ability to consistently collect information using
our traditional tests and tools. Some of the standard
criteria of authority and relevance to the institution’s
mission remain critical. Other standards such as
longevity and access are more problematic to apply. One
challenge is the lack of consensus among librarians on a
definition of grey literature. Another is the failure of
collection policies to adequately address grey literature,
especially in the light of digital environment. Addressing
both challenges is essential to move forward with
collecting digital grey literature in a coherent fashion
within the institution2.

Received 01 June 2012, online published 18 July 2012

3. OBJECTIVES
•

To ensure long term preservation of space science
grey literature

•

To make space science grey literature easily
accessible
335

•

To allow space science community to locate
information
about
conference
proceedings,
workshops, talks, presentations, etc.

Grey literatures can be archived by the submitters
(faculties, student, etc.) from any where and any time
against password authentication

•

All types of grey literature can be archived at one
place in SpaceGL (Fig. 1)

•

To create central database of space science grey
literature

•

Supports interactive integration of grey literature from
multiple sources

•

To develop a mechanism for electronic distribution of
grey literature

•

Allows user to locate grey literature through a single
user interface

•

To serve as a finding aid for key information pertaining
to the space science

•

•

To develop a digital library of space science grey
literature

Provides services to support the submission,
description,
searching,
browsing,
access,
preservation and visualisation of these documents

•

To create a nonprofit service in the interests of space
science community

•

To provide value added service to the space science
community

•

4. SCOPE
SpaceGL: An Indian portal for space science grey
literature, is a prototype conceptual model for the design
of a web portal which provides access to space science
grey literature. It is hoped that model acts as a central
hub for holding records of space science grey literature
from all geographic regions in India.

4.1 SpaceGL on Dspace
Dspace is digital asset management software jointly
developed by Hewlett-Packard and MIT Libraries, and it is
arguably one of the appreciated open source software
deployed worldwide for building digital institutional
repositories that captures, stores, indexes, preserves,
and redistributes content in digital formats. DSpace
provides the institutions and universities operate an open
access and interoperable institutional repository at the
local level. It is also intended to serve as a repository back
up for future development to address long-term
preservation and remote/online access issues. The
system was launched during late 2002 as a live service
hosted by MIT Libraries, and the source code made
publicly available according to the terms of the BSD open
source license, with the intention of encouraging the
formation of an open source community around Dspace3 .

4.2 Features of SpaceGL
SpaceGL is a prototype model to to provide uniform
access to grey literatures (conferences, symposiums,
talks, etc.), providing continuously updated information on
space science related projects, initiatives and events,
etc., going on and documented in India. The important
features of SpaceGL are:

•

Can be accessed from intranet and internet

•

Supports online registration of remote and local user

336

4.3 Functions of SpaceGL
There are three web-user interfaces in SpaceGL:
Collection and user Management, Submission interface,
and Search and Browse. All documents and material on
SpaceGL are organised in collections. Collections can be
organized in trees, which can be created for different
types of grey literature like Conference papers, Seminar
etc. SpaceGL Team Manager is responsible for the local
customisation of the system and administration of users,
i.e. he/she can register users and assign specific rights to
them. Responsibilities and user roles are defined on the
collection level.
Documents are entered via a step-by-step process or
single form submission interface which guides depositors
through the process and offers extensive documentation
of metadata fields in the help texts. Files can also be
uploaded with structured metadata. The different user
roles have different interfaces and visibility of
administrative metadata depends on the level of rights in
the system.
Different types of space science grey literature, i.e.,
colloquiums, symposiums, talks, conference papers,
seminars, etc. are provided, as shown in the collections
and communities page in Fig. 2.
The third interface allows user to search and browse
either on a general subject level or on a specific one.
There are three types of searches available, quick search,
‘full-text search’ and ‘advanced search’ which allows a
combination of various different search terms to exploit
the full potential of the underlying metadata model
(Fig. 3).
The main entry point for getting an overview on records
deposited on SpaceGL is by browsing through collections
or by browsing through the alphabetic lists of authors.
One can browse by date, subject, author or scientific
domain, while the search is operating on titles, authors,
sponsors,
subjects,
handles
and
abstracts.
(Figs. 4-6).
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Figure 1. Home page of SpaceGL.

Figure 4. Browsing interface by title.

Figure 2. Collections and communities.

Figure 5. Browsing interface by author.

Figure 3. Advanced search.

Figure 6. Browsing interface by subject.

5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
As grey literature carries valuable information which is
a vital component of growth of scientific knowledge,
particularly in developing countries like India, the Portal
would act as a central hub for preservation, organisation
and dissemination of space science grey literature.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

It has been devised to provide expeditious access to
grey literatures in various fields of space science and has
been tailored keeping in view the information needs of
space science community. In future on comprehensive
development it would act as a distributed knowledge
discovery tool for space science community to enhance
their research productivity. With a multilingual user
337

interface it aims at improving the global visibility and
accessibility of Indian grey literature.

REFERENCES
1. Vaska, et al. Grey literature repositories. 2010. http:/
/nrgl.techlib.cz/images/Book.pdf (accessed on 21
August 2011)
2. Lehman, Heather & Webster, J. Describing grey
literature again: A survey of collection policies. http://
www.greynet.org/images/GL6_Page_136.pdf
(accessed on 16 June 2011).
3. Shreekumar, et al. Institutional repositories for
knowledge management in academic and research
institutions. 2007. http://drtc.isibang.ac.in:8080/
bitstream/handle/1849/404/Sreekumar,%20MG.p
df?sequence=1 ( accessed on 16 June 2011).
About the Authors
Md Nurul Alam obtained his post graduate degrees in
Library & Information Science from Jadavpur University,
Kolkata and in Computer Science from Sikkim Manipal
University. He has worked with Electronic Media Library

338

and Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur and is
presently employed in Physical Research Laboratory,
Department of Space. His areas of interest are:
Development of application-based products using open
source software technologies and creation of digital
repositories. He has published several papers in Indian
and International journals.
Ms Pragya Pandey obtained her post graduate degree in
Library & Information Science and a diploma in Library
Automation and Networking. Presently, she is employed
at Physical Research Laboratory, Department of Space.
She has an interest in creating tools for easy access to
information She has presented 5 papers in conferences
and 3 in journals.
Dr Chaitali Dutta is currently the President of West
Bengal Board of Secondary Education, India. She holds
PhD in LIS from University of Calcutta. She has a
teaching experience of 21 years. She was a Associate
Professor and HOD of the Dept of LIS in Jadavpur
University, Kolkata. Prior to that she worked in the
Research Library of Jute Technological Research
Laboratories, ICAR, Kolkata for 18 years. She has 30
papers to her credit and has guided 10 PhD scholars of
which 6 have already been awarded the degree.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

