DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 339-346
© 2012, DESIDOC

Selected Free E-Journals in Library and Information Science
in Directory of Open Access Journals
Kaushal Chauhan
Berhampur University, Berhampur-760 007
E-mail: chauhan_khushi@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
Purpose of this study is to evaluate open access e-journals in LIS available on Directory of Open Access
Journals (DOAJ). The DOAJ provides access to quality controlled Open access journals. DOAJ is an effective
source of information for the present day. There is no alternative and substitute to its abundance, utility, and
value. This paper is an effort to guide students, researchers, scholars about free, full-text, quality-controlled
scientific and scholarly journals in Library and information science available on DOAJ.
Keywords: E-resources, e-journals, free e-resources, free e-journals

1. INTRODUCTION
The world wide web has propelled this vigorous growth
of not fit in to the traditional publishing format with the
coming of the age of the e-resources, the way scholarly
communication is disseminated throughout the world has
totally altered. Free online information sources and
services can be accessed on internet without paying any
subscription charges to the publishers and the users do
not need to have any membership in the organisation.
Electronic journals are also known as e-journals, eserials, and scholarly journals or intellectual magazines
that can be accessed via electronic transmission1.
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) aims to be
comprehensive covering all open access (OA) scientific
and scholarly journals that use an appropriate quality
control system. It is not limited to particular languages or
subject areas. There are now 3703 journals in the
Directory. Currently, 1276 journals are searchable at
article level. As of today 213723 articles are included in
the DOAJ service. The DOAJ is hosted, maintained and
partly funded by Lund University Libraries Head Office. It
is receiving funds from Open Society Institute; SPARC;
SPARC Europe; BIBSAM; and Axiell. The DOAJ covers
various major subjects such as Agriculture and Food
Sciences, Arts and Architecture, Biology and Life
Sciences, Business, Chemistry, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, General Works, Health Sciences, History and
Archaeology, Languages and Literatures, Law and

Political Science, Mathematics and Statistics,
Philosophy and Religion, Physics and Astronomy,
Science General, Social Sciences, Technology and
Engineering. The present study covers the depth
evaluation of free e-journals in library and information
science available in DOAJ.

2. METHODOLOGY AND LIMITATIONS
The e-journals studied in this paper were those that
were OA periodicals. DOAJ e-journals have been
accessed for the evaluation of e-journals and to determine
the overall structure of the e-journals in library and
information science. Selected criteria have been taken to
evaluate in tabular form, such as authority, searching,
archiving, coverage, links, etc.2-4 Some e-journals are in
other languages. Some are e-magazines and enewsletters. So theses cannot be evaluated.

3. AVAILABLE JOURNALS
3.1 Journal of the Medical Library Association
Journal of the Medical Library Association (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/journals/93/) is published by
PubMed and from 2002 by Medical Library Association,
US. It covers health sciences, librarianship, education,
and information technology. Its contributions include
education of health sciences librarians, role of medical
librarian and broading profession’s skill set and has been

Received 10 August 2011, accepted 03 November 2011, online published ***** 2012

339

on continuing work to foster a research mentality among
JMLA readers. Articles are in pdf format and arranged
volume-wise at home page. Backup files are available
from Vol. 90-4 0ct 2002—Vol. 98-1, Jan 2011. J Med Libr
Assoc: Vol. 90—Vol. 96; 2002-2008; Med Library Hist J:
Vol. 1—Vol. 5, 1903-1907; Bull Assoc Med Libr: Vol. 1,
1902; Med Lib: Vol. 1—Vol. 5, 1898-1902.

3.2 Chinese Librarianship: An International
Electronic Journal
Chinese Librarianship: An International Electronic
Journal (http://www.iclc.us/cliej/) publishes in various
electronic channels, US. It focuses on both practical and
theoretical aspects of the Chinese librarianship. It
publishes research findings, theoretical explorations, and
case studies by librarians, information scientists, library
school faculty, and students of Chinese heritage, as well
as by librarians and information professionals. Articles are
available through issue-wise, title or author, and Web
index. Backup files are available from No.1, June 1996—
No. 30, Dec. 2010 and available in e-text format. It is peer
reviewed and indexed in Ebsco, LISTA, LISI, LISA and
listed in Ulrich’s and Cabell’s.

3.3 Communications in Information Literacy
Communications in Information Literacy (http://
www.comminfolit.org/index.php/cil/issue/archive)
is
published by University of Oklahoma. It is dedicated to
advancing knowledge, theory, and research in information
literacy. Articles are arranged volume-wise and issuewise. Backup files are available from Vol.1, 1-2, 2007--Vol.
4, 1-2, 2010 in pdf format. It is indexed in DOAJ, EBSCO,
SCOPUS, Google Scholar, H.W. Wilson, and Proquest.

3.4 Coordinates: Online Journal of Map and
Geography Round Table of American
Library Association Series A & B
Coordinates: Online Journal of Map and Geography
Round Table of American Library Association (ALA)
Series A &
B
(http://www.sunysb.edu/libmap/
coordinates.htm) the Map and Geography Round Table
(MAGERT) of ALA. It focuses on essays, project reports,
technical notes, republished articles, and other materials
of interest to the cartographic community. It includes map
and GIS librarianship, history of cartography, map
cataloging and bibliography, map reading and
interpretation, new developments in online mapping, and
other subjects of interest to a broad spectrum of
cartographically literate readers.
Articles are arranged issue-wise in html and pdf
format. Backup files are available from S. A: N. 1-9, 28
May 2005-March 2010 & S. B: N.1 Jan 2005-No. 9, 20
Aug 2009. It is irregular and indexed in DOAJ.
340

3.5 DIGITHUM: The Humanities in Digital Age
DIGITHUM: The Humanities in Digital Age (http://
www.uoc.edu/digithum/7/eng/numeros.html) is published
by Fundació per la Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
(FUOC). It includes various fields relating to the
humanities and social sciences, digital culture,
information society; ICT and main focus is on knowledge
society, ICT, teaching and dissemination of humanities
and social sciences. Articles are arranged by issue-wise
and available in pdf format. Backup files are available from
Issue No. 1, 1999—Issue No. 7, 2005. It is peer reviewed
and annual publication comes out in May.

3.6 EBIB Electronic Information Bulletin for
Librarians
EBIB Electronic Information Bulletin for Librarians
(http://ebib.info/biuletyn/) is published by Stowarzyszenie
Bibliotekarzy Polskich Komisja Wydawnictw, Poland. Its
focus is on librarianship, information, and library
technologies. It includes essays, reports, announcements,
letters, discussions/polemics, and agenda and is available
in e-text and rtf. Special issue 2000 is available for browsing.
Abstracts are available from 1999-2010.

3.7 Electronic Journal of Health Informatics
Electronic Journal of Health Informatics (http://
www.ejhi.net/ojs/index.php/ejhi) is published by Central
Queensland University, Australia. It focuses on
advancement of health informatics and IT in healthcare. It
provides healthcare workers with a readily accessible, evehicle for sharing information about research,
knowledge, experiences, perceptions and wisdom with
colleagues involved in all facets of health informatics and
health IT. Articles are arranged volume-wise, and available
in pdf format. Backup files are available from Vol.1, 1,
2006—Vol. 5, 1-2, 2010. It uses a single blind peer-review
process.

3.8 Electronic Journal of Knowledge
Management
Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management (http://
www.ejkm.com/) is published by Academic Conferences
International Ltd, UK. It includes topics relevant to the
study, implementation and management of knowledge
management and contributes to the development of both
theory and practice in the field of knowledge management
and accepts academically robust papers, topical articles
and case studies that contribute to the area of research
in, and practice of knowledge management. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup
files are available from Vol. 1, 1, Sep 2003—Vol. 9, 1,
March 2011. It is bi-annual and blind-refereed by members
of the editorial board or other suitably qualified readers.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

3.9 European Journal of ePractice
European
Journal
of
ePractice
(http://
www.epracticejournal.eu/ is published ePractice.eu,
Spain. It promotes the diffusion and exchange of good
practice in eGovernment, eHealth and eInclusion. Types
of material published are articles, case studies and
interviews. Articles are arranged issue-wise and are
available in pdf format. Backup files are available from 30
Nov. 2007—25 March, 2011. It is peer reviewed and issue
indexing has been given.

3.10 Evidence Based Library and Information
Practice
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice
(http://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/EBLIP/
index) is published by University of Alberta. It provides a
forum for librarians and other information professionals to
discover research that may contribute to decision-making
in professional practice and publishes original research
and commentary on the topic of evidence-based library
and information practice. Articles are arranged year,
volume and number-wise and are available in pdf format
Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1-4, 2006—Vol. 6,
1, 2011. It is peer reviewed and quarterly. Author, title, and
issue indexes have been given.

3.11 E-JASL: The Electronic Journal of
Academic and Special Librarianship
E-JASL: The Electronic Journal of Academic and
Special Librarianship (http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.
org/) is published by ICAAP, Canada. It covers all aspects
of academic and special librarianship without regard to
region or country. It is refereed e-journal dedicated to
advancing knowledge and research in the areas of
academic and special librarianship. Articles are arranged
volume-wise and available in html format. It is listed in
DOAJ and indexed in LISA.

3.12 High Energy Physics Libraries Webzine
High Energy Physics Libraries Webzine (http://
library.web.cern.ch/library/Webzine/index.shtml)
is
published by HEPLW Team. It is devoted to high-energy
physics libraries, aims to help in daily activities by
discussing experience in the delivery of services to users.
Articles are arranged issue-wise and available in html
format. Backup files are available from Issue 1, March
2000—Issue 13, Oct 2006.

3.13 Human IT
Human IT (http://etjanst.hb.se/bhs/ith//info-eng.htm)
is published by Högskolan i Borås Country, Sweden. It
focuses on digital media as communicative, aesthetic,
and lucid instruments with closely aligned with the new
field of research, which is alternatively referred to as
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

humanities computing, and social informatics. Articles
are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format.
Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1-4, 1997—Vol. 11,
1, 2010.

3.14 Informatica Economica Journal
Informatica
Economica
Journal
(http://
revistaie.ase.ro/index.html) is published by Ministry of
Education, Research and Youth, Romania. It focuses on
economic informatics, information society, information
systems, and information technology. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup
files are available from Vol. 2, 1-4, 1998—Vol. 15, 1, 2011.
It is founded by Faculty of Cybernetics, Statistics and
Economic Informatics Academy of Economic Studies,
Bucharest.

3.15 Information Research: An International
Electronic Journal
Information Research: An International Electronic
Journal (http://informationr.net/ir/) is published by Prof
Lund University Libraries, Sweden, UK. It is open access,
international, peer-reviewed, scholarly journal, dedicated
to making accessible the results of research across a
wide range of information-related disciplines. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in e-text format.
Backup files are available from Vol.1, 1-3, 1995-96—Vol.
16, 1, 2011. It is indexed by Google Scholar, INSPEC:
Engineering Village, LISA, and ISI’s Web of Knowledge.

3.16 Information Technology and Disabilities
Information Technology and Disabilities (http://
people.rit.edu/easi/itd.htm) is published by EASI: Equal
Access to Software and Information Country, US. It
covers IT, disabilities, and education. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in e-text format.
Backup files are available from Vol. 1, Jan 1994—Vol. 11,
2005 and Vol. 12, 1, June 2008. It is peer reviewed and
accessible through podcasts, webinars, and online
courses.

3.17 Informing Science: The International
Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline
Informing Science: The International Journal of an
Emerging Transdiscipline (http://inform.nu/) is published
by Library and Information Technology Association (LITA).
It includes digital libraries, metadata, authorization and
authentication,
e-journals
and
e-publishing,
telecommunications, distributed systems and networks,
computer security, and intellectual property rights, etc.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in html
and pdf format. Backup files are available from Vol.1
1998—Vol. 1. 14, 2011. It is a refereed and quarterly
journal.
341

3.18 Interdisciplinary Journal of Information,
Knowledge, and Management
Interdisciplinary Journal of Information, Knowledge,
and Management (http://www.ijikm.org/) is published by
Informing Science Institute, US. It includes information,
knowledge, and management, organisational learning
etc. Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 2006—Vol.
6, 2011. It is blind refereed by three or more peers.

3.19 Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and
Learning Objects
Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and Learning
Objects (http://ijklo.org/) is published by Informing
Science Institute, US. It provides readers around the
world with the coverage of developments in e-learning and
learning objects and publishes articles on theory,
practice, innovation, and research that cover all aspects
of e-learning and learning objects. Articles are arranged
volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup files are
available from Vol. 1, 2005—Vol. 7, 2011. It is blind peer
refereed by three or more peers.

3.20 International Journal of Digital Curation
International Journal of Digital Curation (http://
www.ijdc.net/./ijdc/issue/current) is published by The
Digital Curation Centre, UK. It is devoted to papers,
articles and news items on curation of digital objects and
related issues. Articles are arranged volume-wise and
available in pdf format. Backup files are available from Vol.
1, 1, 2006—Vol. 6, 1, 2011. Issue and author indexes
have been given.

3.21 International Journal of Doctoral Studies
International Journal of Doctoral Studies (IJDS) (http:/
/ijds.org/) is published by Informing Science Institute, US.
It focuses on informing science, information systems, IT,
information science, information security, IT education
and facilitation of knowledge enhancement related to
doctoral studies in these areas. Articles are arranged
volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup files are
available from Vol. 1, 2006—Vol. 6, 2011. It is listed in
Cabell’s Directory of Publishing Opportunities:
Educational Curriculum, Methods and in Educational
Psy. Admin., EBSCO.

3.22 International Review of Information Ethics
International Review of Information Ethics (http://
www.i-r-i-e.net/) is published by International Center for
Information Ethics, Germany. It focuses on the ethical
impacts of IT on human practices and thinking, social
interaction, other areas of science and research and the
society itself. Articles are arranged volume-wise and
342

available in pdf format. Backup files are available from Vol.
1, 1-2 June & Oct 2004—Vol. 13, 1-2 March & Sep 2010.
Author index has been given.

3.23 Issues in Informing Science and
Information Technology
Issues in Informing Science and Information
Technology (http://iisit.org/) is published by Informing
Science Institute, US. It provides insight into how best to
inform clients using IT and covers research in IT
education, such as curriculum and techniques for
teaching IT. It encourages the sharing of knowledge and
collaboration among the wide variety of fields that use IT
to inform clients and also includes communications,
communicating meaning, community and society,
computer science, data communications, distance
education, e-commerce, education, government, health
care, medicine, history, information science and library.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 2004—Vol.
7, 2010.

3.24 Issues in Science and Technology
Librarianship
Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship
(http://www.istl.org/) is published by Association of
College and Research Libraries, US. It serves as a vehicle
for science-tech librarians to share details of successful
programmes, materials for the delivery of information
services, background information and opinions on topics
of current interest, and to publish research and
bibliographies on issues in science and technology
libraries. Articles are arranged volume-wise and available
in e-text format. Backup files are available from Dec
1991—64 winters 2011. Author index has been given. It is
published quarterly (summer, winter, fall, spring).

3.25 JEP: The Journal of Electronic Publishing
JEP: The Journal of Electronic Publishing (http://
www.journalofelectronicpublishing.org/) is published by
Scholarly Publishing Office (SPO), University of Michigan
University Library. It provides archives of works covering
current trends and issues in e-publishing. Articles present
innovative ideas, best practices, and leading-edge
thinking about all aspects of publishing, authorship, and
readership. Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1-2,
1995—Vol. 13, 1-3, 2010. Articles are arranged issuewise and available in e-text format.

3.26 Journal of Digital Information
Journal of Digital Information (http://jodi.ecs.soto
n.ac.uk/r or (http://journals.tdl.org/jodi) is published by
Texas Digital Library, US. It covers information
management, information science, IT, digital libraries,
hypermedia systems, hypertext criticism, and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

information discovery. Articles are arranged by issue,
author, title, and theme. Backup files are available from
Vol. 1, 1-2, 1997—Vol. 12, 1, 2012.

Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol.1, 2006—Vol.
5, 2010 (Annual).

3.27 Journal of Educational Media & Library
Sciences

3.32 Journal of Medical Internet Research

Journal of Educational Media & Library Sciences
(http://joemls.tku.edu.tw/index_e.htm) is published by
Tamkang University Press, Taiwan. It covers aspects of
library science, information science, and IT. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup
files are available from Vol. 28, 1-4, 1991-1990—Vol. 48,
1-3, 2011. It is covered by Scopus, LISTA, DOAJ, H.W.
Wilson Database, LLIS, LISA, PAIS, Ulrich’s, Chinese
ERIC, THCI, and CEPS.

3.28 Journal of eLiteracy
Journal of eLiteracy (http://www.jelit.org/index.html) is
published by University of Glasgow, UK. It discusses on
topics relevant to JeLit themes involving a theoretical,
comparative, overview or critical element, case studies,
research reports, and reviews. Articles are arranged
volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup files are
available from Vol. 1, 1, 2004—Vol. 2, 1-2, 2005.

3.29 Journal of Health Informatics in
Developing Countries
Journal of Health Informatics in Developing Countries
(http://www.jhidc.org/index.php/jhidc) is published by
University of Otago, New Zealand. It shares and promotes
academic knowledge in the field and to encourage writers
from developing countries to contribute in health
librarianship. Articles are arranged volume-wise and
available in pdf format. Backup files are available from
Vol.1,1, 2007—Vol. 4, 1-2, 2010. Author, title and issue
indexes have been given.

3.30 Journal of Information Literacy (JIL)
Journal of Information Literacy (JIL) (http://
www.informationliteracy.org.uk/JIL.aspx) is published by
Chartered Institute of Library and Information
Professionals, UK. It investigates to make generalised
observations on how information literacy impacts on
organisations, systems, and individuals. Backup files are
available from Vol. 1, No. 1-3, 2007—Vol. 4, No. 2, 2010
and are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format.

3.31 Journal of Information, Information
Technology, and Organisations
Journal of Information, Information Technology, and
Organizations (http://jiito.org/) is published by Informing
Science Institute, California, US. The JIITO covers
specialised area of information systems research
indicated in its title. It focused on empirical studies.
Conceptual articles are published just exceptionally.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Journal of Medical Internet Research (http://
www.jmir.org/) is published by Gunther Eysenbach
Country, Canada. It covers health informatics and all
aspects of research, information, and communication in
the healthcare field using internet and intranet-related
technologies; which are nowadays called ‘eHealth’.
Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1-2, plus
supplement 1, 1999—Vol. 13, 1, 2011. It is indexed in
MEDLINE and other databases, and full-text articles are
permanently archived in PubMed Central. The new JMIR
impact factor released in June 2008 is 3.0. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in html format.

3.33 Journal of the Association for History and
Computing
Journal of the Association for History and Computing
(http://quod.lib.umich.edu/j/jahc/browse.html)
is
sponsored by the American Association for History and
Computing. It promotes and develops interest in the use
of computers in all types of historical study at every level,
in both teaching and research. It defines useful standards
to maximise the utility of computers in historical studies
and intended for a general audience of teachers,
students, and researchers interested in the application of
computers in historical studies. Backup files are available
from Vol.1, 1, June 1998—Vol. 13, 1, May 2010. It
contains indexes—Subject, author, articles, coloumns,
editorials, reviews, books reviewed by title, books
reviewed by author, software reviewed and available in etext format.

3.34 Library & Information Research: Research
into Practice for Information & Library
Services
Library & Information Research: Research into
Practice for Information & Library Services (http://
www.lirg.org.uk/lir/ojs/index.php/lir) is published by CILIP
Library & Information Research Group, UK. Its focus is on
research for LIS community; reporting of research;
reflective and evidence-based practice, etc. Backup files
are available from Vol. 31, 97, 2007—Vol. 34, 108, 2010.
Issue, author and title indexes are given and publishes
both refereed and non-refereed submissions. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format.

3.35 Library Journal
Library Journal (http://www.libraryjournal.com) is
published by Cahners Business Information. It is a
publication for librarians, with features and analytical
news reports covering technology, management, policy,
343

and other professional concerns. Backup files are
available from Issue No. 1-20 Jan-Dec, 2002—Issue No.
1-17, Jan 2011; free subscription is also available. Articles
can are available in e-text format and internal search
engine has been given.

science. Articles are arranged volume-wise and in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 6, 1-2, July
1996—Vol. 21,1, March 2011 (bi-annual). It is bi-annual
and distributed through a list server, and an ftp site. It is
indexed by ISA, LISA, EBSCO, and SPI.

3.36 Library Philosophy and Practice

3.40 MLA Forum

Library Philosophy and Practice (LPP) (http://
www.webpages.uidaho.edu/~mbolin/lpp.htm) is published
by University of Nebraska, Lincoln Libraries, US. It
Includes explorations of current, past, and emerging
theories of librarianship and library practice, as well as
reports of successful, innovative, or experimental library
procedures, methods, or projects in all areas of
librarianship, set in the context of applied research.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Annual Vol. Dec.
2007—Annual Vol. Dec. 2010. Issue, author and title
indexing has been given. The LPP is indexed in LISTA,
DOAJ, Library Literature & Information Science, and
SCOPUS.

MLA Forum (http://www.mlaforum.org/) is published
by Michigan Library Association, US. It focuses on all the
aspect of library and education. Articles are arranged
volume-wise and available in e-text format. Backup files
are available from Vol. 1, 1-2, 2002—Vol. 7, 2009. It is
indexed in Library Literature & LISA. In Jan. 2008, it
began publishing a single annual volume prior to 2008.

3.37 Library Resources & Technical Services
Library Resources & Technical Services (LRTS)
(http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/alcts/resources/lrts/
index.cfm) is published by Association for Library
Collections & Technical Services. It includes collections,
preservation, acquisition, serials, cataloguing, and
classification. The LRTS supports theoretical,
intellectual, practical, and scholarly aspects of the
profession of collection management and development,
acquisitions, cataloging and classification, preservation
and reformatting, serials by publishing articles and book
reviews. Articles are arranged volume-wise and available
in pdf format. Backup files are available from Vol. 41,
1997—Vol. 55, 1-4, 2010 and full-text from Vol. 44, 1-2,
2000—Vol. 52, 1-4, 2008.

3.38 Library Student Journal
Library
Student
Journal
(http://
www.librarystudentjournal.org/index.php/lsj/index)
is
published by University at Buffalo, US. It focuses on
education, training, career paths, future trends, and
advance discussion of LIS topics. Backup files are
available from 2006-2011 and available in pdf and html
format. Issue, author and title indexes have been given.

3.39 LIBRES: Library and Information Science
Research Electronic Journal
LIBRES: Library and Information Science Research
Electronic Journal (http://libres.curtin.edu.au/) is
published by Curtin University of Technology, Australia. It
is devoted to new research in library and information
344

3.41 North Carolina Libraries
North Carolina Libraries (http://www.ncl.ecu.edu/
index.php/NCL) is published by North Carolina Library
Association, US. It focuses on libraries, librarianship,
media centers, and academic libraries. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in pdf format. Backup
files are available from Vol. 60, 1-4, 2002—Vol. 68, 1-2,
2010. All the volumes are indexed.

3.42 Partnership: The Canadian Journal of
Library and Information Practice and
Research
Partnership: The Canadian Journal of Library and
Information
Practice
and
Research
(http://
journal.lib.uoguelph.ca/index.php/perj/index) is published
by The Partnership, Canada. It provides feature articles on
theory and research and on innovations in practice indepth, peer-reviewed articles. Other types of articles
include viewpoints, conference presentations, profiles,
news and announcements, professional development and
reviews. Articles are arranged volume-wise and available
in pdf and html format. Backup files are available from Vol.
1, 1, 2006—Vol. 5, 2, 2010. It is published twice a year. It
is peer reviewed and indexed journal.

3.43 South African Journal of Information
Management
South African Journal of Information Management
(http://www.sajim.co.za/index.php/sajim/issue/current) is
published by University of Johannesburg, South Africa. It
presents original research, novel synthesis, or judicious
review of current theory, method, policy, or practice in the
fields mentioned below. Article submission, review and
publication are accomplished entirely electronically.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in html
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 6, 1, 2004—
Vol. 13, 1, 2011. It is peer-reviewed and published four
times a year in numbered issues.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

3.44 The Bonefolder: An Outgrowth of the
Book Arts Web

available from Vol. 9, 2, summer 1995—Vol. 16, 1 spring
2010.

The Bonefolder: An Outgrowth of the Book Arts Web
(http://www.philobiblon.com/bonefolder/) is published by
The Book Arts Web, Syracuse University Library,
Syracuse, NY, US. Its focus is on established and
emerging authorities on a variety of book arts topics
including hand bookbinding, teaching, business practice,
the history of the book, the book as art, general tips and
tricks, exhibitions, how-to technical articles, and reviews.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1, Fall
2004—Vol. 7, 1, March 2011. It is listed in DOAJ and is
archived as part of the New York University Library’s
contribution to LOCKSS (Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe).

3.48 Virginia Libraries

3.45 The Code4Lib Journal
The Code4Lib Journal (http://journal.code4lib.org/) is
published by Code4Lib, North County Regional Library,
US. Its focus is on Foster community and share
information among those interested in the intersection of
libraries, technology, and the future. It helps libraries in
computer technology, using computers and the internet to
offer unprecedented access to information and library
resources. The C4LJ aims to help engender collective
understanding and the necessary support for improving
library technology and digital services. Backup files are
available from Issue 1, 2007—Issue 13, 2011. Articles are
arranged issue-wise and available in e-text format.

3.46 The Journal of the Rutgers University
Library
The Journal of the Rutgers University Library (http://
jrul.libraries.rutgers.edu/index.php/jrul/index) is published
by Rutgers University, US. Articles based on the holdings
of the Rutgers University Libraries, and in the areas of
New Jersey history, Rutgersensia, bibliography, and the
history of libraries, books and printing are covered.
Articles are arranged volume-wise and available in pdf
format. Backup files are available from Vol. 58, 1997—Vol.
64, 2008. It is reviewed and issue, author and title indexes
have been given.

Virginia Libraries (http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/
VALib/) is published by Virginia Library Association, US.
It provides a platform to exchange information, ideas, and
solutions to mutual problems in professional articles on
current topics in the library and information field to
advance literacy. Articles are arranged volume-wise and
available in pdf and html format. Backup files are available
from Vol. 42, 1, 1996—Vol. 56, 4, 2010.

3.49 Webology
Webology (http://www.webology.ir/) is published by
University of Tehran, Iran. It focuses on periodicals, web
science periodicals, information science periodicals,
library science periodicals, information retrieval; web
crawling, cataloging and searching; search engines and
directories; search behavior; metadata, etc. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and available in e-text format.
Backup files are available from Vol. 1, 1-2, 2004—Vol. 7,
1-2, 2010. It is peer reviewed and is indexed by LISA,
Scopus, DOAJ, EBSCO, Ulrich, Web Citation Index,
World Cat, etc.

4. FINDINGS
A major similarity found that almost e-journals are
concentrating towards digital library initiatives,
technological, information service developments and
information networking issues contains a wide coverage
of local library issues ranging from ongoing research dayto-day news from the work place, etc. Out of several
searched e-journals it is found that all available in full-text
form free of cost and can be received regularly. The most
notable findings in the study are that it provides effective
communication between user and online free e-journals.

5. SUGGESTIONS

•

Library webpage should give users links for free ejournals available in DOAJ.

•

Users should be informed regularly about the free ejournals.

•

Rigorous study on the use and usability of free ejournals available on DOAJ by the users to be made
on regular basis.

•

The LIS professionals have to create more awareness
of free e-journals.

•

The speed of the Internet connectivity should be
improved by acquiring more bandwidth or a better
option.

3.47 Urban Library Journal
Urban Library Journal (http://lacuny.cuny.edu/ulj/) is
published by City University of New York, US. It focuses
on academic, research, public, school, and special
libraries in an urban setting, public higher education,
urban studies, multiculturalism, library and educational
services to immigrants, preservation, etc. Articles are
arranged volume-wise and full-text is available in pdf and
html format. It is refereed journal and backup files are

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

345

6. CONCLUSIONS

REFERENCES

The emergence of electronic resources has
drastically revamped the status of all the libraries and
information centers across the world during the last
decade3. There has been a rapid urge of the user
community to get more and more information online.
Academic libraries facing shrinking budgets are trying to
acquire quality Information resources in the most efficient
and effective means possible. This coupled with the
positive attitudes. The free e-journals are available in
accepted standards and the users are using free ejournals satisfactorily. The DOAJ provides most high
profile and heavily used free e-resources in the entire
subject. The result of the study can help and stop them
subscribing in print and can save fund. One can easily get
information for total strength of free available online ejournals. The results of this study can be useful for
information scientists studying or working with portalbased retrieval of e-resources, and also for the designers
and developers of future online interactive information
retrieval systems.

1. Das, Kshirod & Jeevan, V.K.J. Evaluation of search
fecilities and research results of few INDEST
resources. XXV IASLIC Conference, Chennai, 2005,
35-46.

346

2. Ghosh, Rita. Understanding user needs and building
e-resources. Information Management in Digital
Libraries. Paper presented at the National Conference
on Information Management in Digital Libraries, IIT
Kharagpur, 2006.
3. Grogg, Jill E. Educating for electronic resources. J
Electr. Resou. Lib., 2008, 20(1), 11-15.
4. Smith, Alastair G. Citations and links as a measure of
effectiveness of online LIS journals. IFLA Journal,
2005, 31, 76-84.
5. Beck, Susan E. The good, the bad & the ugly:
Evaluating electronic journals. Computers in
Libraries, 1997, 34-43.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

