DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 353-357
© 2012, DESIDOC

Digital Libraries and Higher Education in Nigeria in 21st Century
Stella Ngozi Ifeoma Anasi
University of Lagos, Main Library, University of Lagos, Akoka, Lakos, Nigeria (Lagos)

ABSTRACT
Higher education in Nigeria has come under severe criticisms in recent time due to poor quality of its
products. There is therefore an urgent need for academic institutions in Nigeria to catch up with innovations
in educational practices in developed economies. This paper explores the benefits of digital libraries to higher
education in Nigeria in the 21 st century. It examines the challenges being faced by higher education in Nigeria.
These include the deplorable state of the libraries, inadequate funding, severe shortfall in teacher: student
ratio, poor quality of graduates, increasing demand for participation in higher education, among others. It
highlights the fact that digital libraries are critical and essential for effective teaching, research, and learning
in all tertiary institutions in the 21st century and it should therefore be a priority. However, the paper stresses
that the development of digital libraries should not be conceived as a panacea for the myriads of challenges
facing higher education in Nigeria but that it is a technology that promises to address some of these challenges.
Therefore, strong and unwavering commitment by all the stakeholders towards the deployment of digital
libraries in tertiary education is recommended.
Key words: Digital libraries, higher education, Information & Communication Technology, Nigeria

1. INTRODUCTION
The world is witnessing rapid transformation in all
spheres of human endeavour due to the deployment of
digital technologies. Opoku1 observes that digital
technologies have been integrated into virtually every
facet of education, commerce, health, governance and
civic activity, and have become critical factors in creating
wealth worldwide. This technological innovation is
tremendously impacting all levels of education,
particularly in critical areas like higher education. The
pervading impact of digital technologies have given birth to
a number of digital libraries all over the world. Digital
libraries play significant role in teaching, research, and
learning in academic institutions. These include reduction
of the digital divide, improved use of information, improved
collaboration, timely access to information, improved
facilities for information sharing, improved searching and
manipulation of information, and so on2. The focus of this
paper is to explore the benefits of digital libraries to higher
education in Nigeria in the 21st century.

2. CHALLENGES FACING HIGHER
EDUCATION IN NIGERIA
All over the world, higher education plays a strategic
role in human capital formation. It is a place where

students are equipped with cutting-edge competencies to
compete in the ever-evolving globalised world.
Unfortunately, the products of most academic institutions
in Nigeria fall short of this expectation. Abubakar3
declared that: “the stark reality is that the quality and
worth of our human capital have gone down quite with
serious long-term implications for the effective
management of the nation’s affairs, its prosperity and its
competitiveness in the global environment. Many see the
universities as purveyors of stale and sterile knowledge
that churn out half-backed products that can neither be
employed nor can they engage themselves gainfully”.
A fundamental problem facing most academic
institutions in Nigeria which affects the quality of their
products is the deplorable state of the academic libraries.
Zell (1998) cited by Teferra4 captured vividly the sorry state
of most academic libraries. He observed that: “academic
librarians for sometime now have found it increasingly
difficult to acquire and make available to their users the
full range of publications in print format they require and to
which members of the university community might need
has been estimated that the average cost of a journal
virtually doubles within a period six years, and some of
the main culprits in massive increases in subscription
rates… were some of the leading European science
journals”.

Received 28 November 2011, accepted 30 January 2012, online published 18 July 2012
353

Similarly, the Report on Libraries in Nigeria Federal
Universities commissioned by the National Universities
Commission (NUC) in 1990 cited by Ogunrombi5
indicated that the book stock of Nigerian University
libraries is in a deplorable state such that the libraries can
no longer support the academic programmes of their
institutions. About 90 per cent of the book collections of
universities studied is foreign imprints. There is no
remarkable improvement in the current state of most
academic libraries as many of them are largely stocked
with outdated books and journals. However, only
academic libraries that are linked up to the world wide
web could boast of significant change and unfortunately
many tertiary institutions in Nigerian are yet to be
connected to the internet. No doubt the quality of the
library in any academic environment affects the quality of
teaching, research and learning and this in turn
determines the quality of the output.

streets in urban centres in search of employment. Saraki6
observes that only an estimated 10 per cent of all
graduates produced by the education system is
employed annually.
Closely related to the problems of teaching, research
and learning is severe short fall in the teacher: student
ratio in tertiary institutions in Nigeria. Ibidapo-obe8
lamented the gross inadequacy of qualified teaching staff
in tertiary institutions in Nigeria. He indicated that the
teacher-student ratio (TSR) in most programmes in
Nigerian Universities fall short of the NUC-approved TSR
as shown in Table 1. This problem can be attributed to a
number of factors which include inadequate recognition
for teachers, poor remuneration, brain-drain, poor
motivation, teacher apathy, lack of commitment and so
on9.
A critical factor to the survival of higher education in
Nigeria is funding. For many decades, the funding of
higher education in Nigeria has been precarious.
Abubakar3 stressed that funding of tertiary education has
been a contentious issue and that the budgetary
allocation has always been viewed as meager. The
budgetary allocation to education between 1999 and 2007
fluctuated between 5.9 per cent and 11.83 per cent of the
national budget. However, in 2008 it was increased from
6.07 per cent to 13 per cent 3. This is far below the
UNESCO recommendation that 26 per cent of the total
budget of a nation should be allocated to education9. The
effect according to Omotosho10 is explicated in many
adaptive mechanisms such as:

Furthermore, the 2003 World Bank report on research
which is the core function of academic institutions
indicated that although Nigeria is Africa’s most populous
country it has only 15 scientists and engineers engaged
in research and development per million persons. This is
in contrast with 168 in Brazil, 459 in China, 158 in India,
and 4,103 in the United States. The same report revealed
that as in 1995, Nigeria’s scientific publication was only
711 while that of South Africa was 3,413, India’s was
14,883 and Brazil’s was 5,440. If Nigera is far behind in
research there is no indication that it is measuring up in
teaching and learning6.
More so, teaching and learning has to contend with
what Knapper cited by Jaffer, Ng’ambi and Czerniewicz7
described as: “instruction that is too didactic, a lack of
personal contact between teachers and students and
among students, assessment methods that are
inadequate to measure sophisticated learning goals and
too little opportunity for students to integrate knowledge
from different fields and apply what they learn to the
solution of real world problems”. No wonder many
graduates of Nigerian higher institutions are roaming the

•

Curtailment of laboratory/practical classes;

•

Limited number of field trips;

•

Curtailment in
conferences;

•

Curtailment of the purchase of library books,
Chemicals and basic laboratory equipment;

•

Freezing of new appointments;

the

attendance

of

academic

Table 1. Universities student teacher ratios in Nigeria (No.)
Disciplines

NUC guideline

1994/95

1995/96

1996/97

1997/98

1998/99

Administration

20:1

40:1

44:1

44:1

32:1

43:1

Arts

20:1

14:1

16:1

17:1

18:1

16:1

Education

24:1

27:1

24:1

25:1

27:1

22:1

Engineering and technology

09:1

22:1

19:1

18:1

21:1

19:1

Environmental design

10:1

17:1

19:1

16:1

15:1

16:1

Law

20:1

32:1

34:1

22:1

29:1

29:1

Medicine/health sciences

06:1

11:1

11:1

09:1

12:1

11:1

Pharmacy

10:1

25:1

19:1

13:1

12:1

18:1

Sciences

10:1

15:1

13:1

20:1

18:1

16:1

Social sciences

20:1

22:1

22:1

28:1

29:1

30:1

Source: Adapted from Ibidapo-Obe
354

8

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

•

Virtual embargo on study fellowship; and

•

Reduction in research grants among others.

At the long run, the product of this system is grossly
ill-equipped to compete with their contemporaries in
developed countries.
Higher education in Nigeria, as is the case in higher
education globally, is hard pressed to increase
participation from diverse groups. These include
marginalised and under-represented groups such as
physically challenged persons, visually impaired persons,
women, people from educationally disadvantaged areas,
rural dwellers amongst others. All these categories are
yearning for highly accessible, affordable and qualitative
higher education. Yearly, they are jostling for limited
spaces in the tertiary institutions. For instance,
Awosiyan11 noted that over one million candidates are
struggling for less than 200,000 spaces in the universities
annually. While admission rates have increased, it has
not kept up with the demand. The National Universities
Commission statistics 2007 showed that between 20022006 the highest point of admission of universities has
been only 15 per cent of the total number of applicants12.
In this context that new opportunities offered by digital
libraries are germane.

3. BENEFITS OF DIGITAL LIBRARIES TO
HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA
Digital libraries powered by digital technologies open
doors of great possibilities and opportunities in higher
education system in Nigeria. It is a technological
innovation that promises a paradigm shift in teaching,
research, and learning which is indispensable in 21st
century education.
The flexibility of learning provided by digital libraries
enhances and advances the informal and distance
learning in tertiary institutions. It gives the distance
learner the opportunity to attain the highest level of
education from their offices or homes. Wallace, et al13
avers that the digital libraries encourage authentic inquiry
learning by providing students access to online
resources, and such resources permit students to enjoy a
flexible learning arrangement which allows them to pursue
their own interests within the bounds of the curriculum.
Access to online resources 24/7 implies that learners are
free to participate in learning activities when time permits
and such freedom have greatly increased the
opportunities for many students to participate in higher
education14. Interestingly, many more students who were
previously constrained by other commitments are now
finding the opportunities to do so14. The list includes fulltime housewives, women in purdah, prisoners, physically
challenged people and all those who have been struggling
with ‘elusive admission’ can achieve their educational
aspirations.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

The deployment of digital libraries in higher education
acts as a catalyst for change in this domain. Digital
libraries promote the emergence of educational
community that shares thousands and thousands of
digital resources in a networked environment. Thus digital
libraries encourage resource sharing among members of
a scholarly community. These benefits according to
Rahman cited by Ikpaahindi15 include free flow of
information resources, better access to information
resources, maximisation of information resources, faster
provision of information and literature support to users,
avoidance of duplication of effort, and reciprocal exchange
of local publications.
In conventional educational setting, digital libraries
offer both teachers and students the opportunity to utilise
digital resources and tools in different formats without
being present in the library. Marchionini and Maurer16
emphasise that: “digital libraries have obvious roles to
play in formal learning settings by providing teachers and
learners with knowledge bases in a variety of media. In
addition to expanding the format of information (e.g
multimedia, simulations), digital libraries offer more
information than most individuals or schools have been
able to acquire and maintain. Digital libraries are
accessible in classrooms and from homes as well as in
central library facilities where specialised access,
display, and tools may be shared. Remote access allows
possibilities for vicarious field trips, virtual speakers, and
access to rare and unique materials in classrooms and at
home. The promise is one of better learning through
broader, faster, and better information and
communication services”.
The capabilities of digital libraries will open doors for
opportunities to expand the pool of teachers with varying
roles able to provide support for learners in variety of
flexible settings14. With the changing roles of the teacher
Oliver14 argued that many people who were not highly
qualified will participate in the teaching process. These
include work place trainers, mentors, specialists from the
workplace and so on. Thus a paradigm shifts from
didactic teaching roles to more facilitative roles.
In addition to changes from conventional teaching
style that revolved around teachers planning and leading
students through a series of instructional sequences to
achieve a desired learning outcome is the shift in learning
style14. Digital libraries promote self guided and informal
learning16. Independent learners are self motivated,
innovative and creative thinkers. Echezona17, et al. opined
that education that is oriented towards critical thinking
and self-directed learning serves the individual over a lifetime. In this regard digital libraries support learning as an
‘active process of constructing knowledge rather than
acquiring knowledge’ and learning that facilitates
‘personal understanding and the development of meaning
in ways which are active and interpretative14. The products
355

of such a learning process that emphasises active
construction of knowledge are creative and self-motivated
and definitely will distinguish themselves unlike the
products of a learning process that perceives the learners
as passive recipients of knowledge.
Similarly, the technology of digital libraries helps to
reduce the gap between those who have access to
information and those who do not. This is often referred to
as digital divide. According to Gyamfi18 digital divide is the
disparity between nations who have access to expertise,
knowledge, and capacity building tools of the 21st century
and those who do not. But through digital libraries the
students and faculty could have access to an ocean of
information resources, acquire skills and knowledge that
will make them productive in the 21st century.
Scholarship thrives on collaboration, cooperation, and
communication in a networked environment. A networked
environment
supports
knowledge
generation,
communication, consumption and dissemination.
Wallace, et al.13 stressed that through digital libraries,
students collaborate with others to discuss and try out
ideas and challenge the ideas of others. No doubt,
contact, collaboration, and cooperation provide enabling
environment for linkage programmes between and among
universities which gives added values to higher education
globally19. It opens up new frontiers for teaching and
learning and facilitates collaborative research among
tertiary institution in Nigeria and other parts of the world.

4. CONSTRAINTS TO DEPLOYMENT OF
DIGITAL LIBRARIES
A number of factors impede the deployment of digital
libraries initiatives in higher education in Nigeria. A
fundamental factor hindering the deployment of digital
libraries in tertiary institutions is fund. Building and
maintaining of digital libraries according to Waters20 is
expensive. Besides the technical aspects, cost, and
other considerations include selecting content and
managing intellectual property20 are to be considered.
Computers and internet connections are backbone of
digital libraries and the cost of procuring them constitute
major impediments for the implementation of digital
libraries in academic institutions in Nigeria.
The global economic meltdown further exacerbates
the situation. In most African countries, Nigeria inclusive
the infrastructure that support digital technology initiatives
are inadequate18. Ani21,et al., remarked that Nigeria is
deficient in the acquisition of ICT infrastructures such as
computers, telephone lines, VSAT, computer networks
and so on. The decision to develop ICT infrastructure is
basically political and except the big shots at the
corridors of power bring this issue forcefully into the
mainstream, the development of digital libraries will
remain a pipe dream.
356

Librarians are the interface between digital libraries
and the users. Ani21, et al. pointed out that there is lowlevel ICT skills among librarians in Nigeria and most of
them lack the requisite skills to function in the digital
environment.

5. CONCLUSIONS
Higher education in Nigeria has a lot to gain if the
development of digital libraries is supported by the
stakeholders. The challenges may seem overwhelming
but strong and conscious commitment on the part of
policy makers and executors is indispensable. Librarians
cannot afford to remain on the other side of the digital
divide. To ensure the digital inclusion of tertiary
institutions in Nigeria, concerted action geared towards
the acquisition of ICT infrastructure is imperative. Digital
libraries are critical and essential for effective teaching,
research and learning in all tertiary institutions in the 21st
century therefore it should be a priority. At this juncture, it
is pertinent to point out that the development of digital
libraries should not be conceived as a panacea for all the
challenges of higher education in Nigeria but it is a
technology that promises to address some of these
challenges.

REFERENCES
1. Opoku, R.A. Ghana and ICT: Strides and challenges
and
the
way
forward.
2004.
http://
www.ghanaweb.com/Ghana HomePage (accessed
on 13 October 2009).
2. Chowdhury, G.G. & Chowdhury, S. Introduction to
digital libraries. Facet Publishing, London, 2003.
3. Abubakar, M.S. Leadership, higher education and the
challenges of development in Nigeria. Paper
presented at 5th Annual Lecture of School of Post
Graduate Studies, University of Lagos, 9 June 2009.
4. Teferra, D. Knowledge creation and dissemination in
African universities with specials reference to
information and communication technology. In African
universities in the twenty first century, edited by P.T
Zeleza & A. Olukoshi. Vol. II, Council for Development
of Social Science Research in Africa, Dakar, 2004.
pp. 377-99.
5. Ogunrombi, S.A. Quality assurance and book crisis
in Nigerian University libraries. Gateway Lib. J., 2003,
6(2), 65-73.
6. Saraki, B.C. Vision 2020 and the challenge of
rebranding Nigeria, 2009. http//www.kwarastate.gov
.ng/speeches/vision-20-2020-and-thechallenge-ofrebranding-nigeria.html

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

7. Jaffer, S.; Ngambi, D. & Czernic Wicz, L. The role of
ICTs in higher education in South Africa: one strategy
for addressing teaching and learning challenges.
Inter. J. Edu. Develop. using ICT, 2007, 3(4). http://
ijedictdec.uwi.edu/viewarticle.php?id= 421 & layout =
html (accessed on 28 May 2008).
8. Ibidapo-Obe, O. The challenge of the teacher
education in Nigeria: The University of Lagos
experience. Paper presented at 2nd Regional
Research Seminar for Africa, UNESCO Forum on
Higher Education, Research and Knowledge in Accra,
Ghana, 22-24 March 2007.
9. Odia, L.O. & Omofonwwan, S.I. Educational system
in Nigeria: Problems and prospects. J. Soc. Sci.,
2007, 14(1), 81-86.
10. Omotosho, M.O. Private sector and university
education system in Nigeria. A review and synthesis.
In Education for millennium development. Essays in
Honour of Professor Micheal Omolewa, edited by
Marcie Boucouvalas and Rashid Adinnoye, Vol. II.
2008. pp. 512-27.
11. Awosiyan, K. UTME: Would it solve admission
problems? 2010. www.tribune.com.ng/.../346—utmewould-it-solve-admission-problems.html (accessed
on 31 March 2010).
12. Olakulehin, F.K. Policy formulation and capacity
building for improved access to higher education in
Nigeria. www.africahighered.org/download/Felix_Ol
akulehi n.ppt (accessed on 31 March 2010).
13. Wallace, R.; Krajcik, J. & Soloway, E. Digital libraries
in the science classroom: An opportunity for inquiry.
D-Lib Magazine, 1996. http://www.dlib.org/dlib/
September 96/ Umdl/09 wallace.html (accessed on
23 June 2008).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

14. Oliver, R.C. The role of ICT in higher education for the
21st century: ICT as a change agent for education,
2002. http://elrond.scam.ecu.edu.au/oliver/2002/he2
1.pdf (accessed on 23 June 2009).
15. Ikpaahindi, L. Resource sharing in cataloguing:
Bibliographic and indexing services in an Information
and communication (CT) age. Paper presented at 26th
Annual Cataloguing, Classification and Indexing
Seminar/Workshop, Abeokuta, 2006.
16. Marchionini, G. & Maurer, H. The role of digital
libraries in teaching and learning. 1995. http://
ils.unc.edu/march/cacm95/sub8.html (accessed on
3 June 2005).
17. Echezona, R.I.; Ezema, J.I. & Asogwa Eze, B.
Globalization, information revolution and higher
education in Nigeria: The challenging roles of library
professionals. Inter. J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2009, 1(6), 7481.
18. Gyamfi, A. Closing the digital divide in Sub-Saharan
African: Meeting the challenges of the information
age. Information Development, 2005, 21(1), 22-30.
19. Ite, U.E. Return to sender: Using the African
intellectual Diaspora to establish academic link. In
African universities in 21st century, edited by Paul T.
Zeleza & Adebayo Olukoshi, CODESRIA, Darka,
2004. pp. 21-41
20. Waters, D. Developing digital libraries: Four
principles for higher education. Educause Review,
September/October 2001, 59.
21. Ani, O.E.; Atseye, E.U. & Esin, J.E. Issues sand
challenges of globalisation of library services in
Nigeria in the 21st century. Information Development,
2005, 21(3), 193-201.

357

