DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 4, July 2012, pp. 358-364
© 2012, DESIDOC

Building Website for Mobile Phone Users of an
Indian Agriculture University Library: A Model
Sunil Goria
University Library, G.B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar-263 145
E-mail: sunilgoria@yahoo.com

ABSTRACT
Use of internet through mobile phones and smart phones has increased very fast all over the world.
Looking at the increasing internet users of mobile phones, an attempt has been done to create a model of
website for mobile phones users of University Library, GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology,
Pantnagar. The paper includes simple steps to create the website for mobile phones and smart phones. There
are various tools on Internet to create the websites for mobile phones. The Wirenode website tool has been
used on the basis of its simplicity and popularity to create this model website. The paper also includes
information about the university library and its services. The model will be useful for Indian library professionals
to develop websites for their mobile phone users.
Keywords: Mobile phone website, smart phone website, mobile library, agriculture university library, mobile internet

1. INTRODUCTION
In the present age of internet, information and
knowledge sector have become the powerful sector in the
world. Internet is playing vital role for providing information
and knowledge in the society. It has become daily need of
the society for social, educational, entertainment and
other activities. Development of websites was started to
access the information through internet. Earlier most of
the websites were static and users were allowed to read
only information. Now most of the websites have been
developed dynamically and interactive with the application
of web 2.0 services. In the present age of digital
information, websites have become major source of
information for researcher, academicians, students and
other users. In academic environment, now most of the
information sources (online journals, online/CD-ROM
bibliographic databases, OPAC, etc.) are available in
digital form and delivered through websites.
Web technologies are changing very fast in both
ways, i.e., creation of websites and accessing the
information. These are supporting the easy access of any
information, anytime, anywhere in the world. With the
development of website technologies, advanced hardware
technologies for communication have also been
developed in terms of wired networks, WiFi networks,
mobile phone networks, etc. Mobile phone networks have

revolutionised the access of internet through wireless
mode. Now smart phones are also becoming popular in
the society. Smart phones combine both mobile phone
and handheld computers into a single device1. They allow
users to do most of the internet activities of computers
using mobile phones.
In the developing country like India, mobile phones
have become so popular and have reached to all most
every corner of the country. Public and private telecom
sector have been achieved to provide mobile phone facility
to the poor at affordable cost up-to the remote areas of the
country. In the present age of internet, most of the
students of Indian universities have their personal mobile
phones. Internet access on mobile phone is also
becoming popular among students at affordable cost in
India. These latest information and communication
technologies (ICT) have provided the new ways to provide
information services to the users. Looking to the impact of
new ICT on library and information science, this model
has been created. In the current ICT trends at national and
international level, it is expected that future of internet is
mobile internet.

2. UNIVERSITY LIBRARY OF GBPUA&T
Established in 1960, G.B. Pant University of
Agriculture and Technology (GBPUA&T) is the first

Received 05 December 2011, accepted 01 May 2012, online published 18 July 2012

358

Agricultural University of India. Presently, the university
has 8 colleges namely College of Agriculture, College of
Basic Sciences & Humanities, College of Veterinary &
Animal Sciences, College of Technology, College of
Fisheries Science Studies, College of Agri-Business
Management, College of Home Science, and College of
Post Graduate Studies in the main campus. It has
another college, namely, College of Forestry & Hill
Agriculture at hill area of Uttarakhand State. The College
of Post Graduate Studies of the University offers 121 postgraduate programmes through the 70 departments of
constituent colleges of the university.
University library has been effectively supporting the
teaching, research and extension activities of the
university by making efforts of acquiring, processing and
organising scientific and technical literature. The basic
ICT infrastructure, i.e., library LAN, web server, library
server, digital library server, CD server, broadband VSAT
internet connectivity, WiFi networking, video conferencing
facility, etc., has been developed by the library. An
integrated library automation software package Libsys is
used for the management of all housekeeping activities of
the library. Library catalogue is available in digital format
as Web-OPAC (Online Public Access Catalogue). A
DSpace digital repository is also established which
includes rare digitised books and thesis. The library has
developed its website (http://202.141.116.194) to
integrate all the online resources for the benefit of its user
for use. University Library has a highly specialised
collection of 3.9 lakh documents in the field of agricultural
sciences, technology and other allied subjects. The
Library subscribes important bibliographic databases in
CD form. Library is the member of CeRA (Consortium for
e-Resources in Agriculture) and INDEST (Indian National
Digital library in Engineering Sciences & Technology)
consortia for providing full-text e-journals to the users.
About 3000 online journals access is provided to the
users through consortium and university library
resources.
The information seeking behaviour of the academic
community for teaching and research now expects that
the contents should reach at their desktops through
intranet or internet. Taking into consideration these
changing needs and expectations of the academic
community at the campus and out campus, university
library has started providing web-based library services to
its users. New web services play a key role for the growth
of knowledge, development of research, teaching and
extension.

3. LITERATURE REVIEW
Various studies have been conducted on use of
mobile phones and access of internet through mobile
phones and computers in developed and developing
countries. A study conducted by Boston Consulting
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Group2 on ‘Internet’s New Billion Digital Consumers in
Brazil, Russia, India, China and Indonesia’ The study2
discussed the purposes of highest internet access for the
year 2009 in these countries i.e. 95 per cent in India for email, 87 per cent in China for Instance messaging, 83 per
cent in Brazil for search engine, 81 per cent in Russian for
Search engine and 59 per cent in Indonesia for e-mail. The
study2 found that in 2009, the highest mobile internet
users are in China (180 Millions) as compared to India (12
Millions), Brazil (11.2 Millions), Russia (40.6 Millions),
and Indonesia (9.0 Millions).
In South Africa3, mobiles have spectacular growth over
the past decade, with more than 60 per cent of all South
Africans above the age of 16 already owning a phone
themselves. According to the study3, computer-based
internet usage is far less frequent than mobile use: 39 per
cent use the internet on a typical day on a computer,
whereas 68 per cent do so using a mobile phone. Use of
internet and mobile phones has a rapid increase in
Kenya4. The important mobile services, i.e., voice service,
short message service (SMS), multimedia service,
location services, video service, applications on the
mobile and data service discussed by Sánchez5 while
future of mobile services in academic libraries discussed
in detail by Lippincott6. According to the study6, “use of
smart phones for reading, watching, listening and
producing digital content that will have the most impact on
libraries’.
Bridges7, et al. found that database and e-resource
providers, i.e., EBSCO Mobile, Summon from Serial
Solution, IEEE Xplore Mobile, PubMed, etc., offer mobile
versions of their search interfaces. Other publishers, i.e.,
Web of Science, Worldcat.org, JSTOR, Taylor & Francis,
etc., are offering databases for mobile phones users.
Other full-text collections, i.e., SciVerse ScienceDirect
for all the full text articles of Elsevier journals, BBC audio
books, EBL e-book library, Google books, etc., are also
available for accessing on mobile phones. Oregon State
University Libraries mobile website is discussed by
Bridges7, et al. and suggested significant implications for
libraries planning to implement a mobile website.
Broussard8, et al. discussed about mobile search
application for the University of Texas library catalog and
suggested that customised mobile applications have
potential to significantly better serve patrons in return for a
relatively small investment in development and
maintenance.
As per the survey conducted in America9 nearly half of
all American adults (47 %) reported that they get at least
some local news and information on their cell phone or
tablet computer. As per the study, 42 per cent of mobile
device owners reported getting weather updates on their
phones or tablets; 37 per cent said they get material
about restaurants or other local businesses. These
consumers are less likely to use their mobile devices for
359

news about local traffic, public transportation, general
news alerts or to access retail coupons or discounts.
Looking to the popularity of mobile phones in India, a
study10 was conducted on plan of M-Library for Smt. Hansa
Mehta Library. In Japan11, over 75 per cent of internet
users already use a mobile as their first choice for
access. “This shift in the means of connecting to the
internet is being enabled by the convergence of three
trends: the growing number of internet-capable mobile
devices, increasingly flexible web content, and continued
development of the networks that support connectivity” 11.

4. NEED OF WEBSITES FOR MOBILE PHONE
USERS
Internet has revolutionary changed in the way of
information generation, information communication, and
accessing information. Today’s students are quickly
using internet for searching information. Nowadays, most
of the Indian universities and their libraries are maintaining
websites for providing information to its users. These
websites are developed keeping in mind to accessible
through internet on desktop personal computers and
laptops. Therefore these websites are developed for
display of information on big screen (i.e. 14 inches or 15
inches or more) and maximum contents are available on
these sites. Generally, the mobile screen size is about 3
inches to 5 inches and about 7-8 inches in case of tablet
computer.
Mobile phone users have been increased
tremendously in India. According to Telecom Regularity
Authority of India’s (TRAI) report India has about more
than 800 million mobile subscribers as on March 2011.
Use of internet through mobile phones has also been
increased very fast in India. As per report of August 2011,
internet and Mobile Association of India (IMAI) (http://
www.iamai.in/), India has presently 35 million mobile
internet users, out of which, 26.3 million users are
classified as active users.
Mobile sites12 are useful because they are developed
specially for mobile phones having many features like
limited important contents, speed, fast access on
mobiles, comfortable view on small screen etc.
Internationally, web-based library services for mobile
phone users have been offered by many academic
libraries (http://www.libsuccess.org/index.php?title=MLibraries) like Aalborg Libraries (Denmark), Boston
University Medical Center Mobile Library, California State
University (Fullerton, Pollak Library), Cambridge
University Library, London School of Economics (LSE)
Library, Mississippi State University Libraries, Michigan
Technological University Library, University of Illinois
Library, University of California (San Francisco),
Universitaetsbibliothek Heidelberg (Germany), New York
Law School, etc. Another revolutionary event in Indian
information technology history was held on 5 October
360

2011 with the launch of world cheapest computer tablet
i.e. Aakash at affordable cost (approximately $35 per
tablet) by Ministry of Human Resources Development of
India. As part of the pilot run (http://indiatoday.intoday.in/
story/), the first one lakh units of Aakash procured by the
government will be given to students for free. As per
government plan, Aakash could be purchased by
undergraduate and postgraduate students at a subsidised
price. Government of India has targeted of delivering one
crore Aakash Tablets. The screen size of the Tablet is 7
inches so websites for mobile phones will also be very
useful for Aakash Tablet users. Tablet PC is notebook
computer on which you can also write using a stylus. The
handwriting is digitised and can be converted to standard
text.
The main purpose of library is to maximise use of its
resources. Leading publishers of online databases and
fulltext online journals have already started to publish their
content for mobile phone users. Looking the popularity
and accessibility of mobiles phones in India, it is high
time to provide the access of university library websites
on mobile phones and smart phones. Mobile websites are
becoming important because in the mobile, the screens
are small to read the too much information. So it will be
very important and useful to develop the websites for
mobile phone users with less contents.

5. GUIDELINES FOR WEBSITES FOR
MOBILE PHONES
The most important factor in developing the websites
for mobile phone users is small size of the mobile phone
screen. There are various guidelines available on internet
to develop websites for mobile phones. The Webcredible
web tool is used to create this model of website.
Following usability guidelines suggested by Webcredible
(http://www.webcredible.co.uk/user-friendly-resources/
web-usability/ mobile-guidelines.shtml) are users friendly:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reduced amount of content
Single column layouts work best
Different navigation
Minimise text entry
Decision whether to create more than 1 mobile site
Design for touch screen and non-touch screen users
Advantage of inbuilt functionality

6. OPERATING SYSTEM FOR MOBILE
PHONES
In mobile phones, different operating system (OS)
cannot install easily, if one does not want preloaded OS. A
mobile OS reflects your lifestyle because it determines
the choice of applications and phone functionality. There
are various OS (i.e. Google’s Android, Apple’s iPhone OS,
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

Microsoft’s Windows Phone, Linux, Nokia’s MeeGo, etc.)
for mobile phones, smart phones and tablet computers.
The most common mobile OS is Android from Google Inc,
Blackberry OS from Research in Motion Limited etc.13.
The Android Open Source Project (AOSP) is tasked with
the maintenance and further development of Android.
Android has a large community of developers writing
applications that extend the functionality of the devices.
As per the study14 for mobile internet uses in India by OS,
38 per cent hit is from Nokia series 40 OS and 31 per cent
form proprietary OS.
Gartner (http://www.geek.com/smartphone-buyersguide/operating-system/) an analyst firm says that
Google’s Android will overtake the iPhone OS by 2012.
The number of Android devices is expanding rapidly, and
includes phones from HTC, Motorola, and Sony Ericsson.
Google is adding new features to Android at a rapid pace,
providing device vendors with the OS code on an open
source basis so they can make it their own. Android is
Linux-based so it scales from basic phones, to fully
featured smart phones, to note-books.

7. DEVELOPMENT OF WEBSITE FOR
MOBILE PHONES
Nowadays development of websites for mobile phones
is not a difficult task. It does not require programming
skills. As for as content on website for mobile users is
concerned, it is expected that one has to reduce the
content of the present websites to optimise it for mobile
phone users. There are free and commercial tools which
provide the facility to convert website and blog into mobile
phone user-friendly websites. With help of free web tool
Wirenode, one can create a mobile friendly website. It
works on Android and other operating systems for mobile
phones and smart phones. Presently, most of the
applications for mobile phone devices have been
developed on Android. Here, an attempt has been made

to optimise website of University Library, Pantnagar as a
model of website for mobile phone users with the help of
Wirenode.

7.1. Steps for Creating Websites for Mobile
Phones
It is required to create an account for developing
website of mobile phones users with Wirenode (http://
www.wirenode.com/). After creating account, account
holders are able to create home page of their mobile
phone websites. Important pages can be linked with
home page. At the time of creating the website for mobile
phones one has to give the name of the site. Here the
name of the model site is libgbpuat and the address of the
site is http://libgbpuat.wirenode.mobi). The homepage of
this site is shown in the Fig. 1. Important pages of the
university library, i.e., About the library, online journals,
Krishi Prabha, CeRA, OPAC, etc., are linked with this
homepage. Some of the link pages are also created with
this tool. The mobile website editor of Wirenode is
important tool to edit the page. Creating internal and
external links are very easy with Wirenode. After
completing the website, it is required to publish the site
with the help of publish command of Wirenode, then it will
be able to access all the mobile phone users. The preview
facility is also provided by the Wirenode so that website
developer can preview its look on mobile phones. The
preview of the model website is shown on mobile emulator
in Fig. 2. Mobile phone users can access this site through
http://libgbpuat.wirenode.mobi.

7.2 Adding Widgets to Mobile Websites
Other widgets, i.e., blogs, RSS feeds, twitter, social
media, etc., can also be added through Wirenode in the
mobile websites. The blog (http://e-agrinformation.blogs
pot.com/) is added to the mobile website. The new post
‘Book Fair’ on blog is shown on the mobile website
automatically at Fig. 3.

Figure 1. Homepage of the Pantnagar Library mobile wesite.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

361

Figure 2. Preview of the mobile website.

Figure 3. New post on mobile website.

7.3 Quick Response (QR) Code
The QR code is two dimensional barcodes. It was first
designed in Japan for automobile industry15. Now the QR
code is very common in mobile phone web industry. The
website’s address is easily transformed into QR code by
various software. These QR codes are quickly read by
mobile phone devices. The QR codes are very helpful
rather than typing web address on small phone devices.
These are more useful than barcode because they can
store much more data. Following QR code at Fig. 4 of this
model website is created with the help of Wirenode.
362

Figure 4. QR code of the website.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

8. BENEFITS OF MOBILE WEB
Academic libraries all over the world are most affected
by internet and digital technology. Indian academic
libraries have been adopting new information and
communication technologies. Websites for mobile phone
users is beneficial because:

encourage and will be helpful for library professional to
develop their library websites for mobile phone users.
There are commercial sites like iSites which also provide
the facility for developing mobile websites with many
features. Many individuals around the world who are
involved in developing, using, and monitoring technologies
in higher education believe that mobile computing has
great significance for educational institutions.
Development of websites in Indian libraries for mobile
phones, smart phones, and tablet computer will be the
great contribution for providing prompt information
services to the maximum users specially to the students.

•

In India, mobile coverage has reached up-to the
remote or village-level so the information from these
websites can be accessed remote areas level at any
time.

•

At university level most of the students and
academicians have the mobile phones. internet
mobile users are also increasing every day in India.

REFERENCES

It will increase the use of online resources without
restriction of time, place, etc.

1. Beal, V. Introduction to mobile devices. http://
www.webopedia.com/quick_ref/
mobile_OS.asp.
(accessed on 4 October 2011).

•

9. SUGGESTIONS

2. Aguiar, M.; Boutenko, V.; Michael, D.; Rastogi, V.;
Subramaniam, A. & Zhou, Y. Internet’s new billion
digital consumers in Brazil, Russia, India, China and
Indonesia. Boston Consulting Group, Boston, USA,
2010.

•

There is an urgent need for library management
software like LibSys, SOUL Koha NewGenLib, etc.
being. used in Indian libraries to promote the facility of
WebOPAC on mobile phones.

•

Training to develop mobile website and mobile
services is need of the hour for Indian Library
professionals. National Informatics Centre (NIC),
National Institute of Science Communication and
Information Resources (NISCAIR), Information &
Library Network (INFLIBNET), etc., may provide the
training to library professionals in this growing area.

•

The library services like reference service, WebOPAC, etc. can be started to develop for mobile
phones/smart phones users in Indian academic
libraries.

4. Duncombe, R. & Boateng, R. Mobile phones and
financial services in developing countries: A review of
concepts, methods, issues, evidence and future
research direction. Third World Quart., 2009, 30(7),
1237-58.

•

Now third generation (3G) and fourth generation (4G)
technology of mobile are coming in the market which
provide very fast internet on mobile phones and smart
phones. So internet-based libraries services on
mobile phones will be useful in future.

5. Sánchez, Montserrat Mateos; Vidales, M.A.
Sánchez; Gallinas, R. Berjón; Gutiérrez, E. Beato &
García, A. Fermoso. M-library: A new platform to
provide mobile-services of libraries. Inter. J. Digital
Content Technol. Appli., 2009, 3(4), 133-40.

10. CONCLUSIONS
In the present digital environment, use of internet
through mobile phones, smart phones, and tablet PCs
have been increased tremendously among youths all over
the world including India. So the future of websites for
mobile phones is very bright and it is need of the hour. The
library professionals have been playing very vital role in
providing the information to the user. The simple steps for
developing website for mobile phone users through free
web tool (i.e., Wirenode) have been discussed in the
paper. This web tool also provides the free hosting facility
for the mobile website with widgets facility. Therefore, the
present model (i.e. http://libgbpuat.wirenode.mobi) will
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

3. Kreutzer, T. Internet and online media usage on
mobile phones among low-income urban youth in
Cape Town. In Preconference Workshop at
Conference of International Communication
Association (ICA), Chicago, 20-21 May 2009. http://
tinokreutzer.org/mobile/InternetOnlineMediaUsage%
28ICA%29.pdf (accessed on 7 October 2011).

6. Lippincott, Joan K. A mobile future for academic
libraries. Reference Serv. Rev., 2010, 38(2), 205-13.
7. Bridges, Laurie; Rempel, Hannah Gascho & Griggs,
Kimberly. Making the case for a fully mobile library
web site: From floor maps to the catalog. Ref. Ser.
Rev., 2010, 38(2), 309-20.
8. Broussard, Ramona; Zhou, Yongyi & Lease,
Matthew. Mobile phone search for library catalogs.
ASIST, 22–27 October 2010, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
www.ischool.utexas.edu/~ml/papers/broussard-as
ist10.pdf. (accessed on 16 November 2011).
9. Purcell, K.; Rainie, L.; Rosenstiel, T. & Mitchell, A.
363

How mobile devices are changing community
information environments. http://stateofthemedia.org/
2011/Mobile-survey/. (accessed on 22 October 2011).
10. Trivedi, Mayank & Suthar, Vishnu. A plan of M-Library
for Smt Hansa Mehta Library: A study. Inter. J. Inf.
Commu. Technol. Res., 2011, 1(3), 91-95.
11. Johnson, L.; Adams, S. & Haywood, K. The NMC
Horizon Report: 2011 K-12 edition. The New Media
Consortium Austin, Texas, 2011. http://www.nmc.org/
pdf/2011-Horizon-Report-K12.pdf (accessed on 23
November 2011).
12. Das, S. Mobile sites: The inclusive option. Data
Quest, 15 April 2011, 50-53.
13. Wikipedia. Mobile operating system. http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_operating_system.
(accessed on 15 October 2011).
14. Comviva Marketing Team. India mobile internet study.

364

http://www.comviva.com/Resource%20Center/mar
ketstudy/Comviva%20India%20Mobile%20Internet%
20Study%20V1 %200.pdf. (accessed on 15 October
2011).
15. Wikipedia. QR code. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
QR_code. (accessed on 12 October 2011).
About the Author
Dr Sunil Goria (BSc, MLIS, PhD in Library & Information
Science and PGDCA) is working as an Assistant
Librarian (Selection Grade) at University Library, GB Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar since
1999. He has published 16 papers in national and
international journals and conferences including IFLA,
ICDL, IAALD, etc. He was awarded Commonwealth
Professional Fellow in 2010, UK and Norman Borlaug
Fellowship of USDA at National Agricultural Library, USA
in 2007. His areas of interests are: Digital library,
knowledge management, e-learning, information literacy,
web 2.0, DBMS, etc.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(4)

