DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 388-392
© 2012, DESIDOC

Open Source Library Management and Digital Library Software
V.T. Kamble*, Hans Raj**, and Sangeeta*
*Department of Library and Information Sciences, Gulbarga University, Gulbarga
**EPKAR, ICAR, New Delhi

ABSTRACT
In this era of transition from information age to knowledge society, the libraries have much greater
challenges to face. The whole perception of library has now changed from collection of books to a single
window knowledge bank. This paper discusses the definition and features of open source library management
software, criteria of selection of best open source library management software, their, advantages and
limitations. Open source library management software is a solution to reducing that cost. The paper describes
in brief about the feature of some of the open source library management software like Greenstone Digital
Library, DSpace, Koha, E-Prints, NewGenlib. PhpMyLibrary, OpenBiblio, Avanti, etc., which are useful for
developing digital library and institutional repositories.The paper also highlight the initiatives taken in India to
make use of open source library management software for developing their digital libraries.
Keywords: Open source library management software, Greenstone digital library, DSpace, Koha, E-Prints, New
Genlib, open access initiative, digital library, GSDL

1. INTRODUCTION

2.1 Advantages of OSS

Library automation starts with the adoption of library
management software in the library. The software should
have the maximum facilities to automate the library into
computerised systems. Library automation is the general
term for information and communication technologies that
are used to replace manual systems in the library. The
key functions of the library, which may be automated are
acquisition, cataloguing, circulation, serials control, and
reference service.

The OSS offers a radically different and exponentially
better software development model. OSS provides cheap
alternatives to expensive commercialised solutions.
Source code of the software is always open and available
to the libraries which is not possible in case of traditional
commercial software. Libraries can modify or develop the
software according to their requirement and for this they
do not have to pay license fees to anybody. The OSS
provides no restrictions on how the software is used. It
reduces dependence on software vendors. The OSS is
more reliable than closed source traditional commercial
software. The OSS also provides security and
technological independence to the libraries. It also helps
the library professionals to deliver low cost or free services
to users. It helps converting their libraries in to digital
form. Implementation cost of OSS is also more affordable
to the libraries than traditional commercial software.
Overall, open source is good for everyone1.

There are many commercial library software are in use
in the different libraries, but open source library
management software has generated lot of interest
among the library professionals over the past years.

2. OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE
Open source software (OSS) is computer software
whose source code is available under a license for users
to look at and modify freely and permits users study,
change, and improve the software, and to redistribute it in
modified or unmodified form1.
The OSS differs from the closed source or proprietary
software. The primary difference between the two is the
freedom to modify the software.

2.2 Limitations with OSS
For any upgradation/change in the OSS, the library
needs support. In case of OSS, there is no body to solve
problem, either one have to hire some expert to solve
problem or library should make arrangement with some
company. Open source products require technical

Received 14 May 2012, accepted 14 May 2012, online published 7 September 2012

388

expertise to operate and maintain open source costs
more to support because the software is typically selfsupporting. Generally, a commercial software company
will immediately respond on customer requests for any
problem. With OSS, if one doesn’t do it himself, he is at
the mercy of a disjoint community of developers.

2.3 Problem Encountered After Taking
Initiative
The main problems faced in the libraries are related to
retraining end-user to get use to new paradigm shift. The
library professional and user have faced initial difficulties
adopting to open source technology practice due to nonavailability of proper training. There are not sufficient
equipments available in the library. Sometimes library
authority does not agree to adopt new technology and
therefore it is very difficult to adopt new systems to
provide library service to the users. Major problem faced
by the library is to shift data from existing software to
OSS because library professionals are not well
acquainted about software programming or source code.

2.4 Selection of Library Management
Software
Selection of library management software (LMS) is
not a simple task. Sometimes librarians go with either
renowned software or maximum number of usage of the
library. Selection of LMS may consist the following points/
steps, which might help the librarians to select the right
software for their housekeeping operations as well as
information retrieval.
There are many LMS, which are very popular and
being used by number of libraries. Librarians may have
the comprehensive study about them before taking
decision in this regard. While examining the software,
librarian must have the followings information about the
software which might help to select the right software for
housekeeping operations as well as information retrieval2:

another, multifunction modules, does it enhance the
productivity

•

Conforming to standards: MARC, Z39.50, ISO-2709,
etc.

•

Scalability: Single user-multi use network. Can it be
used in client server LAN architecture or fully webbrowsing architecture

•

User-controlled customisation

•

Reports that help take decisions

•

Security levels

•

Migration of data or data transfer

3. OPEN SOURCE LIBRARY MANAGEMENT
SOFTWARE
Open source LMS is a valuable catalyst for change in
terms of exploring possibilities and pushing boundaries
for the community. There are many open source LMS
being used in the libraries. In India also, some libraries
like, Delhi Public Library, British Council Library, Mysore
University Library, etc., are using OSS. Some of open
source LMS are:

3.1 Koha
Koha is a promising full featured open source
integrated library system (ILS) created in 1999 by Katipo
Communications for the Horowhenua Library Trust in New
Zealand, and currently being used by thousands of
libraries all over the world. It includes modules for
circulation, cataloging, acquisitions, serials, reserves,
patron management, branch relationships, and more.
Koha has web-based Interfaces. Koha is built using
library ILS standards and uses the OPAC (online public
access catalog) interface. In addition, Koha has no
vendor-lock in, so libraries can receive technical support
from any party from they want. It is distributed under the
free open source general public license (GPL). It supports
MARC 21 and UNIMARC support, Z39.50. It also has a
provision for online reservations and renewals,

•

How it matches the library’s requirements

•

Product quality

•

Features and functions

3.2 NewGenlib

•

Staff training and support service

•

Operating system

•

Hardware and software requirements

•

Functionality: What modules are available, value
addition to existing functions

•

User interface: Navigation, error alerts, intuitive,
customisation

•

Design: Flexibility, switching from one module to

NewGenLib, an integrated LMS is open source under
the most widely used free software license, GNU GPL.
NewGenLib is the result of collaboration between
specialists in library automation and software specialists.
The software was developed over a four-year joint effort
between a professional charitable trust, Kesavan Institute
of Information and Knowledge Management (KIIKM) and a
fledgling software development company. Libraries in
India still do not generally use international metadata and
interoperability standards (e.g., MARC-2l, Dublin Core,
OAI-PMH) and it is believed that this puts them at a great

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

389

disadvantage when it comes to sharing metadata and
building union catalogues and networking. The fact that
libraries are not networked and hence are handicapped in
sharing costly bibliographic and full-text resources among
themselves, the importance of providing a software that
would allow both library management and the creation of
institutional open access repositories increases.

3.3 PhpMyLibrary
PhpMyLibrary is a PHP/MySQL web-based library
automation application meant for smaller libraries. The
software has the facilities of cataloguing, circulation, and
OPAC module. The software also has an import export
feature. It strictly follows the USMARC standard for
adding materials. This software is compatible with the
content management system and have as facility of
Online reservation system for library and also supports
import from ISIS database with an ISIS2MARC program.

3.4 OpenBiblio
OpenBiblio is an easy to use, open source,
automated library software written in PHP. This software
has facilities of OPAC, circulation, cataloging, and other
administrative work. OpenBiblio is well documented, easy
to install with minimal expertise and designed with
common library feature.

3.5 Avanti
Avanti MicroLCS Software is developed by Avanti
Library Systems in Java language. This is a small,
simple, and easy to install and use open source software.
it is a platform independent, and can run on any system
that supports a Java runtime environment. This software is
useful for small libraries, it has a powerful and very flexible
architecture that allows it to be adapted for use in libraries
of any type. This software incorporate standards such as
MARC and Z39.50 as modules and interfaces.

3.6 Greenstone Digital Library
The Greenstone digital library software is an open
source system for the construction and presentation of
information collections. Greenstone is a suite of software
for building digital library collections. It is not a digital
library but a tool for building digital libraries. It provides a
new way of organising information and publishing it on the
internet in the form of a fully-searchable, metadata-driven
digital library. It has been developed and distributed in
cooperation with UNESCO and the Human Info NGO in
Belgium. It is multilingual software, issued under the
terms of the GNU GPL Greenstone runs on all versions of
Windows, and Unix/Linux, and Mac OS-X and is very
easy to install. It has two separate interactive interfaces,
the Reader interface and the Librarian interface. End
390

users access the digital library through the Reader
interface, which operates within a web browser. The
reader’s interface is available in the following languages:
Arabic, Armenian, Bengali, Catalan, Croatian, Czech,
Chinese (both simplified and traditional), Dutch, English,
Farsi, Finnish, French, Galician, Georgian, German,
Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese,
Kannada, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Latvian, Maori, Mongolian,
Portuguese (BR and PT versions), Russian, Serbian,
Spanish, Thai, Turkish, Ukrainian, and Vietnamese.

3.7 DSpace
DSpace was developed by Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) libraries and Hewlett-Packard (HP), as
an open source application that institutions and
organisations could run with relatively few resources. It is
to support the long-term preservation of the digital
material stored in the repository. DSpace accepts all
manner of digital formats, such as articles, preprints,
working papers, technical reports, conference papers,
books, theses, data sets, computer programs,
visualisations, simulations, and other models, multimedia
publications, administrative records, published books,
journals, bibliographic datasets, images, audio files, video
files, reformatted digital library collections, learning
objects, web pages, etc.

3.8 E-Prints
E-Prints has been developed at the University of
Southampton School of Electronics and Computer
Science in 2000 and released under a GPL license for
building open access repositories that are compliant with
the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata
Harvesting (OAI-PMH). It shares many of the features
commonly seen in document management systems, but
is primarily used for institutional repositories and
scientific journals.

3.9 Fedora
Fedora software gives organisations a flexible serviceoriented architecture for managing and delivering their
digital content. Digital objects exist within a repository
architecture that supports a variety of management
functions. All functions of Fedora, both at the object and
repository level, are exposed as web services. These
functions can be protected with fine-grained access
control policies. This unique combination of features
makes Fedora an attractive solution in a variety of
domains. Some examples of applications that are built
upon Fedora include library collections management,
multimedia authoring systems, archival repositories,
institutional repositories, and digital libraries for
education.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

4. Open Source Software Initiative in India
In India there are a number of university and institute
libraries, which are in the process of conversion into DLs.
The advantage of having a DL is now well understood by
librarians, technologists, management and users. The
situation in India regarding DLs is very peculiar. Generally,
the use of information technology (IT) and information and
communication technology (ICT) in libraries in India is
concentrated in universities, Indian Institutes of
Technology (IITs), Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs),
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), ICMR, CSIR, ICAR and
their research institutes and some special libraries. Some
government agencies, as well as public-sector
institutions, are also engaged in digitisation of libraries.
But the initiatives taken by the Government of India in this
direction indicate that the potential of ICTs for developing
DLs has not been fully realised. While one government
agency is providing support for one particular aspect, the
other is focusing elsewhere without any coordinated effort
by a nodal agency3,4.
In agriculture sector, the beginning of digitisation of
Indian information was initiated by ICAR5, when, Govt. of
India took decision to participate in AGRIS database of
Food and Agricultural Organisation. The ICAR has
digitized approximately 1.5 lakh bibliographic records of
research information published in various Indian Journals
and made available to world agricultural community using
CDS/ISIS software. Under the National Agricultural
Innovative Project (NAIP), emphasis would be on
strengthening of the ICAR-Net, creation of digitised
content and knowledge management, using open source
management software and CMS and strengthening of 42
libraries of the SAUs and ICAR Institutes into fully
electronic libraries, formation of an ICAR e-journals
Consortium. Recently, it is decided at UAS, Bangalore in
September 2011 to Implement Koha LMS in 12 partner
libraries under (e-Granth) project of NAIP.
The ICAR also developed its website using an open
source content management system called Drupal. The
website is a unique platform for sharing and dissemination
of information to a wide range of users and stakeholders.
The ICAR research journals (The Indian Journal of
Agricultural Sciences and The Indian Journal of Animal
Sciences) are available in open-access mode and have
been downloaded in 158 countries6. Journal of Medicinal
and Aromatic Plants and Fishery Technology of Society of
Fisheries Technologists (India) are also published as
open access journals on epubs platform of ICAR.
The CMFRI has developed open access institutional
repository, using E-print software. The institute’s
repository can be accessed from the Institute website and
users anywhere in the world can download the research
outputs. This repository was created using OSS
developed by the University of Southampton at UK.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

Kerala Agricultural University (KAU) had launched its
journal, ‘Journal of Tropical Agriculture’ and University of
Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad made available its
journal, ‘Karnataka Journal of Agricultural Sciences’
using Open Journal Systems (OJS), a free open source
software (FOSS).
Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI),
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), Indian
Institute of Spice Research (IISR) and Indian Institute of
Horticultural Research (IIHR) have established open
access repositories using Eprint, DSpace and other OSS.
The Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SBI) with the support
of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(DSIR) had established ‘CaneInfo’ a sugarcane
knowledge repository. Under the NAIP sub-project
‘Strengthening of digital library and information
management’ (e-Granth), 12 institutions in NARS are in
the process of establishing their institutional repositories
which would have a digital collection of rare books and old
journals available in their libraries.
The Indian Academy of Sciences is one of three
science academies in India. Apart from various other
activities, it publishes 11 science journals reporting
research work both in India and outside. These journals,
mainly in print, are freely accessible on the web. The EPrint archives of the Indian Institute of Science is an
online digital repository of research papers, both reprints
and post prints, technical reports, unpublished findings,
and journal articles of the faculty. It was set up using EPrint, and is registered in the e-prints registry.
Eprints@iisc is now part of the worldwide institutional
e-print archives. The E-prints archives allow the faculty
and students to submit their publications electronically to
the campus network. The eprints@iisc website also
supports metadata for browsing and searching. It is also
integrated with the Greenstone Digital Library software,
which enables full-text searching of the e-prints.
The Raman Research Institute has developed digital
repository in DSpace which allows research community
to deposit preprints, post prints, and other publications
and organises these publications for retrieval. It also
contains the annual reports of Institute and newspaper
clippings from its archives. The repository uses DSpace.
National Chemical Laboratory has also developed the
institute repository using DSpace. Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi also develop digital libraries.
Online courseware has been developed and older volumes
of journals have been digitised, among other projects.
More than 500 dissertations are available in the
repository. The Central Library, IIT Kharagpur and
Bombay, has also created institutional repository. The
repository at IIT Bombay has bibliographic information
and abstract for dissertations beginning in 1965. More
391

than 3,000 full-text theses and dissertations are available
in the ETD database.
The repository uses Greenstone. The NISCAIR has
also developed National Science Digital Library by
providing Internet access to digital resources related to
science and technology7.

5. CONCLUSIONS
Digitisation needs a huge amount of money for
creation and maintenance. Libraries have a growing role in
managing the output of their institution due in part of the
open access movement. The OSS have been found very
useful in various library operations. The OSS are a
solution to reduce the cost. Libraries can make use of
open source software for managing digital contents
effectively.
In India automation and networking of library are still in
their formative stages. Recently, ICAR and its institutes/
SAUs taken a decision to implement Koha open source
software initially in 12 Libraries from National Agricultural
Research System (NARS)8.
The LIS professionals should keep eyes on
development and to choose appropriate technology
depending upon needs. Since numbers of libraries
worldwide are using OSS for managing their library
systems more economically and effectively. Librarians
and programmers may worked together to implement
open source integrated library systems and at the same
time, library professional are required to acquire new
skills for developing and managing the digital library by
using open source LMS. For taking benefit from OSS
additional technology, education, and training are
essentially required.

392

REFERENCES
1. Annual Report. Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, New Delhi, 2009-2010. pp. 108-09.
2. Bankar , C.V.; Dayal, Ram & Gajbhiye, Mrunal. Open
source initiatives in libraries. In Proceedings of
National Conferences of Agricultural Librarian and
User Community 2011, edited by A.K. Jain; H.
Chandrasekharan; P. Visakhi; Hans Raj & Nabi
Hasan. Paper presented at Agricultural Libraries in
Knowledge Web, 24-25 February 2011. Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. 2011. pp.
182-85.
3. Bhatt, R.K. & Singh, K.P. Digital libraries: Emergence,
features, challenges and opportunities. In Digital
Libraries 2004: Knowledge, Preservation, Access and
Management, New Delhi, 2004.
4. Hans Raj & Roy, Mitali Gosh. Scientific publishing
and open access in agricultural sciences in India.
Paper presented at Ist AGRIS-ICRISAT Workshop, 6-7
November 2006, Hyderabad, ICRISAT, 2006
5. Harish Chandra. Role of digital libraries in S&T sector.
In Seminar on Migration to e-World: Challenges &
Opportunities for Library Professionals, Anna
University, Chennai, 8-9 December, 2005. pp. 83-100.
6. http://egranth.ac.in (accessed on 20 January 2012).
7. Tripathi, Harish & Hans Raj. Library management
software. In Knowledge Management-Issues and
Strategies, edited by P. Visakhi; V.K. Bharti; K.
Veeraneyulu; K.P. Singh; Hans Raj & C.S. Viswanath.
Udai Publishers, New Delhi, 2010. pp.119-37.
8. Varatharajan, N. & Chandrashekara, M. Digital library
initiatives at higher education and research
institutions in India. Lib. Philoso. Pract., 2007. http://
www.uihome.uidaho.edu/404.htm

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

