DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 401-408
© 2012, DESIDOC

Open Source Software for Library Services
Sunita Barve* and N.B. Dahibhate**
*National Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA), Pune-411 007
E-mail: sunitabarve@gmail.com
**National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune-411 008
E-mail: nb.dahibhate@ncl.res.in

ABSTRACT
Information and communications technology has played a major role in libraries. Libraries have now been
completely dependent on providing new services to its users based on computer applications. Different
computer programs are available for libraries to provide range of services from library automation, library
website management, knowledge management, digital library management to document editing. To manage vast
amount of digital information, libraries need some computer applications which takes care of their requirements.
These applications are generally developed by commercial vendors or are available under open source license
terms and conditions. In the present paper, an overview of range of open source software available for
various library services. Library professionals can effectively use these software to provide innovative
services to their users and without involvement of any of large budgets.
Keywords: Open source software, library services

1. INTRODUCTION
Information and communications technology (ICT) is a
buzz word in library science today. The ICT has been
taught and discussed at a great length in library schools
as well as in library professionals community. Library
schools still lack providing practical knowledge to
students while teaching the ICT related areas. Same is
the case with library professionals where many library
professionals depend completely on computer
applications which are available in the market and
supported by commercial vendors. Once any commercial
software is purchased for the library, library has to depend
on their terms and conditions and keep paying their AMC
costs yearly. Since libraries lack in technical experience,
vendors try to put their own terms and conditions while
purchasing any software. While supplying any
commercial software, the vendors do not supply the same
with its full functionality and proper training of all modules.
For every new small feature they demand heavily from the
customers and still there is lack of dissatisfaction among
the library community while using any commercial
software.
One of the main reasons given by the library
community to use commercial software is ‘support’
Received 14 May 2012, accepted 14 May 2012, online published

provided by the commercial vendors. It is observed many
times that though the AMCs are paid, still the commercial
vendors lack providing proper support for libraries which
include support for installation/re-installation of the
software, solving any issues while using the software,
upgrade of the software, providing new features in the
software, import/export/migration of data in standard
library format for future preservation, easy documentation
manuals, data entry support with library standards (such
as MARC-21, AACR-II, etc.), interoperability support of
data for exchange between libraries, email server support,
multilingual support, etc. Many such issues are not
handled properly by commercial vendors and open source
software (OSS) stands out best.
Several OSS are available today for libraries to provide
new value added services to end-users while handling
large volumes of library data. Many of the professionals
are either unaware of these software or due to insufficient
technical expertise they do not intend to implement these
software in their organisations.
In the present paper, some popular OSS which can be
effectively used in libraries for providing new services are
listed which are heavily used OSS from different
categories. These software are regularly upgraded and
7 September 2012

401

have a strong user community across the world. Many of
these software run on Linux as well as Windows operating
systems.

2. OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE
Since 1997, OSS have taken up a good market in
computer industry. Large number of OSS are available
today on internet. The world’s largest OSS development
website is http://sourceforge.net.
This site provide free hosting for all OSS-related
projects where actual programs, source code, statistics
related to OSS and other details about those projects are
available. Source Forge provides a platform for the
developers to create powerful software. Currently, it is
hosting 3,24,000 projects with more than 46 million users
who are using these software and there are more than
4,000,000 downloads a day1. According to Raymond2, the
definition of OSS is software that is freely redistributable
and can readily be evolved and modified to fit changing
needs.

MySQL, PHP, Sendmail, Bind, Tcl/Tk, Python, etc.
Firefox web browser has recently surpassed Microsoft’s
Internet Explorer due to its quality. Google, is currently
investing money into open source development, with its
own browser Chrome, and two operating systems,
Android for mobile phones and Chrome for computers.
All the OSS software are copyrighted and distributed
with license terms and conditions designed to ensure that
the source code is always available. The most popular
open source license is GPL, i.e., GNU Public License.
Generally, value of any OSS is measured in terms of its
simplicity and connectivity.

3. BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS
Following are some of the benefits of using OSS

•

Software does not depend on any specific hardware
or operating system platform to function.

•

With OSS, people can have any number of copies of
programs on their machines, at home or at work.

The OSS is a collaborative programming development
which releases its source code freely to the general public
for any use, modifications and redistribution without any
licensing restrictions. The source code refers to
instructions written by humans in a computer
programming language to be compiled into a binary
format that can run on a computer, carrying out the tasks
outlined in the source code3. Instructions to computers
are normally written by programmers in programming
languages like – C, C++, Java, Perl, Python, etc. These
instructions are readable by humans and referred to as
source code.

•

Since source code is available one can customise the
software as per the requirements.

•

It is possible to incorporate the software into the
another program to perform new functions.

•

If the user base of open source is large, it can sustain
in the market for long time.

•

Since developers working for open source are spread
across the world its development does not depend on
any single person/community. Hence, new release
versions can frequently be made available to the
community.

There is a general confusion, among the users about
OSS, free-ware, shareware and public domain software
licenses. Free-ware is a software that is released free of
cost in binary format only, which generally does not allow
any modifications and redistribution of the software.
Shareware is a software that is released free of cost in
binary format only and allowed for the use on a trial basis
and then insist end users to purchase the software.
Public domain is a software whose copyrights has
expired or has been released from copyright obligations
by the author(s), rendering it free of restrictions on usage
and redistribution.

•

There is large community of people who work on
popular open source hence regularly new versions of
the OSS are available to the community.

•

There is a group of community who can provide
support through mailing lists, internet relay chat
centers to get quick answer to any of problem/query.

•

Since it is open source, there is no data loss as well
as with open standards/formats, hence it is easy to
retrieve data for future.

The OSS are becoming increasingly popular software
development method. It is a term to describe the tradition
of open standards, shared source code, and collaborative
development. The OSS programs are available for any
user for use. In case of proprietary software, the software
is not free nor the source code of the software is available
to the end user.
There have been many successful open-source
projects e.g. Linux operating system, Apache web server,
402

Following are some of the drawbacks of using OSS

•

Lack of formal support and training that a commercial
software package offer.

•

Often software support is provided only through
mailing lists and discussion forums.

•

Installing and maintaining OSS generally requires a
technical knowledge than that required for commercial
software.

•

OSS are also not known for ease of use as the focus
is usually on functionality.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

•

With no vendor responsible for the software, support
for the OSS applications can vary and often depend on
the user/developer’s communities commitment to the
project.

by using OSS tools. For creating digital libraries, libraries
relied on OSS tools as an alternative instead of any
commercial digital library systems mainly due to
dissatisfaction with functionality8.

•

Documentation manuals of OSS are not very simple.

The OSS resources for libraries is vast and are
increasing at an exponential rate9, These software can be
used in libraries to provide new value added services to
end users without any requirements of large budgets. The
following sections provide list of different open source
applications which are available from different categories
and which can be effectively used to provide new services
to end users with successful implementation without
relying on any commercial vendors.

4. STATE OF OSS IN LIBRARIES
Daniel Chudnov has done a lot to raise the awareness
of OSS in libraries4. The OSS4libsite (http://
www.oss4.lib.org) now available as OSS in libraries (http:/
/foss4lib.org/) provides categorisation and listing of
library-related OSS applications including applications for
document delivery, Z39.50 clients and servers, systems
to manage collections, MARC record readers and writers,
integrated library system applications, digital library
software, digital archiving software, next generation
OPAC software, electronic journal archiving, etc.
The open source movement and libraries have a
common factor such as free and equal access to
information5. Libraries have highly specialised software
needs because the library community have developed its
own complex standards to share information. Until
recently libraries relied on the commercial solutions for all
their requirements due to unavailability of skilled IT staff
as well as unavailability of user friendly open source
solutions. Hence, open source solutions were not
considered in libraries as a scalable or feature-rich
solutions to handle most of the library requirements.
Today several companies/organisations all over the
world are committed to support and develop solutions
based on OSS for libraries as well as in other areas. They
offer services including hosting, installation to support,
and development services6. With these new options,
libraries don’t need an IT staff to deploy software or advice
on development of new features. The OSS provides an
opportunity for libraries to take control of library services
and collections relying on available hardware with
libraries. The time, effort, and money spent on buying
commercial solution can be diverted to provide training
existing staff on teaching OSS application as well as
hiring additional customers to customise OSS as per
specific requirements.

4.1 Library Automation Software
There are range of open source library automation
software available. Out of the available open source
software very few are updated/upgraded regularly and has
a large user base. The CDS/ISIS, is first information
storage and retrieval system developed by UNESCO
available free but not under open source license terms
and conditions and is heavily used only to uncatalogued
library collections. Koha, Evergreen, Invenio, Senayan
Library Management System, NewGenLib, EGranthalaya (not open source but available free after filling
up the form), OPALS-Library Automation Software, ABCD,
Glibms (not updated after 2002), Emilda (not updated
after 2005), OpenBiblio (not updated after 2008) are some
of the software available free to end users for library
automation.
Out of these available software Koha has been
installed widely across world and has a large user base
from developed countries to developing countries hence it
can be used in all types of libraries such as from School
to National library. Many countries have used Koha
effectively to complete their automation and bring their
OPACs on the web. Recently during 2011, Breeding
carried out a survey of automation software used in US
academic and public libraries and it was found that many
libraries in US continue to opt for open source ILSs rather
than proprietary products. Evergreen and Koha ILS have
become mainstream10 in libraries from USA.

4.1.1

Koha (http://koha-community.org)

The OSS generally provide more functions quickly
than commercial solutions as they are developed by the
users of the software who are spread across world and
keep developing small pieces of the software regularly. In
commercial software development, vendors priority is in
profit generation that may not be in line with the needs of
users7. Even with commercial vendors, number of
developers who work for developing a particular software
is a small group which is not the case with open source.

It is 100 per cent open source integrated library
automation software. New versions of Koha are released
every fortnightly. It has a global community of its
developers and has a large user-base across world
(approximately more than 2000 installations). Many
government organisations across world have officially
decided to use Koha to support open source technology.

Many OSS tools are now available for use in libraries.
The development of digital library initiative is mainly driven

Koha supports all modules of library applications as
well as has support for Z39.50 server, multilingual support,
supports library standards such as MARC-21/UNIMARC,

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

403

OAI-PMH, ISO2709 as well as support several next
generation OPAC features.
Koha community has been providing excellent
support through its mailing lists and IRC rooms. Software
has detailed online documentation manual and there are
several power-point presentations available on various
modules of Koha on internet. Many commercial vendors
provide support for koha. In India OSS, Labs, Mumbai and
Anant Corporation, Mumbai are the main commercial
players who provide support for Koha. The software can
handle millions of records and transactions.
Koha can be a best option for libraries to bring their
OPACs on the web from school libraries to national
libraries. Libraries have to make sure that their OPACs
are available on the web. Online book stores provide
details about any book published in any language but
availability of a particular book can only be known if library
catalogs are available on the web and can be Z39.50
compliant for searching and retrieving data.

widely used free open access, institutional repository
software for archiving preprints and post-prints of faculty
members. Due to simple installation process, EPrints
has been used by many libraries.

4.2.3

CDS-Invenio (http://invenio-software.org/)

CDS-Invenio is web-based integrated digital library
software developed by CERN. It is a powerful, flexible
digital library system suitable to handle very large
collections of full-text documents. It tries to combine the
best of the traditional library world and modern information
retrieval technology. It has an excellent authentication
and authorisation policy support. CDS-Invenio has grown
into a large software suite intended to cope with large
collections (almost 1 million records at CERN), and with
advanced library-type functionalities. CDS-Invenio allow to
catalogue print as well as digital documents with several
advance features. It uses MARC-21 bibliographic
standard. CDS-Invenio though supports very good
functionality, due to its small user-base it is not used by
many libraries across world.

4.2 Digital Library Software
Digital libraries (DLs)/institutional repositories (IRs)/
digital archives are been discussed heavily since 2000.
Under open source license terms and conditions range of
digital library software are available especially CDSInvenio, DoKS, DSpace, Eprints, FEDORA, Greenstone,
MyCoRe, etc. Each of these software has its own
advantages and disadvantages. DSpace and EPrints are
the most popular software used across world for building
digital repositories as per the statistics from Registry of
Open Access Repositories (ROAR)/Directory of Open
Access Repositories (DOAR).

4.2.1

DSpace (http://dspace.org )

It provides tools for management of digital assets, and
is commonly used for building institutional repositories. It
was basically designed to manage, host, preserve and
enable distribution of the scholarly output of MIT’s faculty.
In India, many institutions have taken steps to use
DSpace for building digital repositories/institutional
repositories. DSpace has more number of features over
EPrints hence is heavily used across world. Prominent
features of DSpace are that it supports unique
identification number for every digital document that is
added into DSpace repository, provides digital
preservation support, has excellent work-flow
management, has access control privacy and
management, support authentication and authorisation
policies at all levels.

4.2.2

EPrints (http://www.eprints.org)

It is a generic archive software developed by
University of Southampton. When first version of EPrints
was released it became the erst and one of the most
404

4.3 AUDIO/VIDEO RECORDINGS OF TALKS
4.3.1

OpenEyA (http://www.openeya.org )

In every organisations, talks are delivered by faculty
members, invited speakers and students. Many of these
talks are not recorded due to non availability of the
software to record and archive these talks. Libraries can
now take a leading role in recording these talks, archiving
and delivering using open source software called as
OpenEyA which is an easy to implement technology. This
can be one of the value added service from the library. This
technology is simple to use and can be implemented
without any need of high-end hardware. OpenEyA is a
linux-based automated lecture capture system developed
by the ICTP Science Dissemination Unit (SDU), Italy. The
software integrates different technologies under Ubuntu
operating system to synchronise:

•

Video in Flash format (to see whatever happens in
front of a classroom)

•

Slides from screen captures or any USB webcam (to
zoom specific areas of the classroom podium,
blackboard and/or projector screen) and

•

Classroom audio (without the need to wear a
microphone)

OpenEyA allows to archive (in Flash format) and
share (via web, zip) traditional scientific lectures and talks
carried out using chalkboards in classrooms and/or using
modern presentations (PPT, PDF, animations, etc.)
After the recording the software generates one html
file which integrates audio/video and classroom or PPT in
one single html file. As soon as html is opened the flash
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

format video starts running and acts as a streaming
server. This is one of the important feature of ‘OpenEyA’
as well as each file occupy very less space hence to
deliver these contents over web does not have any
constraints.

4.4 Library Website/Content Management/
Knowledge Management Software
Library website maintenance is one of primary activity
of any library. So far, most of the libraries are creating only
html pages of information available in their libraries and
publish this information from the organisational websites.
Some libraries use free web logs to create blog of their
library and disseminate information about their services.
Creating blog is an easy way of publishing information
about library, services provided by library and any other
useful information about the library. There are certain
limitations to either use html or blog services.
A web presence is critical for almost every library, but
creating websites can be daunting. It can take a lot of
time, money and technical expertise, which are often in
short supply. It is difficult to maintain library websites with
updates and with new desirable features demand from
user community. Here, an open source content
management system (CMS) can help. The CMS tools
allow to easily create complex library websites with lot of
new features.
The CMS is a software program that makes building
and maintaining websites faster and easier. The CMS lets
one build a website that can be quickly and easily
updated by non-technical staff members. These open
source systems are created and supported by a
community of developers, and can be downloaded without
cost. Both their feature sets and their price tags make
open source systems particularly attractive to libraries.
CMS stores actual content (text and images) on a back
end database. The system then automatically pulls the
content out and show it on the appropriate pages.
There are several free OSS available which are heavily
used all over the world to maintain institutions web sites
hence same can be used for managing library websites
as well. The well known among these software are Drupal,
Plone, Joomla, WordPress (http://wordpress.org), etc.
These software also can be used to play a key role in
‘Knowledge Management’ projects. Using Joomla, Plone,
Drupal or WordPress is very easy and these software can
handle large volumes of data and can provide several Web
2.0 services.
Plone is difficult system to learn and install.
WordPress, Joomla, and Drupal are fairly easy systems
to get installation done and build library web sites. Among
these three WordPress is the easiest to learn and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

implement but can be used for small website
management.

4.4.1

Drupal (http://drupal.org)

It can be a great choice for libraries for building their
websites and handling complex volume of data. Along
with publishing information about library, Drupal also
allows to support creating blogs for every user, handling of
thousands of pages, storing formatted bibliographic
information, automatically building site map from menus
and content categories, providing tags to every content,
providing social bookmarking support, photo/video
sharing, RSS feeds support, faceted search feature,
maintaining user profiles, taking user polls, etc. Several
Web 2.0 features are supported in drupal. Drupal also
allow to create a library catalog by importing MARC
records.
Drupal uses a classification system for all content in
its system that can allow to place content virtually
anywhere on the site at any given time11. Flexible and
powerful Drupal is a great choice for complex site
maintenance.

4.4.2

Kompozer (http://kompozer.net)

It is used to design simple webpages in html format. It
is an open source web file management system and
easy-to-use WYSIWYG (What-You-See-Is-What-YouGet) webpage creating/editing. Kompozer is designed to
be extremely easy to use, making it useful for non
technical computer users who can create attractive,
professional websites/webpages without needing to know
HTML or web coding.

4.5 Citation Management Software
4.5.1

Zotero (http://www.zotero.org)

It is a free web-based easy to use citation
management tool. It helps one to collect, organise, cite
and share his/her research sources. Zotero is a firefox
plugin and a standalone application. It lives right where
one does his/her work in the web browser itself. Zotero
allows to grab books, articles, webpages, and whatever
else one find and allows to cite and then organise and
generate bibliography in different standard format such as
National Library of Medicine, American Psychological
Association, American Political Science Association,
Chicago Manual of Style, etc., and allow to easily cite
references while writing articles, thesis, reports.
Zotero not only allows to manage all references as per
different categories but as well allow to upload full-text of
files along with each reference and these full text files are
indexed so it allows to search inside the pdf files which
are uploaded on a Zotero server.
405

4.6 Audio/Video Files Editing
4.6.1

Audacity (http://audacity.sourceforge.net)

It is a free OSS for recording and editing sound. It is a
free, easy-to-use and multilingual audio editor and
recorder for Windows, Mac OS X, GNU/Linux and other
operating systems. Audacity allows to record live audio,
convert tapes/records into digital recordings/CDs, edit
variety of audio files, allow to cut, copy, mix sound
together, etc.

4.6.2

Avidemux (http://http://fixounet.free.fr/
avidemux/)

It is a free video editor designed for simple cutting,
filtering and encoding of video files. It supports many file
types including AVI, MP4, MPEG, ASF, etc. Avidemux is
available for Linux, BSD, Mac OSX and Microsoft
Windows under the GNU GPL license.

4.6.3

Kino (http://www.kinodv.org)

It is an another popular video editor software. Kino
allow to load multiple video clips, cut, paste portions of
video/audio and save it as a new file. Kino allow to export
videos into number of formats such as AVI, MP3, MPEG1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4.There are several audio/video
players available under open source such as vlc, mplayer,
Kaffine, etc. which can be used to play audio/video files.
Among all available players, VLC player has capability to
handle most of the audio/video file formats.

4.7 Conference Management System
Conference Management systems are web
applications which usually include features such as
registration, payment, paper submission, review,
scheduling, announcements, post conference details,
proceedings of the conference, recordings of the talks
delivered during the conference, etc.

4.7.1

Open Conference Systems (http://
pkp.sfu.ca/?q=ocs)

It is an open source solution to managing and
publishing scholarly conferences online. It has been
designed to reduce the time and energy devoted to the
clerical and managerial tasks associated with managing
a conference, while improving the record-keeping and
efficiency of editorial processes as well as allow to
publish post conference proceedings.

4.7.2

Indico (http://indico-software.org)

It is an another web application to schedule and
organise events, from simple lectures to complex
meetings, workshops and conferences with sessions and
contributions. The tool includes an advanced user
delegation mechanism, and allows paper reviewing,
406

archival of conference information and electronic
proceedings.

4.8 Journal Management System
4.8.1

Open Journal System (http://http://pkp.sf
u.ca/?q=ojs)

It is a journal management and publishing system that
has been developed to expand and improve access to
research. The OJS can handle online submission and
management of all contents. The OJS assists with every
stage of the referred publishing process, from
submissions through to online publication and indexing.
The OJS is made freely available to journals worldwide
for the purpose of making open access publishing a viable
option for more journals, as open access can increase a
journal’s readership as well as its contribution to the
public good on a global scale.

4.9 Website Download
4.9.1

HTTrack (http://www.httrack.com)

It is a free, easy-to-use off line browser utility. It allows
to download a world wide web site from the Internet to a
local directory, building recursively all directories, HTML
pages, images, and other files from the server to a local
computer. HTTrack arranges the original site’s relative
link-structure. To view a website, one can simply open a
page of the ‘mirrored’ website in a browser, and it is
possible to browse the site from link to link, as if you are
viewing it online. HTTrack can also update an existing
mirrored site, and resume interrupted downloads.
HTTrack is fully configurable, and has an integrated help
system.

4.9.2

Document Editing Software

To edit, combine and manage several PDF files, there
are several free tools available such as pdfedit, pdfjam,
pdfjoin, pdf90, pdf180, etc. are available in linux. One can
easily play with multiple pdf files. These tools allow to
join, rotate and edit pdf files.

4.10

E-learning Management System

A learning management system (LMS) is a system
used to deliver online education. Today, most LMS make
extensive use of web and include features such as
discussion forums, chats, journals, grading tools, and
student tracking.

4.10.1 Moodle (http://moodle.org)
It is one of the most popular open source e-learning
course management system (CMS), also known as a
learning management system or a virtual learning
environment (VLE). It is a free web application that
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

educators can use to create effective online learning
sites. A single Moodle website can host a large number of
courses. Each course can be managed by one or more
teachers. Courses can contain activities such as
discussion forums, student journals, quizzes, surveys,
assignments, chats, and workshops. Moodle includes
support for grading, file uploads, user logging and
tracking, multimedia, e-mail integration, and many other
features, all comparable to those available in a proprietary
LMS.

4.11 Next Generation OPACs
Due to developments in technology, the users expect
now one-stop searching for all documents (federated
searching) that are available in libraries such as searching
across library OPAC (bibliographic information search
about printed books, videos, journal titles), digital library
collections (metadata, full-text search from digital
documents), e-books, e-journals subscribed by the library
and other databases available in the library.
These next generation catalogue systems are
distinguished from earlier OPACs as they provide more
sophisticated search and retrieval features as well as
support12:

•

Images of book covers, CD, audio/video files, Table of
Contents, summaries, reviews

•

Relevance ranking

•

Faceted search

•

Spell checking

•

Users who borrowed this also borrowed

•

Amazon like contents

•

RSS feeds (which deliver new acquisitions of books
and search updates)

•

Write reviews/comments about a book, initiate
discussions about a book, ratings and tag
clouds

•

Create reading lists and share with others through a
more versatile OPAC interfaces

•

Suggest books online

•

Home delivery of books to users who never visit
libraries

•

Mobile/e-mail notices of overdue/return/reserved
books as well as access to library web OPAC

•

Users may be interested in knowing what their
neighbors are reading, listening and watching

•

User ratings

•

Bookmark and share

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

•

TOC, summary of the book and visual display of
narrow down results

Many open source next generation OPAC software
are available such as SOPAC supported by Drupal,
Evergreen, Bluefind, Vufind, Voyager, etc.

4.11.1 Vufind (http://www.vufind.org)
It is a one of the popular and heavily used next
generation OPAC software designed and developed for
libraries by libraries. The goal of VuFind is to enable users
to search and browse through all of your library’s
resources by replacing the traditional OPAC to include
searching records from library catalog, locally cached
journals, digital library items, institutional repository
items, institutional bibliography items, and any other
library collections and resources.

4.12

Wiki Management

A wiki is a website that can be edited directly by
people browsing it. Wikis allow others to contribute and
modify entries. Wikis are online, collaborative that allow
anyone to add, edit or delete pages. Some Wikis require
registered membership, and others are private, but many
allow anyone with access to the web to contribute. Wikis
use a simplified mark-up syntax that allow users to
contribute without any knowledge of HTML.
Wiki’s help libraries to organise library resources and
improve communication with users. Wiki software can be
used to perform several tasks such as to create subject
guides in libraries, to create documentation manuals, to
create professional knowledge repository, to maintain wiki
for a software development and its activities, to maintain
conference website, etc. There are range of OSS available
for creating wikis are CoWiki, Instiki, MediaWiki,
MoinMoin, PmWiki, Swiki, and Twiki.

4.12.1 MediaWiki (http://www.mediawiki.org)
It is an open source extremely powerful, scalable
software and a feature-rich wiki implementation software.
Software runs on PHP and data is stored in MySQL.
Mediawiki is a fully dynamic and a popular software.

4.13

Electronic Journals Archiving

The LOCKSS (lots of copies keep stuff safe) program
(http://www.lockss.org) is an open source, library-led
digital preservation system built on the principle of ‘lots of
copies keep stuff safe’. Today, it is named as ‘Controlled
lots of copies keep stuff safe (CLOCKSS)’. The LOCKSS
system allow librarians to take custody of and preserve
access to the e-content for which libraries have paid for.
Using their computers and network connections,
librarians can obtain, preserve, and provide access to
purchased copies of e-contents.
407

The LOCKSS allows to preserve all electronic
contents locally for which subscriptions are paid by the
libraries which allow them to restore their print purchasing
models. If the publishers web site contents are
unavailable, archived contents are served to the library
users through LOCKSS archived program. The LOCKSS
delivers a copy of the original publication to authorised
users in real time, whenever it is needed. Because
LOCKSS preserves the original publisher’s copy of each
item, it ensures that the most authoritative version
persists, remains unchanged, with full credit to the
publisher.

4.14 Meta Searching/Federated Searching
Federated searching is known as meta searching,
broadcast searching, cross-searching and a variety of
other names, is the ability to search multiple information
resources from a single interface and return an integrated
set of results13.

OSS tools. To save and preserve library data for future, it
is important that libraries adopt as many OSS as they
can and participate in the movement of sharing
information globally with open standards and open
formats.

REFERENCES
1. http://sourceforeg.net (accessed on 4 April 2012)
2. Raymond, E.S. The cathedral and the bazaar.
O’Reilly, 2001. 225 p.
3. Poulter, Alan. Open source in libraries: An
introduction and overview. Vol. 59, No. 9, 2010. p.
655-61.
4. Morgan, Eric Lease. Possibilities for open source
software in libraries. Inf. Technol. Lib., 2002, 21(1).
http://www.ala.org/lita/ital/21/1/morgan (accessed on
4 April 2012).

Federated searching (also known as meta search or
cross searching) allow users to search simultaneously
multiple web resources and subscription-based
bibliographic databases from a single interface. To
achieve that, parallel processes are executed in real-time
and retrieve results from each separate source. The
returned results are then grouped together and presented
to the user in a unified way.

5. Morgan, E. Open source software in libraries: A
workshop. 2003. http://infomotions.com/musings/
ossnlibraries-workshop/ossnlibraries-workshop.html
(accessed on 1 April 2012)

4.14.1 DbWiz (http://researcher.sfu.ca/dbwiz)

7. Krogh, G. von & Hippel, E. von. Special issue of open
source software development. Research Policy, 2003,
32(7), 1149-291.

It is an open source federated search engine which
allows to search across multiple databases, websites,
catalogues, and other online resources from a single
interface, and presents the results as an integrated list.
dbWiz provides a single stop search facility for all the
resources available in any library.

4.14.2 Pazpar2 (http://www.indexdata.com/pazpar2)
It is a high-performance user interface-independent
meta search engine featuring merging, relevance ranking,
record sorting, and faceted results. It is a web-oriented
Z39.50 client which will search a lot of targets in parallel
and provide on-the-fly integration of results. The interface
is entirely web service-based.

5. CONCLUSIONS
Open source offers useful savings in time, money, and
resources. Large percentage of library professionals have
recognised potential for OSS systems and applications.
With exponential growth of information, user expectations
are growing and more and more ‘personalised’ services
are required by users and there is a great opportunity for
librarians to play a leading role in organising and
presenting filtered information by making use of these
408

6. Burger, T.N. Libraries facilitate open access to
information with open source software. 2007. http://
archive09.linux.com/feature/59491 (accessed on 30
March 2012).

8. Breeding, Marshall. An update on open source ILS.
Information
Today,
2002,
19(9),
http://
www.infotoday.com/it/oct02/breeding.htm (accessed
on 1 April 2012).
9. Cervone, F.F. The open source option. Library Journal
NetConnect, 2003, 8-12.
10. Breeding, Marshall. Automation marketplace 2012:
Agents
of
change.
2012.
http://http://
www.thedigitalshift.com/2012/03/ils/automationmarketplace-2012-agents-of-change/
11. Garza, Alejandro. From OPAC to CMS : Drupal as an
extensible library platform, Next Generation OPACs :
Part 2. Library Hi Tech, 2009, 27(2), 252-67.
12. Wynne, Susan C. & Martha, J. Hanscom. The effect
of next-generation catalogs on catalogers and
cataloging functions in academic libraries. Cata.
Classif. Quart., 2011, 49(3), 179-207.
13. Mah, Calvin & Stranack, Kevin. dbWiz: Open source
federated searching for academic libraries. Library Hi
Tech, 2005, 23(4), 490-503.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

