DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 409-416
© 2012, DESIDOC

E-learning Experience using Open Source Software: Moodle
Sadanand Y. Bansode and Rajendra Kumbhar
Dept of Library and Information Science, University of Pune, Pune-411 007
E-mail: sadanand@unipune.ac.in; rajendra_kumbhar@unipune.ac.in

ABSTRACT
The present paper highlights the efforts made by the Department of Library and Information Science,
University of Pune to use an open source software, viz., Moodle for the promotion of e-learning in the department.
Various utilities of the Moodle such as development of the course, blogs, wiki, question banks, notification
to the students, etc., has been used. This article narrates the experience of designing, development and
implementation of e-learning course for the ‘Information Technology’ paper of the MLISc curriculum.
Keywords: E-learning, technology-based learning, Moodle, blogs, wiki

1. INTRODUCTION
Various methods are in existence for imparting
education such as, lectures, lectures with discussion,
panels of experts, brainstorming, videotapes, class
discussion, small group discussion, case studies, role
playing, report back sessions, worksheets/surveys, index
card exercise, guest speakers, value clarification
Exercise, etc. Apart from this list, Jaiswal1 has identified
various teaching methods adopted for imparting LIS
education particularly in the LIS schools in India,
Lectures, on the job training, discussions, project,
assignments, question-answer, tutorials, class-notes,
symposium, mock interview, group activity. In addition to
the above mentioned methods, e-learning is also evolving
as one method for imparting education and within a short
span has gained popularity.

2. E-LEARNING
Terms that are commonly used to denote e-learning
are ‘online learning’, ‘internet learning’, ‘distributed
learning’, ‘networked learning’, ‘tele-learning’, ‘virtual
learning’, ‘computer-assisted learning’, ‘web-based
learning’, and ‘distance learning’2. E-learning is another
way of teaching and learning. Different terminologies have
been used for e-learning, due to which it is difficult to
develop a generic definition.
Robert & Piper3 define e-learning as ‘those that
leverage various internet and web technologies to create,
enable, deliver, and/or facilitate lifelong learning’.

E-learning has a wide variety of definition, but
ultimately it is used to describe the fields of online
learning, web-based training, and technology-delivered
instruction. E-learning could be interpreted as electronic
learning; the learning that involves the internet; learning
from a distance via the aid of the internet and, or other
electronic gadgets4. More specifically e-learning is
supposed to increase the rate of learning for the student
around 20 to 505.
There are many commercial as well as open source
software available in the market which can be used for
developing e-learning contents such as Joomla LMS,
Studio’09, Saba, Desire2learn, Moodle, sakai webstudy,
learning LMS and many more. Among these moodle is
widely used because of its features and characteristics
supporting e-learning. Moodle stands as one of the most
popular open source learning management system.

3. OBJECTIVES
Following objectives were framed for the study:
(a) To develop a course in library and information science
using open source software
(b) To implement the course to the MLIS students of the
Department
(c) To analyse the feedback of the students about the
features of the software and about the e-learning
process implemented in the Department

Received 14 May 2012, accepted 14 May 2012, online published 7 September 2012

409

4. METHODOLOGY
This is a product development research. The product
i.e., a Moodle (Modular Object-oriented Dynamic Learning
Environment)-based e-learning module is the outcome of
this research. For developing this product, Moodle, a
open source software was downloaded and installed with
necessary modifications. In the next step, course content
for the ‘Information Technology’ paper of the MLISc 2nd
year students was designed. Students were given
orientation for the use of the new designed e-learning
module. After the initial orientation students started using
the module, beginning with enrollment, assignment,
blogs, wikis, and question bank. Feedbacks were
obtained from time to time and changes were made to
produce the present product.

5. LITERATURE REVIEW
According to the Moodle website6, it has a large and
diverse user community with over 11,31,546 registered
users on Moodle site alone, speaking over 78 languages
in 218 countries. Many studies have been conducted
highlighting use of moodle for imparting education.
As a courseware package and learning system,
Moodle has great potential for supporting conventional
classroom instruction7. It not only supports text-based
instruction but can also integrates wide range of
resources such as html-formatted documents, graphics,
audio, video, multimedia, flash-based application, etc.8,
because of the facilities provided, it has great potential for
supporting classroom instruction7 Moodle course platform
allows: Activities’ monitoring, upgrade to the latest
technical concepts and specialisation without expense or
business agreement, discussion groups for the teachers’
categories and to adjust homework to the levels of the
students9
Al-Ajlan & Zedan10 made a comparative study of
Moodle and other virtual learning environment systems,
based on the features, capabilities and technical aspects
and came to the conclusion that Moodle is one of the best
virtual learning environment system. Moodle is used for
imparting education in many of the reputed institutions of
the world such as City university, London11, Library of the
University of Padua, Italy has developed English course
for in-service librarians12, and Informatics Engineering
Department of University of Coimbra has developed a
module for the Moodle open source e-learning platform
through which undergraduate students can ‘Build’,
‘Answer’ and ‘Evaluate’ by blind peer review questions
related to a course subject13. University of Malaga,
Malaga, Spain uses Moodle module for teaching
practicals of basic computer organisation course14.
Machado & Tao15 compared the user experience
between the leading proprietary solution, Blackboard, and
410

the leading open source solution, Moodle and found that
Moodle learning management system is the more
efficacious and effective than the Blackboard learning
management system. Sanchez & Hueros16 surveyed 226
students of the Business Administration and
Management (LADE) and Infant and Primary School
Teaching degree courses of the University of Huelva and
found that Moodle usage was also directly influenced by
perceived ease of use and attitude. Whereas Sumak17
revealed that the actual use of Moodle depends on two
main factors: Behavioural intentions and attitudes toward
using Moodle.
Escobar-Rodriguez & Monge-Lozano18 analysed
students’ intention to use Moodle platforms to improve the
teaching-learning process. Undergraduate students of
Physics of Universidad Politécnica de Madrid feel that
Moodle has helped them to reinforce their abilities and
knowledge19.
Welzer20 presented the analysis of a questionnaire
and experiences gained through use of Moodle which
investigate habits and usage of communication features,
students’ willingness to participate in feedbacks, more
particularly when they assess teachers, their general
opinions on e-learning and their experiences with
technical issues of Moodle. Paragina21, et al. came to the
conclusion that the activity of managing a Moodle course
is very complex and delicate both at the educational and
at the computer programming level.

6. DEPARTMENT OF LIS, UNIVERSITY OF
PUNE
The Department of Library and Information Science of
University of Pune, Pune is one of the oldest and richest
department in western India. The department was started
in 1958 and the first diploma course was started in 195859, which was converted to Bachelor’s degree in library
information science in 1965. Since 2002, the department
has introduced two years integrated master’s degree in
library & information science. Apart from these, the
department is also running MPhil and PhD courses. The
Department has the credit of producing more than 2000
library & information science professionals and 57
doctorates. The department is recognised as one of the
finest department in maintaining the quality of LIS
education imparted in the country.
The department is always trying to give best to the
students so that they will be in a position to handle library
as well as technology in a smooth and effective way.
Years together the department was disseminating
knowledge to the students by adopting the traditional
methods of teaching such as lectures, discussion
method, seminars, assignments, tutorials etc., but since
the adoption of the technology in almost every field, the
department felt that they can experiment with the use of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

technology in imparting teaching of LIS, also it will be
helpful to the students in getting acquainted with the new
technology. Hence the Department of LIS came out with
an idea to go for e-learning on an experimental basis by
adopting suitable software and after having the results
further decision regarding adoption of the e-learning may
be decided. After going through a number of options
decisions was made to use Moodle.

7. MOODLE AND VIRTUAL LEARNING
ENVIRONMENT

7.1 Development of Course

File download

Moodle provides a number of options for general
format of the course. Once can choose to order the
course chronologically by week, conceptually by topic or
socially with a big forum as the central organising
principle. The course format one can choose are: LAMS
(Learning Activity Management System), SCORN
(Sharable Content Object Reference Model) Format,
Social format, Topic format, weekly format. The MLISc
course at University of Pune is having information
technology as one of the compulsory paper. Hence, it was
decided that the course on information technology would
be developed on experimental basis and if found positive
response from the students then further it would extended
for other papers also. The topic format of the Moodle
allows to create section for each topic, one can add
content, forums, quizzes and other activities to each topic
section. Accordingly, the course was developed (Fig. 1 )
and necessary rights and permission were set for the
students and the teachers.

Grading

7.2 Enrollment of Students

Instant messages

The administrator was given full rights of the software.
He was entrusted with a role of enrollment of the students
of 3rd semester. Another reason of enrolling students from
3rd semester (Fig. 2) was, that the students of 3rd
semester were well versed with the technology when they

Moodle is a free source e-learning software platform,
also known as learning management system it was
originally developed by Martin Dougiamad to help
educators to create online courses with a focus on
interaction and collaborative construction of content and
in continual evolution and is available under GNU License.
It is a software package for producing internet-based
courses and websites. It is a global development project
designed to support a social constructionist framework of
education6. The features that are supported by Moodle
are:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Moodle was installed on a P-IV with Windows 7
operating system. After successful installation of the
software the system was treated as a server were as all
the systems of the computer laboratory was given access
through the server. Once the software was fully installed
and tested for its various facilities, the following e-learning
activities were carried out using the software.

Assignment submission
Discussion forum
Blog

Online calendar
Online news and announcement
Wiki, etc.

Figure 1. Information technologies course for students.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

411

comes to third semester. Once the enrollment of the
students was completed, they were given orientation of
the software and was made fully aware about the working
of the software and their rights as far as Moodle is
concerned. They were provided with unique login ID and
password to keep close watch on the activities carried out
by the individual student.

7.3 Weekly Online Assignments
The students were provided with the weekly online
assignments (Fig. 3) also they were instructed to submit
their assignment online only. The students were
supposed to login into moodle by using their ID and
password, accordingly it was assessed by the teacher.

7.4 Blogs
Blogs have been around for years, but recently they
have gained popularity. Some of the experts have referred

blogs as a web-based journals.22 They are supposed to be
one of the most powerful tool to enable collaborative
learning process. Today many of the institution has
developed blogs and has kept open for the students to
have discussion on a particular topic. Moodle supports for
the creation of blog, hence it was decided to utilise these
facility as a question and answer board (Fig. 4). The
students were allowed to open discussion on the topics of
their interest from the LIS. It has provided an opportunity
for the students to discuss topics outside the
classrooms.

7.5 Wikis
A Wiki is a web technology that allows a users to
allows anyone to edit, it Promotes collaboration and
knowledge sharing, fosters feeling of ownership and
increases participation. Educators has recently explored
its usefulness in promoting deeper learning and its
integration of learning experiences in inside and outside

Figure 2. Students enrolled.

Figure 3. Weekly assignments of students.
412

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

the classroom. They too have realised that Wikis facilitate
collaborative finding, shaping, and sharing of knowledge,
as well as communication, all of which are essential
properties in an educational context. Students were
encouraged to contribute articles on some of the burning
topics of LIS by using the wikis facility provided by the
Moodle (Fig. 5). They were provided with the permission
so as view, edit and to make a comment so as to improve
the quality of the article.

7.6 Notifications to Students
Monthly seminar is the routine activity of the
department. The 3rd semester students were notified
regarding their seminars using Moodle. The notification
were made available to the students (Fig. 6) well in
advance with the topics on which they were supposed to
make the presentation (Fig. 7). The whole full months
activities were notified to the students by using the
calendar.

7.7 Development of Question Bank
The students are always in need of the old question
papers so as to have an idea of what type of questions
generally appears in the examination. In order to fulfill this
requirement and to give idea to the students what type of
questions generally appears in the NET/SET the question
bank was developed. The question bank generally have all
types of question ranging from long essay type question
to short and objective types of questions. (Fig. 8)

7.8 Generation of Reports
The Department has taken steps to provide education
in the department by using technology. It was important to
keep check on the activities of the students. Hence, it
was decided to keep report of each student and
accordingly fortnightly report was generated which used
to highlight what different activities he has performed in
this learning environment.

Figure 4. Blogs.

Figure 5. Wiki page for editing by students.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

413

Figure 6. Notification of proposed activities through calendar.

Figure 7. Notification of proposed activities through calendar.

The report not only highlights the areas he has
viewed, but also highlights about his active participation
and tasks completed. (Fig. 9).

8. DISCUSSIONS
Moodle has many advantages and can be modified
according to the requirements of the course. At the initial
stage of learning, it was little difficult for the students to
shift the platform, i.e., from traditional classroom teaching
towards the virtual environment. Even two students
commented that it was frustrating to them, but feedback
of majority of the students seems to be positive as they
could gain experience of the technology. The positive
impact can be clearly seen through their active
participation in the discussion made through the blog.
Discussion on the blogs has helped the students to build
414

up their confidence in putting forth their views on a topic.
Wiki facility has really enhanced the collaborative learning
of the students. It has promoted critical thinking and
knowledge construction and the students were able the
go beyond the traditional boundaries of learning. They
were having wider access to the information. It has helped
the students the evaluate a piece of information and share
their classnotes.
Wikis have made their way into the classrooms as
tools for students to perform group authoring and
collaborative analysis, develop literature review for
research projects, summarise readings, communicate
with students and create knowledge bases. Students
were able to upload their assignments, comments on the
blogs and contribution the wiki as per their own leisure
time.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

Figure 8. Question bank.

Figure 9. Generation of activity report.

Even one of the student has commented that, “Moodle
has given them a new vision for collaborative writing”. Nine
students opined that the question bank developed in the
Moodle has helped them for preparation of examinations
such as National Eligibility Test (NET) and State Eligibility
Test (SET) which is supposed to be the most essential
criteria for joining the profession.

9. CONCLUSIONS
E-learning as a teaching-learning mechanism offers
tremendous opportunities for learning beyond boundaries.
Using e-learning an active teacher can reach to
thousands of learners. Similarly, the individual learner
gets opportunity to react to the content delivered to him,
seek further advice, and communicate his thoughts back
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

to the teacher. The teacher in turn can know to what
extent his objective sure has been achieved and what
more is to be done to improve students learning. The elearning modules imparted through the Moodle will also
help enable students, teachers and other agencies
interested in education to develop learning material
collaboratively. Content created through medias like wikis
enhances quality of the content. Such Moodle-based elearning programmes enable teachers to use, multiple
teaching tools like question bank, assignments,
feedback, etc. This certainly enriches students learning
experience.
This module, could be adapted for other papers of the
MLISc course. With little or no modifications, this module
could be adapted to provide e-learning experience to
students of other subjects also.
415

REFERENCES
1. Jaiswal, Babita. Methods of teaching library and
information science: An empirical approach. Annals
Lib. Inf. Stud., 2002, 49(4), 135-39.
2. Sharifabadi, Saeed Rezaei. How digital libraries can
support e-learning. The Electronic Library, 2006,
24(3), 389-01.
3. Robert, Peterson & Piper, Jaffray. About e-learning.
http://peoplesoft-lc.hosted.learnframe.com/aboutele
arning/page2.asp (accessed on 12 February 2012).
4. Helen, Nneka Eke. The perspective of e-learning and
libraries in Africa: Challenges and opportunities.
Library Review, 2010, 59(4), 274–90.
5. Kumar, Ram & Kush, Ashwani. E-learning
emergence. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2006,
26(2), 19-24.
6. Moodle. About Moodle. http://docs.moodle.org/22/
en/About_Moodle (accessed on 12 January 2012)
7. Brandl, Klaus. Are you ready to Moodle. Language
Learn. Technol., 2005, 9(2), 16-23.
8. Godwin-Jones, B. Learning objects: Scorn or
SCORM? Language Learn. Technol., 2004, 8(2), 7-12
9. Paragina, Florica, et al. The benefits of using
MOODLE in teacher training in Romania. Procedia
Soc. Behav. Sci., 2011, 15, 1135-139.

14. Trenas, Maria A., et al. Use of a new Moodle module
for improving the teaching of a basic course on
computer architecture. IEEE Trans. Edu., 2011,
54(2), 222-28.
15. Machado, M & Tao, E. Blackboard vs. Moodle:
Comparing user experience of learning management
systems. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp
?tp=&arnumber=4417910
(accessed
on
12
December 2011).
16. Sanchez, R. Arteaga & Hueros, A. Duarte.
Motivational factors that influence the acceptance of
Moodle using TAM. Comp. Human Behav., 2010,
26(6), 1632-640.
17. Sumak, B., et al. Factors affecting acceptance and
use of Moodle: An empirical study based on TAM.
Informatica, 2011, 35, 91-100
18. Escobar-Rodriguez, T. & Monge-Lozano, P. The
acceptance of Moodle technology by business
administration students. Computers & Education,
2011. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0360131511002934
19. Martin-Blas, Teresa & Serrano-Fernandez, Ana. The
role of new technologies in the learning process:
Moodle as a teaching tool in Physics. Computers &
Education, 2009, 52(1), 35-44.

10. Al-Ajlan, Ajlan & Zedan, Hussein. Why Moodle. http:/
/ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumb
er=4683115 (accessed on 21 December 2011).

20. Welzer, T. & Holbl, M. Student’s feedback and
communication habit using Moodle. Electro. Electri.
Engg., 2010, 6(102). http://www.ee.ktu.lt/journal/
2010/6/16__ISSN_1392-1215Students%20Feedb
ack%20and%20Communication%20Habits%20u
sing%20Moodle.pdf

11. Susannah, Quinsee & Anise, Bullimore. Creating the
strategic learning environment at City University
London. Campus-Wide Inf. Sys., 2001, 28(4), 275-88.

21. Paragina, Silviu, et al. The Moodle course
management system and its e-learners’ needs.
Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci., 2011, 15, 1135-139.

12. Matilde, Fontanin. Developing an English course for
in-service librarians: The advantages of blended
learning. Library Management, 2008, 29(8/9), 777-88.

22. Kolbitsch J. & Maurer H. The Transformation of the
web: How emerging communities shape the
information we consume. J. Univ. Comp. Sci., 2006,
12(2), 187-213.

13. Mario, Zenha-Rela & Rafael, Carvalho. Work in
progress: Self evaluation through monitored peer
review using the Moodle platform. http://ieeexp
lore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=41
17034 (accessed on 12 December 2011)

416

23. Chen, H.L., et al. Using wikis and weblogs to support
reflective learning in an introductory engineering
design course. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.127.5481&rep=rep1&type=pdf
(accessed on 23 December 2011).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

