DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 417-420
© 2012, DESIDOC

Building Digital Library using DSpace: Case Study of GIPE’s
Dhananjayarao Gadgil Digital Library
Nanaji Shewale
Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics (GIPE), Pune-411 004
E-mail: nanamani@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Dhananjayarao Gadgil Library of Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics (GIPE) has started building
up the digital library collections by scanning its valuable rare books during July 2011. The GIPE’s digital library
uses open source software DSpace for building its digital repository. Currently, repository holds more than
7500 digital documents. These documents are available to all the scholars across the world. The present paper
discusses the methodology adapted for its digital library building. The various processes involved were:
Identification of the vendor, identifying the documents to be scanned or digitised, overall work flow, preparation
of the metadata in excel, converting the data into Dublin Core XML format and then finally uploading the
metadata into DSpace server. Unique feature of this digital library is the bulk upload of the metadata along with
digital data files of all the digital documents.
Keywords: Open source software, DSpace, digital library, digitisation, metadata, Dublin Core metadata, XML,
Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Dhananjayarao Gadgil library

1. INTRODUCTION
Dhananjayarao Gadgil Library was established in
1905 as a public library under the aegis of Servants of
India Society with great Indian nationalist leader late
Gopal Krishna Gokhale as one of its founding members.
With the establishment of the Gokhale Institute of Politics
and Economics (GIPE) in 1930, the library has started to
act as the library of the Institute, and since then it has
been mainly responsible for building its collection. It has
the largest and most important collection of social
science documents in India which includes publications
on economics and allied social science subjects.
Presently, the library successfully caters to the needs of
scholars, academicians, policy makers and others
working in social science subjects in India and abroad.
Though attached to GIPE, the library extends
membership to public and thereby, performs the dual
function of an academic or research and a public library.
At present the library possesses more than 2.75 lakh
documents. Other than books, it has bound volumes of
around 1873 journal titles, around 400 unpublished theses
and dissertations and some microfilms, floppies, CDs,
and maps. Indian economic history in general and land
legislation in particular are most comprehensive and

unique collections of this library. Majority of its collection
includes books on agricultural economics, Indian
economy and reports of various committees and
commissions appointed by Government of Maharashtra
and Government of India from time to time.
The GIPE library has supported various research
projects in the areas of rural development, co-operation,
poverty alleviation, employment guarantee, crop
insurance, planning, federal finance, input-output
economics, agricultural development, irrigation and
several other studies in the social and economic
problems of India. According to Haider1, “Libraries are
central organs in a university and play a significant role in
achieving the due objectives of higher education”.
Similarly, GIPE library too has played an important role of
supporting higher education and research for more than a
century.

2. DIGITISATION AND DIGITAL LIBRARIES
According to Wikipedia2, a digital library is a library in
which collections are stored in digital formats (as
opposed to print, microform, or other media) and
accessible by computers. The digital content may be
stored locally, or accessed remotely via computer

Received 14 May 2012, accepted 14 May 2012, online published 7 September 2012

417

networks. A digital library is a type of information retrieval
system Deegan & Tanner3, describe a digital library as:
(a) A digital library is a managed collection of digital
objects.
(b) The digital objects are created or collected according
to the principles of collection development.
(c) The digital objects are made available in a cohesive
manner, supported by services necessary to allow
users to retrieve and exploit the resources just as in
the case of other library materials.
(d) The digital objects are treated as long term stable
resources and appropriate processes are applied to
them to ensure their quality and survivability.
The purposes of digitising and building the GIPE’s
digital library can be summed up as:
(a) Preservation of most of the rare and valuable
documents by reducing wear and tear of the books
which are frequently used by users for reference and
photocopying.
(b) It was observed that most of this collection is used by
researchers from all over the world and it may not be
practical for every user to visit the library and to
access the same.
(c) To avoid the direct access to rare and valuable books
which are in a wear and tear condition and need
physical preservation? So digitisation will give an
access to the materials that can no longer be
accessed in their original format.
(d) Enhance customer service as per their expectations
from existing resources at their convenience and may
not be at any extra cost.

3. NEED FOR DIGITISATION
Hundreds of the libraries in the world have launched
digitisation projects to digitise their collections and place
them on the web. Usually, digitisation of the old and rare
materials helps to present information in new and
important way. Dhananjayarao Gadgil library houses
books that are published right from 1680 onwards. There
are thousands of the books which are now free from
copyright. The main purpose of digitising is to enhance
access and improve preservation. By digitising these
collections, GIPE library can make information
accessible that was previously only available to a
selected group of researchers that could walk into the
library. The idea of digitisation is that, it will allow users to
search collections rapidly and comprehensively from
anywhere at any time. Table 1 shows the type of
documents available in GIPE along with its number which
required immediate action to digitise for preservation and
providing wider access to the research community.
418

Table 1. Number of documents need to be digitised on
priority basis
Type of documents

No. of documents

Rare books published from 1680s

01,700

Old and books free from copyright

50,000

GIPE publications (books, reports, etc.)

01,000

(quarterly journal)
GIPE Publications - Artha Vijnana

00,200

Maps

00,300

Servants of India Society’s annual reports,

00,150

newsletters
Thesis, dissertations and other

00,200

unpublished materials
Miscellaneous documents

01,000

4.1 Software Identification
The GIPE library has preferred to use open source
software both for the operating system as well as the
digital repository software. Some of the reasons for using
open source software are: (1) available free of cost, one
can just download from the internet site like http://
sourceforge.net. (2) Open source software like DSpace
allows customisation to suite the institute’s websites look
and feel, (3) It does not have any vendor lock or copyright,
(4) Open standards used by this software allow easy
sharing of information with vast community of
implementers and developers around the world, (5)
Software is updated frequently, and (6) Online manuals,
help and technical support is available either through
mailing lists or internet relay chats (IRCs).
According to Directory of Open Access Repositories
(OpenDOAR)4 and Registry of Open Access Repositories
(ROAR)5, more than 80 known software are used for
building the digital repositories. The ROAR site indicates
that 1089 repositories from its 2730 registered
repositories use DSpace alone. At the same time, it is
noticed that 859 repositories from 2191 The DOAR’s
registered repositories use DSpace. The DOAR6 also
gives a detailed graph showing the usage pattern of open
source software for digital repository.
Due to some of these reasons, GIPE adapted DSpace
for content management and Ubuntu 10.04 Long Term
Stable Version as an operating system. Installation of the
Ubuntu, DSpace and other components is done by using
LibLiveCD7 which is developed by Prof ARD Prasad
(DRTC, Bangalore) and Dr Sunita Barve (NCRA, Pune).
One can download the LibLiveCD from sourceforge.net.
Other components installed with DSpace from LibLiveCD
are: Apache Tomcat server, Exim-4 mail server, Squirrel
mail–web-based mail client, PosgreSQL/MySQL–
database server, Open SSH server, PHP5, Z39.5 server,
etc. According to Shewale & Barve8, some of the
advantages of using DSpace are:

•

Largest community of users and developers. More
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

than 800 digital repositories in the world are using
DSpace which is highest than any other software of
this type

author(s), edition, publisher, place of publication, year of
publication, class number, keywords (if any), and
abstract (if any).

•

Manage and preserve all types of digital documents

4.5 Quality Check of Digitisation work

•

Supports handle system for every document that is
added into DSpace repository (http:.//handle.net )

•

Support excellent workflow for all operations within
DSpace

•

Completely customisable to fit ones needs in terms of
users’ interfaces, metadata, OAI-PMH compatible,
database configurations, choice of language, etc.

•

Used by number of educational, government, private
and commercial institutions

4.2 Identifying the Vendor
After receiving substantial funds for starting the
digitisation project it was decided that rare and old but
valuable books from the library be digitised. Accordingly,
quotes were invited from various vendors who are involved in
the process of digitisation. Following criterion were taken
into consideration to get the best suppliers/vendors.
(a) Vendor had do the scanning, cleaning text or images,
skew correction, de-speckle, cropping, providing
equal margins, etc. and make searchable PDF for
each book alongwith chapter link, insert watermark (if
any) and upload the data on DSpace or any other
software, etc.
(b) Vendor was to be responsible for maintaining
confidentiality about work, follow the data protection
acts.

4.3 Selection of Books
After identifying the vendor, the actual digitisation
work started in July 2011. First step involved in this project
was the selection of books. Even though there are more
than 50,000 books that need digitisation/preservation,
priority is given to the rare books. Other criteria to identify
the books for digitisation is the publication year, i.e., book
must be published before 1940, means free from
copyright but at the same time the book or title should be
most sought by the library users. Till March 2012, the
library has successfully completed the digitisation of
more than 6700 books and uploaded almost 5900 titles on
the DSpace server.

4.4 Preparation of Excel Data-sheets
Once the books are identified, the bibliographic data
of the document is downloaded from the Library
Management System used by GIPE library and converted
it in the Excel format. This data includes the bibliographic
fields like accession number, title, subtitle (if any),
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

After digitisation, the vendor is asked to submit two
searchable PDF files: (1) preliminary pages alongwith the
content pages of the document and (2) entire book, i.e.
from cover page to the last page. For ease of access and
identifying the documents, the accession number was
used as file name like GIPE-000019-Contents.pdf and
GIPE-000019.pdf. The content file helps the end-user to
judge whether to download the full book or not, thereby
saving the bandwidth and the traffic on the net. First of all,
it is checked that the number of documents returned by
the vendor are same both in terms of the number and the
titles. Secondly the physical condition of the books is in
good condition or not after the books are returned back by
the vendor. Later the PDF files of both the content pages
as well the entire book are checked.

4.6 Preparing DC XML Metadata
In the excel sheet other fields such as type of
document, number of pages, content page file, and
digitised book PDF file, etc. were also included. As
DSpace accepts the data in XML format with Dublin Core
standard format, this excel data is converted to Dublin
Core metadata format using some utilities. Presently, in
GIPE the data is converted by developing a directory from
the Microsoft Mail Merge as the data is already available
in the excel format. There are also a number of utilities
available on the internet to convert the excel data to
Dublin Core XML format. Table 2, shows the sample
record in XML format to be uploaded on DSpace server.

4.7 Bulk Uploading on DSpace Server
In July 2011, the records were uploaded one by one at
an average of 10 minutes per record as one has to input
various fields and upload the data files. It was observed
that the process was very time consuming and there was
a possibility of typographical mistakes while entering
data. After exploring the Internet, it was found that there
are some utilities to bulk upload data on DSpace Server in
XML format. But these utilities were limited to uploading
only the metadata and not the data files called the bitstreams. Due to the limitation of these utilities on internet,
Prof ARD Prasad, has developed some utilities in Perl for
uploading and importing bulk metadata records alongwith
respective bit-streams. The advantage of these utilities is
that one can upload any number of records into DSpace in
a very short span of time. Usually the time taken for
uploading the records depends on the number of records,
the size of bit-streams and the internet bandwidth. Till 8
August 2011, 95 books (37791 pages) were digitised and
uploaded. During 13 March 2012 to April 2012, 350 books
419

Table 2. Sample record in XML format
DC Code Start

<?xml version=”1.0" encoding=”utf-8" standalone=”no”?><dublin_core schema=”dc”>

Title

<dcvalue element=”title” qualifier=”none”>History of Hindu civilization during British rule Vol.III </dcvalue>

Author

<dcvalue element=”contributor” qualifier=”author”>Bose, Pramatha Nath</dcvalue>

Class Number

<dcvalue element=”subject” qualifier=”cc”>Y73Q2:1.2.M/C6.3</dcvalue>

Type of Document

<dcvalue element=”type” qualifier=”none”>Book</dcvalue>

Contents (.pdf)

<dcvalue element=”identifier” qualifier=”uri”>GIPE-000019-Contents.pdf</dcvalue>

Full Text (.pdf)

<dcvalue element=”identifier” qualifier=”uri”>GIPE-000019.pdf</dcvalue>

No of Pages

<dcvalue element=”identifier” qualifier=”citation”>228p</dcvalue>

Accession No.

<dcvalue element=”identifier” qualifier=”accno”>GIPE000019</dcvalue>

Publisher, Place

<dcvalue element=”publisher” qualifier=”none”>W. Newman and Company, Calcutta</dcvalue>

Year

<dcvalue element=”date” qualifier=”issued”>1896</dcvalue>

DC Code End

</dublin_core>

(92575 pages) were digitised and uploaded. Total 6700
books (2092246 pages) have been scanned.

professional start digitising, uploading and making these
collections on the web for the academic community.

The GIPE is in the process of acquiring new IP
addresses with new bandwidth and hence present site
address/domain
name
of
repository
(http://
library.gipe.ac.in) is likely to change soon. In such
circumstance, one should google the keywords like
‘GIPE’, ‘Pune’, ‘Digital’ and ‘Library’ to locate repository
on internet.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

4.8 Statistical View
Bragan9 quotes, ‘Say you were standing with one foot
in the oven and one foot in an ice bucket. According to the
percentage (statistics) people, you should be perfectly
comfortable’. Table 3 shows some of the statistics (facts)
generated by DSpace from Dhananjayarao Gadgil digital
library.
Table 3. Statistics of Dhananjayarao Gadgil digital library

Author acknowledges the contribution of Prof A.R.D.
Prasad, DRTC, Bangalore for developing Perl utilities for
bulk upload of metadata with digital bit-streams onto
DSpace server; encouragement by Prof Rajas Parchure,
Director, GIPE for initiating and successful
implementation of GIPE’s digital library; technical support
from Dr Sunita Barve, SIRC-in-Charge, NCRA; and Mr
Pramod Joshi, Information Scientist, GIPE.

REFERENCES
1. Haider, S.J. Coping with change: Issues facing
university libraries in Pakistan. J. Acad. Lib., 2004,
30(3), 229-36. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_libr
ary, http://www.opendoar.org/index.html

Type of statistics

Number

Bit-stream views

3,99,830

Item views

2,42,007

Community views

2,52,132

Collection views

2,18,010

3. Deegan, M. & Tanner, S. Digital futures: Strategies for
the information age. Library Association Publishing,
London, 2002. 22 p.

Searches performed

0,18,224

4. OpenDOAR: Directory of Open Access Repositories.

OAI requests

0,02,180

User logins

0,00,528

5. CONCLUSIONS
With the invention of the printing technology almost
four centuries ago, huge literature is available in printed
format. With the limited life of the print material, some of
the old and rare books are now being found in an acutely
precarious condition afflicted by termite and time rote
decay. As these are priceless and most valuable to
researchers, it is imperative that these books be retrieved
and saved from extinction by the use of technology visa–
a-vies the process of digitisation. Secondly, there is a
huge demand from the scholars to access this good old
literature, and hence it’s high time that the LIS
420

2. Digital Library. Wikipedia–The Free Encyclopedia.

5. ROAR: Registry of Open Access Repositories. http://
roar.eprints.org/
6. OpenDOAR Chart: Usage of open access repository
software–Worldwide.
7. Prasad, A.R.D. & Barve, Sunita. LibLiveCD. http://
liblivecd.sourceforge.net/
8. Shewale, Nanaji & Barve, Sunita. LibLive CD for
novice users. In Advances in digital libraries
development, edited by Antony Jose. Macmillan,
Delhi, 2012. pp. 185-92.
9. Bragan, Bobby. Statistics quotes and sayings. 1963.
http://www.quotegarden.com/statistics.html
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

