DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 427-430
© 2012, DESIDOC

Open Source Software for Federated Search
Shamkant Deshmukh*, Sonia Bhavsar** and Sandeep Bhavsar***
*S.S. Patil Arts, Commerce and Science College, Jalgaon-425 001
**H&GH Mansukhani Institute of Management, Ulhasnagar-421 003
***Dr V.N. Bedekar Institute of Management, Thane-401 105
ABSTRACT
The article explains the concept of federated search and demarcates the difference between federated
search and other search engines. Advantages of federated search have been described with technologies
used for federated searching. Article also covers open source software available for federated search and
given some federated search applications of public domain.
Keywords: Open source software, federated search

1. INTRODUCTION
Federated search is the necessity of today’s users.
INFLIBNET has played the vital role in providing eresources to universities and colleges through UGCINFONET and NLIST. In the last decade major consortia
have emerged with annual investment stakes ranging from
Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 50 crores. INDEST is the consortium
of IITs, IISc, llMs and the Engineering Colleges funded by
MHRD and AICTE.
The AICTE has made it mandatory to subscribe eresources to its affiliated institutes from 2012-13. It shows
that day by day subscription of e-resources will be more
as compare to print. Because of all these initiatives even a
small library is having good number of e-resources and
now the challenge is to improve the usage statistics of eresources. Federated search plays an important role in
disseminating the information from all these databases in
one search.A federated search is the simultaneous
searching of multiple online databases, with the facility to
see a list of returns from each source with clickable links
that will connect directly to the source database.Jasco1
defines federated search as, “Transforming a query and
broadcasting it to a group of disparate databases with the
appropriate syntax, merging the results collected from the
databases, presenting them in a succinct and unified
format with minimal duplication, and allowing the library
patron to sort the merged result set by various criteria”. In
simple words, federated searching will be defined as a
search system using a common interface that enables

the simultaneous searching of databases from a variety of
vendors. Federated search technology enables users to
search multiple information resources simultaneously
through one search query. Users can then view search
results in a single integrated list. In other words, users do
no longer need to consult each information resource
individually. Instead, they can search multiple library
catalogues (OPACs), websites (e.g. Amazon.com,
Google, etc.), subscription and citation databases all at
once.
Federated search technology is an integral
component of an information portal, which provides the
interface to diverse information resources. Once the user
enters his or her search query in the search box of the
Information Portal, the system uses federated search
technology to send the search string to each resource
that is incorporated into the portal. The individual
information resources then send the information portal a
list of results from the search query. Users can view the
number of documents retrieved in each resource and link
directly to each search result. People find no difference
between federated searching and metasearch but there is
slight difference between federated and meta searching.
Some federated search options are shown in Table 1.

2. DIFFERENTIATING FEDERATED SEARCH
FROM OTHER WEB SEARCH ENGINES
Federated search engines differ from web search
engines such as Google in a number of ways:

Received 14 May 2012, accepted 14 May 2012, online published 7 September 2012

427

Table 1. Federated search options
Website

address

Content

searched

Mednar.com

Medical information sources

Biznar.com

Business-related sources

WorldWideScience.org

Science content from all over the world, from government agencies, as well as
other quality research and academic organisations

http://search.smartlib-bibliogen.ca/
zengine?VDXaction=ZSearchSimple

Capital Smar tLibrary
Consortium of Libraries

http://osulibrary.oregonstate.edu/metafind/about.html

Oregon State University’s Library

http://scienceroll.polymeta.com/search/ui7/searchfr
.jsp?un=scienceroll

A medical student’s
journey inside genetics and medicine through Web 2.0

Science.gov

Science documents from a number of US federal government agencies

http://lifesearch.indexdata.dk/#

University of Copenhagen’s Library of Faculty of Life Sciences

Scitopia.org

Digital libraries of leading science and technology societies

http://www.techxtra.ac.uk

Thirty one different collections relevant to engineering, mathematics and computing,
including content from over 50 publishers and providers

(a) Access to Content

3. ADVANTAGES OF FEDERATED SEARCH

Web search engines do not have access to highquality information that exists in secure knowledge
bases. These data stores need to be accessed by
federated search technologies. This is also true for
businesses seeking a portal to their internal applications.

There are certain advantages of using federated
searches. Some of them are:

•

Reduced time it takes to do a basic search

•

Unified access to diverse content sources

(b) Speed of searching

•

Simultaneous searching across all sources

Web search engines use a technique called ‘crawling’
to search for relevant surface information that is readily
available in the public domain. This information can be
retrieved more quickly than using a federated search as
the data is superficial and may or may not be relevant.
The performance of federated search engines is
dependent on the underlying data stores and their ability
to perform. There are performance-tuning strategies
available to tune the federated search engine.

•

Ability to simple search as well as advanced search

•

Integrated results which are easy to view and use

•

Direct links to the native source for further searching

•

Ability to filter, sort, save, print, export, and e-mail

(c) Relevancy of content
Content retrieved from web search engines may not
be relevant, as the web engine only crawls surface data.
Depending on when a page was last crawled, the results
may be a week, or a month out of date. Federated search
engines use their own relevancy search algorithms that
ensure that results are meaningful and relevant. Searches
are done in real-time, so searches will always return
current information.
(d) Merging of and ranking content
Federated search engines and web search engines
rank results based on their own sorting algorithms.
Additionally, federated search engines can be configured
to merge and remove duplicates during the ranking
process.
428

4. FEDERATED SEARCH TECHNOLOGIES
There are mainly four technologies used for federated
searching:

4.1 Screen Scrapping or HTTP
HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) is the single
most important technology that drives the web and yet
remains virtually transparent. Without this protocol, HTML
and XML via the web would not be able to perform the
myriad of tasks that are put to them daily. HTTP is an
application-level protocol for distributed, collaborative,
hypermedia information systems. HTTP has been in use
by the world wide web global information initiative since
1990. The HTTP protocol is a request/response protocol.
A client sends a request to the server in the form of a
request method, URI, and protocol version, followed by a
MIME-like message containing request modifiers, client
information, and possible body content over a connection
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

with a server. The HTTP communication usually takes
place over TCP/IP connections. The TCP guarantees that
packets arriving to and from the web server are error free
and in the right order. It doesn’t, however, guarantee that
packets arrive no matter what the network conditions are.
When communications are congested or unavailable
webpage delivery is slow and can time-out.

4.2 Z39.50 Protocol
Z39.50 is an American national standard for
information retrieval. It is formally known as ANSI/NISO
Z39.50-1995 - Information Retrieval (Z39.50): Application
Service Definition and Protocol Specification. This
document specifies a set of rules and procedures for the
behaviour of two systems communicating for the
purposes of database searching and information retrieval.
As a network application standard, Z39.50 is an open
standard that enables communication between systems
that run on different hardware and use different software
The Z39.50 standard was developed to overcome the
problems associated with multiple databases searching
such as having to know the unique menus, command
language, and search procedures of each system
accessed. Z39.50 simplifies the search process by
making it possible for a searcher to use the familiar user
interface of the local system to search both the local
library catalogue as well as any remote database system
that support the standard. In libraries, the Z39.50 protocol
is most often used for searching OPAC sources. The
important facilities offered by Z39.50 are as follows:

4.2 Browse
Allows the client to scan the contents of wordlists or
indexes on the server. This can be particularly useful in
the case of controlled keyword lists or facets.

•

Access and resource control: Allows authentication
of users, and cost control and online charging for
commercial services.

•

Sort: Allows the client to request different orderings of
query results, e.g. relevance ranking, sorting by date
or version number, etc.

•

Explain: Allows the client to interrogate the server
about a number of details about its contents and its
level of support for the application profile.

•

Item order: Allows offline ordering of materials in
cases where they cannot be delivered electronically,
or where per-unit charging (e.g. online charging) is
required. Such services are being supplied in an adhoc fashion by online web-based component
repositories such as ASSET. The item order service
provides a ready-made and semantically standardised
version of this service.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

•

Item update: Permits an authorised client to update
the contents of the remote database.

4.3 Search/Retrieve Web Service
Search/Retrieve Web (SRW) Service is a new httpbased information retrieval protocol providing broadly the
same facilities as Z39.50, but by means of very different
technology. The SRW is designed to be a low barrier to
entry solution to performing searches and other
information retrieval operations across the internet. It
uses existing, well tested and easily available
technologies such as SOAP and XPath to perform what
has been done in the past using proprietary solutions. The
protocol has two ways that it can be carried, either via
SOAP or as parameters in a URL. This second form is
called Search Retrieve by URL (SRU). Other transports
would also be possible, for example simple XML over
HTTP, but these are not defined by the current standard.
The primary function of SRW is to allow a user to search a
remote database of records. This is done via the search
retrieve operation, in which the client sends a search
retrieve request and the server responds with a search
retrieve response. The request has several parameters,
most of which are optional. The response is primarily a list
of XML records which matched the search, along with the
full count of how many records were matched.

4.4 XML (EXtensible Markup Language)
XML stands for EXtensible Markup Language. The
XML is a markup language much like HTML and was
designed to carry data, not to display data. XML tags are
not predefined. One must define his own tags. XML is
designed to be self-descriptive and it is recommended by
the World Wide Web Consortium. It is a fee-free open
standard. XML is not a replacement for HTML. HTML is
about displaying information, while XML is about carrying
information. In simple words, XML is a software and
hardware independent tool for carrying information. It is
used both to encode documents and serialise data. It
supports unicode, allowing almost any information in any
written human language to be communicated.
XML is now as important for the Web as HTML was to
the foundation of the Web. XML is everywhere. It is the
most common tool for data transmissions between all
sorts of applications, and becomes more and more
popular in the area of storing and describing information.
The XML simplifies data sharing as in the real world;
computer systems and databases contain data in
incompatible formats.
The XML data is stored in plain text format. This
provides a software and hardware-independent way of
storing data. This makes it much easier to create data
that different applications can share.
429

5. OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE FOR
FEDERATED SEARCH
Pazpar2 is a middleware web service, which allows
libraries to develop their own interface in the programming
language of their choice. This requires significant
development time. Index Data offers, for a fee, MasterKey,
a hosted, fully-customised and configured federated
search tool. dbWiz is a MySQL and Perl-based federated
search tool. It is part of a larger suite of tools called
reSearcher, which Simon Fraser provides for managing
electronic resources, and works with Simon Fraser’s
Godot OpenURL resolver. LibraryFind is a MySQL, Rubyon-Rails-based federated search tool. It can search
Z39.50 databases, open archives initiative (OAI)-capable
databases, and OpenSearch-capable data resources.
Unlike many federated search tools, LibraryFind has a
built-in API, which allows developers to create their own
interface or use LibraryFind search results in unique
ways. The software is also capable of querying the API of
an OpenURL resolver; determining whether or not full text
is available and creating a link directly to that full-text
object.

6. CONCLUSIONS
Federated searching reduces the time it takes to
search and usually displays results in a common format.
Most complete federated search solutions support
multiple search protocols. Typically they offer integrated
OpenURL resolution, spell checking, saved searches,
alerts, de-duping, and single click access to the native
interface. Federated search truly not serve as one-stop

430

shopping for all library databases as people hoped,
because some databases cannot be searched by the
federated search for technical limitations.

REFERENCES
1. Google. WebMaster Tools. Google basics: Indexing.
2009.
2. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federated_search
3. http://searchengineland.com/understanding-federate
d-link-building-a-primer-with-examples-21056
4. http://www.deepwebtech.com/
5. http://www.deepwebtech.com/PDFs/Federated%
20Search%20Primer.pdf
6. http://www.libraryjournal.com/lj/ljinprintnetconnect/
888213-335/karen_coombs_describes_the_universi
ty.html.csp
7. http://www.searchitright.com/federated-search-engin
e-article.asp
8. Lederman, Sol. Crawling vs deep web searching?
Deep web technologies. Federated Search Blog, 17
December 2007. http://federatedsearchblog.com/
2007/12/17/crawling-vs-deep-web-searching/
9. Collins, Maria D.D. & Carr, Patrick L. Managing the
transition from print to electronic journals and
resources: A guide for library and information
professionals.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

