DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 431-438
© 2012, DESIDOC

Comparative Study of Multimedia Resources in Libraries of Delhi
Shailendra Kumar and Gareema Sanaman
Department of Library & Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007
E-mail: shail3@yahoo.com, gareema.sanaman@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
This study is set out to find out the status of the multimedia resources available in the libraries of Delhi,
to further investigate the diversity of nature, types, and formats of multimedia resources available in these
libraries. The study also includes a brief account of facilities available for the conservation and preservation
along with the multimedia production facilities available in the libraries. Findings of the study reveal that CDs/
DVDs are the most preferred physical storage form and compact shelves are the most preferred external
storage form for the multimedia resources in all the libraries. The CEC (Consortium for Educational
Communication)-Media Tape Library is the best multimedia library among all the libraries with all the latest
equipments and best production facilities available throughout India.
Keywords:Multimedia,multimediaresources,multimedialibraries

1. INTRODUCTION
In the age of information technology (IT), multimedia
plays a vital role in providing the digital information to the
users. The IT has a wide range of impact on education,
libraries, and research. Nowadays, libraries and
information centers have multimedia technology as a tool
to satisfy the demands of the users. Multimedia
resources have tremendous potential in revolutionising
the learning process and hold an important place in
today’s knowledge society. The purpose of the present
study is to focus mainly on the current status of
multimedia resources available in the libraries of Delhi and
primarily on the facilities for the management of the
multimedia resources available in the libraries and to find
out the best library among all with best multimedia
facilities and resources.

2. REVIEW OF RELATED STUDIES
Libraries are evolving leading to changes to its
physical facilities, infrastructure, the tools used to drive
library business, and the variety of services provided to
the users1. Today, one of the greatest attractions of a
digital library is its multimedia resources which can be
used for information retrieval to knowledge discovery and
information integration2. Libraries that have not expanded
collection development strategies to include all
information carriers are unlikely to satisfy all the
information needs and demands of their patrons. On this

point, Broderick3 opines: “the librarian who fails to use all
media is narrowing the world he offers to his users”. These
views indicate why it is important for non-print materials to
form part of the information arsenal of today’s libraries and
librarians3.
Multimedia technology has created a total revolution
in the areas of education/training methodology, learning
behaviour, communication pattern, storage, and
searching techniques. The multimedia provides rapid
interpretation and scope to incorporate latest
developments in many sectors of science and technology
taking place all over the world and now it’s time to apply
multimedia technology to enhance libraries4. In the
present academic and special libraries, the educational
videos, instructional visual aids, and audio learning
resources form a significant collection. The traditional
information service options are no longer acceptable by
majority of the users and there is a strong demand for new
forms of services therefore libraries need to be friendly and
familiarise themselves with all relevant and current
popular multimedia resources and their formats5.
Multimedia will have a profound effect on libraries during
the next decade. This rapidly developing technology
permits the user to combine digital images, video,
animation, graphics and audio which can be delivered in a
variety of formats including streaming video on the web,
video on DVD/VCD, embedded digital objects within a
webpage or presentation software such as PowerPoint,
utilised within graphic designs or printed as hardcopy6. In

Received 17 October 2011, revised 03 January 2012, accepted 08 January 2012, online published 7 September 2012
431

the modern information society, multimedia libraries have
become the essential core components of the information
systems managing our digital assets. For the past few
years, there has been an increasing demand for
multimedia libraries especially with the explosion of the
Internet and the increasing amount of bandwidth available
to the end user. From online teaching courses to movie
stores, people are entering a new age where multimedia
data has become a part of daily lives7.
There are several applications of multimedia and its
use in the libraries and information centres for example
the addition of multimedia effects gives lively and
interactive appearance to any presentation including
sound, video and animation effects8. ‘Multimedia-based
library user orientation program’ educates or instructs the
user about the library, library techniques, sources and
services provided by the library in a more efficient and
attractive way. Multimedia allows taking care of all the
forms like text, audio, video, images and animation and is
highly interactive. Multimedia packages form the most
effective tool, which helps the user not only to know about
the library but also helps to identify the staff and consult
them. Also, multimedia resources are easy to handle and
are efficient in the learning process as user interaction is
involved9. The availability and purported strengths of ICT
has increased the applications of multimedia resources in
higher education. Therefore, Diezmann & Watters10 report
the production of multimedia resources involving CDROMs, videos and a website to support the learning of
science teaching at primary level by pre-service teachers.
An overview of the multimedia resources developed in the
study is provided along with an evaluation of these
resources and speculations on future directions10.
Multimedia is fast emerging as a basic skill that will
be as important to life in the twenty-first century as
reading is now as multimedia is changing the way people
read, interact and distribute information. Instead of
limiting one to the linear representation of text on printed
books, multimedia makes reading enjoyable with a whole
new dynamic environment11. The multimedia applications
provide interactivity with other media and connectivity to
other people so that one can share ideas, thoughts and
create new ones. Collaboration and sharing ideas is ideal
works for developing new products and services and
rearranging processes to create better, flexible and virtual
environments. Interaction will lead to creative thinking.
Different kinds of entertainment, edutainment,
infotainment, sociotainment applications and products
are introduced in the market today12. Multimedia
resources, considered in terms of both products and
processes have great potential to enhance education.
New modalities and instruments for development and
delivery have radically increased the support that these
resources can give students across a wide range of
learning activities. Despite the glamour of technology-rich
432

environments, focus must remain on learners and their
motivations and challenges on the knowledge domains to
be explored and on the communities in which learning will
take place13.
These studies highlight the role and importance of
multimedia resources, impact of multimedia technologies
and its effectiveness in libraries but no one served the
current status and types of multimedia resources
available in Delhi libraries. The aim of the study is to find
out different types of multimedia resources in the libraries
of Delhi and to identify different conservation and
preservation techniques used to preserve these materials.
Digitised multimedia data such as images, video and
audio is rapidly becoming common and will soon replace
conventional analogue formats. New techniques are
needed to access, manage and search these new
multimedia data types14. The multimedia technology is a
boon to the libraries and it is up to the Indian librarians
how they use and apply it in their libraries to improve the
services15.

3. OBJECTIVES OF STUDY
The objectives of the study are to:

•

Study the status of the multimedia resources
available in Delhi libraries

•

Identify the physical and external storage formats in
which multimedia resources are available in the
libraries

•

Examine the organisation, maintenance, and longterm preservation of the multimedia resources in the
libraries

•

Determine the availability of production facilities for
various multimedia resources

•

Identify the best library with all the latest and well
equipped multimedia facilities.

4. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY, SCOPE AND
LIMITATIONS
The present study used survey method with the help
of questionnaire followed by interview of the librarians and
the library staff along with observation method to bring out
the clarity to the study. Multimedia resources of the
selected libraries have been analysed by tabulated
method on the basis of the data collected from the
respective libraries during the survey.
In this study the term ‘multimedia’ is used for
contents of the collections of a library which includes
audio-visual materials like magnetic tapes/discs, audio
cassettes, video cassettes, various types of audio-video
tapes, audio/video discs, CD-ROMs, CDs/DVDs along
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

with the multimedia resources available in digitised format
stored on the servers. Six major academic and special
libraries ofDelhi are selected for the study which are
actively working and dealing with the multimedia
resources:
CEC
(Consortium
of
Educational
Communication)-Media Tape Library; CSL (Central
Secretariat Library); AIR (All India Radio)-Digital Sound
Archives; IGNCA (Indira Gandhi National Centre for the
Arts)-Media Centre Library; IGNOU (Indira Gandhi
National Open University)-LDD (Library & Documentation
Division) and IGNOU-EMPC (Electronic Media Production
Centre) Library.

IGNOU-EMPC constitutes of total 10,000 multimedia
resources containing around 5,000 audio and 5,000 video
programmes in tape and CD formats.

5.2 Multimedia Physical Storage Formats
Table 2 represents that among all the formats
available in the libraries; of the all the most preferred
physical storage format is CDs/DVDs format in all the
libraries in which multimedia resources are available. This
is mainly because the archival life of optical media ranges
from 30 to 100 years whereas that of magnetic media is
less than 5 years. In addition to these major parameters
that are extremely essential in preservation efforts, the
lower cost and better transportability of optical media
adds value to these formats16.

5. DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
Data analysis involves involves the analysis of the
various factors like total number of multimedia resources
available in the library, different formats of the resources
available, equipments available for their storage and
preservation, multimedia production facilities available
along with web access facility provided by the library, etc.

Audio-video tapes available in different formats is the
second choice for recording the multimedia data and
lastly, audio-video cassettes available in various formats
are also used by some of the libraries for recording their
data. Almost all the multimedia resources in CEC-Media
Tape Library are available in Beta-Cam cassettes.
IGNOU-EMPC is using DVC-Pro format for recording their
video programmes which is the latest available format
today. DV-CAM, U-matic, and spool tapes are among the
least used formats available in the libraries for recording
their multimedia data.

5.1 Multimedia Collection
Table 1, shows that the AIR-Digital Sound Archives
has the highest number of multimedia resources in the
library, i.e., 32,000 audio resources available in various
formats. Among these resources, 15,000 CDs are
available as the master copies which contain more than 1
lakh audio programmes. CEC-Media Tape library has the
second highest number, 26,500 video resources only.
These resources consist of 15,000 educational video
programmes, 1,500 e-content programmes and 1000
learning object repositories which constitutes the ‘central
repository’ of the CEC for the broadcast purposes. The
CSL has 5,000 digitised multimedia resources which
consist of around 30 lakhs of digital pages of GOI
(Government of India) data. IGNCA-Media Centre Library
consists of total 9,100 multimedia resources which
contains approximately 25,000 hours of audio-video
footage of professional standard. IGNOU-Library and
Documentation Division (LDD) consists of total 5,200
multimedia resources including CDs/DVDs only and

5.3 Various Multimedia External Storage
Facilities
All the libraries are having sufficient external storage
facilities available with them to store their multimedia
resources. It shows that the handling of the physical
storage of the multimedia resources is the least of
worries. However, as professionals, librarians know how
to do this well and how to have climate-controlled
environments, how to conserve and store materials of
various types and so on. Compact shelves of various
types like fire-proof compact shelves, normal compact
shelves and compact mobile metallic shelves are the
most preferred form of storage devices among all the
libraries for the storage of multimedia resources.

Table 1. Multimedia resources available in the libraries
Name of library

Distribution of

multimedia resources

Audio CDs/

Audio

Audio

Video

DVDs

cassettes

tapes

tapes

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

15,000

5,000

12,000

CEC-Media Tape Library

-

-

-

Central Secretariat Library

-

-

-

-

IGNCA-Media Centre Library 500

1,200

1,750

4,150

IGNOU-Lib. & Doc. Div. (LDD) -

-

-

-

IGNOU-EMPC Library

1,000

500

3,500

3,000

1,500

500

10,000

Total

16,500

6,700

17,250

9,650

21,400

16,300

87,800

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

Video

Video

CDs/DVDs

cassettes

Total

-

-

-

2,500

9,000

1,5000

26,500

5000

-

5000

800

700

9,100

5,100

100

5,200

32,000

433

Table 2. Physical storage formats of multimedia resources
Name of library

Multimedia formats available in the libraries
Beta-Cam

U-Matic

Spool

DVC-Pro

Tapes

/DVCAM

CD

DVD

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

3

3

3

-

3

3

CEC-Media Tape Library

3

-

-

-

3

3

Central Secretariat Library

-

-

-

-

3

3

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

3

3

3

3

3

3

IGNOU-LDD

-

-

-

-

3

3

IGNOU-EMPC Library

3

3

3

3

3

3

Table 3. External storage facilities for multimedia resources
Name of library

Storage facilities available at the libraries

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

Compact shelving, fire proof compact shelves

CEC-Media Tape Library

Compact shelving, steel cabinets, archival servers

Central Secretariat Library

External hard disk, storage server, CD storage cabinets

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

Steel cabinets and almirahs

IGNOU-LDD

CD storage cabinets only

IGNOU-EMPC Library

Compact mobile metallic stacks only

5.4 Preservation and Conservation of
Multimedia Resources
With regard to the temperature it is necessary to take
into consideration that thermal energy speeds up
chemical reactions. Thus, if the temperature is high there
will be quicker chemical deterioration process of the
different components. Therefore, when dealing with
conservation of films and magnetic materials, low
temperature is always better than high temperature17.
Table 4 clearly shows that some libraries are still not
concerned for the preservation and maintenance of their
multimedia resources like CSL and IGNOU-LDD. They do
not have any preservation facilities available with them
and also they do not maintain any standard conditions for
the preservation of the resources. AIR-Digital sound
archives maintain the temperature of 18°C-22°C and also
for the long-term preservation; moisture control gel is
applied to the resources. The CEC and IGNCA-Media
Centre Library digitise their multimedia resources
maintained at the standard AC environment. The IGNCA
also run their resources on Beta-machines. IGNOUEMPC library maintains an ideal temperature of 20-25 °C
for preserving their multimedia resources.

5.5 Multimedia Lab Facilities for Production
All the libraries except Central Secretariat Library
have the multimedia production facilities at their
institution/organisation for the production of the

434

multimedia resources. Also, CEC has best multimedia
production facilities at its 17 media centers all over the
India which provide services to other institutions/
organisations also for the development of the multimedia
resources.

5.6 Access of Multimedia Resources through
Web
AIR-Digital Sound Archives hosts the library website
on the server and provides access to its resources by ondemand service. User can request for the particular
resource by visiting their website and by providing their
personal details, the programmes are delivered
accordingly to the users all over India.
CEC-Media Tape Library provides access to its
resources through its website to all the users of the 17
media centres of the CEC. Users can only view the
resources on the website and cannot download the
resources as the copyright lies with the CEC. CSL and
IGNOU-EMPC library did not host the library website on
the server therefore web access facility to the multimedia
resources is not available but the resources requested by
the users are provided to them on an individual basis by
the CSL and resources are sold to the users by the
IGNOU-EMPC for the protection of their resources from
being copied/duplicated (Table 5). IGNOU-LDD hosted
their library website on a web server but they do not
provide any access to their multimedia resources to the
users.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

Table 4. Preservation and conservation the multimedia resources at the libraries
Name of the library

Facilities and conditions maintained at the libraries
Facilities available

Conditions

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

Yes

18-22 °C temperature + Moisture control gel is applied

maintained

CEC-Media Tape Library

Yes

Resources are digitised and put on the video server by streaming method

Central Secretariat Library

No

-

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

Yes

18-22 °C temperature is maintained, resources are digitised into
and run on the β-machine

IGNOU-LDD

No

-

IGNOU-EMPC Library

Yes

An ideal temperature of 20 °C-25 °C is maintained

β-format

Table 5. Access of the multimedia resources through Web
Name of library

Web access facility
Library website hosting on server

Access to multimedia resources via library website

Yes

No

Yes

Partial access

No

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

3

-

3

-

-

CEC-Media Tape Library

3

-

3

-

-

Central Secretariat Library

-

3

-

-

3

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

3

-

-

-

3

IGNOU-LDD

3

-

-

-

3

IGNOU-EMPC Library

-

3

-

-

3

5.7 Use of Multimedia Resources for Elearning
E-learning has the potential to be an effective training
and learning medium as it offers the opportunity to receive
information in various formats (e.g., graphics, text, video)
and access this information anytime and anywhere. The
internet-accessible learning materials are also an
interesting option for students of stationary courses as
additional material helping them to study. Therefore,
multimedia resources play an important role in e-learning
system. Table 6 shows that only CEC-Media Tape Library
and IGNOU-EMPC are part of the E-learning system
among all the libraries.
IGNOU-eGyanKosh is a National Digital Repository to
store, index, preserve, distribute and share the digital
learning resources developed by the open and distance
learning institutions in the country. It is the digital
repository of programmes based learning content
available in text and video formats. Education Broadcast
is a webcasting facility linking to educational channels
such as Gyandarshan, Gyanvani, and EDUSAT. Virtual
Class is an e-learning platform developed in-house to
deliver online programmes of the university. The platform
provides complete online experience right from
registration to certification. Sakshat links to the one stop
education portal, an initiative of Ministry of Human
Resource Development, India to address all the education
and learning related needs of students, scholars,
teachers, and life-long learners of the country.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

CEC is organising e-courses using Vyas-24 hours
Higher Education Channel, EDUSAT Network and
Internet.The Vyas channel managed by UGC-CEC is in
operation for 24x7 basis for the last 18 months. It telecast
4 subjects a day and 28 subjects in a week. UGC-CEC
has repository of nearly 15,000 programmes in 49
subjects. It adds nearly 500 programmes every year.
Presently 6 hours of fresh programming is given every
day. It plans to provide fresh programme of 8 hours a day
in the near future. The other form of packaging and
transmission i.e., e-content and webcasting was started
since last one year or so. At CEC with UGC’s support,
content management and delivery platform has been
developed. Self-learning, instructional (design-based)
video-embeded e-content has been developed and being
put on their website. There is a repository of 300
reuseable short learning objects in about 20 subjects.
This repository is growing fast. There are e-content
module on economics, physics, anthropology, and life
sciences.

5.8 National Telecast Facilities for Private/
National Educational Channels
Out of all the libraries under study, only CSL and
IGNOU-LDD are not providing their multimedia resources
for the National Telecasts to any private or national
educational channel. AIR-Digital Sound Archives
telecasts its resources on all AIR channels and other
private radio channels. CEC-Media Tape Library telecasts
its programmes on Doordarshan, DD Bharti, various
435

Table 6. Multimedia resources as part of e-learning system
Name of library

Part of e-learning system
Yes

No

Name of e-learning system

AIR-Digital Sound Archives

-

3

-

CEC-Media Tape Library

3

-

EDUSAT, Vyas Channel, Learning Object Repository, Digital Video Repository

Central Secretariat Library

-

3

-

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

-

3

-

IGNOU-LDD

-

3

-

IGNOU-EMPC Library

3

-

eGyanKosh, Education Broadcast, Sakshat Education Portal, Virtual Class

Gyandarshan channels and EDUSAT. IGNCA-Media
Centre Library telecasts its multimedia resources only on
DD Bharti. IGNOU-EMPC telecasts its resources on
Doordarshan, DD Bharti, Gyandarshan channels, on
various AIR channels including ‘Gyan Vani’ which is
telecasted over 26 FM stations all over India. Each Gyan
Vani Station has a range of about 60 km and covers an
entire city including the adjoining rural areas.

5.9 Ways of Sharing Multimedia Resources
The objective of a multimedia resource sharing is to
have cooperative networking at regional, national, and
international level. Its activities are directed towards
promoting cooperative endeavors in resource
development and utilisation, with a view to organise library
services at macro level at an economical cost with
maximum benefits. Table 7, represents the views of the
librarians of all the libraries under study which shows that
all the libraries prefer to share their multimedia resources
with each other through online resource sharing and
consortium process. AIR-Digital Sound Archives wants to
share its resources through online resource sharing so
that there may be a facility of ‘e-purchasing’ within the
libraries. The CEC-Media Tape Library and IGNCA-Media
Centre Library want the resource sharing between the
libraries through Consortia so that more and more
institutions may collaborate to share their resources at
reasonably accepted cost to all members. CEC-Media

Tape Library is a part of UGC-consortium named as CEC
developed especially for the universities and institutions of
higher education. The IGNCA suggests the ‘Inter’ and
‘Intra’ country collaboration through consortia so that
resources may be shared easily with all the institutions/
organisations all over the world. IGNOU-LDD has
developed a Library Network called as NODLINET so that
resources may be shared with state open universities,
regional centres and other distance education institutions
through inter-library loan. IGNOU-EMPC wants to share
their multimedia resources through online resource
sharing so that more and more collaboration may be there
with the other universities.

6. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The ever-growing complexity and heterogeneity of
digital file formats together with rapid changes in
underlying technologies have posed extreme challenges
to the longevity of information. Preserving the inherent
complexities of interactive multimedia is a very difficult
task, particularly because formats used in multimedia
resources are ephemeral and unstable. The status of
multimedia resources in the libraries of Delhi shows that
libraries are applying different methods and techniques to
store, maintain, conserve, and preserve their multimedia
collection in best way. But as no single method/approach
can guarantee the long-term survival of the library’s digital
material, therefore a mixed approach is required to

Table 7. Multimedia resource sharing with other libraries
Name of library

Multimedia resource sharing

Reason

through inter-library loan/consortia/
online resource sharing
AIR-Digital Sound Archives

Online resource sharing

‘E-purchasing’ facility

CEC-Media Tape Library

UGC-CEC consortium

More no. of institutes may collaborate in this area

Central Secretariat Library

Online resource sharing

Resources may be shared easily

IGNCA-Media Centre Library

Consortia

Inter and Intra-country collaboration

IGNOU-LDD

Inter-library loan via NODLINET

Resources may be provided through NODLINET to state
open universities, regional centres and other distance
education institutions

IGNOU-EMPC Library

Online resource sharing

More collaboration may be there with other universities

436

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

maintain the good status of the multimedia resources by
the libraries of Delhi. It may involve ‘format migration’ as
one of the option to transfer the multimedia resources
from one medium to another for the longevity.
Migration of data to the latest media and software
versions can be done on a 2-3 year cycle but it will require
a significant monetary investment for each conversion
with constant human attention and training of the
personnel18. With the technological advancements in
computers and electronics, the optical storage media has
become popular. Although a variety of technologies like
magnetic tapes, cartridge tapes, digital audio tapes,
floppy discs, removable hard discs and optical discs are
available for use, libraries generally prefer to use optical
media due to the advantages like less accessing time,
versatility, multimedia capabilities, compactness,
transportability, etc19. Multimedia production is another
important area to be looked upon by the libraries and the
librarians as multimedia authoring packages, scanners,
cameras and other software and hardware are now more
readily available at affordable cost allowing for the
production of one’s own multimedia resources20. The
highly-skilled and well-trained staff can lead to more
effective results in the multimedia production process
which involves the various steps in the authoring and
development of multimedia resources.
Finally, the above study concludes that CDs and
DVDs are most preferred physical storage formats in all
the libraries among their multimedia collection as they are
easy to use, portable and can be duplicated easily if
required. Except CSL and IGNOU-LDD all the other
libraries are maintaining ideal conditions for temperature
and humidity and following various other methods to
preserve their multimedia resources. All the libraries
except CSL have the sufficient multimedia production
facilities available at their institution as CSL takes help of
the outside agency for the production of their multimedia
resources. Also, CEC-Media Tape Library is the best
library among all the libraries with most actively
participating in the management and maintenance of
multimedia resources with best available multimedia
production and resource sharing facilities. The CECMedia Tape Library is the only library that is the part of
any consortium playing a major role in e-learning all over
India.
Librarians play a pivotal role in the planning and
rethinking of new multimedia libraries and their resources.
They are challenged with serving their patrons needs and
also they must have built-in ability and flexibility to focus
on the evolution of the new multimedia library that is more
information diverse. India is in initial stages of
development of multimedia resources for the higher
education and research therefore the libraries of the future
are tasked with an enormous amount of responsibility to
play an expanded multimedia role.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

7. RECOMMENDATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
The survey results suggest that there should be a
multimedia resource sharing network for the libraries as
with the multimedia resource sharing libraries are
expected to coordinate their activities to avoid duplication
to the extent possible. Consortia in India are still in their
infancy and there is a need for libraries to study these
models and establish guidelines and methodologies. The
concept of consortia can work well among the libraries
dealing with multimedia resources having similar
situations such as sufficient additional funds available for
the libraries with committed mindsets21.
Certainly, the human knowledge is not explicitly saved
in the digital library, but is implicitly expressed in different
media such as text, image, audio, and video. Thus, how
to effectively extract the required knowledge and
information from multimedia resources is indeed a key
issue that needs to be tackled in future as the next step.
The research study recommends that there is need for
further research in the following areas:

•

The level of multimedia content development in
various libraries.

•

What is the best multimedia storage and retrieval
model?

•

In-depth studies on multimedia conservation and
preservation techniques.

•

Web-access facility for providing easy access to
multimedia resources.

•

Development of e-learning system for uploading
multimedia content by the libraries.

REFERENCES
1. Cordes, S. Process management for library
multimedia development service. Library Managem
ent, 2008, 29(3), 185-98.
2. Yue-ting, Z. Digital libraries: A testbed for multimedia
technology. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci., 2005, 6A(11),
1201-203.
3. Watson, E.F. Access to audiovisual and multimedia
materials: What are the challenges for developing
countries? In Proceedings of World Library and
Information Congress: 71st IFLA General Conference
and Council, Norway, 2005, pp.1-10. http://
www.ifla.org.sg/IV/ifla71/papers/188e-Watson.pdf
(accessed on 21 May 2008).
4. Satpathy, K.C. & Sinha, M.K. Multimedia application
in libraries. Ind. J. Inf. Lib. Soc., 2002, 15(3-4), 17683.
437

5. Sreekumar, M.G. Building multimedia digital library of
audio/video resources using open source software
and open digital library standards. pp. 138-45. http://
dspace.iimk.ac.in/bitstream/2259/395/1/MGS.pdf
(accessed on 22 April 2008).
6. Mitchell, G.A. Distinctive expertise: Multimedia, the
library, and the term paper of the future. Inf. Technol.
Lib., 2005, 24(1), 32-36.
7. Bressan, S. & Boon, T.T. Environmental noise
classification for multimedia libraries, 2005, 230-39.
http://www.springerlink.com/content/ehklxlb2by7
uhqw2/fulltext.pdf (accessed on 27 September 2009).
8. Bhatnagar, R.; Sharma, V.K. & Bansal, A. Managing
multimedia. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2003,
23(5), 13-20.
9. Kar, Suchitra. Multimedia based user orientation
program for library: A case study. Workshop on
Multimedia and Internet Technologies, DRTC
Bangalore, 2001, pp.1-10. https://drtc.isibang.ac.in/
bitstream/handle/1849/104/Suchi2.pdf?sequence=2
(accessed on 5 November 2008).
10. Diezmann, C.M. & Watters, J.J. A theoretical
framework for multimedia resources: A case from
science education. In Proceedings of Australian
Association for Research in Education Conference,
Brisbane, 2002. http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/000
01882/01/1882.pdf (accessed on 12 April 2010).
11. Hofstetter, F.T. Multimedia literacy. Ed. 3. McGrawHill/Irwin, New York, 2001.
12. Nunes, C.A.A. & Giable, E. Development of
multimedia materials. http://www.ictinedtoolkit.org/

438

usere/library/tech_for_ed_chapters/07.pdf (accessed
on 5 June 2009).
13. Natarajan, M. Multimedia and data transfer
technology: The challenges and delivery. DESIDOC
Bull. Inf. Technol., 2003, 23(4), 19-26.
14. Ramaiah, C.K. Multimedia systems in libraries and
their applications. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol.,
1998, 18(6), 25-40.
15. Ghonaimy, M.A.R. Existing and evolving technologies
for long-term information preservation and the
supporting legal requirements. Inter. Inf. Lib. Rev.,
1997, 29, 367-79.
16. Bereijo, A. The conservation and preservation of film
and magnetic materials (1): film materials. Library
Review, 2004, 53(6), 323-31.
17. Lin, L.S., Chennupati, K.R. & Pitt, K.W. Problems in
the preservation of electronic records. Library Review,
2003, 52(3), 117-25.
18. Moorthy, A.L. & Karisiddappa, C.R. Mass storage
technologies for libraries and information centres.
DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2000, 20(5), 3-20.
19. Browell, S. Using and producing multimedia
materials. Indust. Commer. Train., 1996, 28(7), 9-15.
20. Birdie, C. & Alladi, V. The future of consortia among
Indian libraries–FORSA consortium as forerunner? In
Proceedings of Library and Information Services in
Astronomy IV, Prague, 2002. pp. 165-71. http://www.
eso.org/sci/libraries/lisa4/Birdie.pdf (accessed on 23
November 2011).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

