DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 5, September 2012, pp. 447-451
© 2012, DESIDOC

Development of Digital Assets Management Software
for Research Centre Imarat
N. Venkatesh*, K. Nageswara Rao**, and S. Kalpavalli*
*Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad-500 069
E-mail: venkatesh.n@rcilab.in
**Defence Research and Development Laboratory, Hyderabad-500 058
E-mail: knrao_hyd@rediffmail.com

ABSTRACT
Digital libraries have become integral part of day to day library activities. The ease and fast access to
information in digital environment has brought drastic changes in information seeking behaviour of the users.
This paper broadly covers digitisation issues related to open source software (OSS) their merits and demerits.
The need and role of digital assets management (DAM) system and in-house development of DAM software
for taking digitisation to various divisions in Research Centre Imarat is also discussed.
Keywords: Digital library, digital assets management, digitisation, open source software, Greenstone digital library

1. INTRODUCTION
How you gather, manage, and use information will
determine whether you win or lose1. This is really true
since every activity in any sector, be it education,
research, industry, healthcare, government and so on, is
based on information technology today. Currently, a large
number of libraries are providing access to information by
using digital libraries in their day to day activities. Digital
libraries are providing enormous opportunities for creation
of scientific data and knowledge by way of R&D labs,
universities, government organisations and corporate
sector. No wonder digital libraries pose tremendous
challenges both for organisations and library
professionals.
This paper broadly covers digitisation issues related
to open source software (OSS), their merits and demerits.
It also covers need and role of digital assets management
system (DAM) and in in-house development of DAM
software to serve as dual purpose software for library
applications and also to meet requirements of document
management system for RCI.

2. CURRENT TRENDS IN OSS
Digital libraries are organised collections of digital
information. During the last decade OSS have played

pivotal role in development of digital libraries in India. The
OSS is a practical description of software and believes
that by making the source code available to users the
software can be improved upon.
Some of the advantages of using OSS are:

•
•
•
•

Rights to use without discrimination
Source code availability
OSS permits free modification and redistribution
No annual license fees and restriction on the number
of users2
Some of the drawbacks observed in using OSS are:

•

Lack of formal training and support that a in-house
software package offers

•

Installing and maintenance of OSS generally requires
a higher level of technological sophistication

•

OSS is also not known for ease of use as the focus is
usually on functionality3

•

Documentation manuals of OSS are not user friendly
and to consider OSS to be free of cost is a
misconception.4

The RCI has implemented Greenstone software and
DAM software for building digital library collections.

Received 28 November 2011, accepted 03 January 2012, online published 7 September 2012

447

Hence the comparison is restricted to OSS and in-house
software only. It is generally observed that OSS is not
completely free of cost because of additional and indirect
costs, namely, procurement of additional software,
training, and documentation support.

3. RESEARCH CENTRE IMARAT INITIATIVES
The Research Centre Imarat (RCI) library has started
development of digital library of missiles during last seven
years. It has a rich collection of 500 made-digital objects
and 1000 CD-ROMs. It has used Greenstone software for
building and distributing library collections. It has
categorised missile literature broadly into six areas,
namely, lecture notes, conference papers, current topics,
institutional repositories, ebooks and technical reports.
Keeping in view the disadvantages of OSS as stated
above and the need to carry the benefits of digitisation to
all divisions in RCI has led to in-house software
development.

4. FEATURES OF DAM
The DAM can be defined as management,
organisation, and distribution of digital assets from a
central respository5. The main aim of DAM is creation of
digital information exchange environment that is secure
and accountable.

of information generation, information processing and
reuse of digital assets by a large number of widely
dispersed users.

4.2 OBJECTIVES OF DAM
Keeping in view the need and role of DAM in RCI, a
study was conducted to see the suitability of OSS
software for DAM applications. For this purpose various
features of DSpace, Fedora, and Greenstone were
studied. It is found DSpace and Fedora to be complex in
implementation
and
academically-oriented
and
Greenstone is not designed for meeting the requirements
of DAM system7. The key features of the in-house
software development are as follows:

•

Software is developed using SQL server and Asp.net

•

It is web-based and runs on support of IIS web server

•

IIS 7.0 plays vital role in achieving better performance,
reliability, scalability, and security of websites

•

SQL server is a fully featured RDBMS that offers a
variety of tools for database development,
maintenance, and administration8. The main
components of SQL server include Enterprise
Manager, Query Analyser, SQL Profile, Service
Manager and Data Transformation Services (DTS).

•

Enterprise manager is the main administrative
console for SQL server installation and Query
Analyser offer easy methods for performing queries
against SQL server database.

•

The SQL profile provides a window into the inner
working of the database and the role of Service
Manager is to control the SQL server.

•

The DTS plays a vital role for import and export of the
data between SQL server and a large variety of other
formats. Import and export wizard is commonly used
data transformation applications.

•

The .NET framework provides environment for
building, deploying and running web applications.
Asp.net is a server side scripting technology that
enables scripts (embedded in webpages) to be
executed by internet server.

Thus, DAM leads to decision making framework that
extends time horizon and provides proper platform for
utilisation of broad range of assets6.

4.1 Need and Role of DAM
The DAM consists of set of technologies and
processes designed to manage ever growing digital
assets storage, retrieval, and reuse of the same.
The need and role of DAM are:

•

Growth of digital assets is in leaps and bounds

•

Improves returns on assets

•

Decreases costs and increases productivity

•

Improves decision making

•

Provides platform for reuse of digital assets.
Thus, DAM serves as an efficient process consisting

Table 1 shows the main differences between the
Greenstone and DAM software implemented in RCI and
Figure 1 shows architecture of DAM software.

Table 1. Main differences between Greenstone and DAM
S. No.

Greenstone

DAM

1.

Developed for library applications only

Developed for digitisation needs of various divisions in RCI

2.

Number of steps in adding digital objects are four

Number of steps in adding digital objects are two

3.

Plugins have to be chosen

Plugins are automatic

4.

Training is compulsory and involves payment

Training needs are met in-house and thus free of cost

448

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

Figure 1. DAM architecture.

4.3 Advantages of DAM
The key advantages of DAM software are:

•
•
•
•
•

Serves as integrated platform providing access to
born-digital (CDs/DVDs) and made-digital objects on
intranet
CDs/DVDs can be accessed by nested search
Ability to perform search by author, title, keyword and
category-wise
Supports Boolean search
Choice of plugins is automatic

•

Creation and addition of digital objects is made
simple

•

Supports text, html, word, pdf document, pictures,
audio, and video

•

No need to depend on outside agency for software
installation, maintenance, and upgradation of
software.

To illustrate the importance of DAM software for
providing the required information in a suitable way, Figs.
2-5 show some of the enunciated screen visuals which
are self-explanatory.

Figure 2. Category-wise search of CD-ROMs.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

449

Figure 3. Title-wise search of made-digital objects.

Figure 4. Full-text view of digital object.

Figure 5. Category-wise search of made-digital objects.
450

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

5. CONCLUSIONS
The DAM system provides the foundation for complete
control of digital assets. The in-house software
development is a small step to meet requirements of RCI.
It is presently deployed in RCI library and various divisions
of RCI. The implementation of DAM by various
organisations aligned with a larger vision can provide cost
savings, revenue generation, and better decision making.
Lastly, librarians should make a thorough study of their
environment, opportunities and constraints before
deciding between open source software and in-house
software development.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Shri S.K. Ray, Director,
RCI, for permitting to submit this paper and Dr S.K.
Chaudhuri, Associate Director, RCI for his advice and
guidance.

REFERENCES
1. Gates, B. Business@ the speed of thought using
digital nervous systems. Penguin Books, 1999.
2. Sridhar Reddy, K. Digital libraries-need for adaptation
of open source digital library software: An overview. In
11th MANLIBNET-2010: Trends and challenges in
management and corporate libraries in digital era,
edited by S. Shyam Sunder Rao, 15-17 February
2010, Shiva Sivani Institute of Management,
Hyderabad, 2010. pp. 249-54.
3. Suresh Babu, M. Open source software for digital
library development. In MANLIBNET-2010: Trends
and challenges in management and corporate
libraries in digital era, edited by S. Shyam Sunder
Rao, 15-17 February 2010, Shiva Sivani Institute of
Management, Hyderabad, 2010, pp. 255-59.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(5)

4. Navilekar, P.N. Open source in India. Digit, 2011,
11(8), 48-50.
5. www.digitalassetmanagement.com
6. Dilli, K.T. Library and information science in a digital
era. Atlantic Publishers, New Delhi, 2009.
7. www.opensourcedigitalassetmanagement.org
8. http://databases.about.com

About the Authors
Mr N. Venkatesh is working as Scientist F, Head,
Technical Information Centre (TIRC), RCI, Hyderabad. He
has published number of research papers in various
conferences and journals. His areas of work are: Library
automation, software development for digital library
applications, etc.
Dr K. Nageswara Rao received Masters degree in
Physics in 1988 from Sri Venkateswara University,
Tirupati, and Masters degree in Library and Information
Science in 1992 from Annamalai University. From 1993 to
1995, he worked at the National Informatics Centre,
Hyderabad. During 1995 to 1999, he worked as scientist
at the Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory,
Kochi. Presently, he is Head, TIRC, DRDL, Hyderabad.
His research interests encompass internet technologies,
web mining, digital libraries, and recommender systems.
He has published number of technical papers in national/
international journals/conferences.
Ms S. Kalpavalli is working as contract Engineer in
TIRC, RCI, Hyderabad. She holds MCA from Osmania
University. Her current areas of work are: Library
automation, software development for digital library
applications, etc. She has published two articles.

451

