DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 459-467
© 2012, DESIDOC

E-Learning Technology in the ICT Era: Application to Technical Education
S.F. Kattimani and Ramesh R. Naik
M.S. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru-560 054
Dept of Studies of Library and Information Science, Karnatak University, Dharwad-580 003
E-mail: sfkattimani@gmail.com; rrnaik@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
In the information technology era, the technical institutions have radically changed the information
environment. Information and communication technology (ICT) has created a new opportunities to effectively
store and transmit the digital video over networks. E-learning will be introduced as an integral part of an
environment where teaching is transformed and where learning is an ongoing, creative process. 1 Along with
the basic concepts of e-learning technology and its applications to the technical education using software’s
and hardware requirements, the basic objective of science and engineering education in India is to devise
and guide reforms that will transform India into a strong and vibrant knowledge economy. In this context, the
focus areas for National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) project have been (i) higher
education, (ii) professional education, (iii) distance education, and (iv) continuous and open learning, 2. The
E-Vidya solution is deployed on a local high capacity server of required specification where it can be installed
in each college campus. Client computers access the streaming media content over the standard high speed
campus LAN using a web browser and media player plug-in.
Keywords: E-learning, information and communication technology, National Programme on Technology Enhanced
Learning, e-vidya, e-learning technology

1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of information technology, advancement of
science and literature and exponential growth of
knowledge have made the knowledge storage device
undergo a sea change in the second half of the 20th
century making the world into a global village. The
knowledge production and dissemination in the world
have found a sea change in this information era. The
present era is popularly known as ‘information era’, where
there is an emphasis and importance for information. The
new technological applications especially information and
communication technology (ICT) have accelerated the
research and development and led information explosion.
The combinations of different technological disciplines
such as computer technology, information technology,
telecommunication technology, satellite technology,
digital technology and electronics have contributed to the
emergence of ICT. The ICT applications transformed the
traditional libraries into electronic libraries or digital/virtual
libraries. The emergence internet as a new media of
information delivery triggered proliferation of web-based
resources. The increased use of internet and phenomenal

increase of web-based resources stimulates web-based
potential services that enforce the print media that
transforming into electronic media.

2. MEANING OF E-LEARNING
E-learning is defined as instruction delivered on a
computer via internet or CD-ROM. It can be self-paced or
instructor-led and includes media in the form of text,
streaming video, and audio and builds user knowledge to
improve organisational functioning. E-learning commonly
refers to training delivered electronically in an
organisational setting while online learning is used to
differentiate courses delivered via the internet in
educational settings3.
E-learning is an approach to facilitate and enhance
learning through both computer and communications
technology. Such devices can include personal
computers, CD-ROMs, digital television, PDAs and
mobile phones. Communication technology enables the
use of the internet, e-mail, discussion forums,
collaborative software, and team learning systems4.

Received 29 August 2011, accepted 13 December 2011, online published 19 November 2012

459

With the e-learning in school education and the
popularisation and application of enterprise training, the elearning is considered to be a computer, multimedia and
network-based, teacher-led and student-centered
teaching mode of the new and also in practical
applications, e-learning also refers to the information
technology environment in the teaching and learning
behaviour5.

3. BENEFITS OF E-LEARNING
(a) Reducing the administrative load by making routine
information available online. This will release more
time for other activities.
(b) Making communication easier
students and groups of students

with

individual

(c) Making it possible to use a wider range of resources
that may otherwise be too difficult or expensive to use
(d) Motivating and supporting students
responsibility of their own learning

to

take

(e) Supporting an increasingly large and diverse student
population with little increase in teaching time.
(f) Releasing time for more active, engaging and
interactive forms of teaching
(g) Making it easier to amend and update materials
(h) Contributing to quality assurance agency institutional
audits6
(i) In many contexts, e-learning is self-paced and the
learning sessions are available 24x7. Learners are not
bound to a specific day/time to physically attend
classes. They can pause learning sessions at their
convenience. High technology is not necessary for all
online courses. Basic internet access, audio and
video capabilities are common requirements.
(j) Instructors of the highest calibre can share their
knowledge across borders, allowing students to
attend courses across physical, political and
economic boundaries. Recognised experts have the
opportunity of making information available
internationally, to anyone interested at minimum
costs7.

4. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES AND ELEARNING
Teaching, learning and libraries continue to be shaped
by information technologies. The benefits are many:
improved access to a greater variety of resources;
enhanced communication; interaction; more flexibility;
and reduced barriers of place and time. Information
technologies are of value when they enable interactive
learning and strengthen the social connections among
460

faculty and students; when students have access to a
wealth of online resources and experiences. But the
sheer enormity of the web, and online research databases
and e-resources licensed by engineering libraries can
overwhelm students, even this Google generation!
Today’s engineering student is online across campus or
across the world, studying and working beyond ‘normal’
hours. It is more important and more difficult to develop
programs and services online that match student’s needs
and capabilities. It is found that the use of technology in
teaching and learning enriches the interaction, access,
feedback and support among teacher and students. It is
crucial for faculty and librarians to have guidelines for
online learning as more universities offer e-learning
courses. The challenge of ‘distance education’ is to bring
education to students and all the instruction supports that
happen on campus. What takes place in the library and in
the classroom must be transferred to an online
environment. This can be accomplished when course
faculty and librarians work together to develop curriculum
and support services that engage students. Care must be
taken to be deliberately attentive to the learning needs of
students online. E-learning is still learning! and students
and faculty must be able to meet (virtually), explore,
search, analyse, respond and react. Librarians, faculty,
and IT staff must monitor student learning to gauge the
effectiveness of the technology, course and service
design and delivery. In Indian contest many engineering
faculties are using course management software (WebCT,
Blackboard, etc.)8. The development of IT employed to
provide distance education have resulted from a ‘pushpull’
relationship between providers and the public:
technological advances have created awareness and
demand among users, while usage has pushed providers
to further develop technologies. The new technologies
have also made distance education courses more
convenient and better suited to the needs of different
students9.
Today’s librarians must create an engaging setting for
teaching and learning by offering a welcoming library
space, a wealth of online resources, combined with
librarians’ expertise and collaborative instruction
programmes.
Rapid
advances
in
information
technologies, new methods of teaching and learning, and
the changing makeup of university student populations
are impacting the academic library. Working together,
librarians and faculty can develop active learning
experiences for students, and provide opportunities to
integrate resources and discovery. Meeting the
information literacy needs of students is best done by
integrating library instruction with the course curriculum.
This involves collaborative (faculty-librarian) planning,
design, and teaching to create a learning environment that
challenges students to discover and test their own ideas
and research findings. Librarians and faculty share
common goals for student success. Mastering of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

than any other single medium. Computers can be used to
transmit texts and graphics, connect users in a variety of
real-time and asynchronous dialogues, deliver messages
between users, and receive both audio and video
transmissions. College students seem generally positive
about the internet and its impact on their educational
experience. The majority of college students have a
positive attitude toward the internet and its
communication tools. They are comfortable with internet
communication, and even report finding enjoyment while
using it for academic and personal reasons. Their internet
habits are split between academic and social uses, and
they find it functional for both purposes. Distance
educators provide access to selected library resources in
digital form for their classes.

information literacy and information technology skills
equips students to become independent life-long
learners10.
E-learning technology can setup virtual universities,
as shown in Fig.1. Virtual universities are institutions that
offer most or all of their instructions via technological
means and are distinguished by their nearly-exclusive
use of technology as the educational delivery device. It is
important to note that even non-networked transmissions,
whether digital or analog, may incorporate elements of
digital network technology. As new types of organisational
arrangements emerge, challenges to the flexibility of the
higher education community may continue.
For now, distance education providers are offering
traditional and nontraditional students alike the
opportunity to pursue college education through a variety
of arrangements. The computer is the most versatile of
distance education instruments, since it can incorporate
or perform the same function as a television or telephone,
as well as providing more interactivity, delivering more
content, and supporting more comprehensive services

These selected resources may be designated as
electronic reserves, or “e-reserves,” similar in concept to
the use of reserve materials for on-campus classes,
which the instructor sets aside for outside reading to
supplement primary course materials. These or other eresource materials are sometimes made available to
remote-site students11.

Teaching Centre
Teaching Centre

Server
Server
1

1

server22
Server

server3 3
Server

server
Server 4
4

_____________________________________________

Router

Router

Internet
Internet

University
University
Figure 1. Virtual universities structures.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

461

5. LIFE-CYCLE OF E-LEARNING PROCESS
To reason the need for standards and interoperability
in e-learning systems, one should be aware of the
lifecycle of the e-learning process and have an overview of
the components of e learning systems and their
functionality. The stages of a learning process present the
building blocks of an e-learning environment and provide a
general model that comprises of the different services that
e-learning technologies provide. How the building blocks
fit together into an overall e-learning application
infrastructure and give a functional overview of the
processes that make up an e-learning environment is
explained.
The life-cycle of the e-learning process from the
planning and preparation of a course to the consumption
by the learners is depicted in Fig. 2. The life-cycle,
comprises of four phases, namely: design phase, where
the targets and requirements are specified, the production
phase, where content is produced, assembled and
packaged for distribution, the deployment phase, which
requires the collaboration of learners in order to distribute
the appropriate content per case, and the assessment
phase, where the outcome of the whole process is
evaluated.
For the successful design of a learning process one
should first define the required features of learner’s profile
and the recommended competencies. It should also
specify in detail the educational targets to be achieved by
the end of the learning process. The production phase
integrates the production of content modules, their buildup based on the initial design, and the packaging of the
content to be delivered. The deployment phase that
follows should consider the ability of users to access the
content and collaborate during the learning process. The
learning process ends up with the assessment of learners
through tests and other activities and of the process itself

Learning
Design

through evaluation forms. At the end of every phase useful
information is collected and feed back to every previous
phase of the process. This facilitates the improvement of
the whole process and leads to better solutions for
learners and educators. As an example, the information
gathered during the deployment phase, which concerns
actual learners’ needs and level of satisfaction is used as
an input in the production phase, to reassemble learning
objects and produce more competitive packaged
solutions12.

6. NPTEL: NATIONAL PROGRAMME ON
TECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED LEARNING
National Programme on Technology-Enhanced
Learning (NPTEL) which is an initiative by seven Indian
Institutes of Technology (Bombay, Delhi, Guwahati,
Kanpur, Kharagpur, Madras, and Roorkee) and Indian
Institute of Science (IISc) for creating course contents in
engineering and science. NPTEL as a project originated
from many deliberations between IITs, Indian Institutes of
Management (IIMs) and Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) during 1999-2003. A proposal was jointly put
forward by five IITs (Bombay, Delhi, Kanpur, Kharagpur
and Madras) and IISc for creating contents for 100
courses as web-based supplements and 100 complete
video courses, for forty hours of duration per course. Web
supplements were expected to cover materials that could
be delivered in approximately forty hours. Five engineering
branches (Civil, Computer Science, Electrical,
Electronics and Communication, and Mechanical) and
core science programmes that all engineering students
are required to take in their undergraduate engineering
programme in India were chosen initially. Contents for the
above courses were based on the model curriculum
suggested by All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE) and the syllabi of major affiliating Universities in
India.

Learning
Production

Learning
Deployment
Content
Packaging

Targets
specifica
tion

Learning
profiling

Competencies
definition

Content
Production

Content
Assembling

Collaboration
of learners

Learning
Assessment

Learners’ and
process
evaluation

Content Storage

Figure 2. Life-cycle of the e-learning process.
462

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

6.1 Objectives
Manpower requirement for trained engineers and
technologists is far more than the number of qualified
graduates that Indian technical institutions can provide
currently. Among these, the number of institutions having
fully qualified and trained teachers in all disciplines being
taught forms a small fraction. A majority of teachers are
young and inexperienced and are undergraduate degree
holders. Therefore, it is important for institutions like IITs,
IISc, NITs and other leading Universities in India to
disseminate teaching/learning content of high quality
through all available media.
The NPTEL would be among the foremost and an
important step in this direction and will use technology for
dissemination. India needs many more teachers for
effective implementation of higher education in
professional courses. Therefore, methods for training
young and inexperienced teachers to enable them carry
out their academic responsibilities effectively are a must.
The NPTEL contents can be used as core curriculum
content for training purposes. A large number of students
who are unable to attend scholarly institutions through
NPTEL will have access to quality content from them. All
those who are gainfully employed in industries and all
other walks of life and who require continuous training and
updating their knowledge can benefit from well-developed
and peer-reviewed course contents by the IITs and IISc.

6.2 Implementation
There are two committees, the National Programme
Committee (NPC) headed by the Joint Secretary, Higher
Education, MHRD and the Programme Implementation
Committee (PIC), headed by Director IIT Madras. The
NPC oversees implementation of the programme and
offers policy guidelines and financial structure. Some of
the NPC members are also members of the PIC. The PIC
enables the smooth functioning of the project in several
phases and takes care of content creation and
technology implementation. Members of the PIC meet
periodically (about once every three months) to study the
progress and issues related to coursework development.
In each IIT/IISc faculty are nominated as TEL coordinators
to interact with their colleagues and encourage them to
prepare course materials and offer technical and financial
assistance using funds sanctioned for that purpose.
In addition, two National coordinators, one for webbased development and other for video lectures offer
assistance and oversee the National programme. Groups
are formed for solving specific technology or pedagogyrelated issues and arrive at general guidelines for faculty
preparing course materials. In the first phase of the
programme about 350 faculty members in all partner
institutions worked together to deliver lecture contents. In
the next phase this is likely to increase to well over 1000
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

faculty. Other institutions such as NITs and major
university faculty are also likely to participate.

6.3 NPTEL Projects
6.3.1 Aim
To increase the competitiveness of Indian industry in
the global markets by improving the quality and reach of
engineering education.

6.3.2 Formats
The web formats available are:
•

Web Formats

•

2D and 3D animations

•

Interactive codes

•

Video clippings

•

Voice supplements

•

Easily downloadable format
The video format available are:

•

Live class room sessions

•

Chalk-and-talk

•

Tablet writing

•

Power point presentations

•

Interactive codes

6.3.3 Phase-wise Programmes
In phase I, which was completed recently, the course
materials have been developed for approximately 129 web
courses and are accessible freely through the website
(http://nptel.iitm.ac.in). Lecture contents are also being
made available for 114 video courses (Fig. 3). Both the
web and video courses cover five major engineering
disciplines and the core science curriculum that all
engineers must have, and are distributed are given in
Table 1.
The numbers are likely to change soon as the website
is being continuously updated. The content generation is
spread across all eight institutions. The video content is
available in MPEG-4 format with a bit-rate of 512 kbps
with H.264 compression for streaming through the
Internet. They are accessible freely through the YouTube
channel (http://www.youtube.com/iit). Web contents and
access to embedded video lectures from You Tube are
available free of cost through the website http://
nptel.iitm.ac.in. NPTEL acknowledges with gratitude the
free bandwidth offer for hosting the academic channel by
Google Inc. (Fig. 4).
463

Civil Engineering
Web 26

PHASE 1

45
Core Sciences & Engg

Video 19

Mechanical Engineering
47
Video 21
Web 26

NPTEL
WEB- 129

42
Electronics & Commn Engg
Web 21
Video 21

VIDEO 114

Electrical Engineering
34
Web 16
Video 18

Web 17

31

Video 14

Computer Sc & Engg
40
Web 23
Video 17
Biotechnology

Video -2

Ocean Engineering

Video -2

Figure 3. Phase-wise programme.

Table 1. Discipline-wise web and video courses
Discipline

Web

Core Science

17

Video
14

Civil Engineering

26

19

Computer Science & Engineering

23

17

Electrical Engineering

16

18

Electronics and Communication Engineering

21

21

Mechanical Engineering

26

21

Biotechnology

0

2

Ocean Engineering

0

2

Total

129

114

17.92 %
India
6.91 %
US
75.17 %

Source: Google Analytics
464

Others

Figure 4. User statistics.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

6.3.4 Courses Proposed—UG and PG Level
The courses proposed at UG and PG level are shown
in Fig 5. The copyrights are owned jointly by the MHRD,
IITs/IISc and the faculty. The MHRD has encouraged
faculty to convert their electronic content to text books in
various engineering and science subjects (which will not
affect what is freely available). The rest of the issues are
being studied carefully at present. Barring a few courses,
the rest of the materials are likely to be distributed under a
Creative Commons license in the future13.

7. E-VIDYA
7.1 Proposed Solution
VTU (Visvesvaraya Technological University) elearning extensively explored over the last several months
various options for deploying NPTEL. The VTU and other
contents at VTU affiliated college campuses. Terra
Incognitus Systems Research Alliance (TISRA),
Bangalore in association with VTU E-learning Centre with
hardware platform support from Sun Microsystems, have
evolved an advanced e-learning deployment solution
called E-Vidya. E-Vidya is a custom designed using
proved open source technologies to support the following:

•
•
•
•
•

All necessary software for using the E-Vidya solution
is freely available in open-source. The only tools needed
on the client computer are the widely used open-source
and free Mozilla Firefox web browser and the free opensource VLC Media Player (with the VLC Mozilla browser
plug-in). There is no restriction on the client computer
operating system or hardware any multimedia desktop
PC or laptop is sufficient for accessing content from the
E-Vidya server.
The users can access the videos of subjects of their
choice any time in a campus network environment.
Deployment of this video streaming server in a campus
LAN supports asynchronous learning. If the campus is
WiFi connected, then the video streams can also be
accessed through handheld devices such as mobile
phones and internet tablets. Additional course materials,
as and when produced or available, can also be loaded.
E-Vidya also comprises of open sources LMS called
Moodle. Under Moodle provided e-contents of NPTEL,
SUN, and VTU. So the same streaming server is available
for video on demand streaming as well as moodle
supported e-learning14.

7.2 Hardware and Software Requirements
The hardware and software reqirements are as shown
in Table 2.

NPTEL media content (129 courses)
VTU media content (50 courses)
Advanced Web 2.0 content management and
community management
Moodles–LMS
Education content in Java solaris, etc., of Sun Micro
system

8. CONCLUSIONS
Changes in teaching and learning combined with
advances in Information Technologies have led to the
concept of information or more appropriately, a Learning
Commons. The technological advancements in ICT have

Branch

PHASE II
& III (20072012)

Aerospace Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Chemistry & Biochemistry
Mathematics
Materials & Metallurgical Engineering
Management, Social Sciences & Design
Biotechnology
Ocean Engineering
Textile Technology
Nanotechnology
PG Level Courses for branches covered in
Phase 1 (Civil, Mechanical, Computer
Sciences, Electrical, Electronics &
Communication

Total

Total no. of courses
30
60
70
60
60
60
60
30
20
30
20
100

600

Figure 5. Courses proposed at UG and PG level.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

465

Table 2. Hardware and software requirements
S. N0.

Description

1.

Streaming server and Moodle e-learning

2.

Video content management system Moodle open source LMS,

(As per Sun Matching Grant Program)

Solaris OS, Mozilla browser, VLC media player

Sun SPARC enterprise T5120 Server, 8 Core 1.2 GHz

NPTEL video course 129, VTU video courses 25

ulstraSPARC T2 processor. 128 MB server processor,
16 GB FBDIMM memory (8*2 GB), 2*146 GB RPM SAS
disks, 1 DVD+/-RW. 4-10/10/100/1000 Ethernet ports,
1 serial port, 4 USB ports 1 dedicated PCI-E low profile slot,
2PCI-E low profile or XAUI(10 GB Ethernet) slots 2 (N+1)
720W power supplies Solaris 10 pre installed.
3.

Sun (TM) storage j4200 array, localised power cord kit north

E-Learning courses, NPTEL 129, VTU 30, Sun academic

american 4* Internal 500GB 7.2Krpm SATA HDD 3.5’ Sun

initiateves 50

Storage Tek (TM) PCI-X SAS Host Bus Adapter

created a new opportunity effectively store and transmit
the digital video over networks. The new ICT technology
enables video to be converted into MPEG4 format and
new searching and indexing of digital video contents
enables efficient usage of videos.
In the context of e-learning, the media streaming
solutions offers an excellent technology where, digital
videos of complete courses are processed and stored in
MP4 format in a high speed streaming server which is
managed by a content management software and renders
streaming of videos to the users in order to efficiently
provide access to the users and manage users demand a
fool proof video content management system is most
essential. This software helps to choose the video
specific courses and renders them on a Real player.

REFERENCES
1. Ning, Zhang & Hong, Bao. E-learning and its
information technology. Paper Presented at
Computer Science and Software Engineering, 12-14
December 2008. pp. 396-99. http://ieeexplore.ieee.o
rg/xpl/mostrecentissue.Jsp?punumber=4721667
(accessed on 20 April 2010)
2. NPTEL brochure. A joint initiative of Indian Institutes
of Technology and Indian Institute of Science: Elearning. Department of Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development, India, 2010.
3. E-learning. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-learning
4. Arockia Lourdu & Raju, M. Basics of e-learning: An
overview. In Digital libraries from technology to
culture, edited by C. Anandan & M. Gangatharan.
Kanishka Publishers, Distributors, New Delhi, 2006.
pp. 91-93.
5. Jiangchun, Xu; Jiande, Wu; Yuygui, Li; Jianlin, Mao &
Xian, Yantuan. Construct computer course e-learning
teaching mode based on student and campus
466

network. Paper presented at Computational
Intelligence and Software Engineering, 11-13
December 2009. pp. 1-4.
6. E-learning. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.j
sp?arnumber=05364812 (accessed on 17 April 2010).
7. E-learning.http://www.jnmc.edu/e-learning.htm0536
4812 (accessed on 17 April 2010).
8. Levesque, Nancy. Bricks and Clicks and the Future of
the Academic Library. J. Coll. Teach. Learn., 2004,
1(11). https://portfolio.du.edu/portfolio/getportfoliofil
e?uid=164 741. (accessed on 17 April 2010).
9. Li, Bian. Information technology and its application in
e-learning. Paper presented at Networking & Digital
Society, 2009 International Conference, 30-31 May
2009. pp. 293-96.
10. Levesque, Nancy. Bricks and Clicks and the Future of
the Academic Library. J. Coll. Teach. Learn., 2004,
1(11). https://portfolio.du.edu/portfolio/getportfoliofil
e?uid=164 741. (accessed on 17 April 2010).
11. Li, Bian. Information technology and its application in
e-learning. Paper presented at Networking & Digital
Society, 2009 International Conference, 30-31 May
2009. pp. 293-96.
12. Varlamis, Iraklis & Apostolakis, Ioannis. The present
and future of standards for e-learning technologies.
Interdisci. J. Knowl. Learn. Obj., 2006, 2, 59-76.
http://ijello.org/volume2/v2po59-076Varlamis.pdf
(accessed on 19 April 2010).
13. NPTEL brochure. A joint initiative of Indian Institutes
of Technology and Indian Institute of Science: Elearning. Department of Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development, India, 2010.
14. E-Vidya VTU Brochures. Visvesvaraya Technological
University, (www.vtu.ac.in/) Belgaum. 2010.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

About the Authors
Shri S.F. Kattimani studied at Karnatak University,
Dharwad for his BLISc, in 1993 & MLISc, in 1994, and
Alagappa University, Karaikudi for his MPhil (Library &
Information Science) in 2008. Presently, he is pursuing
PhD from Karnatak University, Dharwad. He his having
16+ years of experience as Librarian in technical
institutions, and presently working as Deputy Librarian at
M.S. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Autonomous
Institute, MSR Nagar, MSRIT Post, Bangalore since
2007. He has contributed several national & international
conference papers.
Dr Ramesh R. Naik has obtained MSc (Botany) in 1991
and Master of Library & Information Science 1994 from

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Karnatak University, Dharwad. He joined the Department
of Library & Information Science, Karnatak University as
Lecturer in 1996. From 2007 he is serving as Associate
Professor in the Department of Library & Information
Science. He is associated with 15 Universities as a
member of BOS and BOE. From August 2007 to May
2009, he served as Assistant Director (Addl. Charge) for
UGC-Academic Staff College, Karnatak University. He is
having one UGC Major project to his credit, and he has
contributed several research papers/articles. He is acting
as Resource person for Indira Gandhi National Open
University and Karnataka State Open University; Mysore
and actively involved in the preparation of course material
for K.S.O.U., Mysore. Presently, six research scholars
are working for PhD under his guidance.

467

