DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 468-476
© 2012, DESIDOC

Design and Development of a Virtual Library
for Social Science and Management
V. Sakthi Regha
Madras School of Social Work, Chennai-600 008
E-mail: vsakthirekha@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
In this information age, it is a worthwhile task to update oneself with not only conventional sources of
knowledge but also with the web resources. There is abundant information available on the web but it remains
a question as how to make the best use of them. This paper presents the outcome of a project that sought
to organise the links of the freely available resources like directories, e-books, e-journals and so on in the
field of social science and management and provide a single-point access to such resources. This paper
describes the methodology adopted to design and develop the virtual library for social science and management.
This could serve as a pointer for aspiring content developers in the field and will also enable library science
professionals undertaking similar initiatives to compare notes.
Keywords: Virtual library, free or open access resources, directories, gateways

1. INTRODUCTION

2. RESEARCH PROJECT

Information and communication technology (ICT) has
facilitated information explosion and knowledge boom in
all disciplines. Digital media and internet have
revolutionised operations in a knowledge society and is a
boon to every field, particularly to the academic
community. World wide web helps to organise the
information distributed on the internet.

This project entitled ‘Virtual Library for Social Science
and Management’ was developed to provide a single
window access to the teaching and learning community
to the wealth of free-access web resources, namely,
portals, e-books, e-journals, and other resources in social
science and management. This website was designed to
cater to the needs of users seeking to harness a
‘Directory’, ‘Subject Portal’, ‘Gateway’ or a ‘Subjects
Guide’. This virtual library is a compilation of free-access
online resources in the field of social science and
management.

The greatest advantage of the Web is the simplicity
that it lends to the information and communication
facilities on the internet. The web is the universal medium
for exchanging data, information and communication.
Millions of web sites provide services that facilitate
sharing resources1.
Web is an excellent medium of sharing information.
Electronic resources (e-resources) are one of the key
elements of information resources. The very nature of web
makes it easy to publish information. Publishing
information on the web is cheaper than the conventional
printing. World wide web has revolutionised the sharing of
information2.
In this era of knowledge explosion, online resources
will continue to grow and be the major source of
information, contributing to the rapid growth in the usage
of internet and web.

In this Knowledge society, sharing knowledge among
the people across the globe, freely and instantly is of
great gain. Open access initiatives in the electronic
environment facilitate worldwide access to knowledge
freely. Apparently, it is a great source of information for the
academic community and particularly for the researchers.
There are various websites providing free services to
search for books, articles, etc., on various subjects. The
use of such resources depends on many factors like (a)
information need and (b) availability of resources. As
regards the first factor, it is needless to say that teachers,
students, research scholars, and other users will have
various information needs and web resources can cater to

Received 17 October 2011, accepted 07 February 2012, online published 19 November 2012

468

5.2 Arrangement of Web Resources
Though the internet is full of search engines and web
directories, all the search engines/web directories
combined have not been able to catalog the whole web9.
World wide web includes many subject gateways/portals,
e-books, e-journals and others. The resources were
arranged category/subject-wise in this study. Generally,
Portals include resources for many subjects; hence they
were arranged separately under the heading Gateways/
Portals. Websites for e-books also include many
subjects. So they were given under the separate heading
‘e-books’. E-journals and other resources are subjectspecific. Hence they were arranged subject-wise. The
resources were arranged under 12 subjects, namely,
Commerce, Economics, Education, Law, Political
Science, Psychology, Research, Sociology, Social Work,
Management, and Human Resource Management,
Important organisations at National and International
levels were arranged as a separate resource but subjectwise. Website link was given to each resource along with
their descriptions like authority, coverage and year of
starting, etc.

To make the organised resources available on the web
and to give global access, one GB web space was
purchased for five years and the domain name was
registered as www.mssw-virtuallibrary.org. This website
includes links for:
Home
About Us
Resources

FAQ
Feedback
Users’ Guide
Contact Us
Search Options

Website included the compatibility browsers, suitable
metatags for search engine crawling, Google Analytics,
site compatibility, flash banner, optimised high quality
images, editable content and images, subcategories, and
admin control. It is a ‘dynamic’ website with the database
support and includes features like homepage (Fig. 1),
PHP pages, Flash, Seo crawling, website compatibility,
Front-end PHP, and back-end Mysql.

6. RESOURCES
The resources collected and used with their
description and hyperlink are:

•

Categories for resources’ listing

√ Directories/subject gateways
√ Subject-Wise resources

5.3 Domain Name and Web Space

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

√ E-books
√ Theses
√ Important organisations
Some of the content of the resources are given as
Appendix A. To make the users understand the
arrangement and to guide them for choosing a right way of
searching the resources for getting the maximum benefit,
the following guidelines are given.

Figure 1. Screen shot of homepage.
470

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

•

Efforts are underway to submit the site to many open
directories to make known about this website to a
large number of people.

•

Postgraduate students and research scholars who
join the institution are given an orientation during the
first year and demonstration during the second year.
This helps them to understand the coverage of various
links and the way to download materials for their
review of literature and other academic uses.

•

Write-up about the website has been published in the
college journal.

•

Some links are found mentioned in more than one or
two directories

•

Some links also have some non-academic resources
like holidays, travel and so on along with some
academic subjects

•

Paucity of free scholarly resources for certain
subjects like commerce

•

As the links may expire or move to some other
address, it would be a great challenge for the
researcher to keep track of the changes for updating.

8. EVALUATION

10. CONCLUSIONS

Since this initiative is mainly for academic usage,
evaluation is to be done with students, research scholars,
and faculty members. Evaluation can be done based on
usefulness and the number of visitors to the project.
Kassim & Kochtanek10 performed usability studies of an
educational digital library in order to understand user
needs, find problems, identify desired features, and
assess overall user satisfaction. Jeng11, in her usability
study on evaluating two academic library websites
(Rutgers University Libraries website and the Queens
College website) concluded that usability is a
multidimensional construct. She further proposed an
evaluation model for assessment of the usability of digital
libraries by examining their effectiveness, efficiency,
satisfaction, and learnability. User satisfaction covers
ease of use, organisation of information, labeling, visual
appearance, content, and error correction.

Web resources will continue as an integral
component of the teaching-learning material. Number of
resources available electronically and their usage is
constantly growing. Academic community needs to be
abreast with latest developments and knowledge in their
own field. For this each one has to read the research
reports, journals and other resources in his/her own
subject. Reading becomes boundary less in the ‘virtual’
and ‘digital’ world. Thanks to the open access initiative
worldwide as this makes knowledge sharing easier.
Hence, this serves as a single-point gateway to the open
access scholarly materials for the subjects under social
science and management. This study needs to be done
as an ongoing project to keep pace with the changing
needs and new resources.

Website of this initiative has had 2350 visitors so far.
There is a link for feedback in the website itself. Hence,
the users can click the link and send their feedback
directly. Some feed backs have been received from the
comments and concerns given by the users are:

•

Some resources are repeated under both general and
subject

•

Few resources are not scholarly

•

Some links are not working

•

More publicity for the website and a training session
to download the resources will help in using this virtual
library effectively.

Some users have recommended some links to be
included. Hence, working on the comments and concerns
of the users are being worked on and hence it is a
continuous project.

9. LIMITATIONS
Like any other study or project, this project also has
some limitations:
472

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to acknowledge the financial
assistance received for this initiative from University
Grants Commission under the Minor Research Project
Scheme.

REFERENCES
1. NIIT. Basics of web site design. Prentice Hall of India,
New Delhi, 2004.
2. Ingersoll, P. & Culshaw, J. Managing information
technology today. Rain Tree Libraries Unlimited,
London, 2004.
3. Ritchie. IUHPE news: Renewed virtual opportunity!
Health Promotion International, 2004, 19(2). http://
vph.sphcm.med.unsw.edu.au/ (accessed on 2
January 2012)
4. Malhan, I.V. & Rao. Creation and development of a
virtual library.
5. Problems faced and lessons learnt from the ‘Gyan
Tawi’ project. In 2nd International CALIBER-2004, New
Delhi, 11-13 February 2004.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Appendix 1

List of Directories/Gateways
http://www.vl-site.org/sciences/index.html
Keeps track of online information as part of the world-wide web virtual library. It provides lists of directories and data
archives, social sciences e-journals and various resources.
http://www.socsciresearch.com/
Includes resources for sociology, anthropology, economics, demography, political science, law, women’s studies and so
on.
http://www.openj-gate.com/Search/QuickSearch.aspx
Includes 4816 open access journals and 2634 peer-reviewed journal articles in the area of anthropology, psychology,
gender studies, political science, public administration, sociology, business economics and management along with other
subjects.
http://www.lii.org/
Include current events and issues, helpful tools for information users, human interest, and more.
http://www.cessda.org/index.html
CESSDA catalogue enables users to locate datasets, as well as questions or variables within datasets, stored at CESSDA
archives throughout Europe. It provides common interface for many of the social science data archives in Europe.
http://www.oaister.org/
OAIster is a union catalog of digital resources. It includes subjects like sociology, anthropology, economics and so on.
OAIster can be searched by title, author/creator, subject, language or entire record. Searches can also be limited by
resource type (text, image, audio, video, dataset) and sorted by title, author, date and hit frequency.
http://www.ssrn.com/
Social Science Research Network (SSRN) disseminates social science research and is composed of a number of
specialised research networks in each of the social sciences.
http://infomine.ucr.edu/
Provides scholarly internet resource collections for many subjects like sociology, social work, law, commerce, education,
economics, political science, etc.
http://bubl.ac.uk/
Provides selected internet resources covering all academic subject areas like generalities, philosophy and psychology,
religion, social sciences, language, science and mathematics, technology, arts, literature and rhetoric, geography, and
history.
http://coombs.anu.edu.au/WWWVL-AsianStudies.html
The Asian Studies WWW Virtual Library is a large scale online information system. It acts as hypertext guide and a
access tool to the networked scholarly information resources dealing with the Asian continent as a whole as well as with
its individual regions and countries.
http://www.intute.ac.uk/socialsciences/
It is a free online service providing access to web resources for education and research, evaluated and selected by a
network of subject specialists. It includes various subjects like anthropology
474

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

http://www.duke.edu/~myhan/s-sk.html
Hosted by the Asian Studies www Virtual Library, it provides resources on various subjects like societies, science,
technology environment, politics, public policies, media, law, language, literature, etc.
http://www.questia.com/Index.jsp
A full-text online library of over 2 million articles on subjects like psychology, education, law, sociology, anthropology,
political science, and economics and so on. It also includes 70,000 full-text books in various subjects.

476

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

