DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 485-492
© 2012, DESIDOC

Assessing the Efficacy of Library Services of District Central
Libraries in Tamil Nadu from Users Perception
S. Thanuskodi
Department of Library and Information Science
Alagappa University, karaikudi-630 003
E-mail: thanuskodi_s@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
Public libraries are essential since they improve literacy, stimulate imagination and expand personal horizons.
They also inform and empower citizens, enable access to a common cultural heritage and support education
at all levels. Also, a positive relationship is observed between public library and literacy level, which in turn,
contributes to increase in economic productivity. Extensive studies were undertaken to study the role of public
libraries in information society, value of services offered and use of the resources. Assessing the effectiveness
of libraries is the order of the day. In order to keep up with the current trends, libraries must constantly evaluate
its functions. Evaluating through user perspective is result based. Because users are the ultimate beneficiaries
and can suggest effective measures to improve the existing facilities in libraries. This study evaluates library
services and gives suggestions for the improvement of district central libraries in Tamilnadu, India.
Keywords: Library services, public libraries, Tamil Nadu, user study, evaluative study

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries provide a variety of services to a wide range
of user groups. Although most district central libraries
have a core set of services related to the provision of
documents and information, each library defines the limits
of its service areas and its relative priorities among them
differently. Most library analysts agree that achieving
effectiveness in library services is a basic responsibility of
library management. However, there is a notable lack of
agreement on what the concept of effectiveness means.
One major group sees library effectiveness as the
achievement of goals. A second major group measures
effectiveness by the efficient use of resources in
optimising performance. A third major group defines
effectiveness in terms of the personnel within the library
and the satisfaction that they obtain from their jobs. A
fourth major group equates effectiveness with user
satisfaction. In short, while there is general consent that
all libraries should attempt to be effective, the criteria for
appraisement remain unclear. Rarely does these
organizations operate equally well in all areas. Because
library services are multidimensional, so is library
effectiveness: no single global measure of library
effectiveness can summarise this multiplicity of services
and clients. A single measure assesses only one

dimension of library performance. Multiple measures help
to construct a more three-dimensional picture. So
effectiveness must be measured by a set of measures
covering the major library functions. The uses measures
for the library services generally are:

•

Overall use success, including success at various
library activities, overall satisfaction, and ease of use

•

Materials availability and use

•

Facilities and equipment availability and use

•

Information services

2. PUBLIC LIBRARY SECTOR
Knowledge and information are powerful instruments
in a society and can play a large part in improving the
quality of life of individuals. Providing access to
knowledge and information is therefore crucial for the
development of society, since knowledge expansion and
information dissemination are important dimensions of
any developed system. Public libraries plays a major role
in the nation development. They helps in the overall
development of the social being and provide information
and knowledge freely to its users. They are accessible for
all, regardless of age, race, sex, relation, nationality

Received 14 November 2011, accepted 24 March 2012, online published 19 November 2012

485

language or social status. The first significant date in the
development of public libraries in India is 1808 when the
Bombay Government initiated proposal to register
libraries which were to be given copies of books published
from the ‘Funds for the Encouragement of Literature’. By
the middle of the 19th century, three presidency towns of
Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras had their public libraries
founded mostly with the active support and initiative of the
Europeans for these towns.
The second phase in the story of the library movement
in our country lasted from the beginning of the 20th century
to 1937. In the first stage, library movement was
remarkable for the official backing and patronage of
scattered libraries here and there; the second phase was
characterised by the Indian intelligentsia taking up the
cause of libraries.
The third phase of the library movement began in 1937
when the Congress came to power in many provinces.
This phase was really a synthesis of the previous two
phases. The main trend of this phase was setting up of
village libraries through governmental effort. Assam, Bihar,
Bombay, Orissa, Punjab, Cochin and some other
provinces and states set up village libraries and even the
travelling libraries. It is estimated that in 1942, there were
13000 village libraries in India.
The fourth phase of the Indian Library Movement may
be described as one of consolidation - consolidation with
a view to husbanding sources so as to yield a library
service to the maximum number of people. Three epoch
making events took place since Independence in the
arena of library services of India in between 1948-1951.
The most sensational and monumental event of these
three was the enactment of Madras Public Libraries Act,
1948 which was the first concerted effort in India to
institutionalise, structure, otherwise, co-ordinate and
organise public library services. The second event which
was not less conspicuous than the first one was the
setting up of the National Library in 1948 by an Act from
the old Imperial Library and the third one was the setting
up of Delhi Public Library by the initiative of UNESCO in
1951.
The fifth and the most remarkable phase of the library
movement in India is the year 1972 when the Raja
Rammohun Roy Library Foundation was established by
the Government of India, in memory of the great social
reformer, Raja Rammohun Roy, who stressed the need for
the modern education for the progress of the nation. The
Foundation was established to spread library services all
over the country in active co-operation with State
Governments and Union Territory Administrations and
voluntary organisations (NGOs) working in the field. It
gave an ever-lasting push to the library movement in the
country.
486

3. PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN TAMIL NADU
Tamil Nadu is the first state that enacted Public
Libraries Act in independent India. It came into force with
effect from 1 April 1950. The act was enacted based on
research and activity by S.R. Ranganathan and the
Madras Library Association. Other states have enacted
public library acts modelled on the Madras Public
Libraries Act. The objectives of the Act are contained in its
Preamble as, ‘An act to provide for the establishment of
public libraries in the province of (Madras) Tamil Nadu and
the organisation of comprehensive rural and urban library
service therein”. The salient features of this act are:
(a) This act facilitates establishment of public libraries in
the State.
(b) Constitution of State Library Committee for the
purpose of advising the government on such matters
relating to libraries.
(c) Provision for appointment of Director of Public
Libraries to control, direct and supervise public
libraries.
(d) Constitution of local library authorities, one for the
City of Madras and one for each district.
(e) Every local library Authority shall levy in the area a
library cess in the form of a surcharge on property tax
or house tax at the rate of six paise per rupee.
(f)

Government shall contribute library fund to each of
the local library authority, except the City of Madras,
to the amount of library cess collected.

(g) Act amended Sec. 9 of Press and Registration of
Books Act, 1867, Central Act XXV of 1867 to the effect
that every printer shall deliver five copies of each book
to the State Government out of which four will be
deposited in the State Central Library, Madras.
Tamil Nadu was very rich in public libraries. The
Connemara Public Library was opened for the public in
1896 and became the State Central Library from 1 April
1950. There is a tremendous growth and development of
public libraries since an enactment of Tamil Nadu Public
Libraries Act 1948 being the first state in India with Library
Legislation. As on March 2011, the state has public library
service units, as
Anna Centenary Library
State Central Library
(Connemara Public Library)
District Central Libraries
Branch Libraries
Mobile Libraries
Village Libraries
Part-time Libraries
Total

1
1
32
1664
10
1795
539
4042

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

The public libraries are being computerised, so as to
improve the library services. The following libraries are
computerised and provided with internet and e-mail
facilities: Connemara Public Library, Chennai; 32 district
central libraries; and 100 branch libraries situated in
Corporation/Municipal areas. The Department of Public
Libraries has been offering extension services, like–
mobile library service, home delivery service, library
service for children, library service for police personnel,
library service for state workers and remote settlers in the
hills, hospital library service, rural library service, parttime library service, library service for students, library
service for research scholars, and library service for
competitions for various civil services.

4. OBJECTIVES
The objectives of the present study are:

•

Collect and understand the indicators of effectiveness
for a district central library

•

Apply the indicators of effectiveness to assess the
performance of district central libraries

•

Assess the existing state of affairs of the library in
respect of its services, facilities and general
satisfaction of the users regarding the library services
in district central libraries of Tamil Nadu

•

Suggest ways and means to improve library services

5. LITERATURE REVIEW
D’ Elia & Walsh1 made an evaluative study of public
library performance. Questionnaires were distributed in
each of the four branches of the Ramsey County Public
Library (USA) to the patrons. A number of measurements
are done for evaluating library performances (a) Library
use: circulation of materials, number of services used,
duration of visits, and frequency of visiting the library; (b)
Evaluation of services: quality of collections, availability of
collections, satisfaction with physical facilities and library
staff, and convenience of hours;(c) Overall evaluations of
and satisfaction with library services; and (d) Individual
characteristics: importance of use, style of use and
purpose of use. The analysis of the data has revealed that
(a) there was no statistically significant relationship
between the number of non fiction borrowed and the
libraries used; (b) there was statistically significant
relationship between the number of activities in which the
patrons engaged and the use of library; (c) there were
statistically significant relationships between patrons’
evaluations of the quality of collections, the availability of
collections, the staff, the over all evaluation of the library
and the general satisfaction with the library; and one or
more of the different libraries used by the patrons; and (d)
there were statistically significant relationships between
the patrons’ evaluations of the physical facilities and the
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

convenience of hours and one or more of the different
libraries used by the patrons.
Van House2 has conducted a study on public library
effectiveness in terms of theory, measures and
determinants. This study has taken two kinds of empirical
approach. The first is ‘outcome studies’ which seek to
define the organisational effectiveness and to develop
indicators of it. The second is ‘determinant studies’ which
attempt to identify the determination of organizational
effectiveness. The data were collected from Baltimore
Public Library (USA). The investigation was on four output
measures, namely, title and subject/author fill rates and
reference and circulation per capita. Fill rate is the
materials availability in the library. The important findings
of the study are: The success of the transaction depends
on both the library and the user; The users’ success in the
library depends on his ability to use information generally
and the library specifically, which depends in part on user
characteristics such as education; The success of the
transaction is measured by the output measures; and 4)
The search success may affect the users’ perceptions of
the library.
Sarada3 has conducted an intensive study of Branch
Library in Pendurthi village in Visakhapatnam taluk and
district (Andhra Pradesh). This study also analysed the
information needs of the village community and examined
the nature of the policy of the government towards the
public library. The findings of this study are: (a) Telugu
fiction occupies a large portion of the collections; (b) 80
per cent of the loaned books are novels, short stories and
other forms of fiction;(c) A stationary group uses the
library frequently for reading newspapers and magazines;
(d) A large percentage (79.79 %) who belong to the middle
class in term of social and economic status use the
library; (e) The educational, social, informational and
cultural functions of the library have been almost
completely neglected; and (f) Since the library functions
as a government agency, it provides information about
citizens and the programmes of the government.
Richardson4 has surveyed children’s services of
public libraries in Illinois in 1977 and 1987 and found that
(a) children’s room is open on an average of 41 h per
week, (b) Expenditure for children’s books and
magazines represents an average of 28 per cent of the
total expenditure for books and magazines of the libraries,
(c) Children’s books represent 33 per cent of the total
book collection of the libraries, (d) average number of
children’s books in the collection is about 10000, (e)
Children’s materials account for 37 per cent of the total
circulation of the libraries, and (f) 85 per cent of the
libraries in the State have at least one story hour for
children.
Saiful Islam5 has carried out a research on the current
status and structure of public library systems and
487

services in Great Britain and Bangladesh. It evaluates the
British public library systems, passage of various Acts,
various library authorities, total number of public libraries,
constituent
libraries,
computerised
acquisition,
cataloguing, classification, literature search, and library
finance. Major differences in library services between the
two countries were brought out and recommendations for
developing an effective public library service in
Bangladesh were made.
Wigg6 has examined rural library services to young
people in New York State. These services include
collection of quality materials, providing culturally diverse
materials, working with preschoolers, assisting students,
conducting summer reading clubs, and giving computer
literacy. The study concludes with the suggestion that a
rural library action plan is needed to overcome the barriers
which prevent rural librarian from making use of existing
resources.
Aslam7 recognised the importance of rural libraries to
be reshaped as community information centres (CIS). A
retrospect of rural libraries in India is traced back from
1910 when free public libraries were established in
Baroda; discusses the present scenario in selected
States such as Karnataka and Kerala; emphasises the
need for strengthening the rural libraries to shoulder new
responsibilities for the socio-economic development. It
identifies the following main objectives of CIS: (a) Provide
easy access to necessary information to enable rural
people to effectively participate in the process of
development, (b) Serve as centre for educational and
cultural activities, (c) Provide access to non-print media
such as radio, TV, audio-video tapes particularly for those
who lack study skill, and (d) Develop the effective
communication strategy with appropriate media mix such
as print material, charts and graphics, posters, non-print
media to educate the rural populace.
Vijayakumar & Kumar8 have made quantitative study
on the different aspects of rural libraries such as
functions, staff, finance, collections, services and
facilities in Shimoga district of Karnataka.
The important findings of the study are: (a) None of the
rural libraries under study had any permanent,
professional or semi professional library staff; (b) Four
libraries had a library committee and other 11 rural
libraries did not have library committee; (c) All rural
libraries under the study got financial support from the
district central library, 5 libraries received fund through
Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation and only one
rural library enjoyed financial source from the grama
panchayath; (d) Maximum collection was of novels, and
maximum reference collection of biographies; (e) All the
rural libraries had adopted their own system of
classification, no library maintained any library catalogue;
(f) None of the rural libraries had mass media like radio,
488

TV, projectors or computers; and (g) None of the libraries
had its own building and was in good condition. The
investigators have suggested that the department of
Public Libraries should have more concern for upgrading
the rural libraries.
Malarvele & Higgins9 have explored the provision of
public library services to the Tamil community through the
National Library Board of Singapore’s system of public
libraries. The interview technique comprising of 12
participants aged between 14 and 65 was done. The
important findings are: (a) All 12 participants visited the
library at least once a month, (b) Eight proposed that all
magazines should be placed in the lending section, (c)
Four felt that library could develop non-print materials for
children in Tamil, (d) Eight said that the reference
collection in Tamil did not meet their intellectual needs,
and (e) All participants were not satisfied with the
collection as a whole including the classification and
location of these materials in the library. They all
suggested that home delivery services for Tamil books,
internet services in Tamil, one regional centre for Tamil
studies should be provided to the Tamil community.
Sule10 has discussed the functions, problems, and
prospects of rural library services and examined their role
in the development of literacy in Nigeria. The prospects of
the libraries are: (a) Rural libraries can sustain the level of
literacy of the rural populace;(b) They can check ruralurban migration, which has negative consequences on
development; (c) They can be the centres of independent
study; and (d) They can serve as centres of recreation and
culture.
Brown11 has studied the reference service for children
in public libraries in Australia. The study revealed that (a)
the reference needs of children are primarily the
requirement of information to enable them to complete a
given school assignment; (b for the successful reference
transaction, the librarian needs to be conscious of
children’s wants and needs; (c) it is important to create an
environment in which children and their questions are
taken seriously; (d) to facilitate the delivery of quality
reference and information services to children, it is
important to have accepted guidelines or standards; and
(e) the need for specific evaluation methods for children’s
reference services will increase the quality of the
reference service.
Ranjith12 has conducted a study on the rural libraries
in Kerala. Data were collected on books and periodicals
collection, membership, working hours, circulation of
books, daily average attendance of members, grade,
yearly grant, other assistance received, and reading
habits of public.
The important findings of the study are: (a) A majority
of the libraries (60 %) have book strength in the range of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

1001—5000; (b) 90 per cent of the libraries have own land
and building; (c) A majority of the libraries (75 %) have
women membership of less than 30 per cent; (d) 45 per
cent of the libraries work 9 hours or more, 30 per cent of
the libraries work 4 to 9 h, and 25 per cent work less than
4 h; (e) A majority of the libraries (62 %) have the
membership 500 or below; (f) 45 per cent of the libraries
have a distribution of 500–1000 books on an average per
month, 40 per cent unto 500, and 15 per cent 1000 and
above; (g) The average daily reading time was the highest
among the youngest age groups of 15-30 years of both
male and female; the highest in degree holders; and 60
per cent are satisfied with the collection of the libraries.
Ikoja-Odongo13 has surveyed the attitudes of
politicians, civil servants, and leaders of Uganda library
associations towards public library services in Uganda.
The following major problems were realised in the
survey: (a) Uganda lacks a policy for public libraries, their
development and maintenance, (b) Ugandan public
libraries do not cover the whole country, (c) The libraries
are starved of grants from central government, (d)
Information materials are inadequate, mostly out of date
and sometimes irrelevant, (e) Literacy levels and illiteracy
are the major problems affecting the use of public
libraries, and (f) Reading habits of the people are very low.

6. METHODOLOGY

7. DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis of data is the ultimate step in research
process. It is the link between raw data and significant
results leading to conclusions. This process of analysis
has to be result oriented.

7.1 Gender-Wise Distribution of Data
To avoid any gender bias, efforts were made to collect
data from almost equally distributed samples. It may be
noted from Table 1 that the data was collected from 306
(52.75 %) male and 274 (47.25 %) female.
Table.1 Gender wise distribution
Number of users

Percentage

Male

306

52.75

Female

274

47.25

Total

580

100.00

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Table 2 provides the data regarding distribution of
users with regard to their status. It may be noted that
youth and adult users together make major chunk (64.83
%) of the respondents. It is because youth and adults are
the major category of the society and the number of users
are usually more when compared to other category of the
society.
Table 2. Category-wise distribution of respondents
Course

Number of respondents

Percentage

Children

78

13.44

Youth

172

29.65

Employed

126

21.73

Adult

204

35.18

Total

580

100.00

7.3 Frequency of Library Visits
The frequency of library visit by the user is usually
influenced by the factors such as collection, organisation
and maintenance of the library resources along with the
library resources, facilities and library services. The
frequency of library visit and its utilisation by the
respondents in Table 3.
Table 3. Frequency distribution of visits by users
Library visit

Keeping in view the above objectives in mind, a
structured questionnaire was prepared to collect data
from the users of district central libraries in Tamil Nadu.
Questionnaire contains various questions pertaining to
the material availability survey, general satisfaction
survey, reference satisfaction survey. The data was
collected from 580 users spread across nine tables.

Gender

7.2 Category-wise Distribution of Data

Number of respondents

Percentage

Daily

256

44.13

Once in a week

144

24.83

Once in a month

116

20.00

As and when

64

11.04

580

100.00

required
Total

As can be observed in Table 3 about half of the user
population claim to visit the library every day. In
comparison with experience of one of the authors of the
present article, the percentage of daily visit appears to be
higher. It appears that the respondents have claimed that
they visit the library on daily basis. These kinds of
problems known to have exist in an opinion survey like the
present one. Whereas, 144 (24.83 %) users visit once in a
week and 116 (20 %) visit the library once in a month and
64 (11.04 %) of them visited the library as and when
required. The cumulative total of the rows 3 and 4 in the
Table 3 gives an indication that significant number of
users (31.04 %) use the library rarely. Some measures
need to be taken immediately to improve upon this
situation.

7.4 Purpose of Visiting Library
Large percentage of users on the day of data
collection visited the library either for borrowing books
(31.38%) or for study (21.38 %). This trend of course
489

Table 4. Purpose of visit
Purpose of visiting the library

Number of respondents

Study in the library

124

Percentage
21.38

Borrow books

182

31.38

Consult dictionary or encyclopedia

76

13.10

Spend leisure time

65

11.20

Refer non book materials

42

7.25

Read periodicals

91

15.69

Total

580

100.00

or other reference sources

conforms to the normal expectations. Usage of reference
materials may have to be increased by some means in
the district central libraries as our study shows that only
13.10 per cent of the users visited the library for
consulting the reference books. Taking into account the
cost of these materials, we feel that if the collection
development policy has to be cost effective the librarians
and other stakeholders have to give importance for
improving the usage of reference collection.

services, reference services,
periodical services, etc.

photocopy

facilities,

Library being housed with wealth of knowledge, any
amount of time could be spent for a worthy cause Users
were asked to indicate the average time spent by them on
their each visit. The responses received are analysed from
the data presented in Table 5. As expected only 11.04 per
cent users spend their time more than three hours a day.

Table 6 depicts the various services that are rendered
to the user community in district central libraries. As per
this study is concerned, general book service is the
highly sought after service in district central libraries
(70.26 %) and internet services much lower at 24.73 per
cent. This trend is explicable, because users are very
much dependent on textbooks and they are not very much
exposed to the use of internet services (24.73 %). Users
have found that reference service (41.57%) is highly useful
to fulfil the needs of ‘everyday approach’. Almost 58.94 %
of them are in favour of abstracting and indexing service in
libraries, contrast to that nearly 11.05 per cent of the
respondents were not in favour of Xerox services. The
library authority and libraries have to work together to
encourage users to use periodicals and internet.

7.6 Extent of Use of Library Services

7.7 Information Searching Pattern

Library is a service-oriented institute. It fulfils
information needs of the users and contribute for the
enhancement of their knowledge. Hence, district central
libraries provide various services such as general book

Searching for the right information is a skill. Previous
studies have shown that some users tend to rely on
library staff to find information while some others search
on their own or take help of their friends to find the relevant
information. It can be noted from the Table 7 that 39.65 per
cent of the users depend largely on library staff to find
relevant information. This led them to rely on library staff
most of the time. Interesting finding is that 28.62 per cent
of the users search for information through catalogue
cards. The percentage of usage of catalogues might
increase if it is updated regularly and the quality of
information contained in them is increased substantially.
It is not uncommon to see that new users taking the help
of their friends/older users to find information in libraries

7.5 Time Spent in the Library

Table 5. Time spent in libraries
Time spent in the library Number of

Percentage

respondents
One to two hours

174

30.00

Less than one hour

246

42.41

Two to three hours

96

16.55

More than three hours

64

11.04

Total

580

100.00

Table 6. Extent of use of library services
Library

Highly useful

Moderately

Partially useful

Not at all useful

General book services

407(70.26)

125(21.57)

31(5.26)

17 (2.89)

Reference services

241(41.57)

147 (25.26)

153 (26.31)

39 (6.84)

Periodical services

284 (48.94)

104 (17.89)

140 (24.21)

52 (8.94)

Xerox services

210 (36.31)

150 (25.78)

156 (26.84)

64 (11.05)

Abstracting and indexing services

342 (58.94)

98 (16.84)

92 (15.78)

48 (8.42)

Internet services

156 (26.84)

125 (21.57)

156 (26.84)

490

services

useful

143(24.73)
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Table 7. Information searching pattern
Information searching pattern of the users

Number of respondents

Percentage

By taking help of library staff

230

39.65

By using card catalogue

166

28.62

By taking help of friends

96

16.55

By taking help of colleagues

54

9.32

Any other

34

5.86

Total

580

100.00

(16.55 %). The users take the help of colleagues and that
resulted in our study with 5.86 per cent.

7.8 Satisfaction of Information Provided
The importance of existence of libraries is to satisfy
the information needs of its user. It has to move with the
time and equip with modern technological gadgets to
satisfy the needs of the users. Around one fourth of the
users were completely satisfied with the information
provided in the library. It can be observed from the study
43.79 per cent of them are partially satisfied with the
information provided in the library. On the other hand there
are some dissatisfied users also. District Central libraries
in Tamil Nadu must take note of this and have to plan for
better service.
Table 8. Satisfaction of information provided
Satisfaction with
information

Number of respondent

Percentage

provided

in the library
Partially satisfied

254

43.79

Mostly satisfied

146

25.18

Completely satisfied

118

20.35

Not at all satisfied

62

10.68

Total

580

100.00

7.9 Suggestion to Improve Library Services
Table 9 shows the suggestions made by the users to
improve library services. It is now an established fact that
computers can really enhance the speed and the
Table 9. Suggestion to improve the library services
Suggestion to improve

Number of

Percentage

the library services

respondents

To computerise library

214

36.89

To increase the number

162

27.93

96

16.55

58

10.00

50

8.63

580

100.00

efficiency of services in libraries. Unfortunately, many
district central libraries are yet to see the day of the light
as far as computerisation is concerned. The users have
also noticed this lacuna and have urged for
computerisation. This is evident from the fact that 36.89
per cent of the respondents have asked for the
computerisation of libraries. One of the important services
that usually found in district central libraries is book bank
scheme, in which users are privileged to borrow the books
for a few months or a year.
As most of the users depend on this facility, they
(27.93%) have asked for the increase in the number of
books loaned out under book-bank scheme. Infrastructure
facilities is the common problem, that district central
libraries come across often, as most of the libraries
placed in a very small room or some time classroom
converted into the library, this has to be stopped, hence
16.55 per cent of the users have asked for the
improvement of infrastructure facilities. District central
libraries some time provided extension service like quiz,
debate, and screening films.
To conduct these kinds of programmes, users have
asked for (10 %) separate media services. To have
browsing centres in libraries, now has become common
phenomenon. Hence, users (8.63 %) have asked for
separate browsing room. Browsing room could be used to
enhance to technological information literacy skills of the
users.

8. RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the findings of the study, the following
recommendations are made for the library services of
district central libraries in Tamil Nadu:

•

A district central library is the best place to acquire
knowledge and spend valuable time for the users.
However, a good number of users spend not more than
one to two hours a day in libraries. This situation has
to improve and libraries should attract them more.

•

This study found that district central libraries are
lagging behind particularly in providing user-specific
information. It is thus imperative that they must
redesign their approach.

•

Organising need-based awareness and training

of books under the book
bank scheme
To develop infras
tructure facilities
To have separate room
for media service
To have a separate
browsing room for browsing
Total

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

491

programmes at the national level to facilitate most
effective use of information.

•

Setting up the linkage with international organisations
and major national library systems of the world to
open up cooperative ventures in the field.

•

Young persons in the society represent a dynamic
section of population with ambitions and energy to
achieve their goals. Public libraries should be aware of
their needs to provide services that help them to
realise their goals.

•

Director of Public Libraries, Govt. of Tamil Nadu
should earmark separate funds for conducting
information literacy programmes in the public
libraries. Intially the grants may be given to the State
Central Library to start IL programmes which may be
extended later to all the District Central Libraries in
the state. Financial support may also be sought from
local business and industrial organisations.

9. CONCLUSIONS
India has made considerable progress in the
establishment of public library service. The present
government’s emphasis is on use of modern technology
to serve the public. Because of this, the future of libraries
is bright. Public libraries have always been the door to
learning for a great majority of the populations that they
serve. They are knowledge centres and contribute to lifelong learning. This study found that public libraries are
lagging behind particularly in providing user specific
information. It is imperative thus that they must redesign
their approach. This study reemphasised that fact that the
collection development alone would not result in attracting
publics to libraries. A public library is the best place to
acquire knowledge and spend valuable time for the users.
However, it is found from the study that a good number of
users spend not more than one to two hours a day in
libraries. This situation has to improve and libraries should
attract them more. The suggestions made by the users
are valid and it is the right time to take those suggestions
seriously, where the world is becoming flat and universal
work-culture is the order of the day.

REFERENCES
1. D’Elia, George & Sandra Walsh. Patron’s uses and
evaluations of library services: A comparison across
five public libraries. Lib. Inf. Sci. Res., 1985, 7(2), 330.
2. Van House, Nancy A. Public library effectiveness:
Theory, measures, and determinants. Lib. Inf. Sci.
Res., 1986, 8(1), 261-83.
3. Sarada, K. Rural library services in India. Ess Ess
Publications, New Delhi, 1986.
492

4. Richardson, Selma K. Children’s services of public
libraries in the United States. Inter. Lib. Rev., 1987,
18(1), 15-24.
5. Saiful Islam, K.M. Public library systems and
services. Herald Lib. Sci. 1990, 29(3), 163-71.
6. Wigg, Ristina. Across towns and across times:
Library service to young people in rural libraries.
Library Trends, 1995, 44(1), 88-111.
7. Aslam, M. Rural libraries in India: As community
information centres. Granthana, 1998, 5(1), 139-46.
8. Vijayakumar, M. & Kumar N. Problems and
prospects of rural libraries. SRELS J. Inf. Manag.,
2001, 38(2), 165-76.
9. Malarvele, Ilangovan & Susan, E. Higgins. Library
provision to the Tamil community in Singapore.
LIBRES,
2003,
13(1),
9-17.
http://
libres.curtin.edu.au/libres 13n1 (accessed on 12 May
2011).
10. Sule, Nathaniel N. The contributions of rural library
services to literacy development in Nigeria: A review of
the past century and prospect of the new millennium.
Library Progress (International), 2003, 23(2), 133-41.
11. Brown, Anita. Reference services for children:
Information needs and wants in the public library.
Australian Lib. J., 2004, 53(3). http://alia.org.au/
publishing/alj/53.3/full.text/brown.html (accessed on
12 May 2011).
12. Ranjith, K.S. Rural libraries of Kerala. CDS, TVM,
2004.
13. Ikoja-Odongo, J.R. Public library politics: The
Ugandan perspective. Information Development,
2004, 20(3), 169-80.
About the Author
Dr S. Thanuskodi is working as Associate Professor and
Head-in-Charge in the Department of Library and
Information Science, Alagappa University. He holds BSc.
MA., BEd., MLISc, MPhil., PhD, and ML (International
Law and Constitutional Law) degrees. He started his
career as Librarian in the Central Law College, Salem.
After that he served as Assistant Professor, Annamalai
University. His areas of interest include information and
communication technology (ICT), user studies,
bibliometrics, webometrics, research methodology and
digital libraries. He has written 15 chapters in the
textbooks of Library and Information Science and
published more than 60 research articles in the national
and international journals. He has presented around 30
research papers in national/international conferences/
seminars.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

