DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 499-508
© 2012, DESIDOC

Information about Services and Information Resources on
Websites of Selected Libraries in Rajasthan: A Study
Sarwesh Pareek and Dinesh K. Gupta
DLIS, Vardhaman Mahaveer Open University, Kota, Rajasthan-324 010
E-mail: sarweshpareek@yahoo.com; dineshkg.in@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
A website is considered as an important promotional/informational tool for all kind of organisations. It
informs the visitors about the institution, its mission, resources, services, activities, and so on; encourage
visitors to interact with the services/resources; exchange services and products with electronic transfer of
money; and establish continuous dialogue among the employees and the visitors. Libraries being public service
institution, it becomes necessary that they have more and more information in the public access through
websites. Data pertaining to 12 selected library and research centres in Rajasthan was collected from their
websites during September-December 2010. Analysis found that information resources and services available
on the websites vary from library to library.
Keywords: Library websites, e-journals, library services, e-resources

1. INTRODUCTION
In the traditional library, users had to enter the library
to use its services and resources. With e-resources and
e-services, libraries have started to offer a virtual entrance
to the users through the libraries’ websites. Such visits, in
analogy to the traditional physical visits, are called virtual
visits1. Today, people around the globe are using internet
for communication, searching and accessing information,
learning and also for entertainment. Presences on the
internet through organisational websites have become
essential for organisations. But the quality of content and
information of the websites have been issues2.
As for libraries, their own websites can be effectively
used for provisioning information services. Library
websites not only are a gateway to an institution’s
resources but also create direct links to the native
interface of each resource.
Users may search the library’s online catalogue; use
a subject guide or database to access a citation form the
internet or access full text articles of web based journals;
they may browse an e-journal; fill out an interlibrary
lending form; e-mail a reference question via the ask-alibrarian service or borrow an e-book all by remote
access3.

2. UNIVERSITIES AND RESEARCH CENTRES
IN RAJASTHAN
Rajasthan is the largest state in the Indian Union. With
10 per cent of the landmass of the country and 5 per cent of
its population, it presents huge challenges in terms of
development and socio-economic growth. Two-thirds of the
State is desert areas with severe water shortages and other
attendant
disadvantages.
Given
these
natural
disadvantages, the State fully realises that the prospects of
all-round development can be improved only if care is taken
to develop information technology and used for the
development of education. In Rajasthan, academic libraries
began computerising their library operations only after the
year 2000. There are number of academic and research
institutions in Rajasthan that have computerised libraries
and about fifty of them are part of e-resources consortia or
library network. Important academic and research
institutions in Rajasthan include a law university, a technical
university, a Sanskrit university, an open university, two
agricultural universities, a health science university, six
affiliated universities, eight deemed universities, thirteen
private universities, six research centres, and other
engineering and management colleges. Recently an Indian
Institute of Management and an Indian Institute of
Technology have also been established in the State.

Received 17 October 2011, accepted 07 February 2012, online published 19 November 2012

499

In the recent years, a number of e-journals/eresources consortia have been formed by the academic/
research libraries in India. It is essential for these libraries
to have websites or web pages to provide information on
the e-resources and also act as a gateway to provide
access to the e-resources. In Rajasthan there are many
educational and research institutions having libraries. For
the purpose of this study, the libraries attached to the
institutions have been categorised into:

•

General universities

•

Deemed universities

•

Agricultural universities

•

Medical universities

•

Technological institutes

•

Research institutions

Websites of two each from the above mentioned
categories of libraries that are members of e-resources
consortia or/and library networks as shown in Table 1
have been chosen for the present study.

3. LITERATURE REVIEW
There have been a number of studies that focus on the
library websites and most of the studies are about the
performance evaluation and usability of library websites
with very little importance given to the content analysis.
These studies are related to different areas like website
design, web credibility, content features of websites,
structure of websites, content and usability of eresources on websites.

Babu4 analyses the various aspects of the credibility of
university websites in Tamil Nadu. He found that the
universities studied have their own websites but they
lacked standard design and structure. Clausen5 compared
Danish university library websites and found that the
library websites were above average. Cohen & Still6 found
that larger institutions made greater use of freely available
internet resources and were more likely to create web
version of paper documents. Still7 in a study of university
library websites in four English speaking countries found
that the visual display of information was similar across all
countries and there was much less information on
instructional materials and remote access. Vijaykumar8,
et al. reported that the library websites of Indian institutes
of technology were different from one another in many
respects.
Osorio9 studied websites of science-engineering
libraries of 45 universities, using a prototyping model to
access content and design. A list of 66 elements was
developed consisting of design features such as
navigation bar, library photograph/logo, screen lengths,
and colours, and content features such as search this
site, electronic resources, user education program,
subject guides, and electronic reference. Osorio also
identified predominant design features represented in the
science-engineering libraries studied. This approach
forms the starting point for the authors’ methodology
regarding distance education pages. Bao10 looked at how
academic libraries provide links to commercial databases
and remote access to those resources. The study found
that less than one-half of the surveyed institutions (67 of
143 or 46.9 %) use web-based interactive reference as an
extension of their traditional reference services. Web-

Table 1. Information about university/intitution under study
Name of university/institutions

Type of university/institute

URL address of library

Member of
consortium/network

University of Rajasthan, Jaipur

General university

http://www.uniraj.ac.in

Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Udaipur

General university

http://www.mlsu.ac.in

UGC-INFONET

Banasthali Vidyapeeth University, Banasthali

Deemed university

http://www.banasthali.org

UGC-INFONET

Jain Vishwa Bharati Institute, Ladnun

Deemed university

Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture

Agricultural university

& Technology, Udaipur
Agricultural university

Sawai Man Singh Medical College, Jaipur

Medical university

(Rajasthan Heath Science University)

AGRIS, AGRICOLA, CABCD Database

http://www.raubikaner.org
http://medicaleducation.rajasthan

NISAGENET, CERA
DELNET

gov.in/jaipur/facilities.asp
Medical university

(NIMS), Jaipur
Malviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur

UGC-INFONET, DELNET

http://www.mpuat.ac.in/index
php?id=53&type=DP

Rajasthan Agricultural University, Bikaner

National Institute of Medical Sciences

http://jvbi.ac.in/

UGC-INFONET

http://www.nimsuniversity.org

DELNET

/campus.php
Technological institute

http://mnit.ac.in/division/facilities

AICTE-INDEST, DELNET

/library/
Mody Institute of Technology & Science,

Technological institute

Laxmangarh

http://www.mitsuniversity.ac.

AICTE-INDEST, DELNET

in/library.aspx

Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur

Research institute

http://www.cazri.res.in/library.html

CERA

Indian Institute of Health Management

Research institute

http://www.jaipur.iihmr.org/

DELNET

Research, Jaipur
500

frmLibrary.aspx
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

based interactive reference services are primarily used to
provide brief factual information, basic guidance in
conducting library research on a topic, and answer
questions about library resources, services, policies,
procedures, and facilities. McGillis & Toms11 and
Battleson12 et al. reported on usability studies of
academic library websites. Coffta & Schoen13 examined
websites from four- and five-year colleges and universities
to find out about interlibrary loan policies, contact
information, and holdings. King14 examined the
homepages of ARL libraries to compare design
similarities and differences. He categorised his findings in
seven sections like background, document header, footer,
document body, page length, number of steps to library
homepage from parent institution website, and domain
name server. There are many and various examples of
checklists designed to evaluate internet resources but
there are only a few regarding academic library websites.
The scope of such papers again is limited and does not
include all the constituent technologies or components as
applicable to this.

3.1 Types of Library Websites and Their
Research Area
There are different types of academic libraries like
university, colleges, schools, research and many more.
While there are a number of studies to be done that
examine the webpages of academic library websites and
public library websites, few concentrate solely on special
libraries. These libraries serve the very specific
information needs of users and patrons. Furthermore,
library websites are a very useful resource that can be
improved with further study and analysis. The more
information that is collected about website content and
design, the better library websites can become. Table 2
summarises different types of websites and their different
research areas from relevant studies.

4. OBJECTIVES OF STUDY

•

To determine the library services and facilities offered
through library websites;

•

To find out whether the libraries have a direct link to
their electronic resources on their webpage; and

•

To find if the libraries’ homepage promote the library
services.

5. METHODOLOGY
There are many checklists designed to evaluate
internet resources, but there are only a few regarding
academic library websites43. In fact, there are no
commonly accepted standards or even sets of criteria for
evaluating such websites. For the present study a
checklist was designed and developed on the basis of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

previous evaluations of such websites by Susan44,
Dickstein & Mills45, Kupersmith46, Kumar33, et al.
Haneefaa32 K48, Coffta & Schoen D M13, Battleson12,
Chao43, Vasantha40, Vijaykumar8 , Shukla47, Kalara48 and
Jalal49 were useful for preparing a comprehensive checklist
for evaluation of library websites. The checklist included
general information, information about library collection,
information on e-resources, information about library
services, and linking pattern for e-resources. This
checklist was used to record the features present on each
website. It was extended, as necessary, as new features
were noted on webpages accessed for the study.
The data collection was done for the three months
period of September-December 2010 for further analysis.

6. ANALYSIS
6.1 General Information Available on Website
The library portal of any institution has to provide
general information about library regarding about
institution (a library website usually accessible under any
main university’s website, if it is so why a library website
explain about institution), about library, library objectives,
area and site plan, contact information, date of update,
departmental library, FAQs, library automation, library
committee and other information, library staff,
membership information, news and events, working
hours, suggestions and feedback sections. It also should
include authority, copyright, domain name, and aesthetic
features of the site.
Figure 1 shows the general information content of the
selected library websites. It is revealed that six of the
twelve libraries provide their history on their website.
These include University of Rajasthan, Mohan Lal
Sukhadia University, BV, Jain Vishwa Bharati Institute,
Mody Institute of Technology & Science, and Central Arid
Zone Research Institute. Seventy five percent of the
libraries provide information about their institution. The
library portals of Jain Vishwa Bharati Institute, University
of Rajasthan and Central Arid Zone Research Institute
provide more general information on their library home
pages as compared to the others. Whereas, the website
of SMS medical college and National Institute of Medical
Sciences University provide limited information regarding
their library services. They just provide an image in the
link of facilities and services available institution.
The FAQs links are available on the websites of
Banasthali Vidyapeeth, Jain Vishwa Bharati Institute,
Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture & Technology,
Rajasthan Agricultural University, and Malviya National
Institute of Technology libraries. Only Indian Institute of
Health Management Research library provides
information about library objectives on their homepage.
501

Table 2. Summary of earlier studies on websites, and relevant areas
Website type

Research area

Selected

Academic library websites

Web sites design

Adams15 (2002)

article(s)

Geographical
USA

orientation Research

Content analysis

method

Web portals, library

Shokeen 16 (2009)

India

Seven C’s

Content and Usability

Sapa 17 (2005)

Polish and USA

Content analysis

Content and Design

Onyancha

South Africa countries

Link and Content analysis

Content features

Clyde

(1996)

Various countries

Content analysis

Content features

Clyde (1999)

Various countries

Content analysis

Content features

Clyde

Various countries

Content analysis

Content features

Jurkowski

Content of home pages

Osareh

Content features
Content analysis
Citation analysis

Wang

Content and structural

Wood 27 (2009)

e-resources

School library websites

University library websites

19

(2007)

18

20

(2004)

21

USA

Content analysis

Around the world

Content analysis

Elgohary 24 (2007)

Arab countries

Web impact factor

Jeyshankar

India

Webometric analysis

23

22

(2004)

(2003)
25

(2009)

(2005)

26

USA

Webometric analysis

South Africa

Content analysis

features
Government websites

Content and link analysis

Sasikala28 (2003)

India, USA and UK

Content analysis

Web impact factor,

Walia 29 (2010)

India

Webometric analysis

Babu30(2010)

India

Webometrics

USA

Content analysis

web link analysis
Central university

Search engines, link

library websites

analysis, WIB

Association of research

Content features

Detlor 31 (2006)

National library websites

Content features

Haneefa

Asian countries

Content analysis

Management library

contents and usability

Kumar (2009)

India

Content analysis

Library portal, e-resources,

Letha

India

Content & design analysis

Qutab35 (2009)

Pakistan

Content analysis

Michalec

USA

Content analysis

libraries
32

(2010)

33

websites
Special library

34

(2006)

content analysis
Academic, public &

Content features
special library websites

Art library websites

Content and structural

IIT’s library websites

Content analysis

Pathak 37 (2008)

India

Content analysis

IUCAA library

Library services, library

Sahu

India

Content analysis

36

(2006)

features
38

(2005)

homepage
Private universities

Web impact factors

Utulu39 (2008)

Nigeria

Website and web
presence analysis

Science universities

Design features and

Vasantha40 (2008)

Around the world

usability features

Content and
design analysis

NHS library website

Content and design

Ebenezer41 (2003)

UK

Content analysis

Other websites

Link analysis,

Mukherjee 42 (2009)

India

Webometrics

search engines

6.2 Library Collection
According to the Encyclopaedia of Library and
Information Science, ‘Library collection is the sum total of
library materials, books, manuscripts, serials,
government documents, hamlets, catalogues, reports,
recordings, microfilms reel, micro cards and microfiche,
CDs etc., that make up the holding of a particular
library’57. The present study made an attempt to examine
the availability of information about library collection on
502

the websites of respective libraries and data is presented
in Fig. 2. All the selected libraries give information about
their collection on their websites. The scope of their
presentation varies from general to highly detailed. Figure
2 shows the information about the collection such as
books, audio-visual materials, CD/DVDs, e-books, ejournals, microfilms and microfiche, patents, project
reports, standards, etc. It is found that about 66 per cent
of libraries provide details of their books and journals and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

12
10
8
6
4
2

Figure 1. General information about library.

Suggestions/feedback

Membership
Research reports

News & events

Library staff
Reprints

Library objective

Library committee

Library automation

FAQs

Departmental library

Date of update

Copyright holder

Contact information

Area & site map

About institution

About library

0

9
8
7
6
5
4
3

Thesis & dissertations

Standards

Project reports

Patents

Newspapers

Newsletters

Microforms

Manual

Journals & magazines

E-journals

E-books

CDs/DVDs ROMs

Books

Audio-visual material

0

Archives

2
1

Figure 2. Information about library collections.

magazines on their websites. These include University of
Rajasthan, Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Banasthali
Vidyapeeth University, Jain Vishwa Bharati Institute,
Malviya National Institute of Technology, Mody Institute of
Technology & Science, Central Arid Zone Research
Institute, and Indian Institute of Health Management
Research. The library of University of Rajasthan,
Banasthali Vidyapeeth University, Mody Institute of
Technology & Science and Indian Institute of Health
Management Research provides information about ejournals. About 42 per cent of libraries (Jain Vishwa
Bharati Institute, Malviya National Institute of Technology,
Mody Institute of Technology & Science, Central Arid
Zone Research Institute, and Indian Institute of Health
Management Research) have CD and DVD-ROM
collections. Only Indian Institute of Health Management
Research library gives information about collection of ebooks. Sawai ManSingh Medical College and National
Institute of Medical Sciences did not give any information
about their collection.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

6.3 Information About E-resources
Since the libraries chosen for this study are members
of either e-resources consortia, library networks or both,
they have access to a large pool of varied e-resources that
include e-journals, e-books, and databases and so on.
Institutional repositories are being promoted and even
mandated in many institutions in India. It was found that
66 per cent of the institutes have institutional repositories
on their websites. Six libraries were found to be
subscribing to online databases; they include University
of Rajasthan, Banasthali Vidyapeeth University, Malviya
National Institute of Technology, Mody Institute of
Technology & Science, Central Arid Zone Research
Institute and Indian institute of health management and
research. Three libraries, viz., University of Rajasthan,
Banasthali Vidyapeeth University and Malviya National
Institute of Technology provide links to different
consortium through their website. Only Indian Institute of
Health Management Research library provides library
503

membership form through website. Malviya National
Institute of Technology library provides user guide for their
different users. University of Rajasthan provides the link
for downloaded dissertation and theses for their users.
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University and Maharana Pratap
University of Agriculture & Technology provide
Examination papers for downloading on their websites.
Libraries of Rajasthan Agricultural University, Sawai
ManSingh Medical College, Malviya National Institute of
Technology and Indian Institute of Health Management
Research provides links to different libraries and
information centers. Only four of libraries having a CD
ROM databases includes Malviya National Institute of
Technology, Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture &
Technology, Mody Institute of Technology & Science and
Central Arid Zone Research Institute. Study clearly shows

that Malviya National Institute of Technology and Indian
Institute of Health Management Research having a good
collection of e-resources and they provide links through
their website and National Institute of Medical Sciences
and Sawai Man Singh Medical College are very poor in the
collection of E-resources. (Figure 3)
University of Rajasthan, Banasthali Vidyapeeth
University and Malviya National Institute of Technology
library websites have more links and retrieval interface in
the comparison to other library websites studied.
Websites of these three libraries provide links to the full
text databases with user authentication; such facility is
available in the campuses only. A screen shot of the ejournal list at the University of Rajasthan website is shown
in Fig. 4.

10
8
6
4
2

User guide

University publications

Research papers

Online database

Membership form

Link to different consortium

Link to different website

Institituional repository

Examination papers

E-thesis & dissertations

E-journals

E-books

CD-ROM databasaes

Bibliographic databasaes

0

Figure 3. Information on e-resources.

Figure 4. Screenshot of University of Rajasthan e-journals list.
504

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Technology & Science, Malviya National Institute of
Technology, Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Indian
Institute of Health Management Research. The Jain
Vishwa Bharati Institute, Malviya National Institute of
Technology and Indian Institute of Health Management
Research (33 %) having a web OPAC facility through their
website. Malviya National Institute of Technology library
provide video viewing facility, site search, reprographic
services and audio and video using facility. And only
Indian Institute of Health Management Research provides
CAS and SDI journal and magazines contents, new
arrivals list, and newspaper clipping service to their users.

Ten library websites indicate that they are member of
library consortia/ network and the users can access eresources through UGC-INFONET, AICTE-INDEST,
DELNET, NISAGNET, CERA (Consortium for E-resources
in Agriculture) etc. Further, it was observed that Malviya
National Institute of Technology library is subscribing
journals from J-Gate India and also provide online link to
access these journals in its library portal. It is worth to
note that the library portal of National Institute of Medical
Sciences and Sawai Man Singh Medical College provide
information and links to these e-resources.

6.4 Library Services

Linking e-resources is an important facility provided to
the users. Such links are provided through the library
website itself; or through publishers’ website, through
specific data center or through search engines.

Library services describe the facilities provided by a
library for the use of book and dissemination of
information. Library and information centers are relating to
two areas, which are largely document-oriented, have
also shaping in a way, which have now given them distinct
status.

7. DISCUSSIONS
The finding of the study clearly show that all library
websites having information and sitemap on library portal.
Websites of the Sawai Man Singh Medical College and
National Institute of Medical Sciences have produce
image of the library on the website of their respective
institutions. May be they have lack of knowledge about
the importance of library portals through which they
provides links. Some time it is also found that due to
administration or management instructions some of the
institutions did not produce more information on the
library portals. So librarians or library in-charge put strong
reasons in support to their management for providing
more and current information on the web portals which
helps users for accessing the information through linkage
which are far from the institution and spent more time to
access e-resources.

Figure 5 depicts the various kinds of services like
audio & videos service, bibliographical services, CAS and
SDI, e-journals access, internet & intranet access, Issue
& return of books, newspaper clippings, video viewing
facility, reprographic services, xeroxing service, book
bank facility, web OPAC, etc., which are made available in
the libraries. It is found that University of Rajasthan,
Malviya National Institute of Technology, Central Arid Zone
Research Institute and Indian Institute of Health
Management Research provide information regarding their
services.
Seven out of 12 university library provide internet
access to their users. It include University of Rajasthan,
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Maharana Pratap
University of Agriculture & Technology, Mody Institute of
14
12
10
8
6
4

Xerox facility

Web OPAC

Video viewing facility

Site search

Reprographic services

Reference service

Reading room facility

Newspaper clippings

New arrivals list

Journals & magazines

Issuing & returning

Internet access

Inter library loan

E-journals access

CD-ROM Search

CAS & SDI

Book-bank

Bibliographic services

0

Audio and video

2

Figure 5. Information about library services.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

505

It is also found that all the library websites have
information about books, Journals, reference sources and
back volume of journals, etc. The study clearly indicates
that almost all library websites have given contact
information, FAQs, and copyright holder.
Whereas, important points like library rules, location,
subscription of e-newspapers, lecture notes, exhibitions,
online seminars, indexing and abstracting services,
translation services , training and guidance for the users,
SMS queries, organisational structure of the library, web
based circulation, promotion of library services, etc., have
not been covered on the library websites.
Some of the institutions provide link to the library but
no information has been uploaded. There is no direct link
to e-resources consortia. These consortia are not used
off-campus. The information or brief report of the library
available on the library website is not updated regularly
and it is found to be old. Hence, it is mandatory to update
these regularly with date of last updating and frequency of
updating. This will add more credibility to the site. For
example: The information loaded on Central Arid Zone
Research Institute website is not updated since 2006.
Only Malviya National Institute of Technology library
gives information regarding their future plans. Only
Malviya National Institute of Technology Library provides
branch–wise book bank list for SC/ST students. Some of
the libraries uploaded pictures and graphics to show their
facilities. No library provides information regarding open
and close access system.
Indian Institute of Health Management Research
library is the only library which provides link to the
membership form. University of Rajasthan library website
provides list of CD-ROMs databases available in the
library.

8. CONCLUSIONS
The study gives an informative preview of the contents
and design of library websites in Rajasthan. Although the
libraries have a web presence and varying levels of
services, there is enormous scope of improving the
websites. For example, University of Rajasthan and
Malviya National Institute of technology website found
give more and more library information and linkage to its
homepage as compared to others. They give all the
information in the paragraphs and produce very less links
information to the homepage.
It is observed that the entire library websites of
Rajasthan are different from one another in many
respects. These are identified as premier institutes of
higher education and research and Technology in
Rajasthan. Having common goal, there is need for library
cooperation among the libraries. To achieve this kind of
506

cooperation, there is need to design and develop a unique
type of library website containing resources and services
of their individual libraries and also providing links libraries
of other libraries. Further, there is also need to form an
educational network specialised among the libraries. At
present most of the libraries are member of UGCINFONET, AICTE INDEST, AGRIS, etc.

REFERENCES
1. Poll, R. Evaluating the library website, statistics and
quality measures. In World Library and Information
Congress, 73rd IFLA General Conference and Council,
19-23 August 2007, Durban South Africa. http://
archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla73/papers/074-Poll-en.pdf
(accessed on 15 October 2010).
2. Bhattacharjee, Jayanta & Sinha, Manoj Kumar.
Quality control issues for design, development and
maintenance of websites. In Dynamic Interoperable
Web Based Information Systems: 4th International
Convention CALIBER-2006, 2-4 February 2006. pp.
13-22.
3. Ibrahim, A.E. Use and users perception of eresources in the United Arab Emirates university.
Libri, 2004, 54(3), 18-29.
4. Babu, B.R. Credibility of university websites in Tamil
Nadu. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2009, 29(3),
16-28.
5. Clausen, H. Evaluation of library websites: The
Danish case. The Electronic Library, 1999, 17(2), 8387.
6. Cohen, L. B. & Still, J.M.A. Comparison of research
university and two-year college library web sites:
Content, functionality, and form. College & Res. Lib.,
1999, 60(3), 275-89.
7. Still, J.M.A. A content analysis of university library
websites in English speaking countries. Online Inf.
Rev., 2001, 25(3), 160-64.
8. Vijayakumar, M.; Kannapanavar, B.U. & Mestri, M.
Content analysis of Indian Institutes of Technology
libraries web portals: A study. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf.
Technol., 2009, 29(1), 57-63.
9. Osorio, N.L. Websites of science-engineering
libraries: An analysis of content and design. Sci.
Technol.
Librarianship,
2001.
http://
www.library.ucsb.edu/istl/01-winter/refereed.html
(accessed on 15 October 2010).
10. Bao, X. A study of web-based interactive reference
services via academic library home pages. Ref. &
User Serv. Quart., 2003, 42(3), 250-56.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

11. McGillis L. & Toms E. Usability of the academic
library web site, implications for design. College &
Res. Lib., 2001, 62(4), 355-67.

25. Jeyshankar, R. & Ramesh Babu, B. Websites of
universities in Tamil Nadu: A webometric study.
Annals Lib. Inf. Stud., 2009, 56(2), 69-79.

12. Battleson, B.; Booth, A. & Weintrop, J. Usability
testing of an academic library web site: A case study.
J. Acad. Lib., 2001, 27(3), 188-98.

26. Wang, Cheng-Zhi. Evaluating demographic websites:
Toward webometric criteria. J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2005,
31(2), 52-61.

13. Coffta, M. & Schoen, D.M. Academic library web sites
as a source of interlibrary loan lending information–a
survey of four-and five-year colleges and universities.
Lib. Resou. Tech. Serv., 2000, 44(4), 196-200.

27. Wood, M. Academic library websites in South Africa.
Innovation, 2009, 39. http://www.innovation.ukzn
.ac.za/InnovationPdfs/No39-Mandy%20Woodr.pdf
(accessed on 5 September 2010).

14. King, D. Library home page design: A comparison of
page layout for front-ends to ARL library websites.
College & Res. Lib., 1998, 59(5), 458-65.

28. Sasikala, C. Evaluation of websites: A study. 2003.
CALIBER
Files/Caliber_2003_CD/Us/6.htm
(accessed on 5 September 2010)

15. Adams, Kate. Content and design of academic library
web sites for distance learners: An analysis of ARL
libraries. DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska –
Lincoln, 2002. http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/librarys
cience/76 (accessed on 17 October 2010).

29. Walia, Paramjeet K. Government of India websites: A
study. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2010, 30(4), 310.

16. Shokeen, N.S. Use of portals for improved access to
library and information services in the web
environment. ILA Bulletin, 2009, 45(1-2), 5-8.
17. Sapa, Remiguisz. The roles of American and Polish
academic library websites: A comparative study.
LIBRI, 2005, 55, 1-20.
18. Onyancha, Omwoyo Bosire. A webometric study of
selected academic libraries in eastern and South
Africa using a link analysis approach. South African
J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2007, 73(1), 25-39.
19. Clyde, L.A. The school library websites: On the
information superhighway or stalled in the car park?
In Unleash the power! Knowledge, technology,
diversity: 3rd Third International Forum on Research in
School Librarianship, edited by L. Lighthall and E.
Howe. International Association of School
Librarianship, Settle, 1999, pp. 227-37.
20. Clyde L.A. School library web sites: 1996-2002. The
Electronic Library, 2004, 22(2), 158-67.
21. Clyde L. A. The library as information provider: The
home page Abstract.. The Electronic Library, 1996,
14(6), 549-58.
22. Jurkowski, O. School library website components.
Tech Trends, 2004, 48(6), 56-60.
23. Osareh Farideh, A. Notice on content of library and
information science (LIS) schools website. LIBRI,
2003, 53, 262-65.
24. Elgohary, Amgad. Arab universities on the web: A
webometric study. The Electronic Library, 2008,
26(3), 374-86.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

30. Babu, B. Ramesh. Websites of Central Universities in
India: A webometric analysis. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf.
Technol., 2010, 30(4), 33-43.
31. Detlor, B. & Lewis, V. Academic library web sites:
Current practice and future directions. J. Acad. Lib.,
2006, 32(3), 251-58.
32. Haneefa, K. Mohamed. Contents of National Library
websites in Asia: An analysis. Annals Lib. Inf. Stud.,
2010, 57(2), 98-108.
33. Kumar, B.T. Sampath; Prithvi-raj, K.R.; Naik, A.
Sadashiv & Reddy, Raghavendra. Content analysis of
Indian Institute of Management library websites: An
analytical study. In 7th International CALIBER-2009,
Pondicherry University, Puducherry, 25-27 February
2009.
34. Letha, M.M. Library portal: A tool for web enabled
information services. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol.,
2006, 26(5), 11-16.
35. Qutab, S. & Mahmood, K. Library web sites in
Pakistan: An analysis of content. Program, Electr.
Lib. Inf. Sys., 2009, 43(4), 430-45.
36. Michalec, M. A content analysis of art library
websites. Art Documentation, 2006, 25(2), 47-55.
37. Pathak, S.K. Proper content management to the
library web site, evaluation of all IIT’s library websites.
In 6th International CALIBER -2008, University of
Allahabad, Allahabad, 28 February - 1 March 2008.
38. Sahu, Hemant Kumar. Role of the library homepage
as a new platform for library services: A case study. In
3rd International CALIBER - 2005, Cochin, 2-4
February 2005. pp. 475-83.
507

39. Utulu, Samuel C. Avemaria. Information technology
and web use characteristics of Nigerian private
universities. African J. Lib. Inf. Sci., 2008, 18(2), 11929.
40. Vasantha Raju, N. An analysis of usability features of
library websites. Annals Lib. Inf. Stud., 2008, 55(2),
111-22.
41. Ebenezer, Catherine. Usability evaluation of an NHS
library website. Health Inf. Lib. J., 2003, 20, 134-42.
42. Mukherjee, B. Link analysis of Indian political parties
websites: A temporal comparison. Annals Lib. Inf.
Stud., 2009, 56(3), 201-11.
43. Chao, H. Assessing the quality of academic libraries
on the web: The development and testing criteria. Lib.
Inf. Sci. Res., 2002, 24, 169-94.
44. Susan, J. Gardner; Juricek, John Eric & Xu, F. Grace.
An analysis of academic library web pages for faculty.
J. Acad. Lib., 2008, 34(1), 16-24.

508

45. Dickstein, R.V. Mills. Usability testing at the
University of Arizona Library: How to let the users in
on the design. Inf. Technol. Lib., 2000, 19, 144-50.
46. Kupersmith, J. Library terms evaluated in usability
tests and other studies. 2003. http://www.jkup.net/
terms-studies.html (accessed on 5 September 2010)
54 Shukla, Akhandand & Tripathi, Aditya, Establishing
content awareness evaluation criteria for library
websites: A case study of Indian academic library
websites. Annals Lib. Inf. Stud., 2010, 57(4), 403416.
55 Kalra, Jaya & Verma, Ajay, Evaluation indicators of
library websites of selected research institutions in
India. Annals Lib. Inf. Stud., 2011, 58(3), 139-50.
56 Jalal, Samir kumar; Biswas, Subal Chandra &
Mukhopadhyay, Parthasarthi. Web impact factor and
link analysis of selected Indian universities. Annals
Lib. Inf. Stud., 2010, 57(2), 109-12.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

