DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 506-512
© 2012, DESIDOC

Cloud Computing and Libraries
S.Y. Bansode and S.M. Pujar*
Department of Library and Information Science, University of Pune, Pune-411 007
*Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Gen Vaidya Marg, Goregaon (East), Mumbai-400 065
E-mail: sadanand@unipune.ac.in; pujar@igidr.ac.in
ABSTRACT
Cloud computing is a new breed of service offered over the internet, which has completely changed the
way one can use the power of computers irrespective of geographic location. It has brought in new avenues
for organisations and businesses to offer services using hardware or software or platform of third party
sources, thus saving on cost and maintenance. In this paper, an attempt has been made to give an overview
of this technology, initiatives, advantages and disadvantages and the areas in which libraries can deploy this
technology for providing services and augment the productivity of library staff.
Keywords: Cloud computing, Web 2.0, libraries

1. INTRODUCTION
Till recently, and now too many organisations and
individuals use computers to work alone, inside a
business or home by investing on hardware, software and
maintenance. This scenario is slowly changing owing to
the emergence of new breed of Internet services popularly
known as Web 2.0, through which now one can use the
power of computers at a completely different location,
what it is popularly called as ‘in the cloud’ or ‘cloud
computing’. There are many synonyms for cloud
computing such as, ‘on-demand computing’, ‘software as
a service’, ‘information utilities’, ‘the internet as a
platform’, and others1. Cloud computing refers to use of
web for computing needs which could include using
software applications, storing data, accessing computing
power, or using a platform to build applications.
From e-mail, to word processing or photo sharing or
video sharing one can use products that live in the cloud,
which are secure, backed-up and accessible from any
Internet connection. The best live example of this is
Gmail, which is increasingly used by organisations and
individuals to run their e-mail services. Google Apps being
free for educational institutions is widely used for running
different applications, especially the email services,
which was earlier run using their own computer servers.
This has saved cost for the organisations as they pay per

use for applications and services and time for the
computer staff, which they can invest on running other
services and need not worry about upgrading, backup,
compatibility, and maintenance of servers, which is taken
care of by Google.
Libraries are using computers for running services
such as Integrated Library Management Software (ILMS),
website or portal, digital library or institutional repository,
etc. These are either maintained by parent organisation’s
computer staff or library staff. It involves investment on
hardware, software, and staff to maintain these services
and undertake backup and upgrade as and when new
version of the software gets released.
Library professionals in most cases not being trained
in maintaining servers find it difficult to undertake some of
these activities without the support of IT staff from within
or outside the organisation. Now cloud computing has
become a new buzzword in the field of libraries, which is
blessing in disguise to run different ICT services without
much of a problem as third-party services will manage
servers and undertake upgrades and take backup of data.
Even though there are some concerns in using cloud
services such as privacy, security, etc., some of the
libraries have already embraced this new technology to
run some of their services.

Received 18 January 2012, accepted 30 March 2012, online published

506

2. WHAT IS CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing is a new technology model for IT
services which many organisations and individuals are
adopting. It allows them to avoid locally hosting and
operating multiple servers over an organisation’s network
and constantly dealing with hardware failure, software
installation, upgrades, backup and compatibility issues
and also enables them to save cost. In other words, it
refers to “the delivery of computing as a service rather
than a product, whereby shared resources, software, and
information are provided to computers and other devices
as a metered service over a network, typically the
internet”.2 In this model rather than investing on hardware
and software, organisations buy and pay for the services
as needed basis. Cloud computing also helps to increase
the IT requirements quickly and easily to accommodate
the changes in demand. In other words, it enables
organisations to add or remove hardware/software as per
the needs just by requesting the service provider to do so.
The Christy & Carina3 of Gartner Group define cloud
computing as ‘a style of computing in which massively
scalable and elastic IT-enabled capabilities are delivered
as a service to external customers using Internet
technologies’. To simplify the concept, cloud computing
can be defined as ‘simply the sharing and use of
applications and resources of a network environment to
get work done without concern about ownership and
management of the network’s resources and
applications’4.

3. TYPES OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing IT model has wider meaning as it
essentially has three different types of services viz. SaaS,
PaaS and Iaas.

3.1 SaaS (Software as a Service)
Saas is popularly known as software on demand. In
this, applications or software is delivered as a service to
the end user, who can access the program online using a
web browser or any other suitable client. Here, service
provider licenses an application to customers either as a
service on demand, or through a subscription, in a ‘payas-you-go’ model, or at no charge. Some of such services
are Google Apps, Salesforce, etc. There is usually little
customisation or control available with these applications.
However, subscribers benefit from low initial costs, have
access to (usually 24/7) support services, and needn’t
worry about hosting, installing, upgrading, or maintaining
the software5.

3.2 PaaS (Platform as a Service)
Cloud computing has evolved to include platforms for
building and running custom applications, a concept
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

known as ‘platform as a service’ (or PaaS). PaaS
applications are also referred to as on-demand, Webbased, or software as a service (or SaaS) solutions. In
this, a computing platform supplies tools and a
development environment to help organisations to build,
test, and deploy web-based applications. It helps
‘organisations not to make investment in the
infrastructure required for building web and mobile
applications, but can rent the use of platforms such as
Windows Azure, Google AppEngine, and Force.com.
Applications which are built using these provider’s
services. However, are usually locked into that one
platform6. This service is delivered the way utilities like
water and electricity are supplied, users have to simply
‘tap in’ and take what they need without worrying about
the complexity. And like a utility, PaaS is based on a
metering or subscription model so users only pay for what
they use. With PaaS, one can focus on innovation instead
of complex infrastructure7.

3.3 IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service)
IaaS also referred as HaaS or (Hardware as a Service)
offers both storage and computing power services. It
delivers computer infrastructure i.e. a platform
virtualisation environment as a service along with raw
(block) storage and networking. In this, rather than
purchasing servers, software, data-center space or
network equipment, clients instead buy those resources
as a fully outsourced service. Suppliers typically bill such
services on a utility computing basis; the amount of
resources consumed (and therefore the cost) will typically
reflect the level of activity2. The best example of this
service is Amazon’s web services viz. Simple Storage
Services (S3) for data storage and elastic compute cloud
(EC2) for computing resources. Organisations are using
Amazon’s web services to host or backup their websites,
for content delivery, to run high performance computing
simulations, to host media collections and many other
services. IaaS is priced on a pay-as-you-go model
enabling clients to scale up or down the operations
depending on their needs at any given time and pay only
for what they use5.

4. CLOUD COMPUTING INITIATIVES
There are good number of cloud computing initiatives
undertaken by Amazon, Google, Microsoft and others
offering various types of cloud computing services for the
organisations, businesses, and individuals. Some
services offered by these initiatives are:

4.1 Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Amazon is perceived as one of the major players in
the business, offering a wide range of prominent cloud
computing services such as elastic compute cloud (EC2),
507

simple storage service (S3), simple DB and simple
queuing service (SQS). It provides a reliable, scalable,
low-cost infrastructure platform in the cloud that powers
hundreds of thousands of businesses in countries around
the world7. Some of the solutions offered by Amazon
through cloud computing include application hosting, web
hosting, backup and storage, enterprise IT, content
delivery, and databases. To help new users, Amazon also
offers a free service for a period of one year on all its cloud
computing services to launch new applications, test
existing applications in the cloud, or simply gain handson experience with AWS.

4.2 Google Apps
Google Apps cloud services, a multi-tenant, internetscale infrastructure, offers faster access to innovation,
superior reliability, and security, and maximum
economies of scale as compared to on-premises, hosted
and software plus services technologies8. Google Apps is
available free for individuals and organisations (limited up
to 10 user accounts), educational institutions and US
non-profitable organisations and for a price to businesses
and organisations. Google apps offer Gmail, Google
Docs, Google Sites, Google video and other services on
the cloud. Google Apps helps organisations to move their
e-mail services, web services and office applications on
the cloud. In addition to Google Apps, Google also has
‘Google App Engine’ service, which enables organisations
and businesses to build and host web apps on the same
systems that power Google applications. It offers fast
development and deployment; simple administration, with
no need to worry about hardware, patches or backups;
and effortless scalability8.

4.3 Microsoft Windows Azure
Windows Azure is a cloud platform from Microsoft
Corporation that empowers organisations to develop and
run applications with unbounded scalability and ease-ofuse. With this flexible platform one can easily scale up or
down to meet the demands of business. With the pay-foruse business model, i.e., one is paying for the services
which are actually used while one is not paying for the
services which are not used. Windows Azure allows
developers to develop and run applications quickly, while
leveraging current skills to develop applications with .NET,
PHP, or Java9. Some of the scenarios offered by Windows
Azure for businesses and organisations include SaaS,
storage, computing, database management etc.

4.4 Rackspace Cloud
The Rackspace cloud is a cloud computing platform
that offers three types of services for organisations and
businesses viz. cloud servers, cloud files and load
balancers. Cloud servers are available to organisations in
different sizes and are measured by the amount of
508

physical memory reserved for an instance and range from
256 MB up to 30 GB on Operating system of their choice
to run various web services. Cloud files provides an easy
to use online storage for organisations to store files and
media which can be delivered globally using Akamai’s
content delivery network (CDN). Its third service Cloud
balancer helps organisations to enhance their server
capacities and to balance the load factor and this service
is extended only on-demand10.

5. CLOUD COMPUTING INITIATIVES FOR
LIBRARIES
Like all purpose cloud initiatives undertaken by
giants, there are sizable number of initiatives relevant to
libraries initiated by organisations and business houses,
which are in the business of integrated library software,
digital libraries, search engines, etc. Few major ones are:

5.1 OCLC’s Webscale
OCLC has set an example for making use of cloud
computing for libraries. Years together OCLC has been
functioning as a cloud computing vendor because they
provide cataloguing tools over the internet and allow
member institutions to draw on their centralised data
store11. Now, OCLC has geared to implement the plan of
library management systems on the cloud in which OCLC
has web-scale delivery and circulation, print and
electronic acquisitions, cataloguing and license
management components. Its worldshare management
services (WMS) allows libraries to manage entire
collection management life cycle in a cloud-based
application. The overall purpose of webscale—sharing
resources, data, and innovation—is supported by a
variety of features that work together to save money,
promote community development and drive better
services for library users.
In other words, this will generate cost benefits for
libraries and efficiencies not possible when utilising
disparate, specialised systems12. The service promises
to include privacy, security, scalability and technical
support.

5.2 Ex-Libris Cloud
Ex-Libris a leading library software vendor from USA,
who initially developed most of the current products as
locally implemented solutions and at a later stage,
adapted them to a hosted environment. The company’s
next-generation library system, Alma, was conceived as a
cloud-based service to transform the traditional
management of library resources. It besides ensuring
considerable savings in total cost, involved in the
implementation of software and the use of a centralised
cloud service enables libraries to easily influence the
collaborative efforts of the library community to provide
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

effective services for their users13. To provide worldwide
cloud-based services; it has opened data centers at
various locations. The company promises to adhere to
data security, updates, and standards in implementing
cloud services to safeguard the interests of customers.

5.3 Duraspace’s DuraCloud
Duraspace provides open sourse repository solutions
by undertaking turnkey projects for organisations and
libraries to enable them to share scholarly literature using
DSpace and Fedora Commons. It is dedicated in
sustaining and improving Fedora and DSpace, two of the
most dominant open source repository solutions. Its new
service DuraCloud provides digital preservation support
services in the cloud, which is cost effective and simple
for libraries. DuraCloud helps libraries to move content to
the cloud and store it with different service providers to
eliminate the risk of data loss.
The cloud solutions offered include online backup,
preservation and archives, media access, online sharing,
and cloud broker14.

5.4 OSS Labs
OSS labs from India is using Amazon’s elastic cloud
computing platform owing to the various capabilities of
Amazon such as high durability of data, strong
information security based on ISO standards, scalability,
and flexibility. It is expected that the OSS labs will be able
to provide robust open based solutions to demanding
customers15. Using Amazon’s cloud services, it is offering
Koha ILS and DSpace institutional repository hosting and
software maintenance subscription services for libraries.
This has enabled cost-saving for libraries and also helping
library professionals to be free from worrying about
software updates and maintenance.

6. CLOUD COMPUTING APPLICATIONS IN
LIBRARIES
Libraries are in a unique position to experiment with
cloud computing given their service-oriented mission and
need to find appropriate solutions using limited
resources16. According to Fox,11 “one of the key pressures
that pushes libraries to cloud solutions and proves to be
an impediment to the migration is the availability of IT
support services. He also observes that goals and
policies of organisation might also force libraries in
making use of cloud computing services”. These factors
make SaaS and PaaS approaches appealing for libraries.
However, according to Kroski5, “libraries are experimenting
with all types of cloud computing services including that of
infrastructure services, i.e., IaaS”. Libraries are using
cloud computing in number of areas starting from
federated search, website hosting, digital libraries, library
automation, etc. Some of these are:
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

6.1 Automation
Automation is an area; most of the libraries keen to
start in order hasten day-to-day operations. Until now,
automation in libraries is being undertaken on locally
hosted servers using different types of commercial and
open source integrated library management software and
managed either by internal IT or library staff. However, now
many of the software vendors and third party services
offering hosting of this service (SaaS approach) on the
cloud to save libraries from investing on hardware. Apart
from cost-benefit, the libraries will be free from
undertaking maintenance such as software updates,
backup, etc. For example vendors such as Ex-Libris,
OSS Labs are offering this service on the cloud.

6.2 Digital Library Services
Digital libraries or institutional repositories have
become part of modern libraries owing to changing format
of information. The digital library services are presently
being offered by libraries mostly using locally hosted open
source software such as DSpace, EPrints, Fedora
Commons etc for providing open access to scholarly
resources. Apart from adding resources, this involve
libraries to maintain the servers, undertake backup and
carry on regular updates as and when the new version of
the software is released thus putting lot of pressure on the
library or IT staff. To relieve the libraries in undertaking
this kind work, vendors are now offering digital library
services on the cloud using SaaS approach. For example
vendors such as Duraspace, OSS Labs, etc., are offering
this service.

6.3 Office Applications
Libraries, at present, use various office applications
such as word processing, spread sheets, power point
presentations, etc. using Microsoft Office on the local
computers. However, now owing to cloud computing there
are many applications which are made freely available on
the internet by companies like Google, Microsoft, etc.
Google Docs, a free office applications suite available on
the internet may be used in the libraries to undertake
office operations, which also allows storing and sharing of
resources with other colleagues, who can remotely work
on the documents irrespective of their geographical
location.

6.4 Storage
Libraries require space to store the electronic files
and documents. The documents could be official
correspondence, full text documents, bibliographic
records, tutorials, etc. At present, these are stored and
accessed using personal desktops or from servers which
are locally hosted. The cloud computing has brought in
plethora of new services, which offer space at no cost to
509

store the files and documents. For example, Windows
Sky Drive offers 25 GB to store files and share documents
online. Similarly, Amazon, DropBox and many more
initiatives offer storage space on the cloud to enable
organisations and individuals to store and share their
documents. Libraries may take advantage of this and
store some of their documents in order to undertake
collaborative activities with other libraries. In regard to the
digital preservation, libraries are making use of services of
CLOCKSS (http://www.clockss.org/clockss/Home) and
Portico (http://www.portico.org/digital-preservation/) to
get permanent access to the subscribed content
irrespective of the publisher’s existence.

6.5 Search Services
Libraries have already migrated key services such as
OpenURL providers, and federated and pre-indexed
search engines on the cloud either by using commercial
or open source solutions. For example, hosted Ex-Libris
SFX Open-URL link resolver service offers libraries to linkup to the subscribed journal full-text articles.

6.6 Website hosting
Website hosting is one of the earliest adoptions of
cloud computing as many organisations including
libraries preferred to host their websites on third party
service providers rather than hosting and maintaining their
own servers. This is owing to either organisation’s not
having the required bandwidth of Internet (with static IPs)
or technical manpower to maintain the servers. Google
Sites serves as an example of a service for hosting
websites outside of the library’s servers and allowing for
multiple editors to access the site from varied locations.

7. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
Like any other technology, cloud computing too has
its advantages and disadvantages as compared to locally
hosted services.

7.1 Advantages

•

Increased storage

Cloud can hold more storage than a personal
computer or the servers available in the libraries or
organisations and it is possible to extend as per the need.

•

Highly automated

The IT or library staff need not have to worry about
keeping the software up-to-date. The cloud service
provider takes care of updating software as and when new
version is released. When the server is updated everyone
using the service also get access to the new version
without updating anything on their end17.

•

Flexibility

Cloud computing offers much more flexibility than
other local network computing systems and saves time
plus cost for organisations. It is possible for organisations
like libraries to expand the services anytime, by
requesting for an additional space on the servers.

•

Better mobility

The staff and the users of the library can connect to
the library servers from any place or from wherever they
are, rather than having to remain present at their desks by
having a PC and Internet access.

•

Shared resources

One of the important components of cloud computing
is that one can share the resources. It allows people
within and outside the organisations to have access to the
resources. A group of libraries can come together and can
put their resources at one place, which in turn will enable
them to provide access to more number of resources to
their end users.

7.2 Disadvantages
Following are some of the main disadvantages of
cloud computing:

•

Cost saving

The biggest concerns about cloud computing are
security and privacy, especially if the organisations are
dealing with sensitive data such as credit card information
of customers. If the proper security model is not yet in
place, then the data stored on the cloud is vulnerable to
attacks from viruses, theft, etc. In addition to that, since
the services are offered over the Internet it is very difficult
to assess the physical location of servers and software
and security audit is hard to undertake. Also, there is a
risk of data loss owing to improper backup and systems
failure.

Easy on installation and maintenance

No longer having to worry about constant server
updates and other computing issues, organisations will
be free to concentrate on innovation and the IT staff may
510

•

Some of the advantages of cloud computing are:

Cloud computing technology is paid incrementally
thus saving costs for organisations. It offers price savings
due to economies of scale and the fact that organisations
such as libraries are only paying for the resources they
actually use.

•

concentrate on other tasks. There is no need to procure
any hardware to run the servers.

Data security and privacy

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

•

Network connectivity and bandwidth

Since the cloud computing is offered over the Internet,
if the connection goes down due to any reason then the
organisations suffer from loss of data connectivity till the
time it is set. Also the service requires more bandwidth,
as it may not work on low-speed Internet connections18.

•

Dependence on outside agencies

modern ICT activities without worrying about technical
side of it, except adding content of resources. Libraries
have taken a big leap in adopting this technology
especially in the West, but surely it will slowly spread to
developing countries. It is evident from the literature that
some service providers have already pitched in to help
libraries to automate and establish digital libraries on the
cloud.

The cloud services being offered by third party
services over the Internet, it is virtually difficult to have any
control on the maintenance levels and the frequency. Also
it is tough to assess the contingency procedures of the
service provider in regard to backup, updates, restore and
disaster recovery. Migration to other service provider is
also an issue, if the uniform standards are not followed by
the host.

REFERENCES

•

3. Christy, Pettey & Forsling, Carina. Gartner highlights
five attributes of cloud computing. 2009. http://
www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1035013 (accessed
on 28/12/2011).

Limited flexibility

Flexibility may be limited in terms of special
customisation as services on the cloud will be common
for all the customers.

•

Cost

1. Hayes, B. Cloud computing. Communications of
ACM, 2008, 51(7), 9-11.
2. Wikipedia. Cloud computing. http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Cloud_computing (accessed on 12 December
2011).

4. Scale, Mark-Shane E. Cloud computing and
collaboration. Library Hi Tech News, 2009, 26(9), 10-13.

Initially the cost could be higher, but may reduce
depending on the usage of services. However,
organisations may end up paying higher charges in the
future.

5. Kroski, Ellyssa. Library cloud atlas: a guide to cloud
computing and storage/stacking the tech. Library
Journal, 2009. http://www.libraryjournal.com/article/
CA6695772.html (accessed on 15 February 2011).

•

6. Colayer. What is Paas? 2009. http://ex.colayer.com/
_cached/LINK_whatispaas/LINK_whatispaas.html
(accessed on 29 December 2011).

Knowledge and integration

Deeper knowledge of cloud computing is essential as
working of the service is totally dependent on the service
provider. Similarly, integration is an issue as it will be
difficult to integrate equipment used in data centers to
host data with that of peripheral equipments in the
organisation such as printers, USB drives, etc.

8. CONCLUSIONS
Cloud computing is a new baby in the computer
systems technology emerged owing to the developments
in internet and associated technologies. It is in the
evolving stage, requires some amount of careful
considerations before organisations think about hosting
some of their services. However, this technology has
certain advantages, which definitely help organisations
such as libraries in managing their services, which will
relieve library staff from managing the servers.
Library professionals many a times find it difficult to
manage the technologies owing to their skill levels, lack of
support from IT departments or for not having IT facilities
within the organisations. This kind of situation always
hinders library professionals in undertaking automation of
library activities, developing digital library services, etc.
Here, cloud computing may help libraries to undertake
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

7. About AWS. 2011. http://aws.amazon.com/what-isaws/ (accessed on 4 January 2011).
8. Google.com. Google App Engine. 2011. http://
code.google.com/appengine/ (accessed on 2
January 2011).
9. Microsft.com. Cloud Platform. 2011. http://www.mic
rosoft.com/en-us/cloud/cloudpowersolutions/develo
pment-and-hosting.aspx?fbid=oaQUdO25BEm
(accessed on 19 March 2011).
10. Rackspace.com. The Rackspace Cloud. 2012. http://
www.rackspace.com/cloud/ (accessed on 1 June
2011).
11. Fox, Robert. Libraries in a cloud. OCLC Sys. Serv.,
2009, 25(3), 156-61.
12. OCLC. OCLC Worldshare management services.
2012. http://www.oclc.org/webscale/overview.htm
(accessed on 6 January 2012).
13. Kozokin, Sarit. Ex-Libris cloud: Open for business.
2011. hhttp://www.exlibrisgroup.com/?catid={BC76
511

D337-FEFA-4603-B827-28AB9F818BDB} (accessed
on 8 January 2012).

journal.code4lib.org/articles/2510 (accessed on 8
January 2012).

14. Duracloud.org. Duracloud. 2012. http://www.dur
acloud.org (accessed on 8 January 2012).

17. Webhostingreport. The advantages of cloud
computing. 2011. http://www.webhostingreport.com/
learn/advantages-of-cloud-computing.html (accessed
on 1 January 2011).

15. OSS Labs. OSS Labs to host its solutions on
Amazon’s cloud computing platform. 2011, http://
www.osslabs.biz/news/oss-labs-host-its-solutionsamazons-cloud-computing-platform (accessed on 13
March 2011).
16. Mitchell, Erik. Using cloud services for library IT
infrastructure. Code4Lib Journal, 2010, 9. http://

512

18. Miller, Michael. Cloud computing pros and cons for
end users. 2009. http://www.informit.com/articles/
article.aspx?p=1324280&seqNum=2 (accessed on
20 December 2011).

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

