DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 516-525
© 2012, DESIDOC

Application of Information Communication Technology
to the Management of Library’s Readers’ Desk
*

O.M. Olaniyi, A. Omotosho, E.A. Oluwatosin, O.K. Towolawi, and G.C. Grant-Ezeronye
Bells University of Technology, Ota, Ogun-state, Nigeria
E-mail: *engrolaniyi09@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
The automated library’s readers’ desk management system is a modern innovation that is expected to help
in the circulation registration of processed books and register users. The existing library management system
processes in most institutions of higher learning in the developing countries is not fast enough and it is mainly
manually processed. This paper presents a library readers’ desk management system with the use of fingerprint
biometric and barcode technology to the activities of a library’s readers’ services. The proposed system is
capable of reducing the time spent and errors associated with identification and verification of users and
library books as well as charging-in and charging-out of books to library patrons.
Keywords: Barcode, biometrics, circulation and classification/readers’ desk, fingerprint, information and
communications technology, ICT

1. INTRODUCTION
The capacity of information and communications
technology (ICT) network has grown faster than any
technology in history, doubling every two to three years.
The cost of digital transmission and computer equipment
has been dramatically reduced and the range of services
that can be provided by ICT has been continuously
expanded. The explosion of ICT since the beginning of the
20th century has been rendering manual-based library
system in academic, research, special and public
libraries as less relevant1.
The library allows people to borrow and gives the
borrower a time when to return the borrowed item. If the
item is not returned on the due date, the person pays
infringements for late or lost book charges. The circulation
unit is the main public service point found at the main
entrance of a conventional library. The operations
performed at the readers’ desk are registration of users,
lending, charging in, monitoring materials for damage and
routing them for repair or replacement, among others. The
existing library system processes in most institutions of
higher learning in developing countries are still not fast
enough and are majorly manual in nature. The circulation
desk unit of a library which is basically the integral part of
the readers’ service department needs improvement with
information technology.

The advent of the internet, digitisation, and the ability
to access the library and research materials from remote
locations have also created dramatic changes by the end
of the twentieth century2. The developments of expert
systems, wireless networks, virtual collections,
interactive web interfaces, virtual reference services, and
personal web portals bring about greater changes since
the start of the new millennium. The significant and fast
changes in librarianship, where digital and electronic
libraries are being established to complement, and in
some cases to completely replace the traditional libraries
and its associated services cannot be overemphasised3.

2. RELATED WORKS
2.1 Role of ICT in Library Services
The library is divided into different housekeeping
operations: Acquisition control, serials control,
cataloguing and classification, circulation control, and
metadata linking. Each of these has its major operations
it takes care of. The circulation desk is the main public
service point found at the main entrance of a conventional
library. The operations performed at the circulation desk
are: Registration of users, lending of materials, charging
in materials returned, monitoring materials for damage
and routing them for repair or replacement, etc.

Received 17 October 2011, accepted 07 February 2012, online published 19 November 2012

516

Automation of the library is a key element for information
industry. Research and development of library automation
has grown very rapidly in recent decades and become
increasingly important for the economic growth of
librarianship of a developing or developed country4.
The functions of the circulation desk which is the main
public service point usually found near the main entrance
of a library5. It provides lending services and facilities for
return of loaned items. Renewal of materials and payment
of fines are also handled and troubleshooting Circulation
Technology, i.e., library circulation software, scanners,
printers, etc. and collecting statistics on library use, i.e.,
patron transactions, material checkouts, etc., Circulation
staff may provide basic search and reference services,
though more in-depth questions are usually referred to
reference librarians at the library reference desk. The
circulation desk is in most cases staffed by support staff
or paraprofessional instead of professional librarians.
Cataloguing and classification is a system of coding and
organising library materials (books, serials, audiovisual
materials, computer files, maps, manuscripts) according
to their subject and allocating a class mark or call number
to all library resource. Library classification is said to have
many standard schemes in use, and many more have
been proposed over the years such as: (a) Universal
schemes covering all subjects. Examples include Dewey
Decimal Classification (DDC), Universal Decimal
Classification (UDC) and Library of Congress
Classification (LC); (b) Specific Classification (SC)
schemes for particular subjects or types of materials.
Examples include Icon class, British Catalogue of Music
classification, and Dickinson classification, or the NLM
classification for medicine and National schemes
specially created for certain countries, example is
Swedish Library classification system, SAB (Sveriges
Allmanna Biblioteksfrening)5.
Academic libraries, to fulfil their mission of supporting
the educational objectives of their parent institutions,
which include teaching, learning, research and cultural
development, have to acquire and maintain core relevant
books, journals, and audio-visual collections and
services. Today, academic libraries are faced with
multifaceted challenges in managing library collection
and services as a result of inadequacy of financial
support6. In work done by Faseum7, the operations of a
library was automated by creating a central database for
the library, providing reliable security measures for the
library items and data, keeping and maintaining a save
record of the library, and making ways of reservation and
recommendation of books and journals easy for users,
while improving and reducing human stress.
The system in described by Faseum 7 also allows
users to borrow books from the library remotely from a
computer; this feature becomes unnecessary because
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

the user would still have to manually collect the book from
the library due to the fact that the library does not provide
any carrier services. Though rare, the last copy of a book
can be borrowed by two people caused by network errors.
The library never lends the last copy of an item because of
its users who would prefer to use the item in the library
rather than borrow it. The patron is then faced with
challenges when he realises what the network has
caused. Another constraint faced in was the inability of
the library to monitor users overdue. This challenge is an
issue that every conventional library faces and tries to
solve but never gets a total solution because users can
borrow books and never use the library again and make it
difficult for the library to track them down.
Olaniyi & Olusade8 authors point out the opportunities
provided by ICT to libraries. These are: Organization of
information for use; provision of value added ICT-based
information services; library cooperation and resource
sharing; institutional repositories (digital local content);
and content building. ICT also provides Value-added ICTbased information services such as: web-based online
public access catalogues (OPACs); networked digital
information resources; electronic-based interlibrary loan
and document delivery services; online user education;
readers’ advisory and e-reference services; and providing
facilities for accessing information. Academic and public
libraries in Nigeria face many challenges when trying to
take full advantage of the opportunities provided by ICTs.
They are mainly related to: Financing and sustainability of
ICT infrastructure; constant change in the ICT industry;
lack of technical ICT background among library
administrators; lack of adequate ICT facilities in libraries;
erratic state of power generation; and low level of
technical knowledge of ICTs.
Olaniyi & Olusade8 revealed that the number of library
software in the Oyo State Library Board was low couple
with inadequate number of staff and most of the available
staffs were inadequate in ICT skills. Major factors
hindering the establishment and management of an
effective use of ICT in the Oyo State Library Board were
also identified. It ranged from inadequate funding, to lack
of ICT hardware and software, and also irregular power
supply.
Seeking access to library resources and information
services in higher education libraries all over the world is
undergoing tremendous transformation, especially, with
the advent of ICT as tool and enabler. The application of
ICT into academic libraries has improved information
delivery, users can now stay in their homes and
classrooms to access and interact with the libraries and
receive information without physically visiting the libraries.
Manir9 reveals that ICT today is changing the work of
libraries and information centres more than ever. Libraries
in Africa institutions need this technology because of the
517

advantage it brings. Based on reality, ICT application in
library activities has the ability to change the pattern of
information resources access and utilisation; it will also
make research and teaching simpler and easier than
before.
With all the aforementioned benefits of ICT to
academic libraries, the digital divide issue is still
outstanding. This is the gap between those who have
access to technology (telephones, computers, and
internet) and related services and those who donot have
access to these resources. This digital divide exists at all
levels of the society, for example in developed countries
vs. developing countries. ICT application has brought new
changes in the library activities, but the pleasures
provided do not seem to pervade the entire members of
African higher institutions. For academic libraries to be
effective, specific technology must be carefully matched
to the need of the environment. It can be said that much of
what ICT has to offer and its potential to the academic
libraries has not yet been fully deployed and exploited in
African Universities8.
Outdated technologies that were first acquired in early
1980s, through 1990s are merely guarding libraries,
thereby creating systemic complexities that are
increasingly becoming difficult to sustain. Some
universities have achieved a high degree of development
with respect to ICT, in particular the acquisition of
hardware and software and the setting up of local area
networks (LANs) mainly as donations. Technological
changes take place very often and there is a clear need to
follow this trend so as not to lose out of the quality. With
this process, integration of ICT is enabled in the
enhancement of library activities.

2.2 Application of Biometric Technology in
Library Services
Biometric
represents
the
physiological
characteristics of a person like fingerprints, hand
geometry, face, voice, and iris10. Historically, usernames
and passwords are the most common form of
authenticating computer users. They are also the worst
management challenge for IT staff and the biggest
network security hole in existence. Many help desks
handle more password related calls than any other
category. Users routinely share their passwords with one
another. Over the last several years, biometric devices
and applications have experienced growth over the world.
It leads to good security because it combines two
authentication factors—‘something you know’ (PIN) and
‘something you are’. It is easy to share ‘something you
know’ with another user, but reasonably difficult to share
“something you are”. Since security mechanisms rarely
have a positive impact on usability, biometrics, through
templates can indeed make a system easier to use since
there is no longer the need to remember passwords.
518

A biometric template is an individual’s sample, a
reference data, which is first captured from the selected
biometric device. During the enrollment process, three to
four samples are captured to arrive at a representative
template. The individual’s identity is later verified by
comparing the subsequent collected data against the
individual’s biometric template stored in the system. The
biometric templates and the overall enrollment process
are the key for the overall success of the biometric
application. The user will need to go through re-enrollment
again if the quality of the template is poor. Templates are
stored within the biometric device, remotely in a central
repository or on a portable card.
The security of a library with the use of CCTVs and
biometrics was proposed by Manir7 . Foolproof security
with the use of CCTV and biometrics can be achieved in
libraries. Studies have revealed that there is an increase in
the use of biometric technology because now that there is
an improved technique of identifying authorised users,
and users are ready to cooperate. Now nations are
integrating biometrics technology into their organisations.
The public population in major continents such as North
America, Europe, and Asia prefer the use of biometrics.
Though CCTV would also be an important factor in
ensuring almost total security, biometric scanners like
the fingerprint scan and facial recognition gives security a
greater edge11. Users will no longer make use of ID cards,
yet access will be simple and reliable. The Fujitsu Library
System and Naka City Public Library of Japan make use
of the contactless Palm Vein authentication technology
which allows lending of library materials without the use of
cards.
With the Henry Identification System in use the
system would work efficiently since we have palm prints
of all fingers of both hands, but if it is just one fingerprint
as input print, because of the distinct prints on each
finger, there will not be any Primary Grouping Ratio (PGR)
factor (i.e., there won’t be a match anywhere in the
system). The proposed system stores just one single
fingerprint instead of 10 prints for an individual, thus
reducing the amount of memory required to store the
fingerprint templates. It also finds another method of
classifying each print into their categories (which are the
left and right loops, whorl and arch). Though the proposed
system by Kanth & Nath12 claims to be forty times more
efficient than the existing system, there is still a problem
with the system database management. Because the
database should contain only one fingerprint input, the
proposed system does not identify the middle and little
finger, so the purpose to store just one fingerprint is
meaningless. In this paper, the proposed system stores
just one thumb fingerprint like the system described by
Laha13 to save time for registration and space for the
database; and since it’s a school library and not a
security conscious company where every piece of
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

information and data has a very tight access. Biometric
technology, over the years has been applied to different
parts of the global industry for: physical access, virtual
access, e-commerce applications, corporate it, aviation,
banking and financial, healthcare, government, and
schools. The use of biometrics is very important to
institutions because many areas in an institution require
identification. Picture card, pins and visual identification
which are usually the common kinds of identification
come with challenges of time and resources of operation.
With the introduction of biometrics, money and time are
saved and operations are improved. One can concentrate
on safety, increase in productivity as well as practical
ways of implanting biometrics in school environment
where time and money14. Choosing the right biometric
solution is also considered depending on the properties
and factors of the technology.

2.3 Barcode Technology in Libraries
Barcodes are a series of vertical black lines and
spaces. The barcode is a simple, compact, graphical way
to record data15. They are machine readable. Linear (or
one-dimensional or 1-D) codes, two-dimensional codes
(e.g. data matrix), and composite codes (a combination of
1-D or 2-D symbologies) are available. The reported
advantage of 2-D and composite codes is that they can
encode more information than one-dimensional bar
codes. This may be a significant consideration when
examining the utility of applying barcodes to smaller
medical devices, such as surgical instruments and
implants.
The 1-D linear barcodes typically consist of a series of
dark and light bars, either dark bars on a light background
or light on a dark background, and are read by scanners,
such as laser scanners. The 2-D symbologies use various
combinations of dark and light shapes such as dots or
dashes. Barcode information is read by an optical (laser)
scanner that is part of a computer system. A handheld
scanner or barcode pen is moved across the code, or the
code itself is moved by hand across a scanner built into a
checkout counter or other surface. The computer then
store or immediately processes the data in the barcode.
The light beam flashed from the barcode scanner on
the barcode label undergoes reflection at the white lines
and absorption on the dark bands. This reflected light is
collected back and is converted into electric pulses by the
photoelectric circuitry of the scanner. Further, the pulses
are converted into binary information by the interface
circuitry of the scanner before they are fed to the
computer, for further processing. Hence, the information
read from the barcode acts as a substitute for the same
information entered through a keyboard.
At the heart of each barcode system is the unique
identification (ID) number assigned to every item being
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

tracked. An ID number in the form of a barcode label is
attached to every item in the inventory. When a labelled
item is moved, shipped, used, disposed of, or modified in
any way that should be recorded, the item’s barcode is
scanned and the information goes into the information
tracking system. Databases help you locate and retrieve
relevant information in a quick and efficient manner.
The most common barcode application for academic
libraries is in the tracking of materials as they are charged
out and received. In some libraries, librarians often allow
students to scan books out themselves because of the
efficiency of the technology. Many schools utilise batterypowered portable barcode readers as a cost-effective
solution to physically take book inventory right on the
shelf.
Much like a library, bar-coded student identification
cards and bar-coded labelled books speed up and provide
absolute accuracy to the processes of charging in and
charging out books.
Barcode technology has been proven very efficient in
other school applications, such as: Student attendance,
which usually consumes a lot of time and energy; CTS
(career technology studies) competency tracking
system-data specific to the competencies of students
within vocational training programmes are assembled with
the use of small, portable, pocket-sized bar code readers;
fixed asset tracking-with a user-friendly software and
portable hardware and uniquely-encoded and durable bar
code labels, desks, computers, lab or AV equipment, etc.
can be tracked following the asset attributes such as date
purchased, serial number and product type, and date and
time it was last seen16.

2.4 Barcoding for Faster Library Transactions
The circulation desk responsibility in an automated
library involves keying in large amount of data.
Sometimes, the library staffs at the counter have to retype
the same information due to error in data entry. With the
application of a bar coding system, which is the simplest
coding technologies available, this voluminous work can
be handed in a smooth manner in a much less time. The
speed of data capture is three times faster than the speed
at which a skilled data entry operator can input data and
also the error rate is negligibly small.
Libraries can use accession number or class mark of
books a unique information that distinguish library
collection, as the vital information entity to barcode its
collection. This information is exported from the library
database/catalogue database and then converted to a
series of black and white lines by the barcode software.
The barcode technology is essentially a data transfer
device and hence it works in perfect harmony with any of
the computerised database systems.
519

In16, Barcoding in library offers a lot of comfort and
ease to handle bulk routine tasks efficiently17. The
application of this technology for charging-in or out of
books is widely identified and practiced in the developed
countries of the world. With the help of a data gathering
device, the barcodes can be used to verify stock, as
libraries have to resort to stock verification, at intervals.
Mishelving and wrong archiving of books are also autodetected which helps the staff to rectify these challenges.
If the parent institution also has a computerised
accounting system, all the bills can be routed after bar
coding so that their follow up and processing are done
efficiently.
Rajindran and Bhushan18 reveals method of library
automation conducted at Raja Ramanna Centre for
Advanced Technology (RRCAT) library, India by
employing barcode and LibSys facilities. With these,
library stock verification could be performed easily with
less manpower. Laser barcode scanner for reading labels
was used at the circulation counter; a portable data
capturing terminal with build-in laser scanner for inventory
for stock verification; and accessories such as cradle,
cable, battery, and other items were the hardware
installed to implement these technologies.
Barcodes are being used effectively to speed-up,
avoid human error, and automate the processes in
industry for production planning control, materials
management, purchase sale, and inventory control. In
libraries, barcode is being used to automate the datacapturing process, for stock verification, and in the
circulation counter for issue/return of books, documents
or books are scanned and stamped (month and year)
manually at the inside back cover to avoid duplication.
During scanning, the terminal stored the accession
number of each document and automatically displayed
the document number for a moment. If a data scanned is
wrong, it can be manually updated or rescanned, and if a
document has been scanned multiple times, the terminal
simply stores the documents with duplicate accession
numbers.
Barcode technology is reliable and easy to use. It
improves accuracy and accelerates the processing time,
eliminates the typing errors, decreases the costs, and
improves the services. During the stock verification
period, routine library activities can be carried out without
any disturbance. Data-capturing terminal is handy and
portable and there is no problem of scanning the data
multiple times. Since there is no human intervention, the
verification report generated by the system is perfect and
accurate.
Academic libraries in developing countries need its
readers’ services activities such as charging-in and
charging-out of books, registration of books, students,
staff, etc. This work combines the strengths attributed
520

with biometric and barcode technology using the library of
The Bells University of Technology, Nigeria as a case
study.

3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The following scientific approaches were used to
achieve the central idea of this work. They are:
requirement definition and infrastructural.

3.1 Requirement Definition of the Proposed
Service Infrastructure
(i)

Readers Desk System Management Requirement

This requirement follows from the assumption that to
automate the library’s reader’s desk system, the system
should provide:
(a) Eligibility and authentication: The system should be
designed in a way that only allows access to
authorised personnel.
(b) Uniqueness: Only one user can borrow a book at a
time.
(c) Accuracy: Library staff should be able to compute
records with lesser errors.
(d) Integrity: Records can only be modified, updated or
deleted by the administrator.
(e) Reliability: The system should work robustly without
any loss of records due to good and reliable database.
(f)

Flexibility: More modules of library operations can be
integrated into the system to increase functionality.

(g) Convenience: Users should be able to enter/exit the
library with minimal sign in/out time. Library staff
handle borrow and return process faster with less
errors.
(ii) Service Provision Requirement
The infrastructure should allow the readers desk to
monitor registration of users, lending materials to library
users, checking in materials returned, monitoring
materials for damage and routing them for repair or
replacement, etc.

3.2 Infrastructural Model and Architect
(i)

Overall System Architecture

The hardware phase integrated into proposed
automated system involves two technologies, namely: (i)
Biometric Fingerprint Scanner (Scans the fingerprints of
users, (ii) Barcode Scanner (Front End), Barcode Verifier
and Barcode Printer (used during the installation phase.
The software phase is divided into two sub-phases: (i)
Front End (application which interfaces the users would
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

interact with (ii) Back End (database where the
information is stored. In designing the front-and back-end
of the system, some development tools required are: (i)
Microsoft Visual Studio (.Net Framework): The
programming language used is C#, which is structured,
imperative, object-oriented, and declarative, (ii) Microsoft
SQL Server 2005: It is a fast, stable and true multi-user,
multi-threaded SQL database server; SQL (structured
query language).The main goals of Microsoft SQL are
speed, robustness, and ease of use. It defines an xml
data type that could be used either as a data type in
database columns or as literals in queries.

to borrow/return books. It will also be used during the
charging-out and charging-in process, where library users
have to identify themselves as the borrowers of a book.
The barcode scanner registers the library books on the
shelf and is used to increase the process of checking-in
and out of the books. The application software allows the
user of the system, i.e., the administrator and the library’s
readers’ desk staff to perform the basic circulation
operations, i.e., add users, charge-in and out books, as
well as add more users to access the system (only the
administrator can add more users of the system) and
monitor the library users that enter and exit the library.

The system architecture in Fig. 1 shows how the
system operates and functions. It consists of a
centralised database server that stores all the information
about books, library users and their properties and
processes. The barcodes of the books are stored via a
barcode scanner in the server as strings, while the
fingerprint templates of the library users are stored via a
fingerprint scanner in the server as byte. The fingerprint
scanner is used to register both the university staffs and
students to allow them access the library during entry and

(ii) Application Framework Overview
Figure 2 gives the platform application framework of
the proposed readers’ desk management system. The
figure above shows the integration of a barcode process
and biometric process with a library’s readers’ desk
process. With the automation of the readers’ desk,
circulation processes can be done easier and faster, with
better security when the barcode scanner and fingerprint
scanner are installed and programmed into the system.

Figure 1. System architecture of proposed system.19

Figure 2. Framework of the Proposed System.19
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

521

Efficiency and effectiveness is improved after this
synchronised technology.

administrator, student, university staff and Circulation
Desk staff on each tier of the model.

(iii) Requirement Specification

In Fig. 3, there are four main actors: librarian,
students, university staff and circulation desk staff. The
registered student or university staff sign-in into the library
via a biometric finger print authentication and then
manually search books. At the circulation desk, with the
use of a bar coding system, tracking of books on shelves
and a self maintained record of all books in the library are
achieved.

From the architecture, two main components are
required for the development and implementation of the
architecture:
(a) User Terminal: The readers’ desk management
application resides on a terminal device which is a
computer or laptop with intranet access
(b) Application Server: The application server ensures
that the assumptions stated in the readers desk
system management requirement above are met,
authorises and authenticate library users.
(c) Analysis of Model: The structure of the proposed
system can be analysed using the Use-Case
diagram, Class diagrams and the behavioural/
sequence diagram.
The use case scenario of the proposed system is
shown in Fig. 3, showing the interactions of the library

Also, the library administrator/circulation desk staff
can register books, students, charge-in, charge-out
books, etc. All information here is stored in the
centralised server and can be used for future reference in
addition to the report accessible to the library
administrator.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The impact which biometric and barcode technologies
could have on the front desk of the library is shown in
Figs. 7-9. The process of charging-in and charging-out

Figure 3. Use Case scenario for the proposed library readers desk system management.19

Figure 4. Proposed library readers desk system business level activity diagram.20
522

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

Figure 5. Automated book registration process using barcode scanner.

Figure 6. Generated report showing a list of registered library books.

Figure 7. Automated logbook during entrance into the library.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

523

Figure 8. Process of checking-in books.

Figure 9. Registration of library users.

both the readers and tracking books available through
biometric feature of readers is shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 9.

5. CONCLUSIONS
It is essential that academic libraries keep up with
developments in ICT through the application of
technologies into library services. Much of what ICT and
its application can offer is yet to be fully deployed and
exploited in developing nations. Therefore to enable the
integration of a range of ICT applications in the
enhancement of the readers’ activities of an academic
library, biometric and barcode application is a sine
quanon.These applications of this technology improve
accuracy and it also takes critical factor of time and cost
in the activities of the circulation unit of a library. It is easy
to use and improves the operational efficiency of the
readers’ desk staff, thereby enabling the library to give a
timely service to its users.

REFERENCES
1. Eguavoen, O.E.L. Attitudes of library staff to the use
of ICT: The case of Kenneth Dike Library, University of
Ibadan, Nigeria. Ozean J. Soc. Sci., 2011, 4(1), 1-6.
http://www.ozelacademy.com/OJSS_v4n1_1.pdf
2. Ostrow, Stephen E. Digitizing historical pictorial
collections for the internet. 1998. http://www.clir.org/
pubs/reports/ostrow/pub71.html
524

3. Ramzan, M. Does level of knowledge impact
librarians’ attitude toward information technology (IT)
applications? In 2nd International CALIBER- 2004, 1113 February 2004, New Delhi.
4. Parmar, Arvind Singh; Kumar, Sanghmitra A.;
Prakash, Thushara & Kalyane, V.L. Highlights of
library automation related documents. INSPEC,
2004. http://wenku.baidu.com/view/a8447f60caaed
d3383c4d 3c0.html
5. Wikipedia. Library circulation. 2011. http://en.wikiped
ia.or g/wiki/ Library _ circulation.
6. Ifidon, Sam E. Problem of collection development in
third world countries. In Modern theory and practice of
library collection development. Justice-Jeco Press,
Benin City, 2006.
7. Faseun, O.R. Computerised library management
system (Case study: Bells University of Technology
Library, Ota). Bells University of Technology, Ota,
Nigeria. June 2010. B.Tech Dissertation.
8. Olaniyi, E.T. & Olusade B. The State of Diffusion of
ICT in Nigerian Public Library: A case study of Oyo
State Library Boar. Paper presented at 3rd
International Conference on ICT ApplicationsAICTRA-08, 21-25 September 2008, Ile-Ife, Nigeria,
2008. pp. 106-15.
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

9. Manir, A.K. Implication of ICT’s in libraries of higher
education institutes: A panacea catapulting library
development in Africa. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol.,
2011, 31(1), 65-71.

17. Jeevan, V.K.J. Barcoding for faster library
transactions. DESIDOC Bull. Inf. Technol., 2000,
20(3), 15-19. http://publications.drdo.gov.in/gsdl/coll
ect/dbit/index/assoc/HASH40cf.dir/dbit2003 015.pdf

10. Sulochana, S.; Ravindra, T. & Balwant, S. Survey of
biometric recognition systems and their applications .
J. Theoret. Appli. Inf. Technol., 2010, 11(1), 45-51.
http://www.jatit.org/volumes/research-papers/Vol11
No1/6Vol11No1.pdf

18. Rajendiran, P. & Bhushan, Indu. automated library
stock verification with barcode and LibSys. DESIDOC
Bull. Inf. Technol., 2006, 26(5), 17-21.

11. findBiometrics. Biometrics for time and attendance.
2011. http://www.findbiometrics.com/time-attendanc/
12. Kant, Chander & Rajender Nath. Reducing processtime for fingerprint identification system. Inter. J.
Biometric Bioinf., 2006, 3(1), 1-9. http://www.cscjour
nals.org/csc/manuscript/Journals/IJBB/volume3/Issu
e1/IJBB-5.pdf
13. Laha, Jasobanta. Biometric techniques- enhancing
security standards in high performance. 2008. http://
ezinearticles.com/?Biometric-Techniques—Enhanci
ng-Security-Standards-In-High-Performance-Enter
prise&id=1224599.
14. IdentiMetrics. Biometric student identification:
Practical solutions for accountability & security in
school, 2009. http://www.identimetrics.net/articles/
Practical_Stu_ID_for_schools.pdf.
15. Wikipedia.Barcode. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/arcode
16. CodeFacts. Bar code technology in schools. 2010
http://www.aurorabarcode.com/PDFs/Bar%20Cod
e%20Technology%20in%20Schools.pdf

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

19. Grant-Ezeronye, G.C. Development of a library’s
readers’ desk management system. Bells University
of Technology, Ogun State, Ota, June 2011. B. Tech
Dissertation.
About the Author
Mr Olaniyi O. Mikail is currently a Lecturer and Acting
Head of Department of Computer Engineering, Federal
University of Technology, and Minna, Niger State. He had
his First Degree in Computer Engineering at the Ladoke
Akintola University of Technology, Ogbomosho, Oyo
State, Nigeria and MSc in Electronic and Computer
Engineering at Lagos State University, Lagos, Nigeria. He
is currently a doctoral student at the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Ladoke Akintola
University of Technology, Ogbomosho, Oyo State,
Nigeria. He is a Professional member of Institute for
Electrical/Electronic Engineering (IEEE), Association of
Computer Machinery (ACM), International Association of
Engineers and Computer Scientists and Registered with
the Council of Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria. He
has published in reputable journals and learned
conferences. His areas of research include: Intelligent
systems, computer security, e-governance, and
telemedicine.

525

