DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 32, No. 6, November 2012, pp. 526-532
© 2012, DESIDOC

Cloud Computing: A Promising Economic Model for
Library and Information Centers
Shashi Prabha Singh and R.S.R. Veralakshmi*
Department of Library & Information Science, University of Delhi, Delhi-110 007
*Department of Library & Information Science, University of Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
ABSTRACT
Till 1970s, Indian libraries were mainly dependent upon their own resources to meet their users’ information
needs. Then came an era of computerisation where libraries started working in a collaborative manner being
connected through networks or consortia to utilise the resources of participating libraries also. Now cloud
computing is emerging as a new technology which is becoming popular for scholarly communications in
different types of organisations, particularly in corporate organisations. In this context, the article reviews
how far cloud computing is suitable in libraries and the extent to which its applications and services can be
used. The authors believe that India is self-sufficient now as it has the adequate technology and skills to bridge
the digital divide. The cloud computing model would enable libraries to maintain better control over the applications
and the data stores containing sensitive, private information. In addition, it helps the users to maintain their
personalised information. Infrastructure virtualisation and cloud computing are becoming attractive choices
being challenged by growth in the size of collection, new formats and dynamic usage. Hence, it is high time
for the libraries to focus and avail the advantages of cloud computing to offer user-centered multi-level
services to enable them to achieve greater level of satisfaction.
Keywords: Cloud computing, architecture, platforms-as-a-service, infrastructure-as-a-service, software as a
service

1. INTRODUCTION
Libraries since their inception have been
disseminating the knowledge by providing different types
of services but at that time they were totally dependent
upon their own resources. However, with the introduction
of technology, the scenario has totally changed as today
they can provide information 24x7, crossing all the
geographical boundaries. This was possible because of
the use of computers and accessing the networking and
consortia. So libraries are now focusing on appropriate,
tailored, timely, and multi-level services for their users by
using different service models such as, WWW, FTP, BBS
(Bulletin Board Service), and e-mail. However, with the
fast technological developments, users’ information
requirements are becoming more and more personalised
so libraries are entering into a new era of using newer
technology, i.e., cloud computing which offers usercentred personalised services, leading to greater
satisfaction among users.
The buzz around cloud and virtual computing has
grown almost simultaneously as well as exponentially as
a revolution to change the use of internet and information

system. Cloud can be used as an environment for
scholarly communication, collaboration, discovery,
publication, and dissemination of scholarly works.
Because of these features, virtualisation, and cloud
computing are gaining growing acceptance around the
world to have efficient service delivery in a cost-effective
manner. It is a landmark development after the integrated
(networked) computer systems and the internet. Adoption
of cloud computing is slowly increasing, particularly in
corporate organisations that require more adaptability and
flexibility in response to outgrowing needs of IT industry.
As a result, it is emerging as an extremely popular model
for providing the demand-based virtualised resource
service which being internet-based, not location-specific
and accessible from anywhere 24x7. Virtual advanced
technology helps to remotely communicate and deliver
data to clients. Such services are based on virtual
resources which are networked, independent of common
location, accessible from anywhere without any concern
about their ownership and management. Present
environment raises challenging issues in organising and
managing the physical resources to explore their efficient
utilisation in different activities. For this, cloud computing

Received 27 January 2012, revised on 14 April 2012, accepted 26 April 2012, online published 19 November 2012

526

offers individuals to personalise their environment in which
they work or learn. So this is an accessible resource of
hardware, software, and the artifacts stored in the cloud
that can be accessed or shared through Internet from
anywhere at any time.

add capabilities without investing on new infrastructure,
training new personnel, or licensing new software.

3. EMERGENCE OF CLOUD COMPUTING

2. WHAT IS CLOUD COMPUTING?

Emergence of cloud computing can be traced back to
1969, when Leonard Kleinock, the chief scientist of
ARPANET who invented internet said, “as of now,
computer networks are still in their infancy, but as they
grow up and become sophisticated, we will probably see
the spread of computer utilities which like present electric
and telephonic utilities will service individual homes and
offices across the country”9. This vision of Kleinock has
come true in this economically constrained dynamic
environment when many organisations are being forced to
cut down their cost on IT management by adopting cost
effective tools and technologies like cloud computing.

Cloud computing is a new technology which is an
improvement of distributed computing, parallel computing
and grid computing. The basic principle of cloud
computing is making tasks distributed among large
number of computers but not in local computers or remote
servers3. This is a dynamic model, based on pay-per-use
(subscription) or scalable system in which configuration
of resources (hardware, platform/services) can be graded
to suit the needs of the users for optimum utilisation of
resources. In simple words, it is a subscription-based or
pay-per-use real time service over the internet4.

Hartig10 indicates that the concept of cloud computing
is derived from the imagery of the ‘internet cloud’, in which
the imagery of a cloud is traditionally used to represent
the internet or some large networked environment.
According to Sharif11 this is a major revolution, second
only to the invention of the printing press. According to
Sanchati & Gaurav3, cloud computing is a completely new
IT technology, known as the third revolution after PC and
Internet in IT. Indeed the concept of cloud computing
emerged from distributed grid and utility computing
systems.

The vendors of this model also guarantee the
utilisation of these virtually interconnected resources by
employing customised-service-level agreements (SLAs).
According to Geelan5, cloud computing is the userfriendly version of grid computing. However, Buyya6 et al.
have given much more elaborate definition which reads
that cloud computing is a kind of “parallel and distributed
system consisting of a collection of interconnected and
virtualised computers that are dynamically provisioned
and presented as one or more unified computing
resources, based on SLA established through negotiation
between the service provider and consumer”.

4. CLOUD COMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURE

Cloud computing has greater educational potential at
affordable cost to advance the scholarship of teaching and
learning programmes1. India’s problem of vast illiteracy
and low levels of education at school level can be solved
by cloud computing2. Dhawan further adds that NCERT or
ICSE clouds can be there with CBSE courseware and
books, and the students can download educational
materials from any place at a far less cost being shared
by millions of students.

Cloud computing takes the concept of virtualisation
even further by adding a couple of additional twists. In a
cloud computing environment, the organisation running an
application neither typically own the physical hardware
used for the applications nor usually know exactly from
where the computation work of the applications is being
processed. Cloud computing provides an organisation
with appreciably more flexibility and scalability to satisfy
computing needs7. Thus cloud computing means sharing
and use of applications and resources of a network
environment to get work done without concern about
ownership and management of the network’s resources
and applications8. This is a way to increase capacity or

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

The cloud computing infrastructure resides in a large
data center, managed by service providers who offer
computing resources anywhere, any time at an
economically affordable cost i.e. ‘pay-as-you-go basis’11.
According to Hand12, in cloud computing, not just the data
but the software also resides within cloud, and one can
access everything not only through our PCs but also
cloud-friendly devices, such as smart phones, PDAs, the
mega-computers
(supercomputers)
enabled
by
virtualisation and software as a service. The data center of
hardware and software is called cloud, which when made
available to public is called ‘public cloud’. Here, multiple
clients can store their information in a single server and/or
in the same data centre. On the other hand, the internal
data center which is not accessible by public is called
private cloud4,13. These are typically contracted by an
organisation with a provider on one-on-one basis. Since,
Private cloud is not shared with others, so it has higher
level of security7. However, ‘public Cloud’ (also known as
commercial cloud) and ‘private Cloud’ (also known as
individual cloud) are already available from Amazon,
Yahoo, Desktop Two, and Sun Secure Global Desktop,
etc. However, Google’s efforts in cloud computing have
generated a great deal of interest14,15.

527

4.1 Characteristics of Cloud Computing
There are many distinguishing features of cloud
computing but some important features are1,7.
(a) Versatility
(b) Cost-effectiveness (pay-per-use)
(c) Virtualisation
(d) Security

application programming interface (API) that enables
machines to interact with cloud software in the same way
as the user interface facilitate interaction between
humans and computers18. There are various computers,
servers and data storage at the back-end of the system
that create the cloud of the computing services. A central
server administrates the system, monitoring traffic and
client demands to ensure that everything runs smoothly6.
This follows a set of rules called protocols and uses a
special kind of software called middleware.

(e) Sustainability

7. COMPONENTS OF CLOUD

(f) Scalability

There are various components present in the
computing space such as4:

(g) User-friendly
(h) Resource Optimisation
(i) Infrastructure and service-level agreements (SLAs)

5. ADVANTAGES OF CLOUD COMPUTING
From library perspective, cloud computing offers
following advantages1,16,17.
(i) There is no need to own all infrastructure facilities as
cloud computing takes care of it.
(ii) Provides large amounts of processing power
comparable to supercomputer level.
(iii) It can be used as a personal workspace.
(iv) Since the service is not location specific, it provides
opportunity for ubiquitous computing.
(v) Virtualised technologies are a boon to green IT
companies as virtual servers provide unlimited
capacity, bandwidth, increased security and disaster
recovery solution.
(vi) Capital expenditure is minimised.
(vii) It is far more economic, as payment is based on
utilisation of service.
(viii) No need to copy all stuff from one PC to another when
buying a new one. Moreover, one can create
personalised repository of information that keeps
growing as long as one wants.
(ix) A convenient tool to engage in the scholarship of
teaching and learning.

6. CLOUD COMPUTING ARCHITECTURE
Cloud computing system can be divided into two
sections-the front-end and the back-end which are
connected to each other through internet. The front-end
includes the client’s computer and the applications
required to access the cloud computing system. To
explain further, the cloud computing system uses
528

(a) Infrastructure: The cloud infrastructure is a concept of
providing the hardware as a service. The virtualisation
technology allows servers and storage devices to be
shared. Cloud computing relies on sharing of
hardware and other computing resources, rather than
having local servers, thereby reducing the cost of use
and maintenance, etc.
(b) Storage: Separating data from processing and storing
in a remote place is referred to as a cloud storage,
which as a database, can hold large amount of data.
(c) Platform: A service for application deployment and
managing the required hardware and software needs
is known cloud platform.
(d) Application: In cloud computing the software
architecture eliminates the need to install, run and
maintain an application at the user’s device, thereby,
avoiding the cost/resource required to maintain or
support applications.
(e) Service: An independent piece of software which can
be used in conjunction with other services to achieve
an interoperable machine-to-machine interaction over
network is called cloud service.
(f)

Client: Cloud client is a requester device (hardware or
software) which tries to utilise cloud computing
services over the network.

8. CLOUD COMPUTING AND LIBRARIES
Libraries have been in transition since their inception
as they are directly affected with environmental changes.
There was a time, when biggest library used to be the one
with largest collection and they were serving their users
mainly with their own resources in an almost isolated
manner. Then came an era of computers where libraries
started getting connected with other collaborating
libraries through networks and consortia for mutual
advantage of sharing the resources at divided/shared cost
with a shift of emphasis from acquisition to access.
Emergence of electronic resources has an added impact
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

on libraries which forced them to prepare to face different
kinds of challenges from users to meet their multidimensional requirements. Now, there ia a new phase
when libraries are adopting and utilising the computing
resources and services that are not even owned by it.
Cloud computing and Web collaboration are emerging as
two major concepts, supporting innovative developments
in library automation. Cloud computing is emerging to
help libraries to offer much improved services by
strengthening the power of cooperation among libraries
and showing their combined presence on web. This will
certainly help to enhance the efficiency of libraries by
enabling them to access information through large global
network of cooperating libraries and eliminating the ITrelated problems, thereby saving time, money and
manpower. With these developments, heterogeneous
resources are accessible to anyone, anywhere because
of the application of domain independent software.
Evidence of the library’s active online or digital clients
can be observed in the growing online social networks. In
addition, forming of communities of interest among Web
users indicate a growing movement toward Web
collaboration which allows users without knowledge of the
underlying internet’s infrastructure, to create content and
have a contribution to what is being communicated and
published daily8. According to Farkas19, it can be useful for
libraries as web provides opportunities for libraries to
collect the tacit knowledge (through knowledge
management) that ‘resides in people’s heads’ (collected
through interviews/ personal documents) and benefit from
the library’s ‘community of users’ supplying ‘feedback
and contributions’.
Using cloud computing can share the server in many
application procedures, realises the resource sharing,
thus also reduced server’s quantity, achieves the effect of
reducing the cost. Therefore utilising cloud computing in
the digital library, will give our work, the life and the study
inevitably obtaining a greater efficiency3.
Libraries traditionally manage servers with huge
volumes of data and face critical problems in their
management due to lack of expertise and the cost
involvement in acquisition and maintenance of required
hardware and software. For example the university or
research libraries hold the data of thousands of electronic
journal downloads and thousands of digitally converted
data of rare/heritage documents. In any case there is a
risk of data security and universal access. Therefore, the
libraries can apply cloud computing to data integrity,
upgrade and maintenance, intellectual property
management, backups, disaster management, and
failover functions. It facilitates reduced operational costs
of IT resources; increases operational efficiency; extends
distributed access through virtualised environment. By
adopting this change, libraries can accrue increased
reliability, declined costs due to economies of scale and
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

other production factors. Many library staff members are
already experienced users of cloud computing – without
even knowing it. Some are using the cloud in the form of
GoogleDocs. Staff users of Facebook take advantage of
cloud, as do those who use photo sharing services such
as Flickr20. Through Web 2.0 applications, the information
seekers are shifting much of personal computer usage to
the cloud. For example, bookmarks are freed from the
desktop by storing them on social bookmarking websites
such as Delicious, uploaded and shared videos on
YouTube, used services such as slideshare to host
presentations, some have designed applications for
popular platforms such as Facebook. Under these
circumstances, the LIS professionals have to catch up
with the challenges of the IT savvy environment by utilising
the applicability of following cloud computing service
models in libraries:

(a) Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
This is a software delivery model which remotely
provides access through Internet to business functions as
a service. In SaaS, a provider licenses an application to
customers for use as a service on demand. SaaS
software vendors may host the application on their own
web servers or download the application for customers but
it is disabled after use or after the demand contract
expires. This type of cloud provides a wide range of
applications (software) tools to end users. Any web
application is a cloud application in the sense that it
resides in the cloud. Google Docs (for word processing
and spreadsheets), YouTube, SlideShare, Amazon,
Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, and virtually every other Web
2.0 application is a cloud application in this sense. It
offers several advantages like accessibility from any
location, rapid scalability and bundled maintenance. Its
applications in libraries are OpenURL resolver, journal
listing service, instructional guides, reserves statistics,
and IM/chat service. Its major limitations are threat to
data security and oppose open source movement.

(b) Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS)
It offers platform on which software developers can
build new applications or extend existing ones saving the
cost of underlying hardware and software. This platform
typically includes a database, middleware and
development tools, all are in the form of services through
the Internet. Its applications in libraries are integrated
library system, archives management software, initial
website applications, etc.

(c) Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS)
This is another model of computing services and
resources, also called utility computing. For this service,
users are charged according to usage. This type of cloud
provides virtual hardware capacity to organisations on an
529

elastic basis (flexible). Elasticity and scalability are the
two terms associated with cloud computing that gives the
ability to expand and reduce resources according to
specific service requirement. Data Storage/hosting and
archiving/preservation are important services among
these. This system of packaging and storage requires
minimum or no cost for hardware. Amazon was the
pioneer in this, providing virtual machine instances,
storage, and computation as innovative services.
Amazon’s Elastic Computer Cloud (EC2) is a major
example of IaaS. Other examples include Rackspace’s
Mosso and GoGrid’s ServePath, etc. IaaS provides
servers, software, data-center space and network
equipment, available in a single bundle. Its applications in
libraries are for hosting institutional repository discovery
layer, ILS discovery layer. However, Sanchati and
Kulkarni3 have also suggested some more service models
which are as follows:

(g) All-people Service

(i)

OCLC Web Scale Management Services: It is from
traditional ILS systems by offering member libraries
one unified solution to help streamline routine tasks—
like acquisitions and circulation. By moving these
functions to the web, libraries are able to share
infrastructure costs and resources, as well as
collaborate in ways that free them from the
restrictions of local hardware and software. With webscale management services, the libraries will be able
to:

(d) Unified Search Service

•

Lower total cost of ownership for management
services;

•

Eliminate format-specific operations;

•

Simplify critical (but routine) back-office operations;

•

Reduce the support costs for disparate systems;

•

Customise and extend library management services
by using new applications and services available from
an open, extensible platform;

•

Make your data (and libraries’ aggregated data) work
harder for better decisions; and

•

Free staff time for high-priority services and local
innovation.

(ii)

LibLime—Hosted in LibLime’s distributed cloud
computing data center, hundreds of libraries are able
to alleviate their internal IT support needs. No software
is installed on desktops and no servers are required in
the libraries22.

Although majority of libraries are using OPAC (Online
Public Access Catalog) but a uniform access platform is
not available to share the OPACs. However, with the
adoption of cloud computing, the integrated library
resources support distributed uniform access interface,
promote usage of library resources, answers users’
questions by using high-quality navigation

With this model, libraries can provide services to all
the people with the help of cloud computing. Anyone who
can legally identity the network authentication has the
right to visit the joint resources of libraries on the internet.
There are some live examples of cloud computing for
information management.

(e) Real-time Access Services
Due to innumerable advantages of electronic
resources, users prefer to access electronic journals and
electronic databases. However, by introducing cloud
computing, libraries can establish a shared public cloud
jointly which can have infinite storage capacity and
computing power bringing obvious benefits to libraries. It
can help to reduce the substantial cost involved on
purchase of electronic databases. Moreover, users can
visit the shared resources by any terminal equipment,
such as PC, mobile phone or PDA using internet access.

(f)

Knowledge Service

In the context of knowledge economy, knowledge
resources are directly affecting the productivity and
national development. So the mode of dissemination of
information and knowledge has become the most
challenging task for librarians today. However, at this
juncture, cloud computing and establishment of shared
public cloud can help a great deal to save on manpower
and resources. Moreover, with cloud computing, librarians
won’t have to maintain their own equipments or deal with
users personally which will provide more time and energy
to librarians to offer their users the needed information and
knowledge-based services.

530

(iii) Ex Libri—Ex Libris Group is a leading library
automation solutions provider, offering the only
comprehensive product suite for the discovery,
management, and distribution of all materials—print,
electronic, and digital23.

9. CONCLUSIONS
With the unlimited growth of electronic resources and
technological developments, libraries are facing the
serious problem of budget constraints, which was never
so acute earlier; moreover users’ demands are multiplying
and becoming more challenging. Under these
circumstances, cloud computing which is a metered
utility service like mobile or electricity, where users pay
for real time use, is a great ray of hope. It is a broad array
of web-based services, allowing users to obtain wide

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

range of technology-enabled services on a pay-as-you-go
basis. As a result, it is becoming popular day by day
because of its important features such as, costeffectiveness, efficiency, user-friendliness, flexibility, data
security, scalability, world wide connectivity and
automatic adaptation, etc. So cloud computing is the
broad concept of using the Internet to allow people to
access technology-enabled payment based services that
are greatly scalable and accessible from anywhere. The
new trends in the automation spawned by recent web
development are making libraries to be more reliant on
software and computing resources provided by outside
companies in service delivery to users. Therefore, in this
environment, library should constantly attempt to improve
user service models by adopting new technologies.
Although the use of cloud computing is still in its infancy
but effects of using it are quite obvious. With the
introduction of Cloud Computing, libraries can certainly
offer more effective and user-centric services.

REFERENCES
1. Thomas, P.Y. Cloud computing: A potential paradigm
for practicing the scholarship of teaching and
learning. The Electronic Library, 2011, 29(2), 214-24.
2. Dhawan, Neelam. Cloud computing can counter
illiteracy. Times of India, 23 July 2011, 21.
3. Sanchati, Rupesh & Kulkarni, Gaurav. Cloud
computing in digital and university libraries. Global J.
Comp. Sci. Technol., 2011, 11(12), 37-42.
4. Knorr, Eric & Gruman, Galen. What cloud computing
really
means?
Infoworld,
2008.
http://
www.infoworld.com/print/34031.
5. Geelan, J. Twenty-one experts define cloud
computing. Cloud Computing J., 2009. http://
cloudcomputing.sys-con.com/node/612375
6. Buyya, R.; Yeo, C.S. & Venugopal, S. Marketoriented cloud computing vision, hype and reality for
delivering IT services as computing utilities. In
Proceedings of 10th IEEE International Conference on
High Performance Computing and Communications,
Dalian, 2008. pp. 5-13
7. Cervone, H. Frank. Managing digital libraries: The
view from 3000 feet. OCLC Sys. Serv., 2010, 26(3),
162-65
8. Scale, Mark-Shane E. Cloud computing and
collaboration. Library High Tech News, 2009, 26(9),
10-13. DOI: 10-1108/07419050911010741
9. Shivakumar, B.L.; Raju, T. & Revathy, Hannah. Cloud
computing: A dark lining in the dark clouds of crisis
DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

management of economic slowdown. Asia Pacific
Business Rev., 2010, 6(3), 99-105.
10. Hartig, K. What is cloud computing? Cloud
Computing J., 2008. http://cloudcomputing.syscon.com/node/579826 (Accessed on 25 July 2011).
11. Sharif, Amir M. It’s written in the cloud: The hype and
promise of cloud computing. J. Enterprise Inf.
Manag., 2010, 23(2), 131-34.
12. Hand, Eric. Head in the clouds. Nature, 2007, 449,
963. http://www.nature.com/news/2007/071024/full/
449963a.html
13. Gulrajani, Neck & Bowler, Darryl. Software
development in the cloud. Dr Dobb’s Journal,
February 2009, 416, 22-27. http://www.aservo.com/
fileadmin/user_upload/ag/downloads/downloadcent
er/developer/SoftwareDevelopmentInTheCloud.pdf
(accessed on 14 October 2011).
14. Delaney, K.J. & Vara V. Google plans services to
store Users’ data. Wall Street J., November 2007.
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB11961266057350471
6.html?mod=hps_us_whats_news
15. Naone, E. Computer in the cloud. Technology Review,
September, 2007. www.technologyreview.com/Infotec
h/19397/?a=fOCLC. Web–scale Management Servic
es. http://www.oclc.org/webscale/ (accessed on 27
October 2011).
16. Hamilton, D. Cloud computing seen as next wave for
technology investors. Financial Post, 4 June 2008.
17. Aggarwal, Varun. Computing in the clouds. Express
Compute, 18 February 2008.
18. http://www.expresscomputeronline.com/20080218/
technology01.shtml
19. Farkas, M. Technology goes local: Collecting local
knowledge with social software. American Libraries,
September 2008, 50.
20. The proverbial lone wolf librarian’s weblog, Ohio State
University Libraries. Cloud computing tech tips for
libraries.
http://lonewolflibrarian.wordpress.com/
(accessed on 28 October 2011).
21. OCLC. OCLC web-scale management services: The
first cooperative management services for libraries.
http://www.oclc.org/webscale/ (accessed on 27
October 2011).
22. LibLime. http://www.liblime.com/whatwedo
23. Ex Libris.
OurVision

http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/category/

531

About the Author
Prof (Mrs) Shashi Prabha Singh is a Professor in the
Dept of Library & Information Science, University of Delhi,
Delhi. She joined the Department in 1987 and served as
Head of the Department during 1998-2001 and 2004-2007.
Under her supervision and guidance, 6 scholars have
been awarded PhD and 16 MPhil degrees. She has
published 3 books and more than 60 research articles in
national/international
journals
and
conferences,
newspapers, and editorial publications. She is on the
Editorial Board of two Emerald journals published from
UK, namely, The Electronic Library and The Aslib
Proceedings. She had remained Editor of ‘Journal of
Library & Information Science’, the half-yearly journal

532

published by the Department of Library & Information
Science, University of Delhi for six years. As a Subject
Expert, she has been delivering talk on All India Radio and
TV from time to time. She holds honorary membership of
the Research Board of Advisors, The American
Biographical Institute, North Carolina, and USA. She was
awarded SATKAL Best Women Librarian 2007 Award.
Her name has been included in Who’s Who in the World;
International Who’s Who of Professional; Business
Women published by the American Biographical Institute,
North Carolina, USA; Who’s Who in America; 2000
Outstanding Women of the Twentieth Century; Who’s
Who in Asia and Who’s Who in Asia Pacific, Asian/
American Who’s Who.

DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Technol., 2012, 32(6)

