DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 5-6 
© 2013, DESIDOC 
Corporate Social Responsibility and Public Libraries: A Review 
P.S.N. Murthy 
Visakha Steel Plant, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh-530 031 
E-mail: palurisnmurthy@yahoo.com 
Over the last two decades, the Indian industry  had seen a dramatic growth fuelled by economic  reforms and fiscal planning. Today, India as a  developing country is moving forward bestowed with  opportunities which are reflected in its economic  progress and growth. However, the situation does  reflect some inequalities in the society, which need to  be addressed for an overall growth and development  of our country. 
The Prime Minister of India in his message on  social responsibility of business stated that “business  has a responsibility to itself, to its customers,  workers, shareholders and the community. Every  enterprise, no matter how large or small, must, if  it is to enjoy confidence and respect, seek actively  to discharge its responsibilities in all directions and  not to one or two groups, such as shareholders  or workers, at the expense of community and  consumer. Business must be just and humane, as  well as efficient and dynamic”.  
This reminds us that in any societal structure,  there are multiple stakeholders, the one amongst  others being the business represented by companies.  Indian business has traditionally been socially  responsible and has been adopting various methods  of discharging its social obligations. Almost all the  leading companies have reaped the benefits from  this growth and realised that by doing social good  they are discharging their social obligations towards  the society which gave them the profits.  
Today, many developed countries including countries  in Asia, are now paying increasing importance towards  corporate social responsibility (CSR) disclosure  norms. All over the world the corporate sector has  realised its obligations towards the society while  meeting their commercial objectives. However, the  private sector, generally, has been more active in  CSR than the Government and public sectors, and  the situation is slowly changing. There are many  instances where businesses have all along played  an important role in addressing issues of education,  health, environment, and sanitation through their  
CSR interventions in various parts of the country. The World economic forum has also recognised  the importance of CSR by establishing the Global  corporate citizenship initiative. This initiative hopes  to increase businesses` engagements in and support  for CSR, as a business strategy with long-term  benefits both for companies themselves as well as the  society in general. National Knowledge Commission  (NKC) too felt that industrial and corporate house  and private agencies should be encouraged through  fiscal incentives to support the development of  libraries and library services in India. The concept  of CSR is not new to India. Large companies have  been doing social good in the name of ‘philanthropy’  much before the concept of CSR became popular.  Some of the big Indian corporations such as the  Tatas and Birlas are already engaged in CSR in  the form of charity or philanthropy. The concept of  CSR is finally coming out of the purview of ‘doing  social good’ and is fast becoming a ‘business  necessity’.  
The CSR in essence is all about building economy,  markets, and communities. It is just a form of  self-regulation built into a business model. The  CSR is business embracing social responsibilities  for the impact of its activities on the environment,  consumers, employees, communities, stakeholders,  and to everyone in the society at large. The CSR- focused business should proactively promote the  public interest by encouraging community growth and  development and by voluntarily eschewing practices  that harm the public sphere. The corporate CSR  policy should normally cover the following: (a)  Responsibility towards all stakeholders (b) Ethical functioning 
(c)  Respect for workers rights and welfare (d)  Respect for human rights 
(e)  Respect for environment 
(f)  Social and inclusive development activities.  
The concept of CSR is perceived by many  organisations in many ways. Some consider it as  
5 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
a strategy; some have taken it an opportunity for  innovation. Some view it as the one which opens  new avenues for entrepreneurship. Intervention is  required for the equitable distribution of wealth and  improving the quality of the life of the society and  it must come with voluntarily from corporate houses  and their top management.  
Companies usually spend certain percentage of  their profits for product research and publicity. Further,  the expenditure incurred for such activities attract  special concessions and tax exemptions from the  government. Through CSR, the organisations serve  the interests of society by taking responsibility for the  impact of their activities on customers, employees,  shareholders, communities and the environment in  all aspects of their operations.  The thrust of CSR  in public sector is on inclusive growth, sustainable  development and capacity building with due attention  to the socio-economic needs of the neglected and  marginalised sections of the society. 
The CSR mainly focuses on grassroots approach  through public-private partnerships for a sustainable  development. This is a unique concept as it attempts  to achieve tangible results through a framework of  dialogue and partnership between business and  community through enabling environment provided by  the State. The CSR is a company’s commitment to  operate in an economically, socially and environmentally  sustainable manner, while recognising the interests  of its stakeholders.   
Realising the importance of CSR in business,  the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has brought out the  CSR Voluntary guidelines in 2009. Later, in 2011,  CSR was made mandatory and the big corporate  houses are contributing sizeable amounts from their  profits to CSR activities. Many corporate houses  and PSUs are already extending their support under  CSR in areas like health, education, environment,  and community development. Every year awards  are given away to firms which perform well in CSR  activities. It is unfortunate that the list does not  include ‘public libraries’. 
Public libraries are democratic institutions, critical  to the development of socio-economic well being of  any nation. They acquire process and disseminate  information in a variety of formats to every citizen in  the community where they are located regardless of  race, gender, age, etc. Public libraries also employ  all kinds of services to ensure that information  get to the generality of the populace at the most  convenient time and place.  
The UNESCO’s manifesto on public libraries which  states that the “Public library, the local gateway to  knowledge, provides a basic condition for lifelong  learning, independent decision-making and cultural  development of the individual and social groups”.  
6 
Since public libraries are called ‘peoples universities’  they also need the support from corporate houses,  PSUs in addition to Government support. We sincerely  hope that in the years to come public libraries will  once again regain their past glory under the new  initiative—public-private partnership.  
We all know that only public libraries can  provide the basic learning resources such as books,  magazines and newspapers for non-formal education  for livelihood creation and skill development of the  rural and urban poor. We also know that public  libraries in our country are in a pitiable condition  due to lack of funds and support from the respective  State Governments. Although, the Raja Rammohun  Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF), Kolkata provide  funds to public libraries to purchase books, we  need more funds for maintaining the large number  public libraries in our country. This is possible only  through PPP under the CSR mandate. 
Let us follow the path of Andrew Carnegie who is  an all time role model with regard to public libraries  and CSR, who founded 2,880 libraries all over the  country long back. His popular words “Distribution  of wealth for people’s welfare is equally important  as earning”. He used to keep a lighting lamp in  each library as symbolic spread of knowledge in the  darkness of ignorance. That is how he became an  all-time role model with regard to CSR and public  libraries. Let us hope that our Indian corporate  sector will also take a leaf from his life book and  practice it. 
Corporate firms desirous of intensifying their  CSR efforts may come together and form clusters  in a local area and make a meaningful impact on  the lives of the under privileged fellow citizens. If  companies can patronage and provide funds for  the development of at least five public libraries in  and around their manufacturing units, they would  be helping the community by promoting reading  habits and also be socially responsible. Therefore,  CSR activities not only have a positive impact  on community development but also on business  promotion.  
The CSR is a wonderful concept which can be  applied to public libraries to enable them to stand  on their feet. Just like corporate firms adopting  villages and schools, they can also adopt local  public libraries and serve the community at large. It  is felt that if public libraries are given the required  inputs, resources, and infrastructure they can help  the country to become a knowledge society.  
"Social obligation is much bigger than supporting  worthy causes. It includes anything that impacts  people and the quality of their lives."  
-William Ford Jr., Chairman, Ford Motor Co. 

========2========

