DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 7-10 
© 2013, DESIDOC 
Corporate Social Responsibility: Activities in and  
around Visakhapatnam City 
Y. Manohar 
Hyderabad Business School, GITAM University, Hyderabad Campus, Hyderabad 
E-mail: ymanohar@gitam.in 
ABSTRACT 
The paper discusses the scope and principles of corporate social responsibility and its relevance  to the present day business. It also explains the importance of private ﬁ  rms and public sector units of  Government of India and their role in extending a helping hand in the overall development of the society.  The paper also discusses the role of public libraries in augmenting the welfare schemes of the working  communities and bridging the ‘digital divide’ among the various sections of the society. The author describes  various initiatives undertaken by the public sector undertakings in and around Visakhapatnam.  
Keywords:  Corporate social responsibility, public sector undertaking, community development 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) has assumed  a lot of importance not only among the Corporates  but also among the policy makers because of its  long-term benefits. It is but natural that corporates  are responsible to the society for their activities and  owe a great deal to the environment in which they  operate. A company should take a balanced view  of the components of corporate social responsibility  and implement the strategies in accordance with  the company’s policies. Developing countries are  closely scrutinising the activities of the companies.  Even International organisations such as the United  Nations (UN) are increasingly trying to develop CSR  strategies that encourage both good governance and  responsible investment in the developing nations to  provide a better quality of life for their citizens.  
Corporates play a vital role in shaping the  quality of life of the society as a whole in today’s  globalised economy. According to Nobel Laureate  Prof Amartya Sen “Market forces alone are not  sufficient for equitable distribution, and some sort  of intervention is required, be it political or from  business houses, towards society”.  
2.  CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY-AN  
OVERVIEW  
The European Union defines CSR as a concept  that an enterprise is accountable for its impact on all  relevant stake-holders. It is the continuous commitment  by business to behave fairly and responsibly and  contribute to economic development while improving  the quality of life of the workforce and their families  
as well as the local community and the society at  large. In broader terms, CSR means a collection of  policies, programs and practices evolved, adopted  and followed by a company that is based on certain  values, including respect for people, concern for the  communities, and care for the environment.  
The CSR covers various issues, like, human  rights, working conditions, equity, diversity, consumer  protection, environment and health impacts, economic  development, ethical business practices, etc. Today,  companies are increasingly adopting socially responsible  practices because of their long-term benefits. Some  of the possible benefits are:  
Creating and maintaining a high reputation;  •  Securing strong relationship with stake  
holders;  
•  Creating a better, safer and more stimulating  
work culture;  
•  Improving business management efficiency;  •  Protecting from boycott actions;  
•  Making access to funding easier;  
•  Benefiting from fiscal advantages and administrative  
facilitation; and 
•  ucing  enterprise  risk.                                                                                   Red 
3. OBJECTIVES 
When corporates take up CSR, they generally  look in for the following objectives. 
•  To be a member of Global Compact Forum and  
subscribe to its principles 
Received 28 November 2012, online published 21 January 2013         

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
•  
•  
•  
To initiate voluntary measures addressing social  and environmental concerns of stakeholders  To make CSR a key business process for  sustainable development 
To be a good corporate citizen.  
4. SCOPE 
The CSR will include socio-economic, environmental,  and cultural upliftment activities other than those  statutory in nature and also welfare activities meant  for employees. The focus will be on the following  areas related to the community:  
• Environmental care 
• Education  
• Health care 
• People care  
• Peripheral development 
• Cultural efflorescence 
•  Activities as a responsible corporate citizen,  •  To extend help during natural calamities like  
floods, fire, epidemic, etc.  
5.  AREAS OF FOCUS 
5.1 Education, Promotion of Literacy  
• Total literacy 
•  Promotion of specific literacy projects •  Promotion of literacy amongst residents of RH  
colonies and nearby villages 
•  Specific support to tribal students in agency  
areas, in mines areas of VSP by distribution of  
bags, reading materials and grant of scholarships  
etc.  
5.2 Promotion of Girl Child Education  
•  Awareness programmes on girl child education  
in RH colonies and nearby villages through road  
shows, drama/skit or street play, etc.  •  Introduction of scholarships for girl students  
in ZP/ Govt. Schools in surrounding areas of  
VSP 
•  Counseling of parents 
•  Girl child education to be a theme in VSP’s  
calendars/ advertisement materials.  
5.3 Education, Training and Rehabilitation  
of Mentally and Physically Challenged  
Children/Persons 
•  Setting up/ sponsoring special schools, training  
institutions for mentally-challenged children/ 
persons.  
•  Providing infrastructure facilities/equipments.  
8 
• Grants/contributions 
•  Gainful employment opportunities for  
rehabilitation. 
5.4 Promotion of Professional Education 
•  Promotion/support for professional education  
by setting up of educational institutions offering  
courses in Engineering, Medicine, Management,  
etc.  
5.5 Improving the Quality Education in  
Schools in and around Visakhapatnam  •  Introduction of scholarships for good and deserving  
students 
•  Constitution of educational committee to continuously  
monitor and offer suggestions etc., to the schools  
for  CSR                                                                                                         •  Improving the education and career development  
of the students 
•  Conducting inter-school competitions both in  
academic and extra-curricular activities •  Promotion and sustaining high quality learning  
ambience in schools located in premises of  
VSP  
•  Promoting the image of the company by introducing  
Vizag Steel Merit scholarships for deserving  
candidates studying in reputed educational  
institutional like IITs, IIMs, IISc, and other such  
institutions.  
6.  PSUS IN GOVT AND PRIVATE SECTOR IN  
AND AROUND VISAKHAPATNAM 
Rashtriya Ispath Nigam Limited (RINL),  Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP), Bharat Heavy  Plates and Vessels, NTPC, Visakhapatnam Port  Trust, Hindustan Shipyard Ltd., Indian Navy, Naval  Dockyard, HPCL, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Dredging  Corporation of India Ltd, MMTC, VUDA and SAIL  in government sector; and LG Polymers, ESSAR  Steel, JINDAL, Hindustan Zinc, CMR, etc., belong  to private sector in Visakhapatnam district. FACOR,  GMRVRF are private sector units present in the  nearby Visianagaram and Srikakulam districts.  7.  PUBLIC LIBRARIES NEEDING ASSISTANCE 
Around 71 branch libraries under the Zilla  Granthalaya Samsatha located in Visakhapatnam  district, need some assistance. If each public sector  unit can extend funds to atleast 5 libraries in the  surrounding areas near to them for establishing  infrastructure facilities and internet facility, they will  be doing a great service to the community through  CSR. Public libraries are one powerful agent for  impacting the knowledge and skill sets of local  people. Such an initiative can also support the  mission of the recently formed NSDC. 

========2========

MANOHAR: CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
8. NGO-MANAGED LIBRARIES 
•  Visakha Public Library, Visakhapatnam  
•  Hindu Reading room, Visakhapatnam  
•  NGOs Club, Visakhapatnam  
•  Club technicians, Visakhapatnam  
•  Madhav Yuvajana Samajam, Madhavadhara,  
Visakhapatnam  
•  Sree Ganapathy Seva Samithi Granthalayam,  
Visakhapatnam 
•  Gurajada Granthalayam, Visakhapatnam  •  Gowtama Buddha Granthalayam, Gajuwaka  • Saradha Granthalayam, Anakapalli  • Gouri Granthalayam, Anakapalli  
• Lakshmi Grandalayam, Anakapalli  
•  Grameena Yuvajana Mandiram, Munaga Paka  •  Goutham Patana Mandiram, Munaga paka  •  Gowri Womens Library, Anakapalle.  
The above NGO-managed libraries are starving  for some assistance and each corporate company  can adopt at least two libraries in their surrounding  areas for development. Further, corporates can also  think of establishing new local libraries in these  rural areas with a population of 500 to 1000 near  the company’s plant. This will help in improvement  of literacy rate which in turn can contribute in many  ways finally leading to the growth of GDP of the  nation.  
9. BUDGET ALLOCATION 
Upto 2 per cent of the distributable profit (net  profit after tax minus accumulated losses, if any  carried forward) of the company of the previous  year may be considered as the budget for CSR  activities.  
10. CSR INITIATIVES OF VISAKHAPATNAM  
STEEL PLANT (RINL) 
(a) In terms of the RINL CSR policy, the APEX committee  
may decide on case-by-case basis.   (b) The committee can decide taking up projects  
of up to a specified limit. Above this limit it  
needs  to  be  approved  by  the  board.                                                                                                          (c)  The APEX committee will be assisted by  
Personnel (Welfare and CSR) Department in  
formulating the guidelines and its implementation.  
They will be putting up periodical reports on  
progress of implementation of CSR projects to  
the management.  
(d)  RINL/VSP is taking keen interest on CSR and  
developing so many NGO Libraries in and  
around Visakhapatnam.  
(e)  RINL has given a substantial grant to Visakha  
Public Library, Visakhapatnam for the construction  
of building.  
(f)  RINL has constructed a building in Peda  
Gantyada RH colony especially for library and  
provided infrastructure facilities and books to  
the library.  
(g)  RINL is providing books to various school  
libraries and community welfare centres in and  
around Visakhapatnam.  
(h) RINL is providing various facilities like education,  
sports, peripheral development, health and safety  
to RH colonies of VSP.  
(i)  Some of the mega projects where RINL has  
contributed are the Gurukul Vidyalaya at Andhra  
University; water scheme for the tribal areas;  
state of the art operation theaters for the Shanker  
Nethralaya; school for the differently challenged  
people; satellite type blood bank, etc. 
11. CSR INITIATIVES OF POWER GRID  
CORPORATION OF INDIA 
Under CSR, the Power Grid Corporation of  India has donated 25 computers with peripherals,  computer tables and chairs, etc., to the computer  laboratory of Bhagavatula Charitable Trust (BCT)  at the Model High School BCT-Farm Complex at  Rambilli Mandal in the district.  
The corporation also donated books, steel  cupboards, tables  and chairs. It has also donated  25 sewing machines and computerised machines  for embroidery work, etc. 
12. CSR INITIATIVES OF APMDC AND GMRVF  
Currently, some Indian companies spend only  three to five per cent of their profits towards CSR  programmes. The Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development  Corporation Ltd. (APMDC) has decided to spend  considerable amount of its profits on higher education  of tribal people in Utnoor agency area of Adilabad  dist. The Utnoor Integrated Tribal Development  Agency (ITDA) project officer has been entrusted  with the responsibility of ensuring higher education  to tribal people in the area.  
The GMR Varalakshmi Foundation (GMRVF)  is the CSR arm of the GMR Group of companies.  Its mandate is to develop social infrastructure and  enhance the quality of life of communities around  the locations where the Group has a presence.  The Foundation is a Section 25 (not-for-profit)  company.  
It has its own professional staff drawn from top  academic and social work institutions. It is governed  by a Board chaired by Group Chairman, GMR Group.  Education is the main area it is supporting. 
9 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
13. CONCLUSIONS 
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is about how  a company manages its business process to produce  an overall positive impact on society. A responsible  corporate citizen must cater proactively to majority  stakeholders, if not all. Thus, the companies in India  have a long way to go to become a good corporate  citizen by world standards. Since Visakhapatnam  is an expanding industrial hub with the growing  presence of both public and private sector industries  in line with its status of ‘the city of destiny’ these  industries can contribute a lot to the welfare of its  working community and society at large through CSR.  Another line of thinking can be that of developing  the surrounding area of Visakhapatnam with the  concerted efforts of all well meaning organisations  in the area. When such focused efforts are made  the results are bound to be better by an order of  magnitude. To share and improve upon the best  practices followed by different organisations, frequent  workshops may be planned.  
Earlier one such initiative was taken by Vizag  Steel in association with the Indian Society for  Training and Development (ISTD). This was found to  be highly informative and useful. A new dimension  that evolved during the workshop was to also share  the failure stories of CSR initiatives which would  have lot of learning value. Organisations desirous  of intensifying their CSR efforts would do well to  refer the recent guidelines issued on the subject by  DPE, Government of India. With such initiatives all  organisations in a local area may come together in  the form of clusters and make a meaningful impact  
10 
in the lives of the not so well privileged brothers  and sisters of the neighbourhood. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Government of  
India. CSR voluntary guidelines, 2009.  2.  Social Accountability International (SAI): A  
brief. 
3.  Social accountability 8000. International Standard  
(SAI) SA 8000:2001. 
4.  RINL, Visakhapatnam Steel Plant. Corporate  
social responsibility policy, 2011. 
About the Author 
Dr Y. Manohar has 38 years of experience in the  public sector steel industry (SAIL,Vizag Steel) in  the areas of training & development, corporate  HRD, and marketing. He is qualified assessor for  CII-Exim Bank Award for Business Excellence,  qualified lead assessor for ISO 9000 Systems  and internal consultant for TQM implementation.  He has the distinction of introducing modern HR  practices such as PMS, role & goal setting, six  sigma, and TQM, etc. He has published 31 papers  in different disciplines. He was awarded ‘Indira  Super Achiever Award’ and is the 1st  recipient of  such award from PSUs in India; the ‘Vishal Bharati  Gaurav Awards’ from Delhi Telugu Academy for  Excellence in HE field, and the ‘Most Powerful HR  Professionals of India’ by World HRD Congress 2010. 

========4========

