DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 11-16 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Imbibing Public Libraries and Corporate Social Responsibility  
to Promote Rural Development 
Kailash Chandra Das 
PG Dept. of Library & Information Science, Utkal University, Vani Vihar, Bhubaneswar-751 004 
E-mail: dr_kcd@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT 
Social responsibility encompasses the sectors like health, education, employment, income and quality  of life. It should be binding on the corporate sector to work on the above aspects, which are thought to be  primary social indicators. The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in India is in a very nascent stage.  It is still one of the least understood initiatives in the Indian development sector. The CSR represents an  interesting evolution and culmination of philanthropy and ethics. It is regarded as vehicle through which  companies give something back to the society. It involves providing innovative solutions to societal and  environmental challenges. The corporate sector has a pivotal role to play in ensuring private investment  ﬂ  ows to those rural areas that have been left out of the development process so far and also to work  for sustainable development of rural areas in general. Public library can act as an agency for social and  personal development and can become a positive agent for bringing change in the community. 
Keywords: Corporate social responsibility, public libraries, rural development 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 1970, Milton Friedman of  New York Times  rightly wrote: “Social responsibility of business is  to increase profits.” This view is often held and  propounded by those who do not see much merit  in companies being engaged in issues of social  responsibility other than the making of profit. However,  increasingly, the profit case, evident indicators that  are tangible and the altruistic/philanthropic/ ethical  case, evident in the intangibles are getting blurred.  In this context, the purpose is to highlight the need  for a paradigm shift in the importance of greater  investment in intangibles to enhance corporate value.  The pressure on Indian industrialists to demonstrate  their commitment to social development increased  during the independence movement, when Mahatma  Gandhi developed the notion of ‘trusteeship’, whereby  the owners of property would voluntarily manage  their wealth on behalf of the people. Gandhi’s  influence prompted various Indian companies to  play active roles in nation building and promoting  socio-economic development during the 20th century.  The history of Indian corporate philanthropy has  encompassed cash or kind donations, community  investment in trusts and provision of essential  services such as schools, libraries, hospitals, etc.  Many firms, particularly, ‘family-run businesses’,  continue to support such philanthropic initiatives.  The CSR is not new to India; companies like TATA  
and BIRLA have been imbibing the case for social  good in their operations for decades long before  CSR become a popular cause. In spite of having  such life-size successful examples, CSR in India is  in a very nascent stage. It is still one of the least  understood initiatives in the Indian development  sector. In India, most of the corporate houses do  not have a clear policy on social responsibility. While  developed countries like England have separate  ministries to look after the issues of corporate  social responsibility. Out of very few companies  who contribute to the social development; the basic  intention was not to ensure the good of the nation,  rather a business policy to stay away from the tax  net. Social responsibility encompasses sectors like  health, education, employment, income, and quality  of life. It should be binding on the corporate sector  to work on the above aspects, which are thought  to be primary social indicators. They have enough  money to serve the nation on the above segments  of the society. 
2.  WHAT IS CORPORATE SOCIAL  
RESPONSIBILITY? 
A widely quoted definition by the World Business  Council for Sustainable Development state that  “corporate social responsibility is the continuing  commitment by business to behave ethically and  contribute to economic development while improving  
Received 28 November 2012, online published 21 January 2013          

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
the quality of life of the workforce and their families  as well as of the local community and society at  large”1.Thus, the meaning of CSR has two-fold.  On one hand, it exhibits the ethical behaviour that  an organisation exhibits towards its internal and  external stakeholders. On the other hand, it denotes  the responsibility of an organisation towards the  environment and society in which it operates. The  CSR centres on the relationship between business  and the society, and how businesses behaves  towards their key stakeholders such as employees,  customers, investors, suppliers, communities, and  special interest groups2. The CSR represents an  interesting evolution and culmination of philanthropy  and ethics. Specifically, corporate philanthropy has  evolved from the donation of cash and products to  charitable organisations because “it’s the right thing  to do” to more strategic philanthropy where donations  are focused on a theme that has some relationship  to the company’s core business3. Similarly, ethics  has evolved from the company’s obligations to  society to abide by the law, pay taxes, and provide  employment to a more proactive approach where the  firm is expected to adhere to high international codes  of conduct that exceed these traditional obligations.  The CSR is regarded as vehicle through which  companies give something back to the society. It  involves providing innovative solutions to societal  and environmental challenges. 
3.  REASONS OF CORPORATE SOCIAL  
RESPONSIBILITY? 
Three reasons relevant in today’s world are:  •  Changing social expectations, 
•  Increasing affluence of the customers, and • Globalisation 
It is being increasingly recognised that progress  and welfare of a society is not only the responsibility  of the Government alone, but many more stakeholders  need to be involved to attain the development goal.  The corporate sector has a pivotal role to play in  ensuring private investment flows to those rural  areas that have been left out of the development  process so far and also to work for sustainable  development of rural areas in general. Corporate  considers themselves as an integral part of society  and accordingly act in a social responsible way that  goes beyond economic performance. As a result  of this shift from purely profit to profit with social  responsibility, many corporates are endorsing the term  CSR. It is essentially a concept whereby companies  decide voluntarily to contribute to the society to  make it better and environmentally cleaner. A lack of  understanding, inadequately trained personnel, non- availability of authentic data and specific information  on the kinds of CSR activities, coverage, policy,  etc., further adds to the reach and effectiveness of  CSR programmes. But the situation is changing. The  
12 
CSR is coming out of the purview of ‘doing social  good’ and is fast becoming a ‘business necessity’.  The ‘business case’ for CSR is gaining ground and  corporate houses are realising that what is good for  workers—their community, health, and environment  is also good for the businesses.  
4.  INFORMATION SECTOR AND RURAL  
DEVELOPMENT 
Information sector as an emerging area for the  overall social development is an essential prerequisites  for the present social milieu. All information problems  usually stem from information poverty, the concept  which appears to be highly wide-spread and a  pervasive in rural India. Although several factors can  be attributed to this phenomenon, the parameters  are not yet established to identify the information  issues in the context of rural development. Improving  the quality of life of rural folk by providing greater  access to the information needed to affect their  development. The broad areas of rural development  approaches the requirement of information and  satisfying users’ information needs that stand as the  pillars for defining the whole spectrum of information  flow to several functionaries and beneficiaries  involved in rural development programmes. The two  concepts of rural development and rural education  are intertwined with each other to such an extent  that it becomes difficult to talk of one without the  other. Many include rural education as a part of  rural development. Rural development, in fact,  consists of strategies, policies and programmes for  the development of rural areas. 
Libraries have always played a vital role in  promoting education and research, in developing  reading habit and in the dissemination of knowledge  and information. It is a matter of great concern that  the role of libraries in promoting literacy and reading  habit has not been fully realised in our country;  whereas, the growth of interest in library as an  institutional tool for adult education and promoting  literacy has been on a remarkable higher key in the  UK, USA, Russia, and Japan. Literacy programmes  should be integrated with social, cultural and library  activities. These should be planned, keeping in view  the provision for library facilities. Librarians should  be fully involved at each stage, right from planning  to implementation covering pre-literacy, literacy and  post-literacy stages. A well-developed network of public  libraries would be able to play its role effectively  in promoting literacy4. Societal needs are satisfied  through various kinds of activities, each of which  requires information as an input. These include, for  example, education, policy formulation, research and  development, personal needs, business, decision- making, mass communications, public goods and  private goods. Societal needs are also satisfied at  different levels, from individuals through to global  

========2========

DAS: IMBIBING PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY TO PROMOTE RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
communities with information. That is why Panos5 stated that “Access to information is an essential  condition for development”. From this, it could be  said that information if well uttered and packaged  for rural communities will exterminate poverty,  ignorance and will enlighten on how to achieve  economic, social, educational, ‘Rural communities’  in Orissa has suffered from enjoying any meaningful  development largely because of policy implementation  gap artificially created by the governments and  leaders. The consequence of this neglect resulted  in rural communities lacking access to basic  needs such as water, food, education, health care,  sanitation, information and security, leading to low  life expectancy and high infant mortality. These  conditions, considered harsh by the majority of the  rural dwellers, which result their massive migration  into urban areas to look for greener pasture, and  often in search of formal employment, as the only  option for survival. 
Abid6  identified seven types of information  needs in rural areas-(i) Health problem of daily  existence occupation, (ii) government, (iii) society,  (iv) recreation  (v) leisure, (vi) education, and (vii)  religion. People in rural areas require information  that helps them to identify and prepare healthy  meals and how to treat diseases that they encounter.  Clean water, electricity, good roads, and living wage  employment are vital to daily living and productivity  in their communities. To be successful, farmers  require understandable information about strategic  planning information like—how to develop, schedule  the plant and other crops; how to gain and sustain  their firms and firm- related business; and how to  educate and maintain healthy families. 
4.1 Concept of Rural Development 
The notion of rural development has been conceived  in diverse ways by researchers, ranging from thinking  of it as a set of goals, and programmes to a well- knit strategy, approach, or even an ideology. There  is a widely shared view that its essence should be  poverty alleviation and distributive justice-oriented  economic transformation. Although policy makers and  the development community have widely used the  phrase ‘rural development’, what constitutes rural  development seems to have changed significantly  overtimes. Today's concept of rural development is  fundamentally different from that used about three or  four decades ago. The concept now encompasses  concerns that go well beyond improvements in  growth, income and output. The concern includes an  assessment of changes in the quality of life, broadly  defined to include improvement in health and nutrition,  education, environmentally safe living conditions  and reduction in gender and income inequalities.  Today, there seems to be a universal consensus  that the ultimate objective of rural development is  
to improve the quality of life of rural people. This  makes it essential to go beyond the income-related  factors such as prices, production, and productivity  to a range of non-income factors that Influence  quality of life and hence inclusiveness of rural  development. The 1948 Cambridge Conference on  Community Development defined rural development  as “a movement to promote better living for the  whole community, with the active participation and  if possible on the initiative of the community but  if this initiative is not forthcoming by the use of  techniques for arousing and stimulating it in order  to secure its active and enthusiastic response to  the movement. Rural development as defined by the  World Bank is simply a strategy designed to improve  the economic and social life of a particular group of  people - the rural poor. Inclusive rural development  is more specific concept. It is about improving the  quality of life of all members of rural society. More  specifically, inclusive rural development covers three  different but interrelated dimensions. 
•  Economic dimension 
•  Social dimension 
•  Political dimension 
Economic dimension—encompasses providing both  capacity and opportunities for the poor and low- income households in particular to benefit from the  economic growth. 
Social dimension—supports social development of  poor and low-income households, promotes gender  equality and women's empowerment and provides  social safety nets for vulnerable groups. 
Political dimension—Improves the opportunities for  the poor and low Income people in rural areas to  effectively and equally participate in the political  processes at the village level. 
4.3 Information Sources in Rural Development 
Information sources and services play a very  important role to meet the needs of the villagers.  According to the Library Association, Britain, Community  information services assist individuals and groups  with daily problems-solving and with participation in  the democratic process. The services concentrate  on the needs of those who donot have already  access to other sources of assistance and on the  most important problems that people have to face,  problems to do with their homes, their jobs, and  their rights. This would mean a positive decision to  concentrate on enabling people, particularly those in  lower socio-economic groups, to act either individually  or collectively on their problems in the fields of  housing, employment, family and personal matters,  consumer affairs, household finance, education, welfare  rights and civil rights." The community information  sources are those which contain information about  various aspects of the community in particular and  the country in general. In other words, the community  
13 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
information sources carry all types of information  which meet day-to-day needs and provide general  information of interest to local people and about the  neighborhood. The community information sources  serve the following purposes: 
•  To make all section of people educate, enlightened,  
and informed 
•  About problems of life and to be equipped  
for participation in democratic process of a  
country; 
•  To provide reliable information to people on time  
so that the society as a whole is enabled to  
function in an orderly and systematic manner, 
To make information available to the people at  large, without any discrimination, in accordance with  the concept of universal availability of information  collection of the information sources is task of the  information officer unlike any research library or  academic library the information centre for rural  development totally differ in this aspect. Basically, the  sources in the rural development can be grouped-  Indigenous sources (sources which are available  locally and generated locally) and exogenous sources  (sources available commercially) 
The people in the rural society have personnel  sources, viz., friends/ relatives, village elders,  neighbors, panchayat leader, patwari/lekhpal, village- level worker, etc. to get the required information.  Therefore, it demands for the consideration to the  development of indigenous sources in the rural area  which will be useful to everyone in the society.  It is also to be considered that as the people  become more educated and economically sound,  also their tendency to read and know about more  changes. Rural development requires a variable mix  of information generated by government, media,  NGOs, rural development practitioners, and experts.  Oral and written indigenous rural knowledge passed  on to generations through largely informal means,  statistical information, implementation data from  previous projects and schemes, etc. The sources  include published and unpublished, formal and  informal, print and non-print, etc. The significant  constraints of facilitating information to rural people,  according to the World Information Report, 1997- 98 are: 
•  The bulk of the population is not information- 
depended in day to day work and living. •  A large proportion of the population cannot  
consume information in written form. 
•  The vast majority of the population does not  
have the means to access information.  •  People, in general, are not accustomed to pay,  
cannot pay or are unwilling to pay for information  
as it does not figure in their list of wants. 
14 
•  
•  
The existing pattern of economic activities does not  favour a growth in information consumption. The countries do not have sufficient capacity  to invest in infrastructure development. 
5. CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND  
RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
Vast majorities of the India’s poorest people  live in villages and these villages are in a state of  neglect and under development with impoverished  people. The problems of hunger, ignorance, ill- health, high mortality, and illiteracy are most acute  in rural areas. This is not only because of shortage  of material resources but also because of defects  in planning process and investment pattern. India  has the potential to meet these challenges in  rural areas. However, the efforts of governments  may not be adequate to provide basic services  to its citizens.  It is observed that most of the  companies have adopted CSR approach into their  overall business strategy. Therefore, they have  been successful in achieving the objectives of both  business and social development. Their approach  to work is not mainly relief, welfare, and service  delivery but it is sustainable development oriented,  which have long-term benefits. Vedanta Aluminum  Ltd., Tata Steel, NALCO, Dr. Reddy’s Labs, Lupin  India, Ambuja Cement Ltd., Bharat Petroleum, SAIL  believe in promoting human and social sustainable  development through poverty alleviation by building  capacity of rural people. Companies implement  CSR programmes with respect to rural development  through four types of institutions: 
(a)  Companies do it directly by its own CSR division or  
human resource department, or local management  
of manufacturing unit; 
(b)  Through a foundation; 
(c)  Through partnership with NGOs, academic  
institutions, international agencies; 
(d)  Through partnership with Government. 
6.  IMPACT OF CSR PROGRAMMES ON  
RURAL POOR 
The impact of CSR programs in India were  classified under five areas: Livelihood, health,  education, environment, and infrastructure. 6.1 Livelihood 
 The Grameen-LABS is a programme being  implemented by Dr. Reddy’s Foundation in partnership  with the Rural Development Department, Govt. of  India. It aims to provide 35,000 livelihoods to rural  youth in the age of 18-25 years in 7 states of India.  The results of livelihood programmes supported  by Bharat Petroleum show that the SHG group  members are earning a steady income of INR 2000  

========4========

DAS: IMBIBING PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY TO PROMOTE RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
per month and members of the banana plantations  and poultry are earning an additional income of  INR 7000 to 8000 per annum. 
6.2 Health 
Many companies organise a number of health  camps to create health awareness and sensitise  people on health related issues like: Immunization,  blood donation, water purification tablets, etc. Till  2007-08, SAIL has conducted 267 health camps  benefiting more than 4.5 lakh people. In Lanjigarh  (Orissa), Vedanta Aluminum Ltd covered 53 villages  with 32,000 villagers by providing free medicines,  treatment and referral services through its mobile  health units. Tata Steel Family Initiatives Foundation  (TSFIF) established ‘Lifeline Express’ hospital on  wheels which has helped over 50,000 patients in  Jharkhand, Orissa, and Chhattisgarh. 
6.3 Education 
Aditya Birla Group provided education to 62,000  children living in proximity to the plants by running  26 formal schools. The SAIL supports around 138  schools in the peripheral areas of SAIL’s plants/ units in the country where more than 80, 000  children receive education. Asian Paints set up of  the Shree Gattu Vidyalaya, a school catering to 25,  000 children from class I to X. It has helped rural  children gain access to formal schooling. Similarly,  Satyam Computers have developed 170 modern  schools benefiting 40,000 rural children. 
6.4 Environment 
For sustainable management and development  of natural resources, many companies have been  working for tree plantation, watershed management,  waste management, wind firm etc. For example,  SAIL has planted 13.5 million trees in and around  SAIL plants/ mines so far. Watershed development  programme of Ambuja Cement Ltd. covered 9,000 ha  in the last four years. Sustainable water management  remains the top priority of Coca Cola India Inc. So  far, the company’s water initiatives have improved  the lives of more than 1,40,000 people and spread  awareness about the crucial importance of water  conservation among millions of people. 
6.5 Infrastructure 
Out of 14 companies surveyed only six companies  are providing different infrastructural facilities like  construction or development of roads, electricity,  water facility, sanitation, school, health centre,  community centre, etc. Lupin Human Welfare and  Research Foundation’s ‘Apna Gaon Apna Kam’  scheme covered 38,000 villages in Rajasthan and  almost all villages have school buildings, drinking  water, ponds, link roads, community centres, and  electricity. SAIL has been involved in the construction  and repair of 33 km of pucca roads per year,  
thereby providing nearby two lakh people across  435 villages access to modern infrastructure facilities  every year. In Andhra Pradesh, in partnership with  Hyderabad Urban Development Agency, local village  communities and NGOs, Coca-Cola India has helped  16,000 villagers of ‘Saroor Nayar’ restore existing  ‘Check Dam’ water catchment areas. 
7. ROLE OF PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Public libraries are otherwise called community  libraries. Corporate houses can finance or sponsor  various programmes of public libraries to fulfill their  social responsibilities towards communities. Various  examples and case studies have been incorporated  below to corroborate this fact. In the last few years,  the rapid and very exciting developments in information  technology have revolutionised the way in which  information is collected, displayed, and accessed.  The synergy between information and communications  technology (ICT) is allowing access to information  in ways hardly imaginable. Many public libraries  have responded to the challenge of the electronic  public libraries have an exciting opportunity to help  to bring everyone into this global conversation and  to bridge what is often called ‘the digital divide’.  They can achieve this by providing information  technology for public access, by teaching basic  computer skills and by participating in programmes  to combat illiteracy. Corporate houses can finance  these projects. However, to fulfill the principle of  access for all, they must also continue to maintain  services that provide information in different ways,  for example, through print or the oral tradition. Such  services are likely to occupy vital importance in the  foreseeable future. The opportunities provided by  the ICT can be utilised to develop these services  in new and exciting ways. 
8. SOCIAL ROLE OF PUBLIC LIBRARY 
The public library has an important role as a  public space and meeting place. This is particularly  important in communities where there are few places  for people to meet. It is sometimes called ‘the  drawing room of the community’. Use of the library  for research and for finding information relating to  the user’s education and leisure interests, brings  people into informal contact with other members  of the community. Using the public library can be  a positive social experience. 
8.1 Agency for Change 
In carrying out its role in these key areas the  public library is acting as an agency for social  and personal development and can be a positive  agency for change in the community. By providing  a wide range of materials to support education and  by making information accessible to all, the public  library can bring economic and social benefits to  
15 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
individuals and to the community. It contributes to  the creation and maintenance of a well–informed and  democratic society and helps to empower people  in the enrichment and development of their lives  and that of the community in which they live. The  public library should be aware of the issues that are  being discussed within the community and provide  information that will inform that debate. 
8.2 Libraries without Walls 
In developing policies to fulfill the role and  purpose of the public library the emphasis should  be on the services it provides. In meeting the needs  of its community the public library will provide a  range of services, some of which (for example,  large collections of printed material), can be most  effectively delivered from a library building. However,  there will be many circumstances where it is more  effective to provide the service beyond the walls of  the library. Examples will vary in different societies but  the principle of planning library development from a  service rather than a building perspective is important  in all public library policy development. The provision  of services using information and communications  technology also presents exciting opportunities to  take library and information services direct to the  home and the workplace. A variety of transports is  used to deliver services to sparsely populated areas.  The provision of library and information services to  people unable to visit a library due to physical or  sensory disability or lack of transport, for example,  ensures that access to these services is available  to all at their home or workplace regardless of their  circumstances. The public library service in Chile has  developed a variety of mobile services, bookmobiles,  book boats, book boxes, backpacks and bicycles.  These services offer books and cultural activities  for all ages and travel across all terrains. They also  serve rest homes, hospitals, and prisons. 
9.  CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY IN  
ORISSA 
Vedanta Alumina Refinery Project and OMC’s  Niyamgiri Bauxite Mining Project donated three  Ambulances to Rayagada District Administration.  The Ambulance will be mainly used for Janani  Suraksha Yojana programme and emergency medical  services in Rayagada. Vedanta Aluminium Limited  (VAL) provides medical support to Brain Tumour  Patient Doimati Batra from Mundbahali village under  Kurli Gram Panchayat in Niyamgiri hill slope. To  improve the livelihood of Dongria Kondh people in  Lanjigarh Block of Kalahandi district, VAL introduced  pineapple and bamboo Cultivation in the area.  The VAL signed MoU with Zilla Swasthya Samiti,  Kalahandi to upgrade health service of Lanjigarh  area hospital. The ownership of the hospital will  continue to remain with the Government and will  
16 
be managed by VAL under partnership-arrangement. In a response to control the spreading Diarrohea  in Lanjigarh block Kalahandi, Vedanta Aluminium  has joined hands with the district administration in  taking number of measures to stop the spreading of  the epidemic. The Company has set up temporary  medical camps with one doctor and pharmacist  in seven villages in the hilly tribal areas. ‘Project  Ujjala–Rural Electrification’ is a village electrification  work by Vedanta Aluminium in five villages of  Lanjigarh block in Kalahandi district. The Electrification  work, carried out under ‘Project Ujjala’ will provide  electricity to more than 700 households in Jagganthpur,  Balbhadrapur, Kadamguda, Kendubardi, Simlibhata  village of the block. Dongria Kondh women weave  success with sal leave, under the project ‘Jeevika’  run by VAL under its CSR programme. All these  Dongria Kondh women are collecting ‘sal’ and ‘siali’  leaves from the forests, stitching them into leaf  plates and selling them. On July 29, 2009, they  sold 2,89,000 pieces of leaf plates for Rs 86,700  at 30 paise per plate. 
REFERENCES 
1. WBCSD, 1999. 
2.  Hick, S. Morals maketh the money. Australian  
CPA,  2000,  70(4), 72-73. 
3.  Nelson, J. Business as partners in development.  
Prince of Wales Business Leadership Forum,  
United Kingdom, 1996. pp. 65-66. 
4.  Panos. The internet and poverty; real help or  
real hype? Panos media briefing No. 28, June  
1998. http://www.panos.org.uk/global.report/details. 
asp 
5.  Das, K.C. Importance of library services in  
promoting literacy and reading habits in India:  
Programme and prospects. Orissa Review,  1992,  
49(1), 35-38. 
6.  Abid, Abdelaziz. Information literacy for lifelong  
learning.  In  Global Librarianship, edited by  Irwin  
Weintraub & Martin A. Kesselman, CRC Press,  
2004 
About the Author 
Dr K.C. Das  holds Master of Economics and Masters  in Library & Information Science from University of  Delhi, and a PhD in LIS and BEd (Distance) from  Berhampur University. He has more than 28 years  of PG teaching experience. He has also served  in NASSDOC, Parliament Library, STC of India  library, New Delhi in different capacities. Under  his guidance 8 PhD & 7 MPhil scholars have been  awarded degrees. He has published 7 books, 64  articles in National and International journals and  conference proceedings. Presently he is head,  PG Dept of Library & Information Science, Utkal  University, Vani Vihar, Bhubaneswar, Odisha. 

========6========

