DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 17-20 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Importance of Partnerships for Development of Public Libraries in India 
Bhuvaneshwari Ravi and Gayatri Vivek* Centre for Social Initiative and Management (CSIM), Hyderabad 
E-mail: rbhuvi@rediffmail.com 
*Centre for Social Initiative and Management (CSIM), Mumbai 
E-mail: gayatri.vivek@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The paper examines the importance of public libraries in educating the masses and increasing the  literacy rate and disseminating knowledge. It also describes the historical origin of ancient universities  and centres of learning, including public libraries in India and their contribution to the society. The  paper discusses the problems faced by the public libraries today and various options available for their  improvement. The author proposes a new model of public-private partnership with non-governmental  organisations (NGOs) and public-sector undertakings (PSUs) for the growth and development of public  
libraries to enable them to serve the user community. 
Keywords: Public libraries, knowledge society, public-private partnership 
1. INTRODUCTION 
“A library is not just a building stacked with  books and manuals – it is a repository and source  of information and ideas, a place for learning and  enquiry and generation of thought and creation of  new knowledge. Public libraries have the potential  to bridge the gap between the ‘information poor’  and ‘information rich’ by ensuring that people from  all sections of the society have easy access to  knowledge they seek.”1 
In the case of public libraries in India, this  seems to be a far-fetched dream. To begin with  there are not enough number of libraries to cater to  the whole population. Lack of resources is another  major challenge, especially in the case of rural  public libraries. There are infrastructural issues such  as lack of proper buildings, reading room, storage  facility, stock of reading material, etc. There is also  a dearth of suitable reading material in regional  languages. Other issues include low literacy levels,  limited access to technology, and management of  public libraries. 
Although the current state of disorder of public  libraries is a cause of concern, there are some  success stories at the grass-root level that provide  us with hope for the betterment of the situation.  These cases show the importance of partnership  with non-government actors for developing public  libraries.  
Received 28 November 2012, online published 21 January 2013 
2.  PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN INDIA 
Libraries have existed in India since the ancient  period. There are references that suggest that the  ancient universities such as Nalanda, Vikramshila,  Taxila had valuable collections of manuscripts in  their libraries. During the medieval period, i.e.,  Moghul period, great contributions were made to the  Indian culture and libraries by the Moghul rulers.  It is considered the golden period of Indian history  for its educational, literary, and library activities.  During the British period, a number of libraries  were set up such as the Andrews Library, Surat;  Connemara Library, Madras; Government Library,  Janagarh, etc.  
Establishment of these libraries enlightened the  community and may be regarded as the foundation  of the concept of public libraries to the Indian  people. Post-Independence, public libraries made a  tremendous growth. The central and state governments  took a number of steps to develop the nation with  education as the focus and public libraries as an  essential component of it.  
The enactment of Madras Public Libraries Act,  1948 was the first concerted effort in India to  institutionalise, structure, co-ordinate, and organise  public library services. It was also the year in which  the National Library was set-up. The Delhi Public  Library was set-up in association with UNESCO  in 1951.  
17 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
The Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation, an  autonomous body under the Department of Culture,  Government of India, was established. The main  objective of the Foundation was to  spread library  services all over the country in active co-operation with  State Governments and Union Territory Administrations  and voluntary organisations (NGOs) working in the  field of library services, cultural activities, adult  education, and the like. The foundation has done  significant work with respect to supporting libraries  with grants from various schemes.  
The National Policy on Library and Information  Systems was formulated during 1985-1986. Though  the recommendations were not adopted as the  official policy, it serves as suggestive model for  the development of libraries as a whole. 
The next development to the cause of public  libraries was when the National Knowledge Commission  (NKC) included public libraries in its agenda in  2005. ‘National Mission on Libraries’ was proposed  for developing quality standards for libraries, help  them acquire books, digitise content and mobilise  community library movement. As recommended by  the NKC, a national library census is to be carried  out along with periodic surveys of user needs and  reading habits. There is no information as to whether  the recommendations submitted by the working  group on libraries have been acted upon. 
3. LIBRARY LEGISLATION 
Dr S R. Ranganathan is considered the pioneer  of library legislation in India. He was instrumental in  the commencement of the Madras Public Libraries  Act in 1948.  He also inspired the development of  library legislation in other states. Currently, out of  the 35 states and union territories only 19 have  formal library legislation. Within the states that  have passed the legislation, there is no uniform  pattern in terms of funding and operations. While  some states charge a library cess, others do not.  Based on the size, population, literacy rate, etc.,  different states have different approaches to the  public library system.  
What or who can really make a difference?  When we look at the big picture, it seems difficult  to overcome the issues related to public libraries.  However, there are some success stories at the  grassroots level that provide us with hope for the  betterment of the situation. 
4.  PARTNERSHIP WITH COMMUNITY 
The idea that public libraries serve as community  information centres has existed for many years now.  The National Policy on Library and Information System  (NAPLIS) Report of 1986 specifically recommended  that village libraries should serve as local information  centres, bringing areas such as public health, adult  education, and local self-government under the  
18 
same umbrella. But it was never implemented due  to a host of political and bureaucratic reasons. One  of the key recommendations by the NKC-Working  Group on Libraries is also to encourage community  participation in library management. The following  case gives an excellent example of community  ‘partnership’ and not just ‘participation.’ 
‘Rural Education and Development (READ) Global’  is an organisation that is using libraries as a means  of empowering rural communities. ‘READ Global’  brings together education, enterprise and community  development to create lasting social change in rural  South Asia. They essentially partner with villages to  build community library and resource centres (READ  Centres) that include a fully stocked library and  computer room, as well as programmes on topics  ranging from literacy and women's empowerment  to livelihood skills and health education. Each  READ centre is paired with a for-profit enterprise  that generates income to sustain the centre in the  long-run. 
It was started in 2008 in India and is currently  operating in Haryana, Rajasthan, Manipur, and West  Bengal. Six centres have been set up that reach out  to 97470 rural villagers. Ten for-profit enterprises  are functioning from a gooseberry processing facility  that produces iron-rich juices and candies that  reduce anaemia, to sewing and weaving businesses  where women can earn an income to support their  families.  
‘READ Global’ provides the capital to build and  equip the library and also provides seed money to  start an associated business. The profits from the  business are used to support the library and cover  its expenses. Additional revenue is funnelled back  into the community for other social needs such as  health clinics or infrastructure. In this way, ‘READ’  is affecting a community’s educational, economic,  and social development and is ensuring the long  term use and care for the library. 
READ’s model for building its community libraries  is revolutionary because of its heavy focus on  sustainability and community involvement. 
5.  PARTNERSHIP WITH NON-GOVERNMENT  
ORGANISATIONS 
The non-governmental organisations (NGOs)  sector in India is growing at a fast pace, addressing  a number of issues such as poverty, education,  health, environment, etc. The sector has been  successful in reaching the most remote areas  in the country. The NGOs, thus can function as  intermediaries between government and general  public in the delivery of services. Many NGOs,  especially at the village level, are running libraries.  The following case describes how an organisation  has developed partnerships with various NGOs to  establish school libraries. 

========2========

RAVI AND VIVEK: IMPORTANCE OF PARTNERSHIPS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 
‘Room to Read’ is a global organisation dedicated to  promoting and enabling education through programmes  focused on literacy and gender equality in education.  ‘Room to Read’ India was launched in 2003 with  focus on establishing libraries and building the  capacity of teachers and volunteers to encourage  the habit and joy of reading. They also publish  high-quality, illustrated reading materials for young  readers to respond to the dearth of appropriate  children’s literature, especially in rural India.  
Most of the interventions are concentrated in  government public schools and non-profit alternative  educational centres, but they also support some  local community centres. They work in partnership  with the state governments as well as local NGOs  to implement and monitor the work and promote  long-term sustainability. Currently, they are working in  the following regions: Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,  Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,  Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and Uttarakhand. Around  4970 school libraries have been established and 113  local language titles have been published so far. 
6.  PARTNERSHIP WITH CORPORATE/  
FOUNDATIONS 
To rope in corporate support for the cause of  public libraries, we need to understand the motivation  and expectations of various corporate entities.  corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities are  usually centred around creating a positive impact on  the stakeholders, environment and the communities  in which the company operates. Many companies  use the mode of philanthropy to achieve their CSR  goals; for example donating money to a library that  exists near its establishment. 
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation supports  the cause of public libraries in the US and other  developing countries. They are trying to bridge the  digital divide by incorporating computers, internet  connectivity and technology training to public libraries.  The Access to Learning Award recognises the innovative  efforts of public libraries or similar organisations to  connect people to information through free-access  to computers and internet. 
A similar approach by Indian corporate houses  could boost the development of public libraries. 
Another approach is public-private partnership  (PPP) where in a private sector company offers  the library services through a contract.  
‘Just Books’ CLC is a new generation community  library chain that provides access to a network of  neighbourhood libraries. It was started in 2008 and  currently, has 55 outlets in various cities in India.  The business model is a franchisee system, with  a 50:50 ownership pattern.  The franchisee looks  after the procurement of space and day-to-day  operations, while ‘Just Books’ owns and operates  the software. Each of the outlets provides a perfect  
ambience for reading along with technological inputs  (RFID) for self-service. Each ‘Just Books’ library has  approximately 10,000 books and is approximately  1,200-1,400 square feet. The demand for these  libraries is growing by the day. The franchise model  of ‘Just Books’ CLC can be adopted to open new  public libraries.  
7.  CHALLENGES TO BUILD SUCCESSFUL  
PARTNERSHIPS 
While it is easy to mention about the value of  partnership and its role in the development of public  libraries, it is not as simple to put it in practice.  There are a number of challenges that need to  be considered, to come up with a realistic plan. Partnering with the community requires dedication,  imagination, initiative and resourcefulness on the  part of the librarians/authorities to make library  an ideal public service institution. To replace the  existing apathy and inertia among librarians, the  service conditions of the library professionals needs  to be improved. Also, concerted efforts by the  government to employ organisation development  inputs will provide the librarians with role clarity  and a roadmap for development. 
No real links between public libraries and NGOs  exist currently. To reach out to people especially in  remote areas where access to libraries is impossible,  NGOs can play a vital role. Libraries can also partner  with NGOs to conduct adult literacy programmes,  health related programmes, etc. But any initiative with  regard to public libraries needs to be implemented  through the State Government. Not all states have  library legislation, the process of implementation will  be uneven between different states. It may dissolve  further due to bureaucracy, political pressures, and  corruption. 
With corporate partnership, the major challenge  will be to maintain the expectations of the corporate,  i.e., the impact of the investment. This can be  considered a boon in disguise as it will prompt the  library staff to improve the services and make it a  dynamic organisation. The PPP model for libraries  may draw criticism from various sections of the  society as it will entail a paid service. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
A library cannot remain a storehouse of books  and publications. It needs to become a dynamic  organisation that caters to the information needs  and also offers services that are relevant for the  community. Thus, the role of libraries and librarians  needs to undergo an enormous change.  
The problems relating to public libraries cannot  be tackled by a single agency as there are diverse  issues in different parts of the country. But partnership  with the community, NGOs, and corporate will certainly  help in the improvement of public libraries.  
19 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
REFERENCES 
1.  National Knowledge Commission. Libraries:  
Gateways to knowledge. 2007.   
2.  Bhattacharjee, R. Public library services in  
India: Systems and deficiencies. Public Libraries  
Section—Country Report: India. IFLA, 2002. 3.  Pyati, Ajit K. Public library revitalisation in India:  
Hopes, challenges and new visions. 2009. 4.  Ngurtinkhuma, R.K. Public library scenario in  
India. 2010. 
5.  Das, A.K. Library advocacy in India in the light of  
education for sustainable development –Perspectives  
of an emerging economy. 2010. 
6.  Singh, Neena & Murthy, Narayana. Library  
legislation & development of library and information  
centers: An Indian scenario some challenges  
and opportunities. 2011. 
7.  Wani, Zahid Ashraf. Development of public  
libraries in India. 2008. 
8. www.readglobal.org 
9. www.roomtoread.org 
10. www.gatesfoundation.org 
11. www.justbooksclc.com 
12. http://franchiseinindia.blogspot.se/2010/07/just- 
books-library-franchise-founder.html 
20 
About the Authors 
Mrs. Bhuvaneshwari Ravi  is currently an independent  consultant working in the areas of EHS management  systems, embedding EHS culture in organisations,  training and development, and sustainability reporting.  She holds a masters degree in Chemical Engineering  and a Diploma in Learning & Development and  Managing Organizational Knowledge, CIPD, UK.  She is trained in ISO-14001 systems; and is a  qualified executive coach accredited by Results  Coaching Systems, Australia. She has experience  in project engineering, corporate planning, corporate  EHS, corporate social responsibility, learning &  development, and talent/performance management.  She is co-founder of Centre for Social Initiative and  Management (CSIM) which is a learning centre for  prospective social entrepreneurs. 
Ms Gayatri Vivek  has worked as Lecturer, SIES  College of Management Studies, Navi Mumbai  coordinating the course Post Graduate Program in  Social Enterprise Management. She was earlier working  with Centre for Social Initiative and Management  (CSIM), Hyderabad as coordinator and trainer. 

========4========

