DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 21-24 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Development of Public Libraries through Public-private Partnership  
in India: Issues and Challenges 
D. Muralidhar and M. Koteswara Rao* MVGR college of Engineering, Vizianagaram-535 005 
E-mail: dmdher@gmail.com 
*University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad-500 046 
E-mail: mk-rao@hotmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The paper describes the concept of public-private partnership (PPP) and examines how it is different  from ‘privatisation’ concept. It examines the present status of public libraries in India and the need for  mobilising support for their improvement. The authors stress the need for implementing the National  Knowledge Commission recommendation for PPP. The paper highlights the role of the public sector and  private ﬁ  rms in developing public libraries through the PPP model. At the end suggestions were made  on how to implementation the model for the development of public libraries. 
Keywords: Public libraries, National Knowledge Commission, public-private-partnership 
1. INTRODUCTION 
India is one among the fast growing economies  witnessing economic growth. The benefits of this  growth are unevenly distributed among the general  population. Without considering the human needs,  economic growth cannot be sustainable in the  long-term. A major reason for India’s poverty is  the government’s failure in providing basic services  such as education to the poor even 60 years after  the Independence. One way to reduce these gaps  and inequities is to reinvest in improved public  infrastructure, such as education, information, and  library services.  
With this goal in mind Dr Manmohan Singh, the  Prime Minister of India has created the National  Knowledge Commission (NKC) to facilitate the  development of a more equitable knowledge society.  The NKC developed 10 recommendations for the  improvement of libraries in India.  
While public libraries in India have been recognised  for their potential to be local information and learning  centres for the deprived masses, their neglect is a  major point of concern. The key recommendation of  the commission is to encourage greater community  participation in library management so that libraries  become community–based information systems.  While earlier committees and commissions have  investigated the roles of public libraries in providing  community information services, such as the National  Received 28 November 2012, online published 21 January 2013 
Policy on Library and Information System (NAPLIS)  in 1986, a new momentum is now growing around  this issue.  
While the non-governmental organisations  (NGOs) are focusing on issues like environmental  and women’s rights; the state and corporate firms’  response to the needs of the deprived masses is  not enough.  
2.  STATE OF INDIAN PUBLIC LIBRARIES 
The concept of public library in India has its  origins in the British period. Libraries existed in  India since ancient times, serving as repositories  of knowledge in the King’s courts, temples, and  universities. The development of public libraries in  the country started in the post–independence period,  with the introduction of Madras Public Library Act  in 1948 for providing public library service. 
Dr S.R. Ranganathan, father of Library Science,  succeeded in the passage of this legislation and he  was very keen about the development of effective  public library system in India to reach all citizens  of the society. Despite his efforts, the objective  remains unfulfilled even today. Public libraries are  under the jurisdiction of state governments but  currently only 19 states in the country have formal  library legislation. Management of public libraries is  under the State’s purview, the Indian government  providing funds through the Raja Rammohun Roy  
21 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
Library Foundation (RRRLF), for the development  of public libraries in the rural areas. The RRRLF  works in cooperation with state governments and  non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to extend  public library services in different states of the  country. Public libraries are posed with issues such  as low-literacy levels, limited-access to technology  and sometimes limited-availability of linguistically  relevant reading materials.  
Low levels of adult literacy, less number of  automated systems in well-developed public library  systems, and public libraries still are viewed as  repositories of books, etc. are some of the major  issues faced by public libraries. Only one percent  of all Indian public libraries are computerised and  there is a dearth of suitable reading material in  regional languages like Telugu, Tamil, Kannada,  and Malayalam, etc.  
The benefits of public library include increase  in the volume of printed books, informal education  gains, ICT literacy and delivery of information for the  development of the society. The need for libraries to  transform from collection-oriented to service-oriented  has been felt by many library leaders. In spite of  the recommendations of several commissions on  public libraries development, the challenges and  possibilities for Indian public libraries still remain  the same. Public libraries are not seen as providers  of community information services. 
In the 1970s, public libraries in the US coordinated  with government, community and social service  agencies for providing information and referral  services. The citizens are informed about resources  and programmes for individual and community  empowerment through networking. Public libraries serve  as centres for cultural promotion and preservation for  a country’s rich and diverse cultural heritage. Public  libraries include the enhancement of social capital  for communities. Public libraries also can serve  as intermediaries providing access to government  information.  
Public libraries act as information kiosks which  often provide community information through the  use of ICT. They have the potential to ‘reach the  unreached’ by providing relevant information services  which can support economic and social development.  Developing a wide range of stakeholders in such  types of programmes, as well as effective community  participation and ownership is important. Public  libraries have the potential to take on some of the  services of the community technology programmes  but mechanisms for change and use of technology  is necessary. The transformation of public libraries  through information technology is still taking time;  much effort is needed to conceive libraries as  community technology centres.  
 The Pondicherry Information Village project that  MSSRF conducts with the support of the Canadian  
22 
International Development Research Centre (IDRC)  focuses on community-based development through  information technology. This is focused on community  needs based on a pro-poor, pro-women, and pro- environment model of development. The project  focuses on delivering information to villages through  intranet network. The information is provided by  women volunteers through various village knowledge  centres (VKCs) located in different parts of the union  territory. The information needs are local, specific,  government programmes, healthcare, transportation,  and weather, etc. Potential exists for similar models  of partnership and cooperation in the development  of public libraries in India. 
3. DEFINITION 
Public-private partnership (PPP) provides an  opportunity for private sector participation in financing,  designing, construction and operation and maintenance  of public sector programmes and projects. The time  has come to forge a greater interface between the  public and the private sector in a wide range of  activities in the country. 
The Government of Gujarat succeeded in constructing  community school buildings, private health centres  and private housing more cost-effectively through  PPP. In this regard, India’s Ninth Five Year Plan  explicitly recognised the role of NGO’s and Voluntary  Organisations for social development.  
Involvement of community, family neighborhoods  and voluntary organisations under PPP is observed  to have led to empowerment of citizens. The non- profit agencies in the US today combine the service  role with political activism. 
4.  CONCEPT OF PUBLIC-PRIVATE  
PARTNERSHIP 
The PPP is a mode of implementing government  programmes and schemes in partnership with the  private sector. The term private in PPP encompasses  all non-government agencies such as the corporate  sector, voluntary organizations, self-help groups,  partnership firms, individuals and community-based  organisations. The PPP, moreover, subsumes all the  objectives of the service being provided earlier by  the government, and is not intended to compromise  on them.  
Essentially, the shift in emphasis is from  delivering services directly, to service management  and coordination. The roles and responsibilities of  the partners may vary from sector to sector.  
5. PRIVATISATION AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE  
PARTNERSHIP 
The key differences between PPP and privatisation  may be summarised as follows: 
Responsibility : Under privatisation the responsibility  for delivery and funding a particular service rests  

========2========

MURALIDHAR AND RAO.: DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES THROUGH PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN INDIA 
with the private sector. The PPP, on the other  hand, involves full retention of responsibility by the  government for providing the service. 
Ownership: While ownership rights under privatisation  are sold to the private sector along with associated  benefits and costs, PPP may continue to retain the  legal ownership of assets by the public sector. Nature of Service: While nature and scope of  service under privatisation is determined by the  private provider, under PPP the nature and scope  of service is contractually determined between the  two parties. 
Risk and Reward: Under privatisation all the risks  inherent in the business rest with the private sector.  Under PPP, risks and rewards are shared between  the government (public) and the private sector. 
The use of partnership exploded in the 1980’s -  operation of public schools, Adopt-a-Park programme  in Dallas, USA did the same with libraries.       
6.  NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE COMMISSION  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
The National Knowledge Commission’s  recommendations are meant to encourage PPP in  the development of library and information services.  It describes the benefits and roles of libraries,  “Libraries have a recognised social function in making  knowledge publicly available to all. They serve as  local centres of information and learning, and are  local gateways to national and global knowledge.”  Libraries as information and learning centres are  main focus of the report.  
7.  ROLE OF PPP IN PUBLIC LIBRARY  
DEVELOPMENT 
A national census of libraries is needed to  assess the present condition of libraries and the  precise support needed by them. 
Financial, technical, and infrastructural support  is needed from organisations and private agencies  for establishing and modernising libraries, information  centres, knowledge centres and such other activities  those are essential for the development of a knowledge  society in the country. 
There is a need for the establishment of a  National Commission on Libraries to promote a  healthy library scenario in the country and remove  all types of barriers that exist today in the proper  functioning of libraries. Established in 1892, the  JN Tata endowment scheme helps for education  and other projects in the society by spending  Rs 1.50 billion so far. Tata’s started projects for  the development of society, and came forward to  establish public and rural libraries under the PPP  model with the concerned state governments. It  will be a big boost to the public libraries. The PPP  projects have been implemented in other sectors  like power, construction and airports, etc. Similarly,  
it can be extended for the establishment of public  libraries and the concerned Governments have to  take initiative in this direction. 
The Infosys software company, Bangalore  undertakes the largest rural education programmes  in the country by donating books in Orissa and  southern states under its ‘Library for Every Rural  School’ project. The Foundation has set up more  than 10,150 libraries in rural government schools  providing various subject books to the students  of all age groups. It has set up libraries in Hubli  and Bangalore, which can be accessed by under- privileged students in medicine and engineering  for their study. 
Few organisations succeeded and yet they have  to work for the development of public libraries through  PPP. Most of the Public sector organisations and  private firms have to come forward and initiate action  for the development of public libraries in the country  through PPP model. The public sector organisations  like Visakha Steel Plant, SAIL, Visakhapatnam Port  Trust, HPCL, NTPC, IOCL, MMTC, and private  organisations like Infosys, Wipro, TCS, GMR and  BHPV should come forward to implement PPP  models for the development of public libraries  in India. The type of agreements between public  libraries and the coordinated organisations will be  finalised as per the bidding or other type of mutually  agreed terms and conditions. These are not meant  for profit motto type and hence the library projects  must be considered to develop knowledge society,  to increase literacy rates of the citizens and GDP  of the nation. 
8. SUGGESTIONS 
Basic library infrastructure exists in many parts  of India but libraries are not being considered for  Government. Information providers. Partnerships  between libraries and the government in delivering  a range of traditional and non–traditional information  services can be effective and government to think  in this direction for the development of public  library services.  
Government policy-makers should think of  libraries beyond the usual ‘book lending activity’  and consider them as knowledge gateways, which  would enable the society to become a knowledge  society. Numerous domestic and international NGOs  that exist today are concerned with public library  development for partnership between state-funded  public libraries and NGO-supported libraries and  information centres and the Government encourage  such type of organisation to work the development  through PPP. 
Revitalisation of India’s public libraries implemented  at the state-level, with state governments having  the ultimate decision–making authority with regard  to library development and all states have to come  
23 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
forward to develop public libraries through PPP  model in coordination with different agencies that  are interested in this activity.  
The implementation of library legislation has  been uneven between different states in India.  A general lack of faith in public governance also  plagues the attempt to provide public services  through library legislation. With new PPP model, if  adopted by all the states, the public libraries can  regain their past glory.  
The role of public libraries in India is still  misunderstood and hence, they remain underdeveloped.  Libraries need to be thought of as ‘knowledge  centres’ rather than mere storehouses for books. If  the library is truly a growing organism as stated by  Dr S.R. Ranganathan, then Indian public libraries  need to embody this dynamic principle6.  
The issue of funding public libraries in most  countries is always a concern, and same is the case  with India. A greater investment in libraries can go  a long way in meeting the basic literacy and social  development goals through the PPP approach. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Arunachalam, Subbhaiah. Reaching the unreached:  
How can we use information and communication  
technologies to empower the rural poor in the  
developing world through enhanced access to  
relevant information? J. Inf. Sci.,  2002,  28(6),  
513-22. 
2.  Ghosh, M. The public library system in India:  
Challenges and opportunities. Library Review ,  
2005, 54(3), 180-91. 
3.  Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource  
Development. National policy on library and  
information systems—A presentation. Government  
of India, New Delhi. 1986. 
4.  National Knowledge Commission. Report to the  
nation 2007. Government of India, New Delhi.  
2008. 
5.  National Knowledge Commission. Libraries,  
gateways to knowledge: A roadmap for revitalization. 
24 
Government of India, New Delhi, 2007. 6.  Ranganathan, S.R. The five laws of library science.  
Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 1963. 7.  Seth, R. Storehouses of knowledge to educate  
the masses: The Indian library system-a present  
day scenario. Frankfurter Buchmesse , 2006,  
58(9), 622-28. 
About the authors 
Mr D. Muralidhar  is currently working as Librarian,  MVGR College of Engineering, Vizianagaram. He  holds MSc (Mathematics); MA (Philosophy); BEd;  BLISc, and ADISc., from Documentation Research  and Training Centre (DRTC), Bangalore. He is a  NET qualified research fellow doing PhD on ‘Use of  Library Software in different libraries’. He specialises  in management of libraries; technical documentation;  microfilming; industrial photography; bar-coding;  e-journals; and digital libraries. his research interests  are library automation, electronic journals, and digital  libraries. He has published 12 journal articles and  participated in various conferences and seminars.  He is a member of several Library associations and  the Secretary, Society for the Promotion of Public  Libraries, Visakhapatnam.  
Mr M. Koteswara Rao  is a former Librarian, University  of Hyderabad. Prior to this he worked at the Indian  Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai; and United  Nations Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of  Technology, Bangalore. He holds an ADISc, DRTC,  Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore, and a PhD from  University of Madras, Chennai. His current research  interests include library automation software, web  design & web-based information services, on-line  information systems, e-journals, digital libraries,  scholarly communication and scientometrics. He  has published more than 20 papers and participated  in various national and International conferences  and seminars. He has visited Singapore, Thailand,  Indonesia, Republic of China and USA.  

========4========

