DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 25-28 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Revitalisation of Public Library System in India: A CSR Perspective 
N. Sambasiva Rao and N. Nirmala Kumari* 
Dept. of Commerce and Management Studies, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam-530 003 
E-mail: nadendlasr@gmail.com 
*Governement Degree College, Pathapatnam-532 213, Srikakulam District, Andhra Pradesh 
E-mail: nimmu14@yahoo.co.in 
ABSTRACT 
In the present day globalised world, information and its accessibility place a vital role for the  development of human competency and also helps the economy in different ways.  The information era with  its electronic facilities will come with many challenges in all the sectors of development since information  is the base for all developmental activities. Libraries and information centres and librarians will have  their share of challenges and risks to partake in this major activity. To bring about this change, India will  need to have a vision for the 3rd  millennium and each sector will have to adopt the latest developments  in information technology. This includes change in the functions of the library to make it service-oriented  rather than collection of building oriented; preservation and access may be considered as vital; marketing  of information and service development of library professionals to cope with new environment and to deal  with the management techniques for effective functioning of library system. To strengthen the system,  continuous help and support is required from different angles. The  corporate social responsibility (CSR)  of various companies/sectors is the one of those. The CSR not only helps the general public but also  the company to get good employees for their future recruitment. This article focuses on the importance  of public libraries and help to be extended through CSR funding. 
Keywords: Public library system, corporate social responsibility 
1. INTRODUCTION 
“Libraries have a recognised social function in  making knowledge publicly available to all. They  serve as local centres of information and learning,  and are local gateways to national and global  knowledge.” - National Knowledge Commission 
“I’d be happy if I could think that the role of  the library was sustained and even enhanced in  the age of the computer.”- Bill Gates 
The ability of a nation to use and create knowledge  as capital determines its capacity to empower and  enable its citizens by increasing human capabilities.  India today stands poised to reap the benefits of a  rapidly growing economy and a major demographic  advantage that will see the country having the largest  resource of young people in the world in the next  few decades. The challenge and the opportunity  are to galvanise India’s potential into a dynamic  resource: an informed, enlightened and capable  young Indian citizenry would not only enhance and  enrich the processes of national development, but  could be a positive force in the world. In the words  of Dr Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India,  “The time has come to create a second wave of  
Received 14 December 2012, online published 21 January 2013 
institution building, and of excellence, in the fields  of education, research and capability building so  that we are better prepared for the 21st century.” 
A library is not a building stacked with books- it is a repository and source of information and  ideas, a place for learning and enquiry, and for  the generation of thought and the creation of new  knowledge. Public libraries, in particular, have the  potential to bridge the gap between the ‘information  poor’ and the ‘information rich’ by ensuring that  people from all sectors and settings of society and  the economy across India have easy access to  knowledge they seek. Public libraries also considered  as community information centres providing access  at local-level to a wide range of knowledge and  information for the benefit of the individual and  society as a whole. Historically, the public library had  four functions-Informative, educational, recreational,  and cultural. These functions help to strengthen  the human kind1.                           
The main recommendations of the National  Knowledge Commission2  on libraries are:      (a)  Set up a national mission on libraries  (b)  Prepare a national census of all libraries 
25 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
(c)  Revamp library and information science education,  
training and research facilities (Indian Institute  
of Library and Information Science)  
(d)  Re-assess staffing of libraries  
(e)  Set up a central library fund  
(f)  Modernise library management  
(g) Encourage greater community participation in  
library management  
(h)  Promote information communication technology  
(ICT) applications in all libraries  
(i)  Facilitate donation and maintenance of private  
collections  
(j)  Encourage public-private partnerships in development  
of library and information services 
With the internet reshaping so many aspects of  our lives, it has become common for prognosticators  to speculate about the ultimate demise of all sorts  of institutions that many of us have come to take  for granted. But still there is a future for public  libraries in the internet age. Even with the vast  and growing amount of information available on the  internet and more competition for public funding,  Americans say that public libraries will continue to  play a vital role in communities. During the past  several decades, there has been a major effort to  upgrade technology and Internet access to bring the  benefits of these new technologies to all citizens,  regardless of economic circumstances. This has  added further to public approval of the all important  contributions of libraries3. 
2.  LIBRARIES FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW 
When people think about their expectations  of libraries today, they generally think about the  traditional services that most libraries carry out so  well. Topping the public’s list of priorities is that  the basic services they have come to expect from  libraries remain free of charge to the public. They  also expect libraries to have enough current books  for children; numerous reference materials; and  availability of friendly, and knowledgeable librarians.  Libraries should offer convenient reading hours  and special programmes for children, and they  should have well-maintained buildings along with  books and information that are organised for easy  self-service. The top-ten list of public priorities for  libraries also includes making available safe and  productive gathering places for teenagers, being  open on evenings and weekends, and having plenty  of current books for adults. 
Public libraries arose worldwide along with  growth in education, literacy, and publications.  Every country has its own public library history with  influential leaders. Monarchs, wealthy people, and  philanthropists have all made a contribution to society  
26 
in the form of public library development. India is  no exception. Libraries were established in ancient  India, mainly, by the patronage extended by emperors,  major capitalists, and scholars. Indian emperors and  kings supported scholars and scholarship. There  is evidence of well-developed libraries even in the  sixth century AD. The famous Nalanda University  in Bihar had its own magnificent library with a  massive collection of manuscripts covering the  universe of knowledge. Admission to library was  restricted to scholars. Other ancient universities,  such as Taxila and Vikramashila, also had valuable  libraries. Muslim influence in India during the 13th  century AD marked the dawn of another era of  learning and scholarship. The Mughal period gave  a further stimulus to the growth of libraries. Mughal  rulers attached considerable importance to libraries  and appointed scholars as librarians. The Mughal  emperors were patrons of art and literature. In the  period of Emperor Babur, Humayun, and Akbar,  many new libraries were established and existing  ones further developed. Mughal libraries featured  magnificent buildings, rare manuscripts, and scholar  librarians. The names of Maharaja Sawai Man Singh  of Jaipur and Maharaja Ranjit Singh of Punjab will  be remembered with appreciation in the history of  library services in India. The Maharaja of Tanjuar  started the famous Saraswati Mahal Library in 17th  century AD. It remains a unique institution in its  nature of collection and services4. 
3.  PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND ECONOMIC  
DEVELOPMENT 
The public libraries play their role in economic  development through their informative function  which leads to a knowledge society. The role of  the information provider to the public has been  the resulting solution to the problem, with libraries  aiming to prove themselves as vital, necessary and  important providers of services. There are many  views regarding how a public library can contribute  towards economic development. Some believe its  role is to serve as a lifelong learning institution5.  McClure, et al .6  believe that its role is to provide  information literacy. Lozano7  believes that the library’s  role is to provide information about its community.  Businesses and organisations also need information.  Most large businesses have their own libraries while  small businesses often donot. Seeing the glorious  past and present conditions of the public libraries,  definitely there is a need to revitalise the system  for the betterment of the future generations. In  this process, government can not alone do things  better but there is a need to involve each and  every citizen in his might to help to strengthen the  library system.  Particularly, the corporate sector  can do better through its philanthropic attitude.  Industry has to take care of its surrounding people  

========2========

RAO AND NIRMALA KUMARI: REVITALISATION OF PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM IN INDIA 
and places and activities for smooth functioning of  its core activities. There is strong interdependency  between industry and environment.  In this context,  the corporate world has to have special attention  through its CSR activity on these public libraries  being knowledge centers.   
4.  CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) is becoming  an increasingly important activity to businesses  nationally and internationally. As globalisation  accelerates and large corporations serve as global  providers, these corporations have progressively  recognised the benefits of providing CSR programmes  in their various locations. The CSR activities are  now being undertaken throughout the globe. The  term is often used interchangeably for other terms  such as corporate citizenship and is also linked to  the concept of triple bottom-line reporting (TBL),  which is used as a framework for measuring an  organisation’s performance against economic, social  and environmental parameters. The rationale for CSR  has been articulated in a number of ways. In essence  it is about building sustainable businesses, which need  healthy economies, markets and communities.    
The CSR also called corporate conscience,  corporate citizenship, social performance, or sustainable  responsible business/responsible business) is a  form of corporate self-regulation integrated into a  business model8. The CSR policy functions as a built- in, self-regulating mechanism whereby a business  monitors and ensures its active compliance with the  spirit of the law, ethical standards, and international  norms. The term ‘corporate social responsibility’  came into common use in the late 1960s and early  1970s after many multinational corporations formed  the term stakeholder, meaning those on whom an  organisation's activities have an impact. 
The CSR is not new to India; companies like  Tata and Birla have been imbibing the case for  social good in their operations for decades-long  before CSR become a popular cause. Inspite of  having such life-size successful examples, the  CSR in India is in a very nascent stage. It is  still one of the least understood initiatives in the  Indian development sector. It is followed by a  handful of public companies as dictated by the  very basis of their existence, and by a few private  companies, with international shareholding as this  is the practice followed by them in their respective  foreign country.  
Thus, the situation is far from perfect as the  emphasis is not on social good but rather on a policy  that needs to be implemented. Proponents argue that  corporations make more long-term profits by operating  with a perspective, while critics argue that CSR  distracts from the economic role of businesses. Others  argue CSR is merely window-dressing, or an attempt  
to pre-empt the role of governments as a watchdog  over powerful multinational corporations. 
A lack of understanding, inadequately trained  personnel, non-availability of authentic data and  specific information on the kinds of CSR activities,  coverage, policy, etc., further adds to the reach  and effectiveness of CSR programmes. But the  situation is changing. The CSR is coming out  of the purview of 'doing social good' and is fast  becoming a 'business necessity'. The 'business case'  for CSR is gaining ground and corporate houses  are realising that 'what is good for workers-their  community, health, and environment is also good  for the business'. 
5. STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVE 
In every company, there are number of stakeholders  for which the company has to satisfy their basic  needs for the well-being of the company. These  stakeholder groups form the basis of success and  failure of the business. Stakeholders both primary  and secondary are individuals or groups that have  interests, rights, or ownership in an organisation and  its activities. Customers, suppliers, employees, and  shareholders are example of primary stakeholder  groups. Each has interest in how an organisation  performs or interacts with them. These stakeholder  groups can benefit from a company’s success and  can be harmed by its mistakes. 
Secondary stakeholders are also important  because they can take action that can damage or  assist the organisation. Secondary stakeholders  include governments (especially through regulatory  agencies), unions, non-governmental organisations  (NGOs), activities, political action groups, and media.  To serve their stakeholders in an ethical and social  manner, more and more organisations are adapting  the model of CSR.  
When an organisation builds ethical and social  elements in its operating philosophy and integrate  them in its business model, it is said to have  possessed a self-regulating mechanism that guides,  monitors, and ensures its adherence to law, ethics,  and norms in carrying out business activities that  ensures the serving of the interest of all external  and internal stakeholders. In other words, the  objective of being socially responsible business is  achieved when its activities meet or exceed the  expectations of all its stakeholders. 
Human beings are considered both as primary  stakeholders as employees and also as secondary  stakeholders as public. Libraries play vital role in  strengthening the skills and competencies of these  citizens by providing right information and guidance  to shape up their future career. In this context, the  corporate world has to consider for the development  of public libraries in addition to their internal libraries.  Management of these libraries is also important in  
27 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
appointing the qualified person to manage these  libraries.  Required latest technology has to be  provided with sufficient funds. Outside good practices  have to be borrowed and implemented effectively. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
India now has become one of the most developing  countries in the world. It spreads in various fields  of knowledge and disseminates its resources to  the world. It has also established public libraries  and community information centers to give and  help local community to acquire information from  various agencies. Public library services have been  expanded to serve the local people, but after 65  years of independence India, public libraries could  not be administered and managed with the clear  mandate of law in many states of India. There is  every need to strengthen this system by using CSR  mode and better management techniques.  
Government has to bring a stringent law for  implementation of funds under CSR. As libraries are  knowledge centers, the government and corporate  world have to a have special consideration by  funding them liberally. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Andrade, A.M.C. & Magalhães, M.H.A. Objetivos  
e funções da biblioteca pública. Revista da  
Escola da Biblioteconomia da UFMG , 1979,  
8(1), 48-59. 
2.  National Knowledge Commission. Libraries-A  
road map for revitalization, 2007. 
3.  Wooden, Ruth A. The future of public libraries in  
28 
an internet age, Wiley Periodicals, Inc. National  
Civic Review , DOI: 10.1002/ncr.153. Wiley Inter  
Science, 2006. www.interscience.wiley.com 4.  Sathikumar, C.S. Public Library Development  
in India. In  Public Library Development,edited  
by R. Raman Nair. Ess Ess Publications, New  
Delhi. 1993. 
5.  Mackenzie, C. Urban public libraries: Helping  
Brisbane to become a smart city. Australian  
Public Lib. Inf. Serv.,  2000,  13(4), 166-69. 6.  McClure, C.R.; Bertot, J.C. & Beachboard,  
J.C. Enhancing the role of public libraries in  
the National information infrastructure. Public  
Libraries,  1996,  35(4), 232-38. 
8.  Lozano, R. La Informació local a les biblioteques  
publiques: una eina per al desenvolupament de  
la comunitat. Métodos de Información,  2002,  
9(51), 44-51.  
9.  Wood, D. Corporate social performance revisited.  
The Acad. of Manag. Rev., 1991, 16(4). 
About the Author 
Dr Nadendla Sambasiva Rao  is working as Professor  in Department of Commerce and Management  Studies, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam. He  holds an MBA and a PhD from Andhra University.  He has published many papers and also written  a couple of books. He has guided 3 PhD and 10  MPhil students. He has organised 8 seminars and  attended more than 30 seminars/conferences. He has  successfully completed an AICTE project-‘Dynamics  of corporate women mangers in India’.  

========4========

