DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 29-31 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives for Promotion of Public Libraries  
P. Vijay Kumar 
Godavari Institute of Engineering and Technology, Rajahmundry, AP 
E-mail: vijaykumar51@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
This article is intended to understand whether the corporate social responsibility initiatives of the  corporates are improving the state of public libraries. it also seeks to understand whether corporates  take initiatives proactively to promote public libraries, how the public and private sectors are lending their  support to the public library movement, what will be the way forward, and opportunities ahead to tap  
CSR resources for developing the public libraries. 
Keywords: Corporate social responsibility, public libraries, public sector, private sector  
1. INTRODUCTION 
“No success or achievement in material terms  is worthwhile unless it serves the needs or interests  of the country and its people." - Mr. J.R.D. Tata 
Way back in early 70’s when I reached my  village after my PG examinations, the only agenda  before me was to prepare for competitive exams.  My village being a remote place even the local  vernacular used to reach only at about a mid day,  leave a side any magazines. One school teacher  advised me to go to a public library in a small  town nearby where newspapers and magazines  suitable for learning general knowledge and General  English.  After 6 months of my first visit to the  public library, I landed in a good job. Such is the  importance of public libraries for the poor people  from the rural areas. 
Public library, by definition, may consist of state,  district, town-level libraries run by central and state  governments and local bodies. By context, they  may also include libraries attached to government  schools. Extending their coverage and maintenance  of such Libraries has become a major problem  to the successive Governments due to budgetary  constraints.Though, establishment and maintenance of  public libraries is the duty of the government, some  corporates both in the public and private sectors have  taken on themselves the responsibility of spreading  of education, and as a corollary they have been  doing a great service to the public libraries, by way  of their corporate social responsibility (CSR). 
The CSR refers to the involvement of corporates  in socio-economic development programmes. Generally,  such initiatives are taken in the vicinity of the  
Received 14 December 2012, online published 21 January 2013 
area in which they operate, and sometimes at  other places also depending on the cause they  support.  The corporates undertake a broad variety  of activities covering health, education, environment,  sports, music and culture etc. Many organisation  give priority to health and education. In the area  of education, they support/assist in construction of  school buildings, providing furniture and supply of  books for the libraries, etc. There are no separate  initiatives observed for the purpose of promotion  and development of public libraries. 
2.  CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  
MODELS  
The CSR models followed by the corporates in  general, in promotion and development of public  libraries can be classified as follows:  
(a) Establishment of full-fledged libraries in govt  
schools. 
(b)  Construction of a building for housing a  
library. 
(c)  Supply of books or grant for purchase of  
books. 
(d)  Assisting a library renovation. 
3.  CSR INITIATIVES IN PRIVATE SECTOR 
Major private sector organisations like TATAs,  Birlas, Godrej, etc. have established schools at  various places and have provided excellent libraries  in them. They also have provided libraries in areas  around their work places. The new generation  companies like Infosys, Wipro, etc., are also doing  a tremendous job in promoting education along  
29 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
with providing books to the libraries.  Some IT  companies like Microsoft, HP, Zensar, and Cadence,  gift books to schools.   
The Infosys Foundation partners with schools in  rural India to enhance education and library facilities.  It has embarked on the 'Library for Every Rural  School' programme to donate books in Karnataka,  Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, and Kerala. It has set up  35,000 school libraries, the largest rural education  programme in India. A book that simplifies computer  education for rural areas has been published in  Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. In 2010-11, the Infosys  Foundation supplied books to Door Step school,  a mobile school that provides free education to  underprivileged children in Pune and renovated  the library of Gokhale Institute of Public Affairs for  research students. In 2009-10, it supplied books to  book banks accessed by poor students in Andhra  Pradesh and Karnataka. In 2008-2009, it donated  personal computers to schools and the Delhi Library,  and donated furniture to colleges and libraries in  rural areas of Karnataka and Maharashtra1. 
The Ajim Premji Foundation of WIPRO, through  its Ajim Premji University and demonstration schools  initiatives, is making efforts to provide good quality  education. As of June 2012, demonstration schools  are operational at 6 places in Uttarakhand, Rajasthan,  Karnataka, and Chattisgarh. It intends to enhance the  number to 100 schools by 2016. Quality education  would obviously include quality libraries too. The  Foundation include libraries of the Azim Premji  University Library, Bangalore; Institute of Assessment  and Accreditation library in New Delhi; Azim Premji  Foundation's State and District Institutes of Learning  and Development Libraries, Jaipur, Sirohi, Tonk,  Dehradun, Uttarkashi, Udhamsinghnagar, Dhamtari,  Puducherry, and Yadgir2. 
The Coca-Cola India, on 1st June 2012, along  with cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar and campaign  partners NDTV, UN-Habitat, Charities Aid Foundation  (CAF), Tata Teleservices, Pearson Foundation and  Sulabh International, celebrated the completion of  the 100th school under the initiative. The 'Support  My School' initiative, launched in January 2011,  focuses on providing sustainable sanitation facilities,  infrastructural development, and improved access  to water, libraries and computer centres along with  teacher training in government schools across the  country. The revitalisation of the first 100 schools  touched the lives of over 43,000 children in 10  states with the support of its campaign partners3. 
4.  CSR INITIATIVES IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR 
In the public sector, the present day Maharatnas,  Navaratnas and Miniratnas have all contributed  enormously for promotion of education, there by  promoting and development of libraries. One of the  methods followed initially by the public sectors for  
30 
social development is adoption of villages. In the  adopted villages they provide necessary facilities  including libraries in the panchayats. The panchayats  of course have to maintain the day-to-day running  of the library. Libraries were not established in  such interior places, where no one would have  thought of establishing a library nor have resource  to establish one. Listing out libraries provided in  such adopted villages will be a herculean task. This  also true with many private sector companies also  who have adopted the villages.  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), India’s  exploration and production major, is a Maharatna  public sector company. It is the highest profit making  Company in India for several consecutive years.  The ONGC has committed to spend 2 per cent of  its profit before tax on CSR activities, making it  the organisation that spends the largest amount of  money on CSR in the country. The ONGC has its  own CSR policy, for more than 20 years, i.e., much  before the Government issued guidelines to PSUs to  formulate a CSR policy of their own. The ONGC is  present across the country. Present study is limited  to one of its work centres at Rajahmundry.   
The Rajahmundry asset of ONGC is functioning  in the districts of East Godavari, West Godavari, and  Krishna Districts of Andhra Pradesh. The Rajahmundry  Asset responds very positively to the requests of the  local people in many ways in the areas of education,  health, local development, entrepreneurship, women  empowerment, etc., and had spent an amount of  Rs. 285 lakh, in 2010-11. 
Education is an important area which is promoted  by ONGC. Under this head, grants are given for  construction of class rooms, furniture, compound  wall, fans, lighting, drinking water, school uniform,  toilets, games items, etc. ONGC also provides books  to libraries in schools, upon their specific request.  In the last ten years only about 30 schools in East  and West Godavari Districts of AP have approached  ONGC and obtained support for library-related  activity. In addition to the schools, The Gautami  Library, a public library at Rajahmundry was also  supported by ONGC for preserving the old classics  in the library. 
Of late, it was observed that the proposals  received by the ONGC are mainly for provision of  computer-related items for the schools and the requests  for library-related activity are minimal. Perhaps the  digital revolution could be the reason. 
5.  THE WAY FORWARD 
The public libraries, generally maintain a low  profile. They look mainly towards government for  their funding rather than tapping other available  resources. Now a day, the Government has made it  mandatory to all public sector companies to spend  2 per cent of their profits. Even private sector is  

========2========

VIJAY KUMAR: CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY INITIATIVES FOR PROMOTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 
being asked to increase their expenditure on CSR,  and an amendment to the Companies Act is also  on the anvil. Taking this as an opportunity, the  concerned authorities need to come out of the  bureaucratic mindset, change their attitude and  start approaching the organisations, officially, and  seek their involvement in the development of the  public library movement. 
NGOs may also utilise this opportunity and  propose establishment or development of existing  public libraries, and work with CSR wing of Corporates  in promoting public libraries. 
The Government may think of establishing and  maintaining, on a sustainable basis, at least one public  library in every town with a population of 10,000  or more to enable democratisation of information  and access to quality of education at such remote  places. This can be tied up with corporates for  funding under CSR initiatives. This is not to be taken  as that the CSR is to supplement the Government  responsibility, but the fact is that the Government  is short of funds and the corporates are looking for  better opportunities to invest the CSR funds in a  way that promotes greater good and development  of public libraries one such opportunity. 
Due to lack of awareness and paucity of time,  those at the helm of affairs at CSR activity cannot  proactively take up the non-priority areas like the  public libraries. It is for the concerned to generate  awareness and involve them in the process for the  benefit of the public at large. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
The need for the public libraries need not  be overemphasised. They cater to the rural poor  to large extent even today. But their reach need  to be enhances and the quality and number of  the books needs to be improved. CSR activity of  
the corporates can immensely contribute to the  public library movement, provided they are properly  approached and informed of the impact the public  libraries can make on the rural poor but bright  children. In our enthusiasm to develop the public  libraries, we should not lose sight of the fact that,  the present day generation is more tuned to the  digital world, Wi-Fi connectivity, etc. have almost  made lost their touch with the reading habits. Library  enthusiasts also need to inculcate the reading habit  amongst the youngsters to improve the foot falls  in the public libraries. 
REFERENCES 
1. http://www.infosys.com/infosys_foundation/key- 
initiatives/education.asp 
2. http://www.azimpremjifoundation.org/APU 3. http://www.coca-colaindia.com/presscenter/SMS- 
coke_india&Sachin_scores_century.html 4.  Public library scenario in India. http://shodhganga. 
inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/1204/9/09_ch  
apter%202.pdf 
5.  Das, Anup Kumar & Lal, Banwari. Information  
literacy and public libraries in India. http:// 
openmed.nic.in/1278/01/Information_Literacy_ 
Public_Libraries_India.pdf 
About the Author 
Dr P. Vijay Kumar  is currently working as Associate  Professor in Godavari Institute of Engineering and  Technology, Rajahmundry. He holds an MA, LLB and  an MBA degree; and also trained in Sustainability  Reporting from GRI, Amsterdam. He has more than  30 years of industrial experience as HR professional  in NMDC, CCI, and in ONGC as CSR consultant.  He has published more than six articles on CSR in  various national and international journals. 
31 

========3========

