DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 45-54 
 2013, DESIDOC 
From Clay Tablets to Web: Journey of Library Catalogue 
Shiv Kumar 
Panjab University Library, Chandigarh-160 014 
E-mail: shivpuchd@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
The paper discusses the evolution and development of library catalogues from clay tablets to the  web-based catalogue. In the early stages, cataloguing was a local and individual library practice. Each  library constructed its own catalogue, most suited to its purpose.  A series of continuous changes through  the  ages,  in  both,  conventional  and  non-conventional  catalogues,  including  recent  technology  inputs  added  various  features  to  the  present  day  catalogue. Today  the  computerised  catalogue  may  function  like a portal and this function can be exploited infnitely to connect to a variety of data considered useful  for library users. The system designers are trying to adopt new trends in OPACs. Web-based catalogues  initiated Web 2.0 trends like RSS feeds, blogs, downloadable e-media, and instant messages. The facelift  of  the  simple  catalogue  was  eminent  to  keep  up  with  the  versatile  needs  of  the  widely  web-exposed  
library users. 
Keywords: Clay tablets, library catalogue, OPAC, Web-OPAC, historic developments, OPAC features 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Management of accumulated knowledge is carried  out in libraries that are the treasure houses of books,  periodicals,  newspapers,  government  documents,  pictorial reproductions, motion pictures, phonographic  records,  manuscripts,  maps,  and  microforms.  To  provide  speedy  and  easy  access  to  material  in  their  vast  collections,  the  libraries  offer  tools  and  techniques  for  selecting,  locating,  and  retrieving  desired  materials.  
The two main tools are classification and catalogue.  Classification  helps  in  arranging  documents  on  shelves  in  a  systematic  order;  the  catalogue  helps  in organising, identifying, and locating the required  documents.  
The  library  catalogue  is  a  list  and  an  index  to  its  collection  of  books  and  other  materials.  It  enables the user to search documents, locate them  on  shelves,  sections,  libraries,  etc.  The  catalogue  lists the reading materials in a manner that the user  can  seek  and  locate  documents  by  author  name,  titles, subjects, series, and editors which, down the  ages,  were  considered  efficient  tools  for  tabulating  the  vast  library  resources  of  the  library.  
It  is  a  comprehensive  index  that  lists  library  resources  in  one  library  or  group  of  libraries;  arranged  in  a  recognised  order  and  containing  bibliographical  information  (the  name  of  author,  title,  edition,  collaborator,  call  number,  details  of  imprints,  and  collation,  etc.).  
2. HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF  
CATALOGUE 
In  ancient  times,  the  libraries  were  devoted  to  the acquisition and preservation of reading materials  and used some primitive systems of bibliographical  organisation  or  control  to  locate  available  material  according to need. This was a crude inventory lists  which  served  only  as  an  index  for  the  library  and  there were no universal rules. Many attempts were  made  at  standardisation  of  bibliographic  entries  among  library  catalogues  but  primitive  methods  of  bibliographic  control  continued  to  persist.  The  Archaeological Excavations Assurbanipal (1668-626  BC)  revealed  that  bibliographic  information  was  recorded on tablets that served as a crude location  device by recording title, number of tablets, distinct  subdivision,  and  a  location. The Alexandria  Library  had an extensive catalogue compiled by Callimachus  in  the  forms  of  Pinakes  in  250  BC.1-2 
There was scanty information regarding catalogues  and  cataloguing  during  the  Roman  period  even  though  public  and  private  libraries  were  common.  The  Romans  continued  the  methods  established  by  Callimachus,  continued  without  change  during  the  first  seven  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.   The  fall of Rome in the sixth century brought about the  deliberate destruction and dispersion of the private,  public  and  temple  libraries.  The  next  ten  centuries  saw  the  growth  of  libraries  of  the  Western  World  which managed a small collection of manuscripts in  
Received 02 March 2012, online published 21 January 2013             
        
                    

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  1,  JANuARy  2013 
monasteries  established  during  this  period.  These  monasteries  played  a  major  role  in  education  as  they  were  the  primary  places  for  preservation  and  production  in  the  middle  ages  (300-1100  AD).  However, there was little need for library catalogues  and  only  inventory  records  were  maintained.  Post  twelfth  century,  the  typical  catalogue  remained  an  inventory list but libraries of universities began with  the library catalogue of the Sorbonne, university of  Paris in 1289. The 14th  century catalogues included  an  author  index  appended  to  the  inventory  list  which  could  be  conceived  as  a  true  catalogue.  In  1327, the catalogue of the Exeter Cathedral library  was  an  author  catalogue  with  only  one  subject  heading2.  In  the  fifteenth  century,  the  concept  of  the  finding  list  slowly  emerged  with  the  addition  of  author  indexes.  The  16th  century  was  influenced  by  great  bibliographers  like  Gesner,  Treflerus,  and  Maunsell  who  were  framers  of  premier  catalogues.  Maunsell’s  use  of  author’s  surname  was  indicative  of  the  changing  concepts  regarding  names3. 
The 17th  Century brought the Bodleian catalogue,  an  early  form  of  the  first  dictionary  catalogue  with  author and subjects filed in a single alphabetic order  appeared, even though the single entry (author or title  for anonymous) was the rule of the day. It was the  first  printed  catalogue  compiled  by  Thomas  James  in 1605 in the classified form. The beginning of the  19th century  saw  the  emergence  of  the  dictionary  catalogue.  But  some  sorts  of  subject  entries  were  often  visible  in  author  catalogue  with  ‘catch  word’  entries  for  anonymous  works.  In  the  later  half  of  this  century,  various  cataloguing  codes  were  designed.  By  the  end  of  the  century,  the  pattern  of catalogue construction became well-defined with  subject  headings,  main  entry,  classification,  unit  entry,  added  entries  and  adequate  bibliographical  description, which were all well-developed elements.  Co-operative cataloguing was in its beginning stage4.  Thus  the  twentieth  century  may  be  characterised  as  the  period  of  growth  and  development  of  the  catalogue. Co-operative and centralised cataloguing  gained impetus. Computer-based catalogues appeared  during  1960s3. 
End of the late 19th  century also witnessed the  beginning of the card catalogue. The card catalogue  was  first  introduced  (in  1743)  in  France  by  Abbi  Rosier  at  the  Paris  Academy  of  Science  and  at  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,  now  Bibliotheque  Nationale5.  The  early  part  of  the  20th  century  saw  the  card  catalogue  displacing  book  form  catalogues  totally.  Libraries in the uS also began adopting this format4.  Further  development  in  catalogues  came  with  that  contained  the  cataloguing  record  in  compacted  micro-images  and  required  a  microform  reader  for  viewing.  Various  media  existed  for  the  microform  catalogue  like  microfilm  and  microfiche.  This  form  was  directly  produced  from  a  computer  database  
46 
through the computer output microform (COM) method.  The  COM  device  converts  the  digital  information  into  print  displayed  on  microform.  While  libraries  had  been  using  COM  for  book  form  catalogue  production and other technical service applications  since  1960s,  widespread  implementation  of  COM  catalogues  began  only  in  the  mid-1970s5. 3. DEVELOPMENT  OF  CATALOGUE  CODES 
In  the  early  stages,  cataloguing  was  a  local  and individual library practice, whereby each library  constructed  its  own  catalogue  best  suited  to  its  purpose.  Bibliographic  records  were  in  forms  and  styles  peculiar  to  each  library  but  they  lacked  a  system. Gradually, librarians realised the advantages  of co-operation among libraries and standardisation  of practice. The need for codification of cataloguing  practice became apparent. Since the mid-nineteenth  century  saw  a  series  of  cataloguing  codes  which  came into existence. These codes were developed to  standardise practices and improve preceding ones.  The  earlier  codes  were  efforts  of  individuals  while  the later ones were results of corporate undertakings.  The  prominent  developments  of  cataloguing  are  briefly  discussed  in  the  following. 
3.1  Pre-AACR  Era 
The British Museum catalogue was considered  to be the first major cataloguing code developed in  1839; as it influenced cataloguing practices of many  libraries. It was also known as Panizzi’s ninety-one  rules.  It  reflected  the  functions  of  catalogues  as  inventory lists and finding lists. This code had provision  only for author entry arranged alphabetically in which  only  the  main  entry  contained  fairly  bibliographical  details  with  shorter  ‘added  entries’  after  being  prepared  in  the  form  of  simple  cross  references.  Professor Charles Jewett, an American, was greatly  influenced by Panizzi’s code and published a code  of 39 rules named Charles Jewett’s Rules based on  it.  His  discussion  of  subject  headings  represented  the earliest attempt at codifying subject headings as  a practice. Another landmark was the publication of  Cutter’s  Rules  for  a  Dictionary  Catalogue  in  1876  containing  205  rules.  This  was  an  epoch-making  year in the history of cataloguing as the rules were  specially designed for a dictionary catalogue rather  than  any  particular  library.  Cutter  established  the  principles  of  specific  subject  entry  and  the  rules  governing  the  choice  of  subject  heading.  
The American Library Association and British Library  Association  jointly  prepared  the  AA  Code  1908  to  secure greater uniformity in catalogue rules. This was  the first attempt to achieve international co-operation  in the field. The joint code was, however, perfected.  During the Second World War both associations fell  apart.  The  ALA  constituted  a  committee  to  revise  the AA code 1908. It produced the ALA Draft Code  in  1941  in  which  the  174  original  rules  of  the  AA  

========2========

SHIV KuMAR: FROM  C LAy TABLETS TO  W EB: JOuRNEy OF  L IBRARy CATALOGuE 
Code were expanded to 375. Then the ALA revised  the first part of the 1941 draft and published these  ALA  Rules  in  1949.  The  second  part  of  this  draft  was revised by Library of Congress which published  its  own  Rules  for  Descriptive  Cataloguing  in  1949  under  the  title  Library  of  Congress  Descriptive  Cataloguing  1949.  
One of the most significant events in the history  of cataloguing was the International Conference on  Cataloguing  Principles  (ICCP)  known  as  the  ‘Paris  Principles’  held  at  Paris  in  1961.  Delegates  from  53  countries  and  12  international  organisations  participated in the conference. Though many countries  were  greatly  influenced  by  the  ICCP  it  did  not  provide  a  satisfactory  basis  for  agreement  and  several national committees rejected certain clauses  of  the  statement. 
In India, S.R. Ranganathan designed the Classified  Catalogue  Code  (CCC)  and  its  first  edition  was  published  in  1934.  After  five  editions  the  last  was  in  1964.  Each  new  edition  sought  to  improve  the  preceding one. The subject approach was recognised  as dominant in CCC. It had no restriction of language  unlike other codes which were of non-local nature.  The fifth edition appeared with additional rules and  included a feature of economy as it does not cover  the  use  of  imprint  and  collation  in  its  entries. 3.2       AACR  Era 
A  new  code,  the  Anglo-American  Cataloguing  Rules  (AACR),  appeared  in  1967  based  on  Paris  principles and published in two editions, British and  North  American.  It  had  some  variations  between  the  British  and  the  American  texts.  The  Library  of  Congress 1949 was used as the basis of description  for monographs, serials and non-book material. The  logical  arrangement  and  emphasis  on  conditions  of  authorship  rather  than  types  of  works  were  a  landmark  improvement.  Next  step  was  taken  the  International  Meeting  of  Cataloguing  Experts  (IMCE) held in Copenhagen in 1969. Based on this  meeting,  the  International  Standard  Bibliographic  Description  (ISBD)  was  formulated  and  issued  in  1971.  In  1975,  the  General  International  Standard  Bibliographic Description (ISBD (G)) was developed.  The  primary  aim  of  this  code  was  to  prescribe  the  order  of  bibliographic  elements  and  punctuation  marks  on  a  record  to  maintain  uniformity. 
Keeping  in  view  the  ISBDs,  Anglo-American  Cataloguing Code was also modified. A Joint Steering  Committee  for  the  Revision  of  AACR  was  formed  to  redraft  the  AACR  provisions  for  bibliographic  description  to  promote  international  standards.  As  a  result,  the  AACR2  was  published  in  1978.  The  ISBD  (G)  was  incorporated  into  it  as  the  general  framework for bibliographic description. In the course  of application of AACR2 (1978), new developments  occurred  and  the  rules  were  found  inadequate  to  
accommodate new media. Therefore, further revision  to  AACR2  (1978)  it  was  renamed  as  AACR2  R,  1988.  Although  AACR2  R  is  the  result  of  ongoing  revisions,  yet  it  maintains  the  same  principles  and  guidelines  as  AACR2.  Other  changes  are  related  to  material  for  the  blind,  sound  recordings,  music,  etc.,  also  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  greater  conformity in establishing the headings, a few rules  were  also  changed4-7. 
The revisions in AACR continued with amendments  having made in 1998 and 2001 in chapters 3, 9 and  12  along  with  changes  made  to  amend  the  rules  for cartographic materials, electronic resources and  serials  which  were  approved  by  the  Joint  Steering  Committee  in  2001.  The  2002  version  of  AACR2  had  incorporated  the  aforesaid  amendments.  Now  Joint  Steering  Committee  for  revision  of  AACR  became Joint Steering Committee for Development  of  Resource  Description  and  Access  (RDA)  which  is  working  on  a  new  code8. 
4. MODERN  TRENDS 
Libraries had begun using computer applications  for  their  catalogues  in  the  latter  part  of  the  20th  century. Developments in information technology (IT)  revolutionised the catalogue and consequently, the  online  public  access  catalogue  (OPAC)  emerged.  An  improvement  over  OPAC,  the  Web-OPAC,  has  been  in  use  for  quite  some  time  in  the  developed  countries and has also taking place in some libraries  in  India.  
4.1 Online  Public Access  Catalogue  (OPAC) 
One of IT’s greatest accomplishments is transformation  of  the  card  catalogue  to  the  OPAC  to  facilitate  libraries. An OPAC is a library catalogue accessed via  a computer terminal for the benefit of library users.  It  is  a  computerised  catalogue  of  documents  and  reading  materials  available  in  a  library.  It  provides  online  access  to  library’s  catalogue  for  users  and  allows  the  searching  and  retrieval  of  bibliographic  records.  The  OPAC  works  on  several  databases,  but  primarily  on  the  library  catalogue  database. A  catalogue  database  is  the  machine-readable  form  of the card catalogue and is made up of a number  of bibliographic records which comprise a collection  of  data  elements  (author,  title,  publisher,  subject  heading,  etc.)  organised  in  a  systematic  manner  which  represents  bibliographic  items9. 
Harrod’s  Librarian’s  Glossary  and  reference  book  defines  it  as  ‘An  OPAC  is  the  catalogue  of  a  library  or  information  centre  made  available  to  users  online  and  generally  providing  a  variety  of  additional facilities such as loan information, online  reservation, and library news. With the demise of the  card  catalogue,  the  need  for  stressing  the  ‘online  public  access’  part  has  disappeared  and  they  are  now  frequently  just  ‘catalogue’10. 
47 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  1,  JANuARy  2013 
The Online Dictionary for Library and Information  Science  defines,  ‘OPAC  as  an  acronym  for  Online  Public  Access  catalog,  a  database  composed  of  bibliographic  records  describing  the  books  and  other materials owned by a library or library system,  accessible  via  public  terminals  or  workstations  usually  concentrated  near  the  reference  desk  to  make it easy for users to request the assistance of  a trained reference librarian. Most online catalogues  are searchable by author, title, subject, and keywords  and allow users to print, download or export record  to  an  e-mail  account11. 
According  to  Wells12,  the  library  OPAC  has  atleast  three  distinct  functions: 
(a) It  acts  as  a  bibliographic  database  or    an  
electronic  version  of  the  card  catalogue  that  
it  replaced,  acting  as  an  index  for  users  in  
search,  for  example  of  a  particular  book. As  a  
logical extension of this, OPAC increasingly also  
provides  links  to  electronic  texts,  freeing  the  
user  from  the  necessity  of  physically  locating  
material  on  the  library’s  shelves. 
(b) It functions as a ‘portal’ in a way not dissimilar  
to  a  library  homepage,  providing  links  to  non- 
bibliographical  data,  either  relating  to  users  
themselves,  i.e.,  information  about  overdue  
books,  fines,  etc.  or  other  library  information  
like opening hours, etc. In principle, this portal  
function could be extended indefinitely to connect  
to a variety of data considered to be of interest  
to  library  users;  and 
(c) The  OPAC  functions  as  a  promotional  artifact,  
advertising  the  presence  of  the  library  and  
the  services  it  can  provide  and  at  the  same  
time  making  a  statement  of  authority  about  
communicative  links  that  are  supported  and  
facilitated.  OPAC  potentially  has  a  fourth  
function  as  the  management  of  full-text  data  
and management of bibliographic data coverage  
and  the  bibliographic  functions  of  OPAC  itself  
become enabled for full-text searching rather than  
remaining  primarily  an  index.  This  technology  
is  not  widely  implemented  in  current  OPAC  
installations,  but  it  is  on  the  anvil  and  likely  
to  develop12. 
Thus, OPAC is a form of catalogue, a computerised  catalogues  containing  records  of  items  in  a  library  or  information  centre.  It  is  used  for  storage  and  retrieval  of  information  as  it  provide  basic  search,  advanced search, browsing search, Boolean search,  search  through  access  points  such  as  author,  title,  subject, keyword, call number, etc., options. It also  provides  information  on  facilities  like  loan  status,  location,  availability  and  reservation  of  document.  Basically, the OPAC acts as an information retrieval  system. It is not only an information retrieval system  
48 
but  also  a  module  of  an  integrated  library  system.   Therefore,  it  has  more  search  capabilities  and  facilities  than  the  traditional  catalogue. 
4.1.1 Advantages  of  OPAC  
Following are some of the advantages of using  an  OPAC: 
• OPAC offers a greater number of access points  
for  a  single  record; 
• It provides access to a wide coverage of information  
quickly; 
• It provides information which may not be available  
in  the  printed  form; 
• It  connects  to  current  information  since  online  
databases  are  updated  speedily  and  more  
frequently; 
• It  eliminates  need  for  tedious  clerical  work  of  
typing  and  arranging  catalogue  cards; 
• It offers faster search facilities and the capability  
of  Boolean  searching13. 
4.1.2 Historical  Development  of  OPAC 
Computer  applications  firstly  concentrated  on  library  activities  other  than  the  catalogue.  They  were  used  in  libraries  mainly  for  housekeeping  operations  like  circulation  control,  acquisitions  and  serial control. Afterwards began the computerisation of  library catalogues and as a result, OPAC came into  existence. Much had occurred in OPAC development  over  the  last  four  decades.  Bibliographic  records  have  gone  from  brief  (in  some  systems)  to  full,  catalogues have been expanded to become catalogue  and  circulation  systems.  To  facilitate  use,  ‘user- friendly’  interfaces  have  been  built.  Following  are  some  developments  in  OPAC  which  have  taken  place  with  passage  of  time: 
• Sixties  and  early  seventies 
Earlier some libraries in the sixties used computers  for  the  production  of  catalogues.  Eighty  column  punched cards were used to print the catalogues on  paper. The computer systems of that time were not  capable  of  searching  the  catalogue  online.  OPACs  made their appearance in the mid-1970s, while the  history  of  library  automation  can  be  traced  back  to  1954,  the  experiments  with  online  information  retrieval  began  only  in  the  early  sixties.  Seventies  was  a  period  of  trial  and  error  for  the  OPACs  and  large  libraries  in  the  uS  had  still  not  come  to  completely  rely  on  an  online  catalogue7,14. 
  The  concept  of  MARC  (Machine  Readable  Catalogue)  heralded  a  new  era  in  libraries.  MARC  stimulated  the  development  of  library  automation  and information networks. The Library of Congress  launched MARC-I as an experiment when there was  no  established  bibliographic  record  in  machine- readable form. There was no consensus as to which  

========4========

SHIV KuMAR: FROM  C LAy TABLETS TO  W EB: JOuRNEy OF  L IBRARy CATALOGuE 
access points were required to take full advantage  of  an  automated  cataloging  system.  Four  months  before  the  end  of  the  MARC-I  project,  MARC-II  had  been  initiated  after  substantial  evaluation  of  the  MARC-I  format  and  developed  in  1968  as  a  result  of  Anglo-American  cooperation.  The  British  Library  adopted  the  MARC  record  format  in  1967  and  later  on  it  received  increasing  acceptance  all  over  the  world15. 
• Mid-seventies 
By the mid-seventies, computers started affecting  more library processes, particularly circulation control.  The COM was to become a popular way of generating  the  catalogue.  Philip  Bryant  at  the  Bath university  Centre  for  catalogue  research  conducted  early  experiments  on  catalogue  use  for  physical  forms  of  catalogue  (COM  fiche,  COM  film,  card  and  line  printer  paper).  
Cooperative cataloguing systems and resource  sharing started to take place in libraries. The OCLC  (Ohio College Library Centre) was a prime example  of  the  cooperative  system  in  the  uSA.  BLCMP  (Birmingham  Libraries  Cooperative  Mechanisation  Project), SWALCP (South Western Academic Libraries  Co-operative Automation  Project),  LASER  (London  and South Eastern Library Region) and SCOLCAP  (Scottish Libraries Cooperative Automation Project)  were  examples  of  cooperative  systems  in  the  uK.  These  systems  made  catalogue  records  for  participating  libraries  either  in  COM  form  or  on  catalogue  cards16. 
• Late  seventies  and  early  eighties 
Some companies started to develop hardware and  software  packages  or  turnkey  system  for  libraries.  The  co-operative  systems  such  as  BLCMP  and  SWALCP  also  began  to  develop  local  stand-alone  production  which  could  be  linked  into  the  central  database  of  records.  Some  suppliers  of  systems  in  North America  started  to  promote  their  products  in  the  uK  and  Europe.  One  of  them  was  Geac.  It  developed  the  turnkey  circulation  system  for  the  universities  of  Guelph  and  Waterloo  in  Canada  in  1977  and  was  installed  first  time  in  1979  in  a uK  library and went on to become popular in university  libraries  in  the  1980s. 
The ability to search bibliographic records online  came to be referred to as OPAC. The first generation  OPACs allowed only direct searching using the actual  author  or  title  by  matching  the  exact  phrase  to  the  library holding. This meant that they had no ability to  browse the catalogue, and a mistake in the search  term would leave the user bereft of a correct match.  These OPACs had access points similar to those of  a traditional card or COM catalogue. Some OPACs  were  primarily  book-finding  and  locating  tools  and  were fully equipped for known item searching. They  
were phrase-indexed or pre-co-ordinate OPACs with  access points similar to those of  a traditional card  or  COM  catalogue,  i.e.,  author,  title  (as  a  phrase),  class mark or call number (as a phrase) or possibly  subject  headings  (as  a  phrase)17. 
• Mid-eighties  to  late  eighties  
  The  OPACs  became  very  popular  and  were  rapidly available during 1980s. The first demonstration  of OPAC from university of Adelaide held at Biennial  Victorian Association for Library Automation (VALA)  in 1981 boosted many universities and institutes of  technology. By 1985, some public libraries implemented  the  integrated  library  management  systems  like  uRICA,  VTLA,  GEAC,  DOBIS/LIBIS  with  OPAC  modules.  The  European  Library Automation  Group  held  a  meeting  in  1986,  concentrated  on  OPACs.  Around the time when the British Library Research  and  Development  Department  made  a  policy  of  funding  OPAC  research  in  1985. 
A large number of suppliers provided integrated  systems  for  library  management  which  included  modules for various subsystems such as cataloguing,  acquisition,  circulation,  serial  control,  interlibrary  lending  and  also  OPAC  in  the  mid-eighties.  These  were second generation OPACs. Some new suppliers  like  Dynix,  came  into  the  field  with  them  based  on  information  retrieval  techniques  developed  by  online  search  services,  like  Dialog  in  the  1990s.  These  OPACs  were  termed  as  keyword  or  post- co-ordinate  OPACs.  The  words  from  titles,  subject  headings, authors or other names were access points  in  these  types  of  OPACs  and  search  statements  could  be  combined  by  linking  Boolean  operators,  user  did  not  require  an  exact  author  or  title  match  to  find  information.  These  OPACs  had  an  in-built  circulation  system,  which  let  users  know  the  copy  status  of  documents  and  allowed  them  to  place  reserves  or  holds  on  books16.  Keyword  search,  Boolean search and the increased or decreased of  search  results  were  among  the  features  of  second  generation  OPACs.  Interfaces  were  usually  in  two  modes-menu  driven  and  command-driven.  This  made  flexible  interaction  between  the  user  and  OPAC  more  flexible.  In  terms  of  user  assistance,  these provided more options including, help access,  error  messages  and  suggestive  prompts.  Ease  of  use  and  user  friendliness  were  two  major  features  of  this  generation  of  OPACs.18 
Many  OPACs  supported  the  ability  to  restrict  searches  to  specified  record  fields  to  limit  the  results by date, language, place of publication, etc.  and  bibliographic  records  were  also  viewed  in  a  number  of  different  display  formats.  This  initiated  a  trend  towards  making  online  catalogues  more  user-friendly,  and  providing  users  with  as  many  available  options  as  possible.  
49 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  1,  JANuARy  2013 
• 
The  Nineties 
Library management systems witnessed further  evolution  and  development  in  the  1990s.  Some  systems  required  to  install  only  one  manufacture’s  hardware.  A  variety  of  systems  existed  which  required  a  network  to  be  installed  and  some  of  the systems were not compatible with university and  other  networks.  The  market  was  changing  rapidly  and many suppliers differed products which ran on  a wide range of hardware platforms. These systems  made  use  of  low  cost,  high  performance  hardware  as well as standards for communicating systems and  relational  database  management  systems  besides  similar  building-blocks16. 
Further improvements in OPACs were regarded  as  third  generation  OPACs  post  1996.  OPACs  of  this  generation  were  user-friendly,  had  improved  search capabilities with free text search and enriched  database. These OPACs were capable of providing  links  to  external  full-text  indexes,  databases,  and  e-journals  on  the  internet17.  
These  OPACs  enhanced  records  including  additional  and  uncontrolled  access  points  (such  as  chapter  title  in  books)  while  some  of  these  systems  included  partial  match  techniques  instead  of  Boolean  operators.  They  had  the  provision  of  context-dependent  automatic  help  and  used  terms  from  relevant  records  retrieval  to  enhance  the  search  strategy. The  retrieved  sets  displayed  most  relevant  records  first. 
The most recent development that OPACs have  achieved  in  providing  easy  access  to  bibliographic  information was by using GuIs like  Windows. These  systems  may  be  considered  as  fourth  generation  OPACs that have moved up from traditional menu- type  interfaces.  These  OPACs  are  associated  with  client  server  and  graphical  user  interfaces.  They  use  WIMP  (Windows,  icons,  mouse,  and  pointer)  interfaces  to  speed  up  and  simplify  searching.  
Searching  capabilities  in  the  Windows  version  of  OPACs  are  far  more  than  those  found  in  earlier  OPACs. Pointer capabilities allow the user to select  exactly the term he/she is looking for. By using scroll  bars  and  pull-down  menus,  browsing  in  different  indexes is very simple. Boolean operators can also  be used to narrow down or broaden search results.  Such  strings  can  be  constructed  using  the  mouse  alone. A number of OPACs provide the facility to refine  the  search  results  by  year,  language,  and  type  of  publication. Most recent additional advanced feature  of this OPAC is the hypertext function. Through this  function, any word that the user selects or highlights  can  be  used  to  search  all  fields  and  sub-fields  in  all  records  of  the  database.  This  dynamic  feature  helps  the  searcher  navigate  the  database  to  find  more  relevant  documents19. 
50 
4.1.3 OPAC  Features 
Today,  although  a  large  number  of  Integrated  Library  Management  Systems  (ILMS)  are  available  at the international and nation levels, all ILMSs do  not  provide  the  same  features  and  functionalities  in  their  OPACs. There  are  variations  in  features  of  OPACs  of  different  ILMSs.  However,  some  general  features  are: 
• Interactive  Interface 
The  OPACs  have  interfaces  through  which  the  bibliographic information is searched, retrieved and  displayed. Present interfaces are interactive. Interactive  interfaces  allow  communication  between  the  user  and the system in an interactive manner. users can  interact with the system, and alter search methods  and information displays in order to optimise search  results  as  per  their  information  needs.  Graphical  user  interfaces  (GuIs)  have  made  OPACs  more  interactive  and  easier.  
• Types/methods  of  searches 
 Some library softwares offer different types of  searches  namely  simple  or  basic  and  advanced/ expert or complex searches. The term ‘simple/basic  search’ means a search by any word or phrase from  any one bibliographic field of OPAC and ‘advanced/ expert/complex  search’  means  searching  by  more  than one field of the bibliographic elements of OPAC  record.  In  these  types  of  search,  some  OPACs  provide  different  search  methods  such  as  Boolean  logic, truncation, exact searching, word proximity and  phrase  searching.  In  the  use  of  Boolean  operators  such as AND, OR and NOT, user can combine two  or  more  terms  from  title  index,  author  index  and  subject  index  in  a  search  statement. The  user  can  broaden  up  or  narrow  down  their  search  with  the  help  of  Boolean  operator.  
Majority  of  OPACs  permit  the  user  to  broaden  the  search  through  truncation  method.  This  is  a  strategy  to  search  information  by  entering  the  root  part  of  a  word  with  multiple  variants  or  spellings  using  a  symbol  (usually*)  but  the  symbol  varies  in  some softwares. The search word can be truncated  from  both  right  and  left  hand  side.  For  example,  librar*  would  retrieve  library,  libraries,  librarian,  librarians,  etc.  This  search  method  is  generally  used  when  character-by-character  exact  match  does  not  help. 
• Access  points 
In  terms  of  search  capabilities,  OPAC  is  a  significant  departure  from  the  traditional  library  catalogues.  One  of  its  most  interesting  features  over  the  manual  catalogues  is  to  enable  the  user  to  search  the  required  information  in  a  variety  of  ways  that  are  not  available  in  the  traditional  catalogue.  The  OPACs  are  able  to  search  the  

========6========

SHIV KuMAR: FROM  C LAy TABLETS TO  W EB: JOuRNEy OF  L IBRARy CATALOGuE 
catalogue  through  a  greater  number  of  access  points  with  little  information  to  hand: 
(a) Searching  by  author,  title,  call  number,  ISBN,  
series,  etc.  
These  are  basically  string  or  phrase  search  options  and  consequently  the  end-user  has  to  provide  words  from  any  of  these  access  points  in  the search box of OPACs. The facility of combined  search terms using Boolean or other operators may  be  provided. 
(b) Searching  by  subject 
Subject  search  is  a  very  important  search  option. This is general phrase search. The user has  to  provide  either  the  complete  subject  heading  or  the  left  part  of  the  phrase  or  a  search  expression.  The  user  may  use  the  search  terms  or  keywords  from  the  same  subject  headings  list  or  thesaurus  that  was  used  while  the  input  was  prepared  for  the  databases. 
(c) Searching  by  keywords 
Keyword  access  is  a  very  powerful  tool  and  provides more flexibility to user to search the items  for  which  he/she  does  not  have  exact  information.  This  is  very  different  in  the  manual  catalogue.  Keyword search makes the index from all bibliographic  fields such as author, title, series, subject, etc. and  it  is  an  appropriate  alternative  for  the  users  who  cannot match the exact bibliographic information to  the  catalogue.  In  many  OPACs,  there  are  options  for  limiting  keyword  searching  to  fields  such  as  author,  title  and  subject.  The  user  can  enter  one  or  more  keywords  and  these  can  be  combined  using  Boolean  operators.  Other  functions  such  as  truncation  or  limiting  search  options  may  also  be  used  through  it. 
• Browse  searching 
In  this  type  of  searching,  list  of  index  terms  are  presented  in  alphabetical  order  and  searcher  can  navigate  the  database  by  going  forward  or  backward  through  the  desired  index  until  he/she  finds  the  index  term(s)  which  may  lead  him/her  to  relevant records. Through graphical user interface,  this approach helps user to browse different indexes  such  as  author  index,  title  index,  subject  heading,  etc.  This  facility  removes  the  problem  of  search  specification. Browsing search is an effective approach  to searching that requires little effort and knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  user. 
• Search  output  and  bibliographic  display 
Each OPAC has its own capability for manipulation  of  the  search  results.  This  is  usually  a  list  of  bibliographic records retrieved in OPACs with some  holding  information.  The  output  may  be  listed  alphabetically  or  by  publication  date.  There  may  
be provision to print and save the retrieved records,  or  for  the  transmission  of  results  by  e-mail.  OPAC  permits  displaying  bibliographic  information  in  a  variety  of  ways.  OPACs  show  short  display  or  full  display or a combination of both. Most OPACs first  display  a  short  record,  which  can  be  expanded  to  show more details of the documents. Some OPACs  display  card  catalogue  form  or  a  local  format  and  fewer  have  MARC  format  display.  Some  even  use  the  coomon  communication  format  (CCF).  • Search  limits 
Provision  of  search  limit  gives  an  essential  means for making the search meaningful. In terms of  refining search results, OPAC has a great advantage  over  the  traditional  catalogue.  This  option  enables  the  end-user  to  limit/refine  search  results  by  year  of  publication,  types  of  document,  language,  and  location, etc. When many records are retrieved, the  user  may  limit  them  through  the  above  mentioned  options.  Thus,  the  user  can  limit  all  the  search  results  to  the  works  in  a  particular  language,  in  a  particular type of material or all the works published  prior to, during or after a given year. Another feature  of  OPACs  is  to  provide  the  facility  to  user  to  sort  the  search  results  by  the  author,  the  title,  subject  and  the  date  of  publication.  
• Search  strategy 
Search strategy is the planning process to apply  an  effective  search  to  find  relevant  information  on  a  topic  in  a  database.  It  is  a  generalized  set  of  techniques  of  how  to  enter  the  search  into  the  database  or  index.  Some  possible  strategies  include  controlled  vocabulary  searches,  specific  entry searches, browsing, broad to narrow searches,  adjacent  item  browsing,  subject  tracing  searches,  keyword  searches,  and  cross  reference  searches.  The  OPACs  display  the  methods  how  to  make  a  search.    Some  OPACs  display  the  search  strategy  during searching. The OPACs have different search  strategy  tools  such  as  display  of  search  strategy,  provision  of  examples  under  each  type  of  search,  display  of  search  history,  and  sorting  of  records  according  to  relevance. 
• User  assistance/online  help 
It  is  a  valuable  feature  of  OPACs  and  is  a  major advantage over the manual catalogue as the  system can provide assistance to the user to search  documents.  It  is  a  great  tool  to  make  the  user  familiar about OPAC and its facilities. OPACs have  the  ability  to  provide  user  assistance  in  a  variety  of  ways  and  at  different  levels.  Most  OPACs  have  textual  information  on  the  user  screens/interfaces.  Some  OPACs  have  a  provision  of  in-built  help  message  and  procedural  learning/training  to  user  in  order  to  enhance  optimum  use  of  OPACs. 
51 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  1,  JANuARy  2013 
• Status,  holdings  and  location  information  
A  major  feature  of  OPAC  is  to  provide  holding  information  and  to  show  status  and  location  of  the  needed item. OPACs are able to show the status of  the volume and copy of the document and whether  the  document  is  available  on  the  shelf  or  on  loan  or  missing.  These  features  help  the  user  saving  the  time  in  knowing  the  status  and  location  of  the  required  documents. 
• Services/facilities 
The  OPACs  provide  an  interface  with  the  circulation  system  and  a  provision  for  the  options  such as ILL, renewal, reservation, etc. Some OPACs  offer  provision  of  online  mailboxes  for  comments  or  suggestions.  Now,  a  small  number  of  OPACs  also  have  the  facility  to  accommodate  multilingual  documents  of  a  library. 
• Access  and  availability 
unlike  a  manual  system,  the  user  of  OPAC  has  access  to  bibliographic  database,  circulation,  acquisition,  holding  and  location  information  at  the  same  terminal.  unlike  card  catalogue,  OPAC  is  accessible  through  terminals  located  at  different  places  within  and  outside  the  library  via  local  area  networks  (LANs)  and  also  via  wide  area  networks  (WANs).  Thus,  different  users  at  the  same  time  can  search  the  same  record  simultaneously.  In  terms of access to library catalogues, distance has  now  become  irrelevant  as  technology  has  enabled  decentralised bibliographic information access through  the  internet.  
• External  links 
With advances in computer and internet technology,  it is possible now to have access to electronic texts  and  files  stored  anywhere  in  the  world  over  the  network.  Some OPACs provide the ability to link to  electronic  sources  such  as  electronic  journals  and  books  by  using  hypertext  links  of  these  resources.  Different  OPACs  may  be  searched  by  using  the  standard  known  as  Z39.50.  It  is  a  protocol  for  information  search  and  retrieval  in  a  client-server  environment.  
• General  points 
Most of OPACs show the name of library software  and the owning library. Some OPACs display the brief  overview  of  the  library.  Logging-in  and  logging-  off  are usually optional features. Some OPACs explain  the  contents  and  coverage  in  them  and  provide  logging-in and logging-off instructions. The time out  feature  is  also  optional  but  is  a  useful  feature  to  avoid  slow  retrieval  of  information  on  network20-23. 4.2 Web-OPAC 
Web-OPAC or web-based catalogue is an advanced  technological form of OPAC. It is a library catalogue  
52 
on  the  web  or  internet  and  is  the  next  generation  of OPAC. It utilises the world wide web protocol to  deliver  a  library’s  catalogue.  It  is  programmed  to  facilitate the library user to access OPAC remotely.  The concept of Web-OPAC is very well established  and  practiced  successfully  in  developed  countries,  like uSA and uK. In India, however, some libraries  have  begun  providing  web-based  OPAC.  
According  to  Harmsen,  “Web-OPACs  are  an  advanced  generation  of  traditional  OPACs  serving  as  a  gateway  to  the  resources  not  only  held  by  a  particular  library  but  also  to  the  holdings  of  other  linked  to  full-text  resources.”24   Harrod’s  Librarians  Glossary  and  Reference  Book  defines,  Web-OPAC  as,  ‘a  library  OPAC  made  available  to  users  via  a  Web  browser.’10 
According  to  ODLIS,  ‘an  Online  Public Access  Catalogue  (OPAC)  uses  a  graphical  user  interface  (GuI) accessible via the world wide web, as opposed  to  a  text-based  interface  accessible  via  telnet’.11 Thus,  Web-OPACs  are  those  OPACs  which  make  the  searching  of  resources  of  a  library  possible  through  the  world  wide  web.  The  major  advantage  of web-OPACs is that their usage is global, a person  can access them anytime and from anywhere in the  world.  They  perform  all  the  functions  of  OPACs. 4.2.1  Features  of  Web-OPAC 
The  important  features  of  Web-OPAC  are: • The  GuI  is  available  which  is  typically  thought  
of as a combination of windows with pull-down  
or  drop  down  menus,  icons  and  a  pointing  
device such as mouse or trackball to manipulate  
information; 
• The usual features of traditional OPACs such as,  
storing  bibliographical  and    sometimes  full-text  
databases; providing direct access to a library’s  
bibliographical  database  by  means  of  terminal  
or  PC,  providing  instructional  help,  display  of  
search  results  in  readily  understandable  form,  
sometimes  remote  access  from  the  library’s  
location,  information  about  community  events,  
providing  links  to  circulation  files,  reference  
help,  etc.,  providing  search  through  a  variety  
of access points such as author, title, keyword,  
subject,  periodical  title,  series,  call  number,  
ISSN,  or  ISBN,  etc.;  
• The  ability  to  use  hypertext  links  to  facilitate  
navigation  through  bibliographic  records; 
• A  move  towards  emulation  of  the  appearance  
and  search  features  similar  to  those  found  in  
search  engines; 
• Linking  to  full-text  when  available; 
• Ability to help bring a convenience in searching  
of  all  electronic  information  available  through  

========8========

SHIV KuMAR: FROM  C LAy TABLETS TO  W EB: JOuRNEy OF  L IBRARy CATALOGuE 
one interface e.g., catalogue, CD-ROMs, internet  sources,  etc.25 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
To summarise, there have been continuous changes  through  the  ages  in  both  conventional  and  non- conventional catalogues. Conceptually, the objectives  and functions of the catalogues are independent of  its  physical  forms  and  arrangement.  Technology,  however, influenced the way in which the functions are  carried out. Computer and communication technology  have  added  additional  features  in  the  catalogue.  New  developments  in  computer  technology  from  time to time are being incorporated in computerized  catalogue or OPAC/Web-OPAC. Earlier, users have  to  visit  the  library  to  ascertain  the  availability  of  a  particular document; today a user can do it outside  the library. Library catalogues were merely locating  tool  to  find  information,  current  catalogues  are  capable of providing information at the spot without  going  to  library  shelves  because  of  integration  of  electronic  resources  with  it.  
Today, OPAC systems not only serve the purpose  of catalogues but also provide unified or integrated  systems  covering  almost  all  other  library  activities  such  as  acquisition  system,  serial  control  system,  circulation  system,  financial  system,  personnel  management system and so on. Thus, such library  information  systems  are  meant  to  be  bibliographic  information  systems  for  the  users  and  information  systems for library management. OPAC can function  like  a  portal  and  this  function  can  be  exploited  to  extend  indefinitely  to  connect  to  a  variety  of  data  considered to be of interest to library users. System  designers  are  also  adding  new  trends  in  OPACs.  
Web-based  catalogues  have  started  to  apply  Web 2.0 trends like RSS feeds, blogs, downloadable  e-media and instant messages. The RSS feeds and  instant messages may be used as alerting services  for users about new books and other material added  to the library collection. It is hoped that developments  in the library catalogue will continue in line with the  fast advancements in computer and communication  technology.  The  modern  catalogue  should  provide  an  easy  access  approach  and  all  possible  means  to the user for searching the vast library resources.  The  OPACs  have  been  adopted  widely  in  Indian  libraries.  Therefore,  catalogues  should  be  studied  periodically  to  examine  their  effectiveness  and  user  friendliness  from  the  user’s  point  of  view.  The OPACs has come a long way from the tedious  card  catalogue,  yet  there  are  many  more  frontiers  to  be  gained  to  quench  the  very  thirsty  scholars’  quest  for  knowledge.  The  versatile  and  dynamics  evolution  of  the  OPAC  is  a  reflection  of  this  quest  which shall continue to pose challenges and expect  them  to  be  answered. 
REFERENCES 
1. Norriss, D.M. A history of cataloguing and cataloguing  
methods 1100-1850: With an introductory survey  
of  ancient  times.  Graftton,  London,  1939. 2. Johnson,  E.D.  A  history  of  libraries  in  the  
Western  World.  Scarecrow  Press,  New  york,  
1965. 
3. Hanson,  E.R.  &  Daily,  J.E.  Catalogue  and  
cataloguing.  In  Encyclopedia  of  Library  and  
Information Science (Vol. 4), edited by A. Kent  
& H. Lancour. Marcel Dekker, New york, 1974,  
242-99. 
4. Tripathi,  S.M.  Modern  cataloguing: Theory  and  
practice, Ed. 2. Shiva Lal Agarwala & Company,  
Agra,  1982. 
5. Chan,  L.M.  Cataloguing  and  classification:  An  
introduction,  McGraw-Hill,  New york,  1985. 6. Chandrashekara, M. use of catalogues in university  
libraries  in  Karnataka:  An  evaluative  study.  
university of Mysore, Manasagangothi, Mysore,  
2002.  PhD  Thesis.  
7. Taylor,  A.G.  Introduction  to  cataloging  and  
classification, Ed. 7. Libraries unlimited, Littleton,  
Colorado,  1985. 
8. The Joint Steering Committee for Development  
of  RDA.  http://www.rda-jsc.org/index.html 9. Ansari,  M.A.  &  Amita.  Awareness  and  use  of  
OPACs  in  five  Delhi  libraries.  The  Electronic  
Library,  2008, 26(1),  111-29. 
10. Prytherch, R.  Harrod’s Librarians Glossary and  
Reference  Book,  Ed.  10.    Ashgate,  Aldershot,  
2005. 
11. Reitz, J.M. Online Dictionary for Library Information  
Science (ODLIS), 2009, http://lu.com.odlis/odlis_u  
u.cfm  (accessed  on  10 April  2009). 
12. Well, D. What is a library OPACs? The Electronic  
Library,   2007,  25(4),  386-94. 
13. Madhusudhan,  M.  &  Aggarwal,  S.  Web-based  
online  public  access  catalogues  of  IIT  libraries  
in  India:  an  evaluative  study.  Program,   2011,  
45(4),  415-18. 
14. Su, S.-F. Dialogue with an OPAC: How visionary  
was Swanson in 1964. Library Quarterly, 1994,  
64(2),  130-61. 
15. Gernert,  L.  Text  of  cataloguing.  Dominant  
Publishers,  New  Delhi,  2003. 
16. Tedd,  L.  OPACs  through  the  ages.  Library  
Review,   1994,  43(4),  27-37. 
17. Voon, J. LIBR 510 Critical Responses. (No. 1&2),  
2003.  http://www.slais.ubc.ca/people/students/ 
53 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  1,  JANuARy  2013 
resumes/J_Voon/Docs/510critresp.pdf (accessed  
on  22  February  2008)        
18. Matthews,  J.R.  The  online  catalog:  Time  to  
move  beyond  the  boundary  of  a  catalog.  In  
Think  Tank  on  the  Present  and  Future  of  the  Online Catalog, edited by N.V. Pulis. American  
Library Association,  Chicago,  1991,  pp.  5-16. 19. Fattahi, R. Relevance of cataloguing principles  
to  the  online  environment:  An  historical  and  
analytical study. university of New South Wales,  
Sydney, 1997. PhD Thesis. http://profsite.um.ac. 
ir/~fattahi/thesis1.htm. (accessed on 11 September  
2011) 
20. Fattahi,  R.  A  comparison  between  the  online  
catalogues and card catalogue: Some considerations  
for redesigning bibliographic standards.  Library  
Review,   1995,  44(2),  44-58. 
54 
21. Kapoor, K. & Goyal, O.P. Web-based OPACs in  
Indian academic libraries: A functional comparison.  
Program,   2007,  41(3),  291-309. 
22. Babu, R.R. & Tamizhchelvan, M. An investigation  
into the features of OPACs in Tamil Nadu (India).  
Library  Review,   2003,  52(6),  257-67. 
23. Luong, T.D. & Liew, C.L. The evaluation of New  
Zealand  academic  library  OPACs:  A  checklist  
approach. The Electronic Library, 2009, 27(3),  
376-93.  
24. Harmsen, B. Adding value to web OPACs. The  
Electronic  Library,   2000,  8(2),  109-13. 25. Babu, B.R. & O’Brien, A. Web OPAC interfaces:  
An overview. The Electronic Library, 2000, 18(5),  
316-28. 

========10========

