DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 1, January 2013, pp. 63-72 
©  2013, DESIDOC 
Knowledge Access using DL Platform: A TERI Research Library Case Study  
Reeta Sharma and Shantanu Ganguly 
Library & Information Centre, Knowledge Management Division, TERI, Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi-110 003 
E-mail: reetas@teri.res.in; shantanu.ganguly@teri.res.in 
ABSTRACT 
It is a constant endeavour of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)—Library and Information  Centre (LIC) to cater best information services to the users community, which comprises of research  professionals working in the ﬁ  eld of energy, environment and sustainable development. Understanding  the consumer of data, information and knowledge to accomplish the projects, is becoming increasingly  important in relation to the appropriate designing and development of information products and services  ‘tailoring’ to the needs of these users. To cater the services to the research professional’s different service  platforms are used such as, web-enabled information services etc. These services are assessed in terms  of quality, timeliness, reliability and usability.  The paper describes about the TERI digital library initiative  and various digital services provided by TERI Library and the method of analysis opted by TERI Library  professional to assess these services such as google analytic and user survey techniques. The paper  also highlights the result of user satisfaction survey undertaken in the year 2011. The methodology, survey  software, data analysis, result and the action taken in response to the user feedback are highlighted in  
this paper.  
Keywords: TERI, information services, digital libraries, customisation, information products, need  
  assessment, information retrieval, user studies, service quality, user survey 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) is  a dynamic and flexible organisation with a global  vision and a local focus. It was established in 1974  with the purpose of tackling and dealing with the  immense and acute problems that mankind is likely  to face within in the years ahead. The TERI has  created an environment that is enabling, dynamic and  inspiring for the development of solutions to global  problems in the fields of energy, environment and  current patterns of development, which are largely  unsustainable. The Institute has grown substantially  over the years, particularly, since it launched its  own research activities and established a base in  New Delhi, its registered headquarters.  
With staff strength of over 900, drawn from  multidisciplinary and highly specialised fields, offices  and regional centers equipped with state-of-the-art  facilities, and a diverse range of activities, TERI is  the largest developing country institution working to  move human society towards sustainable development.  TERI makes effective use of the latest development  in information technology in both its in-house and  outreach activities1. 
1.1 Library and Information Centre of TERI 
Library and Information Centre of TERI was also  
established in 1974 as documentation and information  centre. TERI-LIC has emerged as a pioneering  research library and information centre in South Asia  on energy, environment, plant biotechnology, forestry,  natural resources, and sustainable development.  The Centre is one of the largest in the region and  most modern in terms of service, infrastructure, and  information technology applications. The TERI-LIC  serves primarily to meet all information needs of  researchers; the Centre also serves energy and  environment professionals worldwide by providing  value-added information services. The LIC has  been organising several conferences, seminars,  workshops in both national and international levels  to promote the digital library developments in India  and abroad. 
1.2 Collection 
TERI library consists of a good number of online  and offline resources in the field of energy, environment,  biotechnology and sustainable development. Currently,  it houses an updated collection with 30,000 books,  reports, reference resources, conference proceedings,  government documents and standards, 475 current  scientific and technical journals, 1050 online journals,  25,000 back volumes, more than 1200 CD-ROMs  and an archive of miscellaneous literature including  pamphlets, reprints, press-clippings and annual reports  
Received 19 March 2012, Revised 27 November 2012, online published 21 January 2013 
63 

========1========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
Figure 1. Staff strength of TERI 
of government, corporate, research, voluntary and  multilateral organisations. Library is also maintaining  separate sections for specialised library on climate  change and Mycorrhiza Information Centre. Besides  these resources, the library professionals are involved  busy in creating new and innovative services keeping  in mind their research requirements.   
1.3 Services 
TERI-LIC services are categorised in three parts  basic, digital, and project-based (Table 1). 1.4 TERI Electronic/Virtual/Digital library 
With the advent of internet technologies, TERI  started its first hop in the year 1999 towards developing  the virtual electronic collection in the areas of energy,  policy economy, environment, plant biosciences,  biodiversity, regulatory issues, urban transport,  etc. Later on, library had undertaken digital library  initiatives and developed a comprehensive digital  library platform that provides rich and structured  content through online, remote, and continuous  access to resources through TERI intranet which  is popularly known as TERInet. 
Table 1. Services provided by TERI-LIC 
1.4.1  About TERInet (Enterprise Information  
Portal) 
The TERINet is a compendium of in-house  knowledge and enables TERI staff access information  on office procedures and systems, online databases  and other sharable in-house information from all  locations of TERI or from any remote place through  Internet. The intranet provides a single window  interface to various applications like KM system,  Oracle-based ERP forms and reports, projects,  CDS/ISIS databases, and MS-Office and Acrobat  documents. TERInet connects more than 700 nodes  distributed across seven floors of the main building  and library block. The main building and library  block are connected through a fiber link and there  are 35 nodes in the library block. There are close  to 10 servers, providing services such as mail,  web, FTP, file, print, DNS, RDBMS, CD-cum-NAS  and customised applications. The Digital library  collection is housed on CD-cum-NAS server. The  main network operating system is provides the login  facility to TERInet. Windows NT and Windows 2000  server are mainly used as application servers.The  
•  •  •  
•  
•  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  
Basic library services Digital library services Project-based services 
News headlines 
Online journals content s 
e-Books/documents 
What’s new in other institutes 
Forthcoming events 
Recent additions 
‘New Article’ alerts 
Online journals 
Databases and portals  
CD-ROM access 
DELNET database  
Theses and dissertations 
Open Access Library Catalogue 
Institute repository in GSDL 
Circulation  
Abstracting services  Reference and referral services  Document delivery  
Reprography  
Literature search  
Inter-library loan 
Book exhibition  
Children’s reading section Seminars, workshops and  conferences 
•  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  
64 
•  •  •  •  •  •  
Business opportunities Events 
Projects/publication updates  of  other institutes  News updates for TERI  websites 
GRIHA 
Sustainable habitat  COSMILE 
AEI 
TERI-NA 
TERI-Europe 

========2========

SHARMA AND GANGULY: KNOWLEDGE ACCESS USING DL PLATFORM 
Figure 2. Network pattern and information ﬂ  ow showing TERInet 
2 
access to TERInet-based resources is through an  intranet and TERInet services program launcher.  Inhouse users mostly use these resources. To  provide access for outside offices and mobile users,  Citrix metaframe software MPLS-VPN link has been  deployed. MPLS VPN is a family of methods for  harnessing the power of multiprotocol label switching  (MPLS) to create virtual private networks (VPNs). The Citrix works on the thin client principle and  delivers the content through a web browser and  creating virtual extranet. The TERI regional offices  (Bangalore, Guwahati, Goa) in India and offices  abroad (TERINA, Washington; TERI-Germany; TERI- Moscow; TERI-Middle-East at Sarjah; TERI-Japan  at Tokyo) are able to access main office intranet  resources using this extranet technology. 
1.4.2  Hardware and Software Used 
Hardware and software used for the electronic  library at TERI1  include a TCP/IP protocol-based  switched network; MS Internet Information Server  version 6.0 also called as web server; network  attached storage (NAS) acting as a file server;  and the Windows 2003 server operating system.  In TERI two basic ideas were taken into account  when considering setting up an electronic library:  To have as much full-length resources in its server  as possible. This meant downloading all relevant  online books and journals and providing access  through electronic library, and (b) other resources  could be accessed through the internet. Later on  GreenStone Digital Library (GSDL) Software was also  used to build the TERI in-house digital repository  and linked with the existing digital library.  
While designing the initial structure of the  electronic library, resources were segregated according  to the following concepts: 
(1) Physical Electronic Library: Here resources  
are available at the TERI server. This helped  
in-house researchers accessing the collection  
through the intranet. Apart from downloaded  
internet resources, other electronic collections  
were also included which were in the TERI  
collection and would continue to remain with  
TERI Electronic Library. 
(2) Virtual Electronic Library: Here links to the  
resources accessible through the internet are  
provided. Access to the resources is only possible  
on internet computers. In this case access rights  
lie with the resource holder.  
(3) Digital Library: It includes all type of resources  
such as links to web resources, databases, and  
full-text downloaded documents in server. 
2.  DIGITAL LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT AT TERI 
The need for digital library at TERI in New Delhi  started with the concept of providing online access to  electronic collections and services from researchers’  desktop or from their home computers and also to  provide access to TERI regional centres and the  centres abroad. Other needs were to aggregate all  scattered resources at one location and provide the  continuous easy multiple remote accesses needed  to accelerate the research process and save the  time of the researcher.  
Apart from that it would reduce the handling,  processing and circulation times, and in addition,  because library space is extremely costly at TERI,  there is tremendous need to save the library storage  space and other resources. TERI Digital Library  was set-up in 1999 to provide better access to a  number of online and virtual resources available  and subscribed by TERI Library like journals, books,  
65 

========3========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
Figure 3. Structure of TERI digital library  in 19992 
databases and CD-ROMs. The TERI Digital Library  has been opened for the researchers since 2000.  2.1 Three Dimensional Digital Library Service  
System 
The three axes are TERI-LIC (organisation  perspective), information  resources and service/ methods which are complementary in supporting,  interacting,  and enhancing each other and steadily  provide the library and information service with a  net force, developing cyberspace in all aspects of  teaching and scientific research. Within the three  dimensional structure, each function will influence  the other two and one weakness may lead to a  complete failure. 
2.2 Services at TERI Library 
TERI Library is providing a good number of  online, digital and personal services to its in-house  researcher and regularly marketing these services  through e-mails. Here are list of online/digital services  provided by TERI Library to its researchers: 
66 
2.2.1 New Headlines 
Library professionals scan 14 national and 5  International newspapers daily for the news on  energy, environment, sustainable development and  other articles related to TERI research interest.  After  scanning, all the marked news items are entered in  customised LibSys database with its weblink and if  weblink is not there, the newspaper clippings are  scanned and save the same in the server.  
Once all the entries are done, html file is  generated, and linked in digital library. The headlines  are circulated through e-mail across TERI Globe.  Archive of news item is also available both in  searchable and calendar form. 
2.2.2 Journals Content Alert 
The website of core journals are scanned for  the latest journal TOC and the same is linked in  digital-library homepage, division-wise and researchers  are informed through e-mail. 

========4========

SHARMA AND GANGULY: KNOWLEDGE ACCESS USING DL PLATFORM 
Figure 4. Current TERInet and digital library model. 
Figure 5. TERI three dimensional digital library system. 
2.2.3  What’s New in Other Institutes 
The library professionals scan important Institutional  respository in GSDL like WRI, World Bank, IISD,  CICERONE, etc. in consultation to the researcher  for their ongoing projects, latest publication and  current emerging topics in the field of TERI research  interest. Information collected through websites  are compiled at one place and access is provided  through e-library on monthly basis. 
2.2.4 Recent Addition 
A list of newly arrived online and printed books are  generated from LibSys and updated on monthly-basis  both on intranet (digital library) and internet (library  site) and users are informed through e-mails.  2.2.5 Forthcoming Events 
Information from conference websites, journals  and also from subscribed events alerts is taken  
regularly, forthcoming events information on various  fields of TERI research.  
Information about the latest events collected and  feeded in LibSys database and the subject-wise list  is generated with full detail about the event, which  later on updated in digital library and circulated  among researchers. 
2.2.6 Articles Alert 
On monthly basis researcher are collecting  full-text latest articles from various online journals  of TERI interest and sending across to relevant  researcher though e-mail. 
2.2.7 Online Journals 
TERI Library is subscribing more than 575  current scientific and technical printed/online journals.  It also subscribes online journals through JSTOR,  Science Direct, and Springer. Online journals are  
67 

========5========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
accessible through IP address and also through  username and password.  
2.2.8 e-Books 
TERI has subscription to Springer e-book collection  on earth and environmental science, Cambridge  online books on climate change and apart from  this, a number of e-books have been downloaded  and purchased on researcher’s request. Researcher  can further consult or access these books through  digital library. 
2.2.9 CD-ROM Collection 
Library has more than 2000 CDs on various  subjects. All are available in TERI Server and  researcher can access these CDs through digital  library home page. 
2.2.10 Databases and Portal 
Library has subscription to online databases  and portals like CMIE Prowess, India trade,Indiastat. com, Infraline.com, Petrowatch, etc. 
2.2.11 Library Catalogue 
Library is using LibSys database for library  management purpose and the TERI researcher  across the globe can access the library collection  catalogue through web OPAC (Online Public Access  Catalogue). 
2.2.12 Theses and Dissertations 
Library also uploaded full-text of theses and  dissertations submitted by the PhD students to  TERI university on yearly basis. 
2.2.13 Institute Repository in GSDL  
Institute is also maintaining its in-house digital  collection which include annual reports, MoUs,  photographs, e-books, newsletter and journals  published by TERI in GSDL Software. 
3. MEASURING KNOWLEDGE ACCESS 
With growing researchers hopes, blasts in know- hows and content and rising costs, assessment  activities have become a routine part of library  management. Besides conventional services, the  library staff is putting enormous efforts to provide  the best and innovative services to its researchers  to support their research work.  
Library has also adopted the mechanism of  periodically examine researcher satisfaction with  the library’s collection, services, and information  preferences to assure that researchers’ changing  needs are continually being met. Library staff at TERI  conducted a comprehensive customer satisfaction  survey in 2011 to meet with the current and future  researchers needs.  
68 
3.1 Method of Analysis 
•  Direct Interaction with research professionals •  Questinnaires based user survey 
•  Data collected directly from publisher •  Result and Discussion of User Survey 3.1.1  What is Google Analytics  
(http://support.google.com/) 
Google Analytics shows how people found a site,  how they explored it, and how one can enhance  their visitors experience. With this information, one  can improve his website’s return on investment,  increase conversions, and make more money on  the web.  
3.1.2  How does Google Analytics work? 
Google Analytics uses a first-party cookie and  JavaScript code to collect information about visitors  and to track one’s website data. Google Analytics  anonymously tracks how visitors interact with a  website, including where they came from, what they  did on a site, and whether they completed any of  the site’s conversion goals. 
3.1.3  Usage Statistics through Google Analytics 
TERI Library has installed the Google Analytics  code in its digital library collection page and every  month getting the information through e-mail as shown  in Figs 6 & 7. The report shows the popularity of  digital library page among users and status of top  contents as listed in the list. Pages in the site were  viewed by users a total of 4,384 times and most  used pages are home page of TERI DL (/el.html),  followed by  News headline service (terilicnews. htm), Online Journals (ej.htm) , Online databases  (e-database1.htm), and electronic books collection  (e-col.htm) 
3.2 Questionnaires/User Survey Form 
Library has designed an in-house user survey  questionnaire using Microsoft technology (ASP. NET, Framework 2, Backened SQL Server 2005). Existing survey application captures various pieces  of information from the end-user. The existing survey  consists of questions and feedback or answers to those  questions. The administrator should be able to see  the survey statistics for every objective type (single  choice or multi choice) question.There were eight  questions (figure 8) under various categories. Name  column was optional to hide the user identification,  so that he can give his/her feedback freely. The eight questions addressed were in the following  areas:  
• Access mode 
• Library resources  
• Library services  
•  Library rating in meeting user satisfaction 

========6========

SHARMA AND GANGULY: KNOWLEDGE ACCESS USING DL PLATFORM 
Figure 6. Google analytic content overview. 
2000 
1856 
1800 
Usage of digital library resources Google analytics (September 2011) 
1600 
1400 
1200 
1000 
931 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 
Digital Library  Alert Scrolling Bar 
Page 
Figure 7. Top used contents of digital library. 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The LIC user survey was conducted to explore  and assess the frequency of use of the library in  the month of September 2011. The survey was  carried out with an aim to improve and strengthen  of library resources and services in disseminating  authentic and value-added information. The LIC  is primarily concerned with providing information  that will keep the users up-to-date in their fields of  basic interest as well as in their related subjects.  The services are provided both on demand and in  anticipation.  
The LIC could manage to get 161 responses  from TERI professionals. Results were based on  the data extracted from the structured part of  the web questionnaire and from the free field  
753 
174 
133 
Online Journals 
Online Databases 
E-documents 
comments that permitted participants to write down  their comments. Results yielded positive feedback  as well as opportunities for further improvements.  
Among a number of digital services provided  by TERI Library, ‘News headline’ is most popular  and frequently used service among researchers  (80) followed by ‘Article of your interest’ (48) and  ‘Journal content alert’ service. A large number  of researchers are accessing ‘Digital services’  occasionally and often. There are very few users  to which the services provided are not applicable.  (Fig. 9). 
In case of resources, the graph shows that  ‘Cambridge online books collection’ and e-documents/ reports are frequently used by TERI LIC users  followed by online theses/Dissertation, and ‘Springer  
69 

========7========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
Figure 8. User survey questionnaire. 
e-books collection’. There are 87 users who are  often using the CD-ROM collection followed by  theses and e-book collection. There are some  researchers which are not aware of the services  provided by the library staff due to their busy travel  schedule. (Fig. 10) 
Users’ response on LIC rating for overall quality  of services was quite satisfactory. The survey  reveals majority of users have rated the library in  category ‘Very Good’ (73), followed by 45 responses  in category ‘Good’ and 30 responses in category  ‘Excellent’ and 13 as ‘Satisfactory’. Therefore, the  overall quality of library services was regarded to  be high for majority of users. Further, it was noted  that no users rated the library in low category in  terms of its resources and services. The findings  thus support users’ satisfaction to overall library  activities. 
As expected, customers frequently used Google  and other search engines to seek information needed  for their work. Following subscribed library online  journals and other databases. Their mode of preference  to send the information queries to library is through  e-mail followed by telephonic calls and info desk. 
Majority of TERI researchers are satisfied with  the digital services provided by the library staff. Forty  nine per cent stated they were too busy to obtain  the information. It was discovered that many of the  researchers were not aware about the some of the  services/resources of their research interest and  there are very few users to whom these services  are not relevant at all. 
70 
5.1 Library’s Action Points 
Based on the results and TERI researchers’  remarks, the library incorporated the results of the  survey into immediate operational improvements  and future action plan items for 2012 Strategic  Plan and Collection Development Policy.  
Some of the ideas generated from the user  feedback form for further improvement of existing  digital services and start the new one of user  research interests are: 
•  All recommendations online resources were  
extracted, priced, and put  in area meeting for  
discussion and further action. 
•  The library incorporated into its 2012 strategic  
plan the aim to increase electronic resources,  
particularly e-journals in TERI research priority  
areas.  
•  The services which are less-used or never-used  
by most of the researchers will be dropped out  
and in place of those something new will be  
planned such as subject guide etc. 
•  The 2012 strategic plan also expands and steps  
up proper marketing of the library services  
among users, emphasising customised services,  
outreach, and collaboration with other libraries  
of similar research interest to position the library  
as a research partner with it scientists.  
•  Marketing the library services through website  
(www.teriin.org) and e-mails. 

========8========

SHARMA AND GANGULY: KNOWLEDGE ACCESS USING DL PLATFORM 
Recent additions 
Forthcoming books 
Articles of your interest 
Figure 9. Usage of electronic services. 
Figure 10. Usage of electronic resources. 
•  Library professional will organise more orientation  
programmes not for new joiners but also for the  
old researchers to familiarise them with various  
services provided by library. 
•  Web 2.0 application will be used to popularise  
the services and resources provided by the  
library to explore using these technologies in  
the future for new researcher in TERI.  •  Library kiosk will be installed at the entrance  
of library in which tutorial about library services  
and resources run. 
News headlines 
Journal content alert 
Recent publications 
Other libraries catalogue 
•  Library professionals will increase face to face  
interaction among users to understand their need  
and make them aware about existing services  
and resources. 
•  Resources sharing and networking with other libraries  
for the maximum utilisation of resources. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
TERI Library is one of the innovative library  which is always busy in generating a number of  digital services for their researcher and also busy  
71 

========9========

DJLIT, VOL. 33, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 
in regularly taking the feedback from the users on  these services through different means. The google  Analytic and survey result in overwhelmingly supported  the presence of the library and the library staff,  among users. It provided valuable evidence-based  data to share with researchers and stakeholders.  The survey took approximately a year to accomplish  from planning through final report and significant  staff time to execute the role and responsibilities  with the help of internal resource advisor. As a tool  for future planning, and to understand the library’s  user need-base and requirement, the survey and  other feedback mechanism are absolutely invaluable  and worth.  
REFERENCES 
1. www.teriin.org  
2.  Deb, S. & Kar, D.C. Setting up an electronic  
library: The case of TERI. The Electronic Library,  
2005, 23(2), 189-99. 
72 
About the Authors 
Ms Reeta Sharma  is working as Information Analyst  in Library and Information Centre, KM Division at  The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI ) for the  past 12 years. Her specialisations include database  management, digital libraries, open source software,  and library and information management. She has  been actively involved in the planning, preparation  and implementation of many programmes in TERI  Library including digital library workshops. She is  instrumental for setting up TERI electronic and  further digital library for its in-house researchers. 
Dr Shantanu Ganguly is Fellow and Area Convener,  Library and Information Centre, KM Division, TERI.  He is also recipient of the most prestigious Bonnie- Hilditch International Librarian Award from SLA, USA  in 2010.  He has almost 21 years of experiences  in the field of library and information science and  served several reputed organisations. He served as  Associate Editor for several reputed national journals  and newsletters and published several papers in  national and international refereed journals. His  areas of interests are: knowledge management and  information service marketing. 
   

========10========

