DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 2013, pp. 83-86 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Information Seeking and Searching Behaviour of Dental Science  
Professionals in Karnataka 
Umesha* and Chandrashekara M.** 
*VS Dental College and Hospital, KR Road, VV Puram Bangalore-560 004 
E-mail: umeshlib@gmail.com 
**Department of Library and Information Science, University of Mysore, Mansagangotri, Mysore-570 008 
E-mail: Chandra.uom@gmail.com 
ABStrAct 
Libraries  in  health  sciences  or  dental  sciences  are  not  just  collecting  or  licensing  the  information  resources. They have various task to match the needs like curriculum based learning, research and point  of care. The present study tries to understand the information seeking and searching behaviour of dental  science professional in Karnataka. This paper tries to fnd out the suitable information sources available  for dental professionals, the areas in which dental professionals are seeking information, and the barriers  
they are facing in accessing information. 
Keywords: Information seeking behaviour, dental science, Karnataka, searching behaviour 
1. IntroDuctIon 
Medical libraries, like other libraries, have a long  history  as  a  traditional  print  library  having  many  tools  for  organisation  and  location  of  information  resources like classification, cataloguing, abstracting,  and  indexing.  The  ‘Index  Medicus’,  as  a  printed  abstracting,  and  indexing  tool,  was  very  helpful  to  medical community, which later became MEDLARS (computerised  bibliographic  database);  since  a  decade  it  is  called  as   Pubmed ,  available  and  accessible  at  free  of  cost  on  internet.  In  fact,  the  dental  science  was  part  of  medical  field  and  has  grown  as  an  independent  discipline  particularly  in  19th   century  with  proper  study,  treatment  and  prevention  of  the  diseases  of  the  mouth,  teeth,  gums  and  jawbones1.  Of  late,  there  are  many  exclusive  textbooks,  reference  books,  journals  and  electronic databases2. Dental libraries were part of  medical  libraries,  later  with  the  growth  of  literature  and  corresponding  specialsation  necessitated  the  creation  of  separate  libraries.  Of  course,  dental  colleges have established libraries due to mandatory  norms  insisted  by  the  Dental  Council  of  India. The  specialisations1  in dental sciences are orthodontics  (treat maloccluded teeth using wires and appliances),  prosthodontics (builds dentures and bridges), periodontics  (is  the  treatment  of  gums  and  underlying  bones),  endodontic (concerned with protection or removal of  the tooth’s pulp in root canal therapy), and pedodontics  (dental  practice    limited  to  treating  children).    
Received 15 December 2012, online published 19 March 2013 
2.   c oncePt oF InFormAtIon SeeKIng  
AnD SeArchIng BehAvIour 
In context of this study, there are many concepts  like information behaviour, information seeking behaviour,  information searching behaviour and information use  behaviour. Majority of these concepts are discussed  right from traditional media libraries and carried on to  e-environment, with media dependent changes.  The  ‘information needs’ depend on the context, media of  access and problem, whereas ‘information behaviour’  is  about  the  understanding  of  human  relationship  to information like interaction, seeking and utilising  information2,3,  further  clarified  as  the  totality  in  relation to sources and channels of information (both  active and passive) like face-to-face communication,  watching  TV  advertisements,  without  any  intention  to  act  on  the  information  and  a  purposive  seeking  for  information  as  a  consequence  of  a  need  is  to  satisfy  some  goal,  may  be  it  printed  media  or  an  electronic. Spencer4 states, that information seeking  of known-item are the easiest to understand, as the  user  knows  what  they  want,  what  search  terms/ words  to  use  to  describe  it  and  where  to  start.  
Information Searching Behaviour3 is the ‘micro-level’  behaviour  employed  by  the  searcher  in  interacting  with  information  systems  of  all  kinds,  it  may  be  a  human computer interaction (use of the mouse and  clicks on links) or at the intellectual level (adopting  a Boolean search strategy or determining the criteria  for deciding relevant one) involve mental acts, such  

========1========

DJLIT, VoL.  33,  No.  2,  march  2013 
as  judging  the  relevance  of  data  or  information  retrieved. Information use behaviour,consists of the  physical  and  mental  acts  involved  in  incorporating  the  information  found  into  the  person's  existing  knowledge base. It may involve, therefore, physical  acts  such  as  marking  sections  in  a  text  to  note  their  importance  or  significance,  as  well  as  mental  acts  that  involve,  for  example,  comparison  of  new  information  with  existing  knowledge3.     
Information searching and information retrieval,  in  Jansen  &  Rieh5 view,  is  focusing  both  on  the  interaction between people and content in information  systems. These two aspects share common ground  largely  because  both  are  concerned  with  the  three  perspectives people, information, and technology in  locating  information  stored  in  computer  systems.   Information searching refers to people’s interaction  with  information  retrieval  systems,  ranging  from  adopting  search  strategy  to  judging  the  relevance  of  information  retrieved3.  
Information searching versus information seeking  was  addressed  as  ‘the  act  of  searching  itself’  particularly  on  the  problems  encountered  and  skills  needed  to  search  information,  including  the  complexities  in  identifying  sources  and  to  locate  the  desired  information2. 
Many  studies  are  published  on  information  seeking  behaviour.  Yet,  there  is  a  need  for  further  studies  to  come  out  with  new  interpretation  of  old  or  new  data  with  respect  to  media  change  or  technology  to  derive  new  approaches.  Majority  of  the  studies  have  focused  around  research  needs,  not  on  other  activities  like  at  the  point  of  care  or  academia.  The  information  seeking  behavior  and  searching  behaviour,  as  per  many  studies,  is  depending  on  the  purpose  of  users  and  access  to  relevant  information.  Carmel6 viewed  around  the  purpose,  urgency  and  use  of  information  sources.  He  also  observed  the  overlap  of  interpretation  in  various  aspects  like  demand,  need  and  use.          
The  number  of  studies  on  information  seeking  behaviour  are  many  and  each  author  viewed  it  differently. Maslow7 viewed  that  motivational  needs  are not information needs, Beal8 viewed in terms of  accessibility  of  information,  Roberts9   considered  it  as wants, desires, demands and requirements. The  seeking  behaviour  of  the  information,  in  context  of  this  study,  is  viewed  as  patterns  and  levels  of  information  transfer  in  context  of  their  academic,  research  and  practice.  The  information  seeking,  as  per  Moslow’s  hierarchy,  could  be  within  the  individual  and  intrinsically  motivated  (as  internal  desire)  or  even  extrinsic  (based  on  the  reward  or  satisfaction), and found that both are interrelated10. The  need  is  a  cognitive  effect11,  where  it  scales  from  the  basic  needs  or  from  their  behaviour,  satisfaction becomes the key factors in information  seeking  behaviour10. 
84 
3. SeeKIng AnD SeArchIng  BehAvIour  
oF DentIStS 
The first choice of information searching, as per  many  studies,  is  Google  (internet  search  engine)  where  dental  professionals  are  not  an  exclusion,  may be it a diagnosis of difficult cases or otherwise.   Even the patients are using the Google to diagnose  their own problem.Tanq & Kwoon12  found that  Google  is  likely  to  be  a  useful  aid  in  diagnosis,  being  easier to use and is freely available on the internet,  specifically mentioned that “Doctors and patients are  increasing proficient with the internet and frequently  use Google to search for medical information”. Also  the  study  point  out  that  “Internet  search  engines  are  useful  for  a  diagnosis  and  becoming  the  latest  tools in clinical medicine, and doctors are in need of  training to become proficient in their use”. Nizam13,  indicated that professionals spend more time on the  Internet  than  the  students  and  research  scholars.  Although internet search engines were the preferred  information  searching  tool,  other  sources  such  as  databases,  gateways  and  aggregations  databases  are also used. Study by Ashin14  reveals that though  libraries  were  willing  to  serve,  use  of  libraries  by  dentists  is  low.  Lundeen15, et  al.   felt  that  there  is  insufficient  knowledge  about  information  sources  and  their  use.  Mcloughlin16   found  the  need  for  structured  information  provision  but  there  is  lack  of  co-operation  between  various  stakeholders  in  information  landscape.    
Majority of the studies have discussed around users  interaction with content and machine.  Bowden17, et al. found that there is a difference in seeking behaviour  between  those  who  access  libraries  physically  and  access  remotely,  still  the  totality  is  in  relation  to  sources and channels of information. The searcher  has to interact with information systems, may be a  human-computer  interaction  and  intellectual  level,  study found that users need required training. Many  of these studies overlap their interpretation around  demand,  need  and  use.  The  user  in  searching  or  seeking information, as a first step, requires to set  the context, may be it an interaction between humans  and machines, or an information acquisition and use.  All these aspects form a set for a holistic cognitive  approach.  Information  searching  process  requires  query  construction,  understanding  terminological  relationship,  adding  advanced  search  features,  making  information  architecture  visible  to  users,  and  encouraging  evaluation  of  search  results.  
4. AIm  A nD methoDoLogY 
  The  present  study,  in  context  of  continued  development of information repackages (electronically)  and  latest  searching  aids,  found  likely  changes  in  information seeking and perceived that change are  continuous,  hence  the  research  questions  for  this  

========2========

UMESHA & CHANDRASHEKARA: INfORMATION  S EEKING  &  SEARCHING BEHAVIOUR Of DENTAL SCIENCE  p ROfESSIONALS 
study  were:  
• How  dental  professionals  are  seeking  
information? 
• What  are  the  suitable  information  sources   
available  for  dental  professionals? 
• How dental professionals are meeting their routine  
5.5  Interest  in online  Library 
The  response  towards  the  statement  of  ‘online  version in the library’ was, ‘strongly preferred’ (46.4 %),  ‘preferred’  (43.8  %)  and  ‘undecided’  (5  %).  
5.6  Interest  on  Free  Publication  on net 
The response of the respondents to the statement  
and long-term needs in the work-academic and  
‘free  publication  available  on  net’  was  ‘strongly  
• 
research?    
What  are  the  barriers  in  accessing  information  and  how  to  overcome  the  barriers?  
information, has the sample of 623 (193 pG students  
preferred’ (50.6 %), ‘preferred’ (38.7 %)and ‘undecided’  (6.9  %).  
The  present  study,  based  on  the  interview  and  
The  present  study,  in  its  survey  of  dental  
the  observation,  found  that  majority  of  the  dental  professionals  about  the  seeking  and  searching  of  
colleges  in  Karnataka,  are  equipped  with  good  
number of computer terminals, having good internet  and  430  faculty  members)  respondents,  selected  
bandwidth,  but  information  resources  are  more  in  
traditional  print  media.  It  has  found  a  miss-match  
from  12  dental  colleges  in  Karnataka.      
5. 
FInDIngS  
5.1 Access  to  Internet 
On  the  whole,  97.40  %  of  the  respondents  indicated that they have access to internet of which  97.90  %  were  pGs  and  97.20  %  were  teaching  faculty,  wherein  64.40  %  were  satisfied  with  the  internet  speed,  53.90  %  of  the  respondents  are  accommodated in the LAN/campus network (53.90 %  pGs  and  52.80  %  teaching  faculty).    
5.2 use  of  Internet  and e-resources 
The survey response to the statement ‘maximum  time  spent  on  internet’  is    that  ‘regular  usage’  with  (91  %)  followed  by  ‘Rarely’  (8.7  %)  and  ‘use  of  email’  is  (87.3  %),  ‘rarely’  (10.5  %)  and  ‘never’  (1.8  %).      
5.3  Accessing e-journals  through rajiv gandhi  
university  of health  Sciences  (rguhS) 
The  response  to  the  statement  ‘accessing  the  journals from RGUHS consortia’, 56 % pG students  and  67.9%  teaching  faculty  indicated  ‘yes’  to  the  statement.  The  response  to  the  statement  ‘how  frequently  accessing  online  journals’,  is  38.8  %  (regularly),  29.5  %  (weekly),  16.5  %  (irregularly)    and  15.1  %  (monthly).  
5.4 need  for training 
Response  to  the  statement  ‘formal  training  or  orientation was usefuls’ very positive with (71.6 %)  indication ‘very much useful’ followed by ‘undecided’  (25.2  %).  In  context  of  the  review  conducted  for  the  study,  it  was  found  that  lack  of  training  and  information  overload  was  indicated  as  some  of  the  factors  affecting  the  usage.  The  study  found  the  need of a well-planned internet literacy programme  and  preparation  of  subject  gateways  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  dental  professionals. 
between  users’  attitude  and  the  collection  in  the  libraries  in  Karnataka,  though  they  have  good  IT  infrastructure. The e-collection is provided through a  consortium called HELINET from RGUHS, but there  is no cohesive system among dental institutions to  meet  the  needs  of  the  professionals  in  the  field. 
6. DIScuSSIonS 
Libraries  in  health  science  or  dental  sciences  are  not  just  collecting  or  licensing  the  information  resources.  They  have  various  task  to  match  the  needs  like  support  to  curriculum-based  learning,  research  and  point  of  care.To  get  align  to  new  environment,  librarians  have  to  study  the  users  information  seeking  behaviour  considering  the   purpose,  needs,  and  domain-based  resources  so  that the interaction between the library staff and the  users  will  be  meaningful.  The  needs  of  the  users  are  not  identical  or  similar  as  the  purpose  of  the  users  varies  like  updating  of  knowledge,  starting  a  new  research  or  on  practice  doubts.  Many  studies  have  observed  that  dissimilarities  of  the  need  are  based on the domain knowledge, situation-specific,  nature  of  libraries/librarians  and  library  facilities  which  directly  influence  their  perceived  needs  and  retrieval  activity  of  the  libraries.  Even  now,  with  all  these  facilities,  dental  professionals  continue  to  clarify  their  doubts  from  colleagues,  continuing  education courses and most frequently used resources  for  professional  development  and  rely  on  personal  experience, credibility of the journal, and discussions  with  colleagues.  
The study found that there is a need for librarians  collaboration  either  to  teach  users  or  mediate  in  searching information whereby information seeking  or  search  behavior  alter,  as  users  may  not  have  the clear perception about  the keywords, specifying  elements (specific aspects of the topic), appropriate  terminologies (specifically from thesaurus) and syntax.  Majority of the studies on information seeking and  
85 

========3========

DJLIT, VoL.  33,  No.  2,  march  2013 
searching are based on librarians perspective, it is  required  to  measure  from  users’  perspective  and  more closely related to complexity than the subjective  measures. Users are lacking in knowledge to refine  a  search,  about  relationship  and  proximity  of  the  terminologies  used  in  the  search.  
7.   c oncLuSIonS 
Seeking  and  searching  behaviour  is  maximum  driven by internet search engines like google, very  few  are  able  to  differentiate  between  scholarly  database and internet search engine. The information  availability  at  free  of  cost,  though  not  authentic  sources  (like  peer  reviewed  information)  using  the  internet  search  engines  are  drawing  more   attention,  not  just  because  it  is  simple,  it  is  more  because  each  searcher  gets  some  information  (whether  authentic  or  otherwise).  Majority  of  the  studies  also  have  revealed  that  users  have  shifted  from  scholarly  information  to  free  un-authenticated  content  (driven  by  internet  search  engine).  It  is  also observed in many studies that latest searching  behavior  are  influenced  by  e-commerce  searching  and  shopping  behaviour.  At  the  same  time  many  users are influenced by peer group of the age, not  by  information  literacy  program  from  the  libraries.  The  competition  among  the  publishers,  visibility  competition, more Google visibility etc., are driving  the users and this behaviour continues strengthening.    Of  course,  many  discovery  tools  are  now  making  scholarly search, much better than Google to increase  users’  loyalty  like  in  traditional  libraries.  In  this  information ecosystem, dentists are passionate about  solving  problems  in  a  professional  manner,  which  requires the detailed study about most suitable and  balanced  way  to  seeking  information. 
reFerenceS 
1.    Comptons’  Encyclopaedia,  1996. 
2. Bates, M.J. Information behavior. Encyclopedia  
of  Library  and  Information  Sciences.  Ed.  3.  
2010.  http://pages.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/bates/ 
articles/information-behavior.html (accessed on  
18  July  2012).  
3. Wilson,  T.D.  Human  information  bahaviour.  
special issue on Information Research, 3(2), 200.  
86 
http://inform.nu/Articles/Vol3/v3n2p49-56.pdf  
(accessed  on  18  July  2012). 
4.  Spencer,  D. four  modes  of  seeking  information  
and  how  to  design  for  them.  2006.http://www. 
boxesandarrows.com/view/four_modes_of_seeking_ 
information_and_how_to_design_for_them  (accessed  
on  18  July  2012). 
5. Jansen, B.J. & Rieh, S.Y. The seventeen theoretical  
constructs of information searching and information  
retrieval. J. Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci. & Tech. , 2010,  
61(8),  1517-34  (accessed  on  18  July  2010). 6. Carmel,  M.  Medical  librarianship.  The  Library  
Association,  London,  1981.  pp.  92. 
7. Maslow,  A.H.  Motivation  and  personality.  Ed.  
2.  Harper  and  Row,  New  York,  1970.  
8. Beal, C. Studying the public’s information needs.  
Journal  of  Librarianship,  1979,  11(2),  130-51. 9. Roberts, N. Draft definitions: Information and library  
needs, wants, demands and uses: A comment.  
Aslib  Proceedings,  1975,  27(7),  308-13. 
10. Kruger, J. A. & fourie, J. A. Basic and developmental  
information  needs  of  secondary  school  pupils.  
Mousaion,  1995,   13 (1/2),  225-27. 
11.  Wilson, T.D. On user studies and information needs.  
Journal  of  Documentation,  1981,  37(1),  3-15.  12. Tanq, H. & Kwoon, J.H. Googling for a diagnosis:  
Use  of  Google  as  a  diagnostic  aid:  Internet  
based study. BMJ, 2 December 2006, 333(7579),  
1143-145. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/ 
pMC1676146/ 
13. Nazim, Mohammad. Information searching behavior  
in  the  internet  age:  A  users’  study  of  Aligarh  
Muslim University. Inter. Inf. & Lib. Rev., 2008,  
40(1),  73-81. 
14. Ashin, E. Library service to dental practitioners.  Bull.  
Medical  Lib. Asso.,  1983,    71(4),  400-02.  15. Lundeen,  G.,   et  al.   Information  needs  of  rural  
health care practitioners in Hawaii. Bull. Medical  
Lib. Asso.,  1994, 82(2),  197-204. 
16. Mcloughlin, H. The information needs of cancer  
patients in the Republic of South Africa. M.Bibl  
Thesis:  Rand Afrikaanse  Universiteit,  1994. 17. Bowden, V.M., et al. Assessment of physicians’  
information needs in five counties. Bull. Medical  
Lib. Asso.,  1994, 82(2),  189-96. 

========4========

