DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 2013, pp. 90-98 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Community-based Health Information and Communication (CBHIC):  
A Proposed Model for Thailand 
Sujin Butdisuwan 
Mahasarakham University, Khamriaang Sub-District, Kantarawichai District 
Maha Sarakham, Thailand-441 50 
E-mail: sujin.b@msu.ac.th 
ABsTrACT 
The present study is to work out a suitable model for community-based data collection and  education,  keeping public library network at the locus of the model. The study has reviewed the profle of Thailand  with regards demographic data and healthcare delivery system particularly at grass root level. The study  analysed the existing status and activities of public library network, its building blocks and framework for  
data-collection and education of the community..   
Keywords:  Community-based information, health information, health systems, health literacy, healthcare   
  delivery system, Thailand 
1.  InTroduCTIon 
The  community-based  health  information  and  communication  (CBHIC)  have  two  components: (a) Understand the ‘community need’ by collecting  
the  community  data  and 
(b)  ‘Reflective  education’  to  the  community  and  
create  informed  society. 
The decision about the health by the community     member, either to choose a suitable healthcare facility  or  to  take  care  of  their  own  health  they  need  to  the knowledge of the system and awareness to find  the  suitable  solution.  The  present  study  is  to  work  out  a  suitable  model  called  ‘CBHIC’,  as  a  two-way  communication  and  information  exchange  model  between community and service providers, also as   an  intermediary  system  between  community  and  providers of health. The proposed model considers  grass root level workers as executive for collecting  community data  and distribution/dissemination of health  information/education materials. Embed information  as an integral part of delivering healthcare through  the entire healthcare system. Information should be  delivered in tandem with care provision and not as  an ‘add-on’ through primary care to secondary and  specialist services1. At the same time, it is perceived  that grass root level workers also are learners about  provider’s  system  as  well  as  community  needs.   Today’s  health  educators  are  not  only  teaching  health  effectively,  but  also  assessing  the  needs  of  target populations including planning, implementing,  and evaluating programs (NCHC 2007). The health  
Received 15 December 2012, online published 19 March 2013 
service  planning  and  evaluation    depends  mainly  on  knowledge  of  resources  and  local  community  data/information2,  such  as  size  and  structure  of  population; areas of met and unmet need; incidence  and/or  prevalence  of  disease(s),  effectiveness  of  interventions  available;  relative  cost-effectiveness;  including  capacity,  quality,  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  political  priorities. 
At  present,  due  to  information  communication  technology  (ICT)-based information and communication,  it can be called as ‘internet society’ which is synonymous  to ‘information society’, due to ubiquitous access to  information  through  internet.  The  ICT  supplements  and compliments the proposed CBHIC in improving  the efficiency of both ‘collection of community data’  and  ‘timely  dissemination/distribution’  of  health  education materials. However, ICT or internet cannot  replace the traditional human system, particularly at  rural  level,  as  internet  facilities  or  use  of  Internet  by  the  community  is  not  up  to  the  expectation  due  to many barriers like language, literacy, availability  of  ICT  facility,  and  access  skills.    
2.    HeAlTH sysTeM 
The  good  health  care  system  delivers  quality  and informed services to all the people with a well- trained manpower, well-maintained facilities, robust  financing  mechanism,  and  reliable  information  for  making decision and policies3. The system to have  balanced  management  of  facilities,  use  of  proper  technology,  medical  devices,  acquiring  community  data  to  understand  the  needs  of  the  community  

========1========

BUTDISUwAN: COMMUNITy-BASED  H EALTH  I NfORMATION AND  C OMMUNICATION  (CBHIC) 
and  educate  community  to  take  care  of  their  own  health, ‘providing equitable access to people-centered  care’4, ‘using good health technologies’5  and ‘medical  devices for taking care of  access to low and middle- income people’6  through primary healthcare system  having  a  reliable  all-round  general  practitioner  to  treat  minor  medical  problems.  
3. CoMMunITy-BAsed  dATA ColleCTIon 
The  data  collection  has  been  undertaken  in  almost  all  the  sectors,  wherein  each  sector  is  confining to their aims, objectives, and functionaries  at grass root level. There is very  less collaboration  among  various  sectors  in  data  collection,  data  sharing,  or  leveraging  common  infrastructure  and   sharing  expertise,  though  some  of  the  baseline  data  are  common  to  all  the  sectors.  The  lack  of  collaboration and cooperation among the sectors has  led  to  duplication  of  data,  expenditure,  and  efforts  thereby,  creates  a  significant  burden  and  distracts  the workers from their regular services. At present,  the  community  data  collection  and  consolidation  is  undertaken  from  local  data  sources,  specialised  survey, routine local and/or national statistics, adhoc  data, and relevant published surveys about trends in  incidence  and  outcome. The  data  is  also  extracted  from  hospital-based  clinical  records  which  have  many  limitations  due  to  inconsistency  in  coding,  legal restrictions on using personal data, timeliness,  and  its  comprehensiveness.  Hence,  there  is  a  requirement  to  establish  inter-sectoral  cooperation  with  proper  coordination  and  cooperation. 
The community data collection includes population- based  data  (census,  household  surveys,  and  vital  registration  systems),  facility-based  data  (public  health  surveillance  and  health  services  data)  and  system  monitoring  data  (human  resources,  health  infrastructure  or  financing).  The  comprehensive  community database can be developed by including  various  other  isolated  sources  of  data  and  stand- alone disease surveillance systems, private sector,  logistics  management  systems,  and  emergency  response  systems.  The  community-based  data  collection,  consolidation  and  uploading  makes  database  automatically  as  a  fully  comprehensive  and  integrated  national  database  that  suits  to  all  sectors  at  all  level.  Of  course,  the  sustainability  of  the community-data systems is depending on better  information  management  tools  and  mechanism  to  properly capture data through routine operations of  each sector.  The application of ICT can be effectively  used for better inter-sectoral cooperation, data flow,  data utilisation and integration in collaborative works,  as  if  it  is  available  in  a  single  database.      3.1 Community-based  Health education 
The quality of healthcare utilisation and desired  health outcomes are usually consistent if professionals  
and consumers of health are updating their knowledge7.  There  are  many  concepts  targeting  community  education  like  health  education,  patient  education,    and  health  literacy.  Health  education  comprises  consciously  constructed  opportunities  for  learning  involving some form of communication designed to  improve health literacy, including improving knowledge,  and  developing  life  skills  which  are  conducive  to  individual  and  community  health8.  
There  are  many  forms  of  delivering  health  messages  in  traditional  and  print  environment  like  street theatre, folk theatre, posters, pamphlets, and   hoardings  which  have  limited  effects  on  the  rural  community due to many barriers9. It is very important  to  convey  the  correct  messages  to  the  community;   otherwise,  it  will  have  disastrous  after-effects.  To  cover  all  the  community,  at  various  levels  like  individual,  group,  institutional  or  community  level,  community-based  activity  is  more  suitable.  Health  education  and  information  materials  are  available,  both  in  print  (traditional)  and  electronic  media,  are  becoming part of the library collection of healthcare  institutions.  Some  of  the  education  materials  are  accessible directly to the needed community member  and some are disseminated through health workers  or  libraries.  The  health  education  is  also  provided  through schools, workplaces, public health settings  or  other  educational  settings  of  the  community.  
One mode of community education can be based  on their ailment or therapy and is an excellent way  to build doctor-patient relationship. Patient education  is  the  process  by  which  health  professionals  and  others  impart  information  to  patients  that  will  alter  their health behaviours or improve their health status.  In a broader sense, health education is a tool used  by  managed  care  plans,  and  may  include  both  general  preventive  education  or  health  promotion  and  disease/condition  specific  education10. 3.1.1  Health  Literacy    
    Health  literacy  is  recognised  as  an  important  activity in the process of care or cure. Many forums  like  Healthy  People  2010,  AMA  foundation,  etc.,   defines  health  literacy  as  ‘the  degree  to  which  individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and  understand  basic  health  information  and  services  needed  to  make  appropriate  health  decisions’.   The  AMA  foundation  defined  it  as  ‘The  ability  to  read,  understand,  and  use  health  information  to  make  appropriate  healthcare  decisions  and  follow  instructions for treatment’. Rootman11, et al., defines  as, ‘The ability to access, understand, appraise and  communicate information to engage with the demands  of health contexts to promote health across the life- course’. These definitions are ultimately treading from  specific task ‘functional health literacy’ to ‘community  health  literacy’  with  a  spirit  of  holistic-approach  in  educating consumers for healthy living. Also the study  
91 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2, MARCH   2013 
perceived  the  value  of  information  is  perceived  as  ‘information is solution and information is money’ if  it is at right time, to right people in a right media- mix and manpower-mix considering varied approach,  barriers  and  understanding  level  of  the  users12.  It  was highlighted that the community-based model for  health  literacy  depends  on  various  factors  such  as  sensitivity, awareness, accessibility, and use of health  information  resources  and  sources  for  clarification  of  their  doubts.  There  are  many  studies,  viewed  health  literacy  in  context  of  adult  literacy  or  actual  literacy of the community. It is required to recognise  health  literacy  as  part  of  Information  Education  Communication  (IEC)  programme,  school  health  programme  or  adult  literacy  programme  as  inter- sectoral  community  education  activity/programme. 
In  context  of  health  literacy,  consumers  are  expected  to  obtain,  use,  understand  and  put  knowledge  obtained  into  action  so  that  each  one  will  have  capability  to  take  appropriate  healthcare  decision.  In  this  context,  health  literacy  is  defined  as  “it  enables  community  to  participate  in  health  care  system  as  an  informed  consumer  of  health,  instead  of  passive  follower  of  instruction  from  the  health care staff”13. It is pointed out that higher the  health  literacy,  more  and  sensible  usage  of  health  care services. Many studies have considered health  literacy  as  an  integrated  activity  in  the  process  of  care  or  a  separate  careful  activity.  
In  the  context  of  health  literacy,  there  are  two  kinds  of  information-prescribed  information  to  a  particular  patient  and  general  information  about  the facility, procedures and preparedness including    technical  information  about  the  ailment  and  the  prescribed  medicine.  Doctors  and  their  supporting  staff are to concentrate on prescription of information.  Libraries,  alongwith  health  education  professionals  are  to  concentrate  on  general  information  about  the facility, procedures, and preparedness including    technical  information  about  the  ailment  and  the  prescribed medicine. This study suggests that tailor- made printed and user-friendly literature along with    training  ‘how  to  use  the  materia’  is  appropriate.   In  developing  countries  like  India  and  Thailand,  majority  of  the  patients  and  their  spouse  tend  to  discuss  about  health  with  family  members,  friends  or relative to check whether the treatment received  is  appropriate  or  not.          
4. HeAlTH sysTeM In  THAIlAnd 
As  per  the federal  Research  Division  Country  Profile4, Thailand  is  divided  into  76  provinces,  877  districts  and  7255  sub-districts.  In  2006 Thailand’s  population  was  64,631,595  with  growth  rate  at  0.68  %,  19th   most  populous  country  in  the  world.  The net migration rate is 0 %. In 2005 about 68 %  of  the  population  lived  in  rural  areas  and  32  %  in  urban  areas.  As  per  2006  data,  22  %  are  less  
92 
than  15  years  of  age,  70  %  are  15–64  years  of  age,  and  8  %  are  65  and  older.  As  per  Ministry  of Public Health, the  birth-rate  was  13.8  births  per  1,000  populations  and  a  death  rate  of  7  deaths  per  1,000.  In  2006  life  expectancy  was  74.6  years  for  women  and  69.9  years  for  men,  or  nearly  72.2  years total. The infant mortality rate was estimated  at  nearly  19.4  per  1,000  live  births  in  200615.  
The Ministry of Education, Thailand 16, supervises  public and private education, from October 2002. free  basic education to student’s, nationwide, is up to 12  years:  six  years  of  primary  education  beginning  at  age six or seven, followed by three years of middle  school  and  three  years  of  high  school,  ending  at  age  18.  Education  has  been  compulsory  through  the  ninth  grade  (from  age  7  to  16)  since  January  2003. with  the  addition  of  two  years  of  preprimary  schooling, the length of education was extended to  14  years  in  May  2004.  In  2006  an  estimated  96%  of  students  completed  grade  six,  80%  completed  grade  nine,  and  79%  completed  grade-12. 4.1 Healthcare delivery system  in  Thailand 
Health system in Thailand operates under three  levels: 
(a)    Sub-district  health  centers,  
(b)    District  hospitals,  and 
(c)    General/regional  hospitals. 
Sub-district health centers cover approximately  5,000 people; district hospitals cover about 50,000  people. District hospitals also serve as a link between  health  centers  and  upper-tier  general  or  regional  hospitals by referral systems. In addition, there are  a  number  of  private  facilities  spread  throughout  the  country,  which  are  concentrated  more  in  urban  areas17. 
The health system18   evolved since the early 1960s,  first  three  national  plans  (during  1961-1976),  and   4th   National  Health  Plan  (during  1977-81)  focused  mainly  on  primary  health  care  and  ‘Health  for  All  by the year 2000’,  5th  National Health Plan (during    1982-1986) continued primary health care strategies  and initiated community health care (Pagaiya 2007)19.  During the 6th  and 7 
th 
 National Health Plans (1987- 1996) geared up toward the development of health  infrastructure, health technology and producing more  health workers  to make primary healthcare facilities  more accessible to people. In 8th  National Health plan  (1997-2001)  adopted  the  decentralisation  to  local  authority Act and emphasised a holistic approach to  health  promotion  and  continued  throughout  the  9th National Health Plan (2002-2006). The 9th  National  Health Development Plan stressed more on provincial  health  system  which  includes  provincial,  district  and  sub-district  levels,  to  provide  accessibility  for  all  within  the  provincial  health  system.     

========3========

BUTDISUwAN: COMMUNITy-BASED  H EALTH  I NfORMATION AND  C OMMUNICATION  (CBHIC) 
Universal coverage scheme in Thailand20, instituted  in  2001  and  restructured  information  system  to  support  the  scheme  by  Ministry  of  Public  Health  (MOPH) which includes doctors, nurses and primary  care  workers  (PCws)  in  Thai  rural  health  system.  Doctors  as  clinical  experts,  nurses  as  middle-level  care  providers  to  fill  in  gaps  if  found  shortage  of  doctors and primary care workers to cover prevention  of  disease,  promotion  of  health  and  to  provide  suitable  accessibility  for  care  to  the  community  of  the  Thailand.  There  were  868  hospitals  and  9,738-community health centres. The first-line units  (first  point-of-contact)  for  community  coverage  are  sub-district (Tambon) or village-level health service  unit,  covering  a  population  of  about  1,000–5,000  where  staff  includes  a  health  worker,  a  midwife  and  a  technical  nurse21.  Thailand's  health  care  system incorporates the private and public sectors,  regulated by the government. The governments take  care  of  infrastructure  and  private  sector  operates  50% of hospitals, which receive US$ 26/year/patient  from  the  government22.  The  grass  root  level  has   collaboration  of  local  employers  and  provincial  health  authorities.  The  skill-set  expected    in  the  programme  are  like  qualitative  and  quantitative  research  methodology,  programme  evaluation  and  strategic planning, management and applied research  skills,  preparation  of    proposal  and  report  writing  skills  including  communication  skills.  The  inter- sectoral  rural-level  integration  in Thailand  includes  environmental  conservation  such  as  bio-diversity,  deforestation, soil erosion, and environmental pollution  directly through community education and collaboration  
and hands-on conservation work. Thailand also has  volunteer  programmes,  as  a  part  of  village-based  programmes,  by  promoting  mutual  friendship,  to  enrich their own experience and making a meaningful  contribution.  The  volunteer  programme  supports  following  various  activities24: 
• Development of medicinal plants, local farmers  
with  crop  development  and  seed  distribution,  
assist  in  erosion  control  planting  efforts,  or  
maintain  local  nurseries.      
• Work  with  local  villagers  or  other  volunteers  in  
activities  such  as  sowing,  mulching,  watering,  
weeding,  and  farming.    
• Help children to share English skills and teaching  
talents  at  elementary  school  children  ranging  
in age from 6-13 years. Many schools lack the  
funds  to  provide  effective  English  language  
training. Native or fluent English speakers with or  
without formal teaching experience can contribute  
greatly  to  a  child's  educational  development.  • Volunteers  who  choose  health  education  will  
have opportunity to work in a variety of different  
projects  located  in  or  near  Bangkok  such  as  
disabled  children. 
• Learn  the  basics  of  Thai  massage  and  then  
use  their  new  skills  to  help  the  children  with  
their  disabilities.    
•  Stay with carefully chosen host families who live  
near  to  the  project  site.  Some  of  the  projects  
are  residential,  where  volunteers  stay  on  the  
project  site. 
Figure 1. Activities of public library networks in Thailand. 
93 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2, MARCH   2013 
5.  PuBlIC lIBrAry  neTworK 
There are two choices in integrating community- based  information  system–  ‘primary  health  care  centers’  or  ‘public  library  system’.  In  fact,  public  libraries are the social institution and cultural center,  at  grass  root  level,  and  are  first  point  of  contact  for  all  kind  information  and  communication  in  any  country.  In  Thailand,  Public  library  network  has  already  partially  integrated  for  data  collection  and  information service. As per Lerdsuriyakul,  Kulthorn  (1999),      Public  library25     was    established  in  Bangkok  in  1916  by  the  Education  Department,  evolved  through      Ministry  of  Education,  in  1949,     to  inculcate  reading  and  learning  habits,  had    20  public  libraries  in  various  provinces.  Later  in  1950  increased to 64 public libraries, expanded   in 1952  to  district  level.  In  1973,  added  as  an  educational  unit  to  the  Adult  Education  Division  of  General  Education  Department  and  developed  programs  around non-formal education for promoting reading  and  learning  habits  and  to  disseminate  culture.  Later in 1979, public libraries got formal status and  became part of department of Non-formal Education  (NfE)  including  Provincial  NfE  Center.  The  real  transformation  of  public  libraries  was  in  1992  by  making them as Community Information Centers, led  to  development  of  community  learning  network.  In  1999 public library system had   850 public libraries  all over the country. The existing activities of public  library  networks  at  Thailand  are: 
5.1  educational  opportunities  in  Public  
library network 
District  and  sub-district  public  libraries  are  recognised  as  learning  centres 
(a) Learners  can  learn  through  any  of  the  formal  
and  information  source  
(b) Learners can transfer their grades gained from  
informal  education  to  formal  and  vice  versa (c) Opportunity for those miss schooling system and  
through NfE curricula or distance education or  
Thaicom  satellite 
(d) Provide  access  to  educational  material  for  
those disadvantaged or older citizens or socially  
isolated  or  have  limited  access  to  educational  
material, 
5.2  Collection  Community data 
The  public  library  networks  have  responsibility  to  collect  information  in  nine  accounts: 
(a) General  information  of  community 
(b) Society 
(c) Politics  and  local  administration 
(d)  Education 
94 
(e) Culture  and  local  intelligence (f) Local  science  and  technology (g) Agriculture  
(h) Industry  and 
(i) Economy.  
5.2.1  Data  Type  in  Collection 
Data  file  in  the  form  of  document  and  pictures  classified  by  sub-district  or  types  of  data,  such  as  population  data,  local  vocational  data,  and  local  small  enterprise  data,  etc.  
5.3   d issemination/education  of  Community 
There are various method and mode of community  education: 
• Exhibition  of  history,  culture,  local  wisdom,  
etc.  
• Displayof  poster  or  circulating  brochure  and  
pamphlet,  etc.  
• Internet  service  or  CD-ROM,  and/or  computer  
online 
• Creating  homepage  of  local  information  and  
developmental projects (initiated by His Majesty  
the  King  for  dissemination  on  Internet  by  all  
provincial  public  libraries,  ‘Chalermrajgumary’  
public  libraries) 
5.3.1  Mobile  Floating  Library  (introduced  in  1999)  • To promote reading and learning of people living  
along  the  rivers  and  canals  in  terms  of  books,  
toys,  videos,  and  exhibitions  
• Various  practically  useful  learning  packages   
like 
- Preservation  of  water  resources  to  make  
people  realise  and  participate  in  keeping  
their  rivers,  canals,  and  their  environment  
clean.  
- Problems like drug, family, election, villagers’  
law,  environmental  reservation,  as  well  as  
the  way  to  perform  jobs,  etc. 
• Proposed  to  start  multimedia  learning  systems  
at  village/local  levels  on  internet,  with  trained  
librarians  to  help  them 
• Host  a  bulletin  board  where  activities  can  
advertise  to  a  group  of  like-minded  people  or  
a  self-help  group,  for  free  
• Helps  to  a  small-business  owner,  such  as  an  
alternative  therapist,  to  place  a  leaflet  about  
their  services 
• Librarians  help  people  to  find  the  contact  
information  or  suitable  health  faculties. 

========5========

BUTDISUwAN: COMMUNITy-BASED  H EALTH  I NfORMATION AND  C OMMUNICATION  (CBHIC) 
Figure 2. Proposed community-based health information and communication (CBHIC) model. 
6. ProPosed  CBHIC Model  
The  proposed  model    (fig.  2)  is  an  inter- sectoral  collaboration  model  at  all  level,  i.e.,  from  grass root to national-level, to encourage solidarity  through  collective  action,  pooling  of  data,  avoid  duplication of efforts and expenditure, and ultimately  to  help  community  participation  and  self-reliant  development.  
6.1 need  for  CBHIC 
The existing system has the problem at linking  and  interacting  with  various  related  sectors  to  develop  networks,  partnerships  and  alliances  at  grass  root  level  and  other  levels  of  information  landscape.  Majority  of  the  sectors,  are  focusing  their work on a single system or a single objective,  which led them to work in isolation without knowing  what other system/sectors are duplicating its effort,  data, service and thereby waste of operating costs.  Due  to  lack  of  integrated  approach  it  is  unlikely  to  pay  attention  to  common  and  related  activities  of  the other sectors, which can help to supplement or  complement the work. The existing grass root level  systems are having weak correlation to improve the  efficiency,  equity  of  access  and  quality  of  public  services  in  general.  
6.2   o bjectives  of  CBHIC 
The proposed system, not to replace the existing  system,  enhance  the  capability  of  the  existing  machineries, workforce for consolidation of knowledge  required/acquired  for  the  programme  and      impart  orientation to workforce of all participating sectors.  In  the  process,  collaborative  system  will  • Identify  the  gaps  in  knowledge  
• Identify  the  plug  points  to  integrate  activity  
between  the  systems  
• Develop  a  better  institutional  capacity  around  
public  library  system.  
The joint effort at grass root level, helps for ‘getting  more  value  for  money  and  effort’  and  will  focus  on  improving equity of access to services, effectiveness  of care, efficient utilization of resources, satisfaction  of users, and sustainability. The integration interface  strengthen one-another in producing the better output,  through their ‘technical’ and ‘allocated’ efficiency in  productivity  and  the  best  use  of  resources      from  given  inputs.  The  ICHIS  needs  to  address  issues  based  on  the  needs  of  the  community  rather  than  demands,  reflective  to  their  expectations  thereby  achieve  equity  of  access  to  all  the  community. 6.3  Inter-sectoral  Collaboration  
The  inter-sectoral  collaboration  of  all  level  is  pictorially  presented  (fig.3),  to  be  developed  from  grass  root  level  to  policy  level,  where  collection  of  community  data  is  down-top  approach;  and  the  development  and  dissemination  of  community  education  material  with  top-down  approach.  
The  proposed  model  identifies  the  specific  problems and needs of the community through data  collection and consolidation, as a first step, before  planning  and  formation  of  group  process,  with  the  objective  to  tackle  community  and  sub-community  problems.  Once the formation of groups reaches a  certain level of   maturity, in terms of interaction skills,  group  cohesion,  and  the  proven  ability  to  manage  group programmes successfully,  provide access to  inter-group  process  and  external  mechanisms    to  further  enlarge  scale  of  interaction.  These  groups  
95 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2, MARCH   2013 
perhaps  becomes  the  basic  ‘building  blocks’  in  building  a  broader  community  and  strengthening  process  with  wider  horizontal  and  deeper  vertical  ties.  Once  groups  are  stable  and  operational,  they  are  encouraged  to  link  together  in  inter-group  or  inter-sectoral  groups  so  that  they  can  solve  bigger  problems and strengthen the power of the community  participation  and  creation  of  ‘informed  society’.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Figure 3. Inter-sectoral collabortive model. 
networking,  with  all  sectors  for  collection  of  data  though  grass  root  level  functionaries  and  develop  a  database  to  perceive  common  goal,  both  at  grass  root  and  decision  making  level. To  develop  community  profile,  considering  the  family  as  a  unit,  to  identify  the  needs  of  the  community  and  strengthen  the  sense  of  community 
Helps to avoid unwanted competition to achieve the  same  results  from  different  sectors/system Helps    to  include  function  and  capability  of  all  participating  sectors,  individually  as  well  as  collectively  and  collaboratively 
Helps  to  shape  the  process,  workforce  and  participation for sharing of resources (financial,  physical and human resource) to achieve equitable  access  of  services  of  each  sector  participating  in  the  integrated  activity 
Capacity  building  to  complement  or  build  upon  locally  existing  institutions  and  organisations  rather  than  replace  them. 
6.4  data  Collection  Model  
6.6  Institutionalisation  around  Public  library  
The  model  (fig.4)  provides  the  details  and  
network  
step-by-step  approach,  at  the  collaboration. 
The  collaborative  and  integrated  choice  forms  6.5  Benefits  of  CBHIC  
new  organisational  structures  and  relationships,  to  
There are many advantages, may not be available  
meet the community needs, where health becomes  straight  away,  to  be  derived  and  evolved: 
the  component  of  bigger  community  system. 
• Transcend  the  limitations  of  acting  in  isolation  
• CBHIS requires institutionalisation around public  
and  location-specific  plan  and  action,  both  
libraries network for strengthening local information  
horizontal as well as vertical  collaboration and  
system 
• Library  will  serve  as  support  organizations  at  
various  levels  (both  horizontal  and  vertical  
level  frameworks)  for  training,  consolidation  of  
community data and health education materials,  
including administrating group formation process  
and  lobbying  for  local  level  institutions.  
Team building and group formation processes will  
have  to  focus  on  demand-driven  skill  development  
such  as  building  collaboration  with  related  sectors  
and technical skills for collecting community data and  
creating community profile, matching profile to suitable  
literature both online and offline, strengthening the  
collective  learning,  problem-solving,  and  collective  
management  skills. 
As  the  content  is  important  and  requires  
continued  input  to  the  system,  libraries  are  more  
convenient  place  for  the  community  to  reach  both  
for  providing  data  or  to  seek  learning  materials  
about any aspects.  As librarians have been trained  
in  profiling  users,  preparing  proper  documentation  
and  matching  of  the  information  requirement  for  
reflective  to  the  needs  (identified  from  the  users  
profile)  of  the  community  or  individuals,  it  would  
Figure 4. data collection model. 
highly  helpful  to  institutionalise  the  inter-sectoral  
96 

========7========

BUTDISUwAN: COMMUNITy-BASED  H EALTH  I NfORMATION AND  C OMMUNICATION  (CBHIC) 
function in context of data and education. Of course,  librarians need additional training  in identifying the  related  resources,  organise/mobilise  communities  for  action,  advocate  health  related  issues,  use  a  variety of education/training methods, develop audio,  visual,  print  and  electronic  materials.  Some  of  the  activities  or  additional  competencies  for  librarians  are like health need assessment, program planning,  implementation and evaluation; service coordination;  and  resource  communication  to  achieve  better  participation  of  community  with  health  system.  In  the  proposed  system,  grass  root  level  workers  of  all  sectors  functions  as  executives/implementers. 
7.  ConClusI ons 
The present information landscape has blurred  the  lines  among  data,  information,  and  knowledge,  as  information  is  directly  accessible  to  people.  In  Thailand,  attempts  have  been  made  to  establish  information  system  using  IT  and  telemedicine  to  reach  and  to  achieve  two  objectives: 
(a) Imparting  knowledge  to  health  workers  and  (b) Collect  community-based  data.  
Many  studies  found  that  there  is  moderately  high  degree  of  acceptance  of  health  information  technology, with a modest level of basic IT knowledge,  by the staff of the health system at grass root level,  no  community  reciprocation.  Also  studies  suggest  that  there  is  a  requirement  to  introduce  innovative  approach  to  implement  IT-based  solution  to  reach  community  through  rural  system  and  to  collect  community  data,  timely.  There  is  need  for  detailed  research  on  developing  data  input  forms,  data  consolidation,  interface  building  among  the  related  sectors  and  ongoing  data  updating  process. 
reFerenCes 
1. Government’s vision for a health care system of  
the future is set out in the white papers: ‘Better  
information, better choices, better health, 2004,  
and  ‘our  health,  our  care,  our  say,  2006. 2. Use  of  information  for  health  service  planning  
and  evaluationhttp://www.healthknowledge.org. 
uk/public-health-textbook/health-information/3c- 
applications/use-information-planning 
3. Essential  health  technologies.  http://www.who. 
int/eht/eht_intro/en/index.html 
4. Innovative  technologies  that  address  global  
health concerns, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2010/ 
wHO_HSS_EHT_DIM_10.12_eng.pdf (accessed  
on  19  June  2011). 
5.   f rost,  L.J.  &  Riech,  M.R.  Access:  How  do  
good  technologies  get  to  poor  people  in  poor  
countries.  Harvard  University  Press,  2008. 6.   w HO,  medical  devices.  http://www.who.int/ 
mediacentre/factsheets/fs346/en/index.html  
(accessed  on  20  June  2011). 
7. Health services research: Scope and significance.  
http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/nurseshdbk/docs/ 
SteinwachsD_HSRSS.pdf (accessed on 21 June  
2011). 
8. http://www.definitionofwellness.com/dictionary/ 
health-education.html  (accessed  on  12  March  
2012). 
9.   w hat  is  health  education?  http://www.cnheo. 
org/PDf%20files/health_ed.pdf (accesed on 20  
June  2011). 
10. http://www.cnheo.org/PDf%20files/health_ed.pdf  
(accesed  on  20  June  2011). 
11. Rootman, et al.   Health  literacy  revisited:  what  
do  we  mean  and  why  does  it  matter?  2005.  
http://heapro.oxfordjournals.org/content/24/3/285. 
(accessed  on  20  June  2011). 
12. Siddamallaiah,  H.S.  Community-based  health  
literacy  model  for  libraries  in  India.  2005.  
http://www.icml9.org/program/track6/activity. 
php?lang=en&id=2 
13. Hibbard & Peter.  Supporting informed consumer  
health care decisions: Data presentation approaches  
that  facilitate  the  use  of  information  in  choice.  
Ann.  Rev.  Public  Health,  2003,  24,  413-33 14.   f ederal  Research  Division  Country  Profile:  
Thailand,  Library  of  Congress,  July  2007  pp.   
11. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/profiles/Thailand. 
pdf  (accessed  on  1  July  2011). 
15. Ministry of public Health. Thailand health profile.  
2005-2007. http://eng.moph.go.th/HealthSit/index. 
php 
16. UNESCO, Education system profile, http://www. 
unescobkk.org/education/resources/country-profiles/ 
thailand/education-sector-overview/ 
17.   w HO,  Country  health  system  profile, Thailand.  
http://www.searo.who.int/en/Section313/Section1525. 
htm 
18. Health  Policy  in  Thailand,  2006.  http://www. 
searo.who.int/Linkfiles/On-going_projects_HP- 
Tha-2006.pdf 
19. Pagaiya & Noree. Thailand’s Health workforce:  
A  review  of  challenges  and  experiences.  
2009.  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ 
HEALTHNUTRITIONANDPOPULATION/ 
Resources/281627-1095698140167/ 
THLHealthworkforce.pdf 
20. Sakunphanit, T. Thailand: Universal health care  
coverage through pluralistic approaches. http:// 
www.ilo.org/public/english/region/asro/bangkok/ 
events/sis/download/paper31.pdf 
21. Public  Health  Education  in  Rural  Thailand:  
Professional perspectives on the ‘learning @ the  
workplace’   Adult  Education  and  Development,  
No. 59. http://www.iiz-dvv.de/index.php?article_ 
id=403&clang=1 
97 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2, MARCH   2013 
22. Kolehmainen-Aitken,  R.  Decentralization  and  
human  resources:  Implications  and  impact.  
Human  Resou.  Heal.  Dev.  J.   1998,   2.   http:// 
www.moph.go.th/ops/hrdj/Hrdj_no3/table_contents. 
html 
23. Kijsanayotin,  Boonchai  &  Speedie,  Stuart.  Are  
Health  centers  in  Thailand  ready  for  health  
information  technology?:  A  national  survey.  
AMIA Ann.  Symp  Proc.,   2006.  424-28. 
98 
24. Sein,  U.T.  Health  volunteers:  Third  workforce  
for  Health-for-All  Movement  Regional  Health  
forum,  2006, 10(1). 
25. Lerdsuriyakul,  Kulthorn. Public library in Thailand.  
In 65th IfLA  Council  and  General    Conference,  
Bangkok,  Thailand,  20-28  August  1999.  

========9========

