DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 2013, pp. 87-89 
 2013, DESIDOC 
Users’ Perception on Medical College Libraries’ Systems  
and Services of Odisha 
Sunil Kumar Satpathy* and Santosh Kumar Satapathy** *Central Library, National Institute of Technology, G. E. Road, Raipur-492 010 (C.G) 
E-mail: drsksatpathy@gmail.com 
**Directorate of State Institute of Health & Family Welfare,  
Govt of Odisha, Bhubaneswar- 751 001 
AbStrACt 
Users are treated as the most important components of libraries, irrespective of types and size. After  all libraries are established and maintained for them. The collection development in libraries is based on  the needs of users and offers various library services to satisfy the information and document needs of  users. The study found that the medical college libraries need to develop systems which will allow library  professionals to quantitatively measure perceived quality, satisfaction, and loyalty towards library as well  as the degree to which specifc elements of a library's services, collections, and environment contribute  
to those perceptions. 
Keywords: Users’ perception, medical college libraries 
1. IntrOdUCtIOn 
The changing technology, explosion of information  and the transition of libraries from print to electronic  have  influenced  the  user  behavior.  Most  of  the  libraries, especially academic libraries are continued  to be hybrid (print and electronic) libraries. Compare  to other academic libraries, medical college libraries  need  special  attention  in  developing  collection,  systems and services, keeping the changing-needs  and information seeking behavior of the users. The  present study has undertaken a survey for assessing  the  exiting  situation,  perception  and  expectations  of  users  in  medical  college  of  Odisha.    
There  are  three  government  medical  colleges  in  Odisha: 
(1) Sriram  Chandra  Bhanja  Medical  College  (SCB  
Medical  College),  Cuttack,  
(2) Vir Surendra Sai Medical College (VSS Medical  
College),  Burla,  and  
(3) Maharaja  Krushna  Chandra  Gajapati  Medical  
College  (MKCG  Medical  College),  Berhampur.  
All  three  colleges  offer  undergraduate  and  postgraduate  level  courses.  SCB  Medical  College,  Cuttack,  also  offers  Bachelor  of  Dental  surgery  (BDS)  course.  
The  random  sample  of  the  survey  includes  450  medical  students,  selected  from  three  medical  
colleges,  which  includes  both  undergraduates  and  post-graduates, out of which 310 responded, wherein  30 students were included form each year of MBBS  course  in  each  college.  Librarians  of  the  colleges  were interviewed using a structured questionnaire to  collect data about their library. The libraries of these  medical colleges are equipped with a good numbers  of print resources such as books, journals, theses,  research reports, etc. and electronic resources. The  library  of  SCB  Medical  College,  Cuttack  has  been  designated as Resource Library (RL) under HELLIS  Network,  National  Medical  Library,  sponsored  by  WHO.  The  library  at  VSS  Medical  College,  Burla  is considered as a part of the Health Internet Work  (pilot project of Government of India) for networking  of  medical  college  libraries.    
2. LIterAtUre  revIew 
There are numbers of studies on users’ perception  and  medical  college  library  systems  and  services.    Bhatt1   examined  the  status  of  library  services  in  medical  colleges  in  Gujarat,  which  surveyed  13  medical  colleges’  libraries  and  found  they  are  still  in    development  stages  where  library  automation  is  not  encouraging  and  lacking  in  e-resources  collection. Baikady and Mudhol2   explored use of web  resources in learning, teaching, clinical practice, and  patient care and found that users prefer web-based  resources over traditional library and users perceive  
Received 15 December 2012, online published 19 March 2013                    

========1========

djlit, Vol.  33,  No.  2,  march  2013 
that web contains exhaustive information and is easy  to  use.  Baskaran3   revealed  that  maximum  use  of  library is by faculty of science particularly scientific  e-journals  for  preparing  seminars,  conferences  and  other  assignments.  Bashorun4,  et  al.  found  that  the  frequency  of  use  of  electronic  resources  by  teaching  staff    was  low,  as  most  of  the  faculty   time  is  spent  on  teaching.  The  study  also  pointed  out  some  of  the  problems  like  lack  of  awareness  to users about electronic resources provided by the  library,  lack  of  electricity  supply  to  use  computer,  slow  speed  of  network,  and  inadequate  searching  skills.  Kumar  &  Kumar5   found,  in  his  study  of  medical  and  management  colleges  in  Bangalore  city,  that  the  users  are  well  aware  of  e-resources  and  prefer  to  use  internet. 
3.  ObjeCt IveS Of  the  StUdy 
The basic objectives of the study are to assess  the  users’  perception  on  medical  college  libraries  systems and services of Odisha. However the other  objectives  of  the  study  are: 
(a) To  find  out  the  existing  situation  of  medical  
colleges  of  Odisha. 
(b) To  evaluate  the  present  library  systems  and  
services  of  these  libraries.  
(c) To  assess  users  perception  and  expectations  
of  medical  college  libraries. 
4.   r eSULtS And  dISCUSSIOnS       
College  Library  and  DDC  scheme  of  classification  in MKCG Medical College Library. All these libraries  are  confined  to  traditional  service  of  print  media  such  as  lending  service,  reference  services  and  reprographic service. Internet service is provided just  as  facility  with  access  of  very  few  e-resources.    
As  per  the  Table  1,  users  are  visiting  library  to  borrow  (98.3  %)  printed  books,  access  Internet  (91.2 %), use of magazines & newspapers (63.2 %),  reference  service  (60.6  %),  and  others  (51.2  %)  service  like  photocopy  of  documents,  preparation  of  projects,  assignments,  etc.  The  study  is  silent  what  91.2  %  of  internet  users  are  accessing. 
As  per  the Table  2  books  and  journals  are  still  being used. The survey is not clear about the access  to e-resource (whether library provide e-resources or  not) and library as place and physical environment   looks  positive  with  (69.4  %).                
5.   fI ndIngS Of  the StUdy    
All  the  medical  college  libraries  are  good  as  a  traditional  library.  Majority  of  the  basic  reference  services  are  moving  away  from  the  practice  such  as  current  awareness  services  (CAS),  selective  dissemination of information (SDI), document delivery  service, preparation of index, abstract, bibliography  etc.  Numbers  of  e-resources  and  ICT  facilities  in  the  medical  libraries  are  very  limited  and  not  satisfactory.  
6. 
SUggeStIOnS And  COnCLUSIOnS All  the  medical  libraries  in  Odisha  are  still  
The survey revealed that the collection of books  
in these libraries is up to 20,000 books, subscription  
operational  as  traditional  libraries,  at  the  same  of journal ranges from 50-100 titles, bound volume  
time, the survey response shows that 91.1 % of the  journals  were  up  to  10,000.  The  SCB  Medical  
respondents are visiting library for internet access,  College  Library  has  15000  theses  and  other  two  
which  provide  benefit  of  prediction  that  ‘though  libraries  has  1200  thesis.  All  the  medical  colleges  
users  are  interested  in  e-resources’  libraries  are  are traditional, where each medical college is using  
not equipped to meet these needs. Even the basic  different classification, NLM classification is used in  
automation  of  the  library  procedure  and  database  
services  are poor. The libraries have   to  subscribe  
SCB  Medical  College  Library,  CC  in  VSS  Medical  
table 1. Purpose of visiting library 
S. no. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 
Purpose 
Issue/return  of books 
Reference service 
Use of Internet /e-resource  Reading of magazines & newspapers Others 
table 2. Use on library collection and internet 
S. no. 1. 2. 3. 4. 
types of collection Books 
Journals 
Theses 
e-resources 
excellent 215 (69.4) 188 (60.7) 130 (41.9) 57 (18.4) 
Note: Figures in parentheses denotes percentage 
88 
no. of responses 305 
188 
283 
196 
159 
Percentage 98.3 60.6 91.2 63.2 51.2 
good 32 (10.3) 54 (17.4) 111 (35.8) 150 (48.4) 
Poor 63 (20.3) 68 (21.9) 69 (22.3) 103 (33.2) 
total 310 (100) 310 (100) 310 (100) 310 (100) 

========2========

satpathy aNd  satapathy:  UsErs pErcEptioN oN mEdical collEGE liBrariEs systEms aNd sErVicEs oF odisha 
e-resources  such  as  online  medical  databases,  e-journals and e-books. At the same time, institutions  have to be equipped with suitable campus network  (with good network backbone and Wi-Fi facilities) to  provide access to e-resources and provide suitable  tools and technique to provide single window access  to  e-resources,  as  well  as  print  resources  through  web-OPAC.  Libraries  have  to  have  website  of  its  own to achieve good visibility for all the resources.  Libraries  required  to  have  Web  2.0  capability  for  active  participation  of  users  in  promoting  effective  use  of  library  resources  like  blog,  wiki,  etc.    
referenCeS 
1. Bhatt, A.  An analytical study of the medical college  
libraries of Gujarat in the age of information technology.  
Lib.  Phil.  Pract.,  2012.  http://digitalcommons. 
unl.edu/libphi  (accessed  on  15  July  2012). 2. Baikady, M. R., et al. Web as a learning resource  
at the medical college libraries in coastal Karnataka:  
Perception  of  faculty  and  students.  DESIDOC  
J.  Lib.  Inf.  Technol.,  2011,   31 (2),  121-35. 3. Baskaran, C. User perception of library services  
in academic institutions in the southern districts  
of  Tamil  Nadu,  India:  A  case  study.  Lib.  Phil.  
Pract., 2011. http://unllib.unl.edu/LPP/ (accessed  
on  15 August  2012). 
4. Bashorun, M., et al. User perception of electronic  
resources  in  the  university  of  Ilorin,  Nigeria  
(UNILORIN). J. Emerg. Trend. Comp. Inf. Sci. ,  
2011,  2(11),  554-62. 
5. Kumar, Sampath B.Y. &  Kumar, G.T. Perception  
and  usage  of  e-resources  and  the  internet  by  
6. 
Indian academics. The Electronic Library, 2010,  28(1),137–56.  
Chiemeke,  S.  &  Umar,  S.S.  Users’  perceptions  of  the  use  of  academic  libraries  and  online  facilities for research purposes in Nigeria.  Lib.  Phil.  Pract.,  2007.  http://unllib.unl.edu/LPP/  (accessed  on  15  July  2012). 
About  the Authors 
dr Sunil Kumar Satpathy  obtained his MLIS, M.A.  (Pol.Sc),  PhD  (LIS)  and  PGDLAN  from  Sambalpur  University,  Orissa.  He  has  professional  experience  as  Librarian,  Sr.  Librarian,  and  Dy.  Librarian  for  more than 16 years. He has co-authored one book  on Library Classification, edited two books and has  contributed more than 50 papers in different journals/ edited  books/seminar  publications.  His  areas  of  specialisation are library automation, digital library,  e-resource  management,  and  library  management.  Presently,  he  is  working  as  the  Dy.  Librarian  of  NIT,  Raipur  (C.G). 
dr  Santosh  Kumar  Satapathy   obtained  his  MLIS  &  MPhil  (LIS)  from  Sambalpur  University  and  PhD  (LIS)  from  Berhampur  University,  Odisha.  He  has  professional experience of more than 15 years. He  has  authored  a  book  titled  ‘Information  Resource  Management  in  Health  Science  Libraries  in  Digital  Era’,  and  contributed  some  papers.  Presently,  he  is  working  as  the  Librarian  of  Directorate  of  state  institute of health & family welfare, Govt of Odisha,  Bhubaneswar. 
89 

========3========

