DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 2013, pp. 104-108 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Medical Librarianship as a Specialisation: A Conceptual Review 
M. Vasanthakumar 
Adichunchanagiri Institute of Medical Sciences, Balagangadharanatha Nagara-571 448 
Nagamangala Taluk, Mandya District, Karnataka 
E-mail: mvasanthkumar07@gmail.com 
AbStRACt 
The medical libraries have played a vital role in disseminating information for different user groups  in variety of settings in the health science institution. There are various programs such as The ‘LATCH  programme’,  ‘medical  informatics’,  ‘clinical  medical  librarianship’,  ‘clinical  informationists’,  ‘evidence  based medicine’ and, ‘consumer health library services. Libraries also are undertaking training program  called ‘Health Information Literacy’. There are some skills like quality fltering and critical appraisal of the  literature,notable  for  information  services. Yet,  there  are  many  skills  required  to  learn  for  effcient  and  effective  service  to  the  medical  community  and  hence  there  is  a  requirement  to  consider  the  ‘medical  librarianship as specialization program’ from general librarianship. 
Keywords: Literature attached to the chart (LATCH) programmes, medical informatics,  clinical medical  
 librarianship, clinical informationists, evidence-based library information practices, consumer  
 health library service, health information literacy, MEDLINE 
1. IntRoduCtIon 
Medical libraries have been evolving in consonance  with  the  development  health  care  services  and  institutions. In its evolution there are some distinct  tools, services, techniques, users’ languages, users’  pressure, user needs and domain knowledge for medical  librarianship.  The knowledge of general librarianship  is insufficient for the nature of professional service  required  for  medical  community  and  institutions. 
Santiago1   opined  that  the  carrier  of  a  medical  librarian  has  become  increasingly  complex  due  to  the  explosion  of  information  and  new  information  and  telecommunication  technologies. As  per  MLA2 (Medical Library Association, USA) medical librarians,  as  service  professionals,  need  to  provide  health  information about new medical treatments, clinical trials,  and standard trial procedures, tests and  equipment  details  to  physicians,  allied  health  professionals,  patients,  consumers,  and  corporations.  Lindberg  &  Humphrey3   identified  different  user  group  for  medical libraries such as health care professionals,  patients,  educators,  students,  researchers,  and  a  ministrators  who  may  need  theaccess  from  their  home, offices, wards, clinics, and libraries. Dorrington4 pointed out that clinical information needs are related  directly  to  the  care  and  treatment  of  the  patient.  Santiago1,  viewed  clinical  information  needs  are  different from those related to research, education,  and administration, because clinicians require rapid  
Received 15 December 2012, online published 19 March 2013  
access  to  practical  knowledge  that  can  be  applied  to  patient  care.  
Holst opined that most significant developments,  in  health  science  librarianship,  have  been  evolved  for the past 50 years, who are working in hospitals  and other health care delivery settings and program  developed  from  time-to-time.  Medical  librarians  have been providing hands-on training for database  searching, document delivery, support evidence-based  medicine  (EBM)  and  clinical  medical  librarianship  which  later  termed  as  ‘informationist’  by  Davidoff  &  Florence5. 
Masys6   identified  two  main  function  of  medical  field:  medical  procedures  and  management  of   information  life  cycle.  It  was  stated  that  half  of  the  industry’s  function  is  information-related  and  they  spend  equivalent  amount  of  time  on  information- intensive industry. Most of the medical library services  are  technology-intensive  and  must  strive  to  keep  up-to-date  with  changing  technologies  and  issues  in  librarianship.  
Marshall7 predicted  the  future  role  of  library  and  information  services,  particularly  to  meet  the  information  needs  of  clinicians.  Clinical  librarians  are: 
• To  be  part  of  health  care  team  to  provide  
enhanced  information  services,  
• To serve  literature searches and articles related  
to  a  specific  patient  care  problem  (LATCH),  

========1========

vasanthakumar: medical  librarianship as a specialisation 
• To  support  and  train  end-user  in  searching  
computerized databases such as MEDLINE and  
other  health  care  databases,  
• To help users to apply quality filtering or critical  
appraisal  of  the  literature,  and  
• To  integrate  clinical  information  systems  with  
the  patient  record. 
All  the  above  identified  services  and  works  requires  additional  training  to  undertake  various  specialised  services. 
2. 
SpeCIALISed  SeRvICeS 
2.1  Literature  Attached  to  the  Chart  (LAtCH)  
programme 
The      ‘literature  attached  to  the  chart  (LATCH)   is  one  of  the  earliest  services  that  attempts  to  link  relevant  information  contained  in  the  health  care  literature  to  support  patient  care.  As  per  Sowell8 LATCH  was  developed  at  the  Washington  Hospital  in  the  mid-1960s,where  librarians  placed  several  key  articles  with  a  chart  at  the  request  of  an  attending  health  professional,  eventually  resulted  over  1,000  LATCH  packages  that  were  kept  and  updated  in  the  hospital  library  for  continued  use,  but there was noparticipation to librarians in patient  care  rounds,  as  a  result,  the  librarians  could  not  anticipate  information  needs  like  clinical  librarians.  Thus, the role of the librarian in this programme is  just to facilitate information on request. Clevesy's9  worked  out  in  by  combining  librarian  participation  with  a  LATCH  service  in  community  hospital  at  Kansas  city  and  Algermissen10   called  as  clinical  information  delivery’7.  
2.2  Medical  Informatics 
Medical informatics is basically a machine-generated  data  and  medical  data.  Blois  &  Shortliffe11   defined  that  "medical  informatics  as  a  storage,  retrieval,  and  optimal  use  of  biomedical  information,  data,  and  knowledge  for  problem  solving  and  decision  making". Perry12 et al.   defined  it  as  “health-related  information, its structure, acquisition, and use” and  mentioned  that  health  sciences  librarianship  and  informatics  are  heavily  overlapping  with  strong  conceptual  links  to  the  theoretical  discipline  of  information science. Dalrymple13  opined that medical  informatics  focuss  only  on  technology  to  embrace  a  deep  understanding  of  biomedical  information  systems, the distinctions between medical librarianship  and  medical  informatics  have  blurred.  Frisse14 et  al.   argued  it  as  crossroads  between  biomedical  science and information technology, with a focus on  developing and delivering information systems that  support health care, decision making, databases for  outcomes  analysis,  and  health  sciences  research  and  administration.  
2.2.1  Medical  Informatics  versus  Health  Science  
Librarianship 
    Health  sciences  librarianship  is  to  handle  biomedical scholarly communications and   has been  on  management  of  print-based  published  literature  and using bibliographic systems. In twentieth century,  medical  librarians  have  focused  more  on  meeting  the information needs of the health professional, not  the patient or consumer. The expert knowledge and  practice of medical informaticists has been primarily  medicine,  rather  than  information.  Furthermore,  recent trends in medical informatics have extended  beyond knowledge-based information (the literature)  to  patient  data,  witnessed  in  the  development  of  electronic health record. The interests in both these  areas  are  limited  to  support  good  clinical  practice.  However,  both  systems  have  been  affected  by  external  trends,  placing  them  on  a  collision  course  with  one  another.  The  medical  librarian  now  deals  with  electronic  literature  and  extends  the  reach  to  patients  and  consumers,  in  addition  to  health  professionals.  
2.3  Clinical  Medical  Librarianship 
Clinical  librarianship  is  a  specialised  service,  originated  in  early  70s,  popularly  called  as  clinical  medical librarianship, was first introduced by Lambat,   University of Missouri-Kansas city medical library15 and  MLA  (1973)  projected  the  library  "we  take  the  library  to  the  user  out  of  the  walls."  Kane16 suggested medical libraries to support patient care,  education,  and  research,  (Giuse17,  et  al.)  to  work  closely with physicians, social workers, pharmacists,  nutritionists, interns, nurses, patients, and families.  Clinical  librarian  eventually  is  taking  the  library  to  the  point  of  care  and  accompanies  physicians  on  their  clinical  rounds,  attends  medical  conferences,  and  continuing  medical  education  programs.  2.4  Clinical  Informationist 
The term informationist was evolved in 2000 
18 
 to  operate within a clinical environment and are trained  in  both  information  science  and  clinical  sciences   to  find,  synthesise  and  present  information  on  a  routine  basis  and  as  a    team  member  of  clinical  round. Davidoff5  mentioned that a health information  professional  with  added  qualifications,  gained  to  work  collaboratively  and  on  equal  footing  with  medical and health professionals to meet information  needs  that  arise  during  both  direct  patient  care  and  medical  research.  Detlefsen19   illustrated  it  as  a  model  of  collaboration  between  the  two  fields.  It  is  perceived  that  clinical  informationist  is  an  extension of the existing clinical librarian role. Kelly15 suggested that a professional having the knowledge  of    information-seeking  skills,  informatics  and  the  clinical  subject    would  be  appropriate  to  work  as  informationist  and  to  contribute  better  at  patient  
105 

========2========

djlit, vol.  33, no.  2,  march  2013 
care,  medical  education  and  clinical  research20.  In  digital environment, librarian is not tied to a physical  library  space,  librarians  to  provide  information  to  the  point  of  need  and  to  assist  at  patient  care  decision-making.  
2.5 evidence-based  Medicine 
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) literatures are  like  a  special  breed  of  literature,  to  assess  the  risks  and  benefits  of  treatments  and  diagnostic  tests21.  It  requires  critical  appraisal  of  the  medical  literature and the conscientious, explicit, and judicious  use  of  current  best  evidence  in  making  decisions  about  the  care  of  individual  patients.  The  practice  of  evidence-based  medicine  means  integrating  individual  clinical  expertise  with  the  best  available  external  evidence  from  systematic  research22.  The  practice  of  EBM  involves  literature  search  and  appraisal skills that are part of the core knowledge  of librarians and hence libraries to become centers  of  evidence  and  librarians  to  play  a  proactive  role  as educators and facilitators and work more closely  with  health  professionals23.  Medical  librarians  are  being  well  equipped  with  the  necessary  skills,  tools  and  resources  at  the  point  of  care  as  well  as    research  and  education.    
2.6  Consumer  Health  Library  Services 
Consumer  health  information  services  are  often  hospital  based,  but  can  also  be  based  in  communities within public libraries18.   The healthcare  environment  of  today  places  great  emphasis  on  patient  health  education.  Consumers  now  engage  in  search  of  information  on  their  own  to  increase  their  knowledge  of  treatments  and  procedures  and  to  reduce  fear  and  anxiety  about  their  conditions.  This has resulted in a demand for quality information  written in lay terminology, which in turn has increased  the demand for librarians specially trained to locate  and  disseminate  this  information.  IFTF24   opined  that  consumers  are  “look  towards  the  marketplace  for  tools  that  enable  them  to  self-diagnose,  self- monitor, self-test, self-treat, and so on”. Scherrer25 felt  that  it  is  like  taking  the  library  to  the  users’  (point  of  need)  and  enter  the  consumers’  field  to  offer  sound  information.  Dismukes26,  also  of  the  opinion  that  librarians  can  assist  patients,  who  are  independently  seeking  information  that  can  be  tailored for a particular lifestyle, using  methods like  bibliographies and reading guides, or through  current  awareness  services  and  social  networks.  Ludwig27 considers it as a standard service offered by health  science  libraries  of  the  future.  It  is  indicated  that  most  of  the  libraries  are  offering  consumer  health  library services in USA and other western countries  effectively  cited  by  Kelly18. 
106 
2.7  Health  Information  Literacy 
American  Library  Association  (ALA)  defined  it  as  “a  set  of  abilities  needed  to  recognise  a  health  information  need  and  identify  information  sources,  assess  the  quality  of  the  information  and  its  applicability  to  a  specific  situation,  (analyse,  understand, and use) the information to make good  health  decisions”.  Medical  library  association28   ,in  context  of  academic  environment,  suggested  that  key  issue  is  to  make  users    know  the  resources  well and using different versions of core databases4.  Palmer29   remarked  that  well  served  bibliographic  databases,  electronic  full-text  journals,  electronic  books,  and  Internet  resources  do  not  come  from  just  one  provider  but  from  many,  so  the  challenge  for  librarians  is  to  provide  users’  with  the  skills  not  only  to  be  able  to  search  resources  but  to  determine which one is best for their specific enquiry  and  how  to  evaluate  the  content.  Librarians  are  also  major  supporters  of  evidence-based  practice,  assisting  clinicians  and  others  to  make  optimum  use  of  information.Recent  developments  in  web- based  support  for  learning  to  use  software  such  as  WebCT  and  Blackboard  are  providing  libraries  with  new  methods  of  delivering  and  supporting  information  literacy  programs.  The  introduction  of  library  portals,  it  is  hoped,  will  encourage  users  to  make  better  use  of  library  resources  and  not  to  rely  on  generic  search  engines  such  as  Google  to  find  information4. 
2.8 Quality  Filtering  and  Critical  Appraisal  of  
the  Literature  
Clinicians to access and evaluate the literature,  its content on a scientific basis, needsquality filtering  or critical appraisal skills, for which there are many  guidelines.  Of  course,  critical  appraisal  needs  of  clinicians  are  different  from  researchers  because  clinicians  need  to  establish  the  relevance  of  the  study findings to the care of their particular patients  as  well  as  the  scientific  validity  of  the  results30 Librarians provide information using ‘quality-filtering’17,      helps  users  to  develop  literature  search  skills  for  critical  appraisal  criteria,  and  teach  the  search  techniques.  
3. ConCLuSIonS 
Medical  librarians  are  an  integral  part  of  the  healthcare team. They have a direct impact on the  quality of patient care, by helping physicians, allied  health  professionals,  faculties,  and  researchers  to  stay abreast of new developments in their specialty  areas.  They  also  work  closely  with  patients  and  consumers  who  are  seeking  authoritative  health  information  (MLA). 

========3========

vasanthakumar: medical  librarianship as a specialisation 
The  role  of  the  medical  librarian  has  become  increasingly  complex. As  the  medical  librarian  has  to  extend various specialised services using various  programmes like LATCH, medical informatics, clinical  medical  librarianship,  evidence-based  medicine,  consumer health library services, health information  literacy, and as an Informationists, in different context    either  in  the  library  or  in  clinical  environment.As  informationist  librarians  can  provide  specialised  services  to  health  care  providers  and  supplement  the  resources  using  web-based  clinical  queries,   quality filtering and critical appraisal of the contents  of the scientific literature. With all these importance,  it is very clear that  there is aneed to consider the  medical  librarianship  as  ‘specialisation’. 
ReFeRenCeS 
1.  Santiago,  Andrea.  Medical  librarian  careers.  
1998.  http://healthcareers.about.com/od/ 
healthcareerprofiles/p/MedLibrarian.htm (accessed  
on  24  February  2011). 
2.  Medical Library Association. http://www.mlanet. 
org/career. 
3.  Lindberg, D.A. & Humphries, B.L. 2015-the future  
of medical libraries. New England J. Medicine,  
2005, 352(11),  1067-70.  
4.  Dorrington,  Linda.  Health  libraries  as  joint  use  
libraries:  Serving  medical  practitioners  and  
students.  Library  Trends,   2006.  FindArticles. 
com. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1387/ 
is_4_54/ai_n26915952/ (accessed on 1 January  
2006). 
5. Davidoff, F. & Florancae, V. The informationist:  
A  new  health  profession? Ann.  Internal  Medi. ,  
2000, 132(12),  996-98. 
6. Masys,  D.R.  Effects  of  current  and  future  
information  technologies  on  the  health  care  
workforce. Health Affairs, 2002,  21(5),  33.  Pro  
Quest Research Library. (accessed on 26 June  
2010). 
7. Marshell, Joanne G. Issues in clinical information  
delivery. Library Trends, Summer  1993,  42(1),  
83-107. http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/ 
journals/list/libt42.htm (# Marshall 93) (accessed  
on  6  July  2006). 
8. Sowell,  S.L.  LATCH  at  Washington  Hospital  
Center, 1967-1975. Bull. Med. Lib. Assoc.,  1978,  
66,  218-22. 
9.  Clevesy, S.R. A modified clinical librarian program  
for  the  community  hospital.  Bull.  Med.  Lib.  
Asso.,  1980, 68(1),  70-71. 
10. Algermissen, V. Biomedical librarians at UMKL.  
1974,  233. 
11. Blois,  M.  &  Shortliffe,  E.  The  Computer  meets  
medicine: emergence of a discipline. In Medical  
Informatics:  Computer  applications  in  health  
care,  edited  by  E.  Shortliffe  &  L.  Perreault.  
Vol.  20. Addison  Wesley,  Reading,  MA.  1990. 
12.  Perry,  Gerald  J.,  et  al.   A  current  perspective  
on  medical  informatics  and  health  sciences  
librarianship.  2005.  
13. Dalrymple, Prudence W. The impact of medical  
informatics on librarianship. Proceedings of 68th 
IFLA  Council  and  General  Conference  August  
18-24,  2002,  Glasgow. 
14.  Frisse,  M.E.  Informatics  and  medical  libraries:  
Changing needs and changing roles. Academic  
Medicine,  1995, 70(1),  30-35.  [PubMed] 15. Lamb, G. Clinical librarians on rounds. J. Amer. 
Med. Asso.,  1974,   230 (4),  521. 
16.  Kane,  Laura  Townsend.  Medical  librarianship:  
a  niche  for  every  interest.  2004.  http://www. 
liscareer.com/kane_medilibrarian.htm (accessed  
on  6  July  2010). 
17.  Giuse,  NunziaBettinsoli, et  al.   Clinical  medical  
librarianship:  The  Vanderbilt  experience.  Bull.  
Med.  Lib. Asso., 1998, 86(3),  412-16. 18.  Kelly,  Kate.  Health  science  libraries:  Future  
trends. 2009. http://epubs.rcsi.ie/cgi/viewcontent. 
cgi?article=1003&context=libraryart  (accessed  
on  7  July  2010). 
19. Detlefsen, E. G. The education of informationists,  
from the perspective of a library and information  
sciences  educator.  J.  Med.  Lib.  Asso.,  2002,  
90(1),  59-67. 
20.  Brown,  Helen-Ann.  Clinical  medical  librarian  to  
clinical  informationist.  Ref.  Serv.  Rev.,  2004,  
32(1),  45-49. 
21. Elstein, A.S. On the origins and development of  
evidence-based  and  medical  decision  making.  
Inflamm.  Res.,  2004,  53(Supp  2),  S184-9. 22.  Sackett,  D.L.  Evidence-based  medicine:  What  
it  is  and  what  it  isn’t.  British  Med.  J.,  1996,  
312(7023),  71-72. 
23.  Lappa,  Evagelia.  Clinical  librarianship  (CL):  A  
historical  perspective.  Elect.  J.  Acad.  Spec.  
Lib.,  2004,  5(2-3),  Greece. 
24. Institute for the future. Personal Health ecologies:  
Mapping  consumer  health  management  in  the  
next decade. 2005. http://www.iftf.org/node/774  
(accessed  on  26  June  2010). 
25. Scherrer, C.S. Reference librarian’s perceptions  
of  the  issues  they  face  as  academic  health  
information  professionals.  J.  Med.  Lib.  Asso.,  
2004, 92(2), 226-32. ProQuest Research Library.  
(accessed  on  26  June  2010). 
26.  Dismukes,  Jennifer.  How  can  medical  libraries  
become  more  relevant  in  the  age  of  digital  
information?  Lib. Student J.,  2009. http://www. 
librarystudentjournal.Org/index.php/lsi/article/ 
viewArticle/120/237  (accessed  on  21  June  
2010). 
27.  Ludwig,  L.  &  Star,  S.  Library  as  place:  Results  
of  a  Delphi  study.  J.    Med.  Lib.  Asso.,  2005,  
93(3),  315-26. 
28. Medical Library Association. Health Information  
107 

========4========

djlit, vol.  33, no.  2,  march  2013 
Literacy Task Force Final Report (Internet). 2009. 
The Association, Cited 1 February 2009. http:// 
www.mlanet.org/pdf/resources/hil final 20050420. 
pdf  (accessed  on  5  July  2010). 
29. Palmer, J. Schooling and skilling health librarians  
for  an  evidence-based  culture. In  Advances  in  
108 
Librarianship,  edited  by  F.C.  Lynden  &  E.A.  
Chapman,  Academic  Press,  New  York,  2000,  
pp.  145-167. 
30. Marshall, J.G. The impact of the hospital library  
on clinical decision making: The Rochester study.  
Bull.  Med.  Lib. Asso.,  1992,  80(2),  169-78. 

========5========

