DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 2, March 2013, pp. 109-113 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Collection Development in the E-content World: Challenges of  
Procurement, Access and Preservation 
N.V. Sathyanarayana Informatics (India) Ltd., Bangalore-560 004 
sathya@informindia.co.in 
AbstrACt 
Collection  Development  is  one  of  the  most  demanding  professional  functions  of  a  library  that  involves deeper understanding of the users’ needs, organisational eco-system in which a library functions,  and the supply-chain of information and publishing industry. The importance of this function to library’s  usage value continues to be more demanding in the e-content world. However, the multitude of choices  offered and controls exercised by the content creators and providers (authors, publishers, aggregators,  and distributors) and the laws that regulate the ownership, pricing, and usage rights of e-content makes  the collection development process one of the most challenging functions in the libraries of digital world  today. It is a very different process demanding the libraries to redefne their purpose and functions. This  article  is  a  broad  sketch  of  emerging  challenges  of  e-collection  development  and  the  changes  it  will  bring in other key functions of the libraries. The scope of discussion is limited to journals and books in  
the digital format.  
Keywords: Collection development, e-content, access, preservation 
1. INtrODUCtION 
In  the  print  world  of  educational  and  research  content, the collection development function revolved  around  the  library’s  philosophy  of  ownership  and  preservation  for  perpetual  use.When  the  libraries  purchased  the  content  from  the  publishers,  the  lending and perpetual usage rights came by default  under  the  first-sale  right  doctrine  of  the  copyright  laws.  Purchase  for  permanent  retention  was  the  only business model available for print collections. However, publishers continued to own the intellectual  property  (IP)  rights  of  the  content  often  without  even  keeping  a  single  copy  of  books  that  have  gone out-of-print and the back volumes of journals.  It  is  well  known  that  when  publishers  decided  to  come  out  with  digital  archives  of  their  old  journals  from  volume  1,  many  of  them  had  to  fall  back  on  the preserved collection of library’s bound volumes!  Evidently, the publishers did not directly control the  method of access and preservation of print material  after  it  was  sold  to  the  libraries.  
In  the  e-content  world,  publishers  have  taken  direct  and  strategic  control  of  content,  its  IP  ownership,  and  its  delivery  and  usage  through  the  entire  legal  life-cycle  of  the  content  until  the  copyright  period  expires.  Technology  will  facilitate  them to maintain just one copy of the content, and  a  few  mirror  copies  if  need  be,  to  serve  the  needs  
Received 15 December 2012, online published 19 March 2013  
of  all  the  global  users  through  internet.  What  the  libraries buy will be right-of-access to this copy for  limited or unlimited usage, for a limited or unlimited  period,  but  by  a  limited  number  of  users  defined  as  authorised  users  of  the  library  (members  of  the  library).  The  process  of  obtaining  and  maintaining  the  right-of-access,  which  is  known  as  licensing,  is  gradually  replacing  the  traditional  procurement  model  of  content  buying.    
2.   rEDE fININg PUrPOsE Of  COllECtION 
DEvElOPmENt 
With  the  publishers  taking  direct  control  of  managing the access and preservation, the selection  of  content  that  adequately  serve  the  needs  and  purpose  of  library’s  user  community  at  affordable  costs today becomes more important than its needs  in  a  distant  future.  The  new  mission  of  collection  development  may  have  to  be–just-in-time  access  to  the  relevant  and  required  content  accessible  by  the  user  from  anywhere.  This  imperative  mission  will  force  the  following  changes  in  the  collection  development  practice: 
• Collection development will become a short-term,  
need based plan. It will move from purchase for  
permanent  retention  to  licensing  for  a  definite  
or  indefinite  (perpetual)  period  of  access  and  
usage. 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2,  MaRCH   2013 
• 
• 
Investment focus will shift from content ownership  for  preservation  to  the  provision  of  technology  infrastructure that will enhance the access, delivery  and  usage  value  of  the  licensed  content. Libraries  will  have  to  engage  the  publishers  to  
from  one  month  to  one  year  or  more.  Consumer  models  are  available,  directed  to  end-users  where  a  user  can  license  access  rights  on  a  monthly  payment/usage  model  which  of  course  will  not  be  appropriate  for  libraries.  Normally,  the  libraries  
user  community  for  content  at  a  global  level. A  new  kind  of  usage  awareness  program  will  
develop  content  licensing  models  that  will  be  
sign  the  license  agreement  for  a  period  from  one  more  affordable  and  serve  the  needs  of  the  
to  three  years.  By  general  understanding,  library  
will  cease  to  have  right  of  access  to  the  content  
• 
once the lease period expires. Following are some  issues  and  questions  that  need  to  be  addressed  
have  to  be  created  for  the  user  community  to  under  this  model: 
understand  and  appreciate  the  new  content  licensing models, associated copyright compliance  
• requirements, and the price value of the content  in  addition  to  its  usage  value. 
3.   bU sINEss  mODEls 
Many  business  models  are  evolving  in  various  permutations  and  combinations  around  the  new  licensing  processfor  e-content  procurement. These  models may control the access by content volume,  duration  of  access,  size  of  the  user  population  and  the  computing  devices  used  for  access.  They  generally  fall  into  a  variant  of  one  or  many  of  the  following  general  models. 
3.1 Perpetual Access  rights 
This  model  is  similar  to  libraries  buying  books  and  journals  in  the  print-model.  The  library  can  license the content that grants access rights by its  user community for an unlimited period. Technically  this  means  that  the  library  has  the  access  rights  for its (organisational) life. The questions that arise  around  this  model  are: 
• Will the library have local archiving rights for the  
content? If so, how and when will the publisher  
deliver  the  content  and  at  what  cost?  • How does the publisher or the service provider  
guarantee  the  continuation  of  access  in  the  
event  of  closure  of  his  organisation?    • Will this model provide the ownership privilege  
under  the  doctrine  of  first  sale  right  that  the  
libraries  have  under  the  copyright  laws?  Or,  
will  it  reduce  ownership  to  the  state  of  virtual  
reality  forever? 
• Is  this  right  transferable  in  the  event  of  the  
library  or  its  parent  organisation  merging  into  
another  entity? 
• How is this right shared in the event of a split?  
• 
• 
This  model  is  popularly  used  by  aggregators  who  license  the  content  from  the  publishers.  The  publishers  generally  grant  limited  period  of  license  to  the  aggregators  are  constrained  by the business compulsions of limited options  in  dealing  with  licensing  period  and  pricing  terms.  While  delivering  the  content  to  libraries  aggregators  need  to  have  a  common  licensing  and  pricing  model  for  the  content  of  all  the  publishers  that  their  aggregation  platform  provides.  For  this  reason,  aggregators  are  not  able  to  guarantee  perpetual  access  rights  to  the  content  they  deliver.  There  are  a  few  exceptions  in  aggregation  models  which  have  tried to offer perpetual access rights. They are  difficult to manage, both by  the publishers and  the libraries. JSTOR, EBSCO, PROQUEST, etc.  are  the  examples  of  this  model. 
Many publishers offer this model as an alternative.  Some publishers offer this model only as conditional  and refuse to make available content for perpetual  access.  
Libraries  develop  collections  for  meeting  the  educational and research needs of their users.  While  licensing  the  content  under  this  model  may  restrict  the  library’s  access  by  the  period  of  lease,  what  happens  to  the  usage  rights  of  a  user  who  has  downloaded  a  portion  of  the  content  for  his  study  or  research  that  may  lost  beyond  the  library’s  lease  period?  User  has  downloaded  the  content,  like  he  takes  a  photocopy of an article form a journal under the  fair-use  doctrine  which  permits  him  to  use  the  article for the entire duration of his academic or  research needs. Does it amount to infringement  if  the  end-user  retains  the  downloaded  copy  even after the library’s subscription has expired  and  not  renewed? 
For  example,  if  theUniversity  is  split  into  two  
3.3   s ubscription  model 
groups  or  campuses,  or  the  library  is  split  into  two  independent  blocks  in  the  same  campus. 
3.2   l imited  Period Access  rights 
This  model  is  similar  to  renting  or  leasing  the  access  rights  for  a  limited  period  which  could  vary  
110 
This model is perceived to be similar to libraries  subscribing  to  print  journals  with  many  variants  in  the  right  of  access.  It  is  the  most  confusing  model  due  to  too  many  varied  practices  by  publishers  in  setting  the  terms  of  licensing.  It  is  a  hybrid  model  of  both  perpetual  access  rights  and  limited  access  

========2========

SaTHyaNaRayaNa: COLLECTION  D EVELOPMENT IN THE  E-C ONTENT  W ORLD 
rights.  Following  practices  and  issues  concerned  with  this  model  need  the  attention  of  libraries  for  engaging  with  publishers  to  fine-tune  this  model  for  reducing  the  ambiguity: 
• In  the  initial  days  of  e-journals,  publishers  
In  the  print  world  the  content  had  inherent  access  disadvantage.  a   copy  could  be  available  for  one  user at a time and the libraries had to buy multiple  copies  where  demands  were  more. a   fundamental  change  that  the  e-content  has  brought  in  is  the  
offered  free  access  to  e-version,  limited  to  the  
feasibility  of  24/7  access  to  all  the  content  that  a  current year of subscription as part of the print  
library licenses to all its users, and simultaneously.  subscriptions. E-access was for limited content  
This will never happen in reality and in any situation  (current  year’s  content  only)  and  for  a  limited  
only  a  small  part  of  the  library’s  content  will  be  period (one year). This was a business strategy  
under  use  by  a  small  section  of  the  users.  Taking  to  promote  e-journal  usage.  Most  publishers  
advantage  of  this  fundamental  change,  publishers  have dropped this model but some still continue  
have  replaced  the  multiple  copy  purchase  concept  
by  concurrent  access  model.  It  is  like  saying  three  
• 
to  offer.  
As a standard term of this model, when libraries  
concurrent  users  are  equivalent  to  licensing  three  
subscribe  to  e-version  of  the  journal  either,  
copies.  This  model  is  particularly  relevant  for  text  independently or as part of the print subscriptions  
books.  The  model  has  opened  up  two  distinct   with  additional  payment  for  e-version  access,  
pricing  options:  
• 
libraries get access to e-version of the content  for  the  current  year  (subscription  year)  with  archival  access  to  a  few  years  of  back-files  
depending upon the period for which the publisher  • 
• 
• 
maintains the back-files on his site. The current  year’s (subscription year) content will be made  available  for  perpetual  access,  but  the  back- years’ content will not be available for perpetual  access.  This  means: 
- if  the  publisher  has  his  collection  
available  for  15-years; 
- if the library has subscribed to e-version for  
5-years,  with  or  without  print  subscription;  - if  the  library  stops  renewing  after  5-years; - the access will be perpetual for the 5-years of  
paid subscription content, and will be stopped  
for  the  rest  of  the  10-years  content.  
Some  publishers  provide  back  file  access  as  part  of  current  subscription  for  rolling  period  of  3-5  years.  Rolling  period  is  one  of  the  most  confusing  and  least  practical  model. 
Of  late  publishers  are  optionally  applying  
Pricing based on number of users in the campus  or full-time-equivalent (FTE) model with no limit  on  the  number  of  concurrent  users.  
Pricing based on number of concurrent (simultaneous)  users accessing the content irrespective of the  user  population  of  the  library. 
3.5 Pay-per-view model 
This model is equivalent to paid document delivery  service.  Publishers  never  offered  this  model  in  the  print  world.  Digital  content  has  made  this  model  a  new,  though  very  limited,  revenue  opportunity  for  the  publishers  and  a  strategy  to  protect  the  stable  revenue  from  the  subscription  model.  This  model  has  all  the  potential  to  bloom  as  a  cost-affordable  option to both libraries and end-users. But, neither  the  libraries  due  to  practical  problems  nor  the  publishers due to revenue considerations, are  willing  to give a serious chance to this model. One of the   reputed e-Journal aggregators admitted to this author  in  a  recent  conversation  in  2011  that  his  system  is recording around 100 million turned-away users.  Even  charging  $1  per  article  would  have  brought  
subscription  model  model  for  e-books  also.  
him  a  revenue  three  times  more  than  his  current  They are applying this model largely for selling  
subscription based revenue. Turned-away users refer  their  complete  collection  or  subject  collections  
to  users  landing  for  full-text  in  a  publisher  portal  which will include their back-lists. Besides finding  
from    discovery  services  like  J-Gate  or  Google  or  new  market  for  their  books,  they  have  brought  
any  abstracting  and  indexing  service  that  provides  in  a  fundamental  change  by  digitizing  their  
links  to  full-text.    
back-lists.  The  concept  of  out-of-print  or  out- of-stock will no longer be applicable for books.  Subscription  model  for  books  has  raised  a  serious  issue  of  long-term  affordability  of  this  mode  to  libraries.  
3.4 User  Population 
Within  the  business  models  discussed  above,  publishers exercise different levels of access control  as  a  means  of  inventing  new  business  models  and  to  manage  price-flexibility  in  product  pricing.  
3.6   s ubscription-based Article  Delivery model 
Libraries rarely buy all journals due to affordability  constrains  even  from  speciality  publishers  in  their  subject area.  Users approach to published content  is  rarely  by  journal  but  more  by  their  topics  of  interest  and  study  needs.  Every  publisher  knows  that  subscription  model  limits  the  access  to  users  for  articles  from  his  other  non-subscribed  journals  by the library, but has rarely ventured into develop  article  delivery  model  as  a  parallel  and  equally  
111 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  2,  MaRCH   2013 
remunerative business model comparable to subscription  model.  Of  late,  as  a  means  of  making  the  article  delivery  (Pay-per-view)  model  affordable,  a  few  publishers  have  started  bundling  article  delivery  through  subscription  model.  For  example:  a  library  serving the needs of users in the chemical research  group  subscribes  to  five  journals  from  the  Royal  Society  of  Chemistry  (RSC)  which  publishes  about  30  journals.  Its  users  have  definite  and  regular  need  for  articles  from  the  rest  of  the  RSC  journals  but  the  library  can’t  afford  to  subscribe  them  all.  RSC’s  subscription-based  offer  for  a  pre-defined  bundle  of  articles  in  the  range  of  100-1000  from  the  non-subscribed  journals  can  meet  library’s  the  needs  in  as  affordable  model. 
4.   rI ghts  &  lICENsEs  
When  a  library  buys  a  book  or  a  journal,  it  acquires the right to make it available for unlimited  and  unrestricted  use  by  its  user  community  and  retain the acquired copy forever. In effect, it acquires  unlimited  lending  rights  to  its  users.  This  right  is  called  the  first-sale-right  which  includes  the  right  to  protect  the  copy  for  ever  or  re-sell  that  copy  to  anybody. The implicit right in protecting the physical  copy  for  ever  will  also  extend  the  right  to  take  a  backup  copy  for  use  in  the  event  of  the  book  suffering  mutilation.  The  only  limitation  imposed  on  the  library  by  the  copyright  law  is  that  the  total  restriction from copying for any purpose other than  limited  copying  of  a  small  portion  (not  substantial  portion) of the book required by an authorised user  of the library for his/her own individual educational  or  research  and  study  purpose. This  concession  is  given  under  the  fair-use  doctrine.  
4.1   m anaging  the rights  and licenses 
When  the  library  moves  to  e-content  what  it  acquires  is  the  right-of-access  to  the  content  wherever  the  publisher  is  hosting  the  digital  copy.  Since  the  library  doesn’t  get  a    physical  copy  and  the  medium  limits  the  right  to  access  only,  limited  or perpetual, it opens up a new world of controlled  or  managed  access.  Due  to  the  fear  of  the  fact  that the copyright laws do not adequately cover the  situations  and  implications  of  content  acquisition  and  access  in  the  digital  medium,  publishers  have  started  the  practice  of  licensing  the  copyrighted  content  with  additional  terms  to  protect  their  IP  rights and economic interest. With every purchase of  e-content signing a license agreement has become  a  normal  practice  now.  The  digital  collection  of  content  that  libraries  will  be  developing  in  future  and  their  ownership  patterns  will  be  represented  by  two  elements:  
(a) Rights acquired for access based on the business  
model  of  the  publisher  chosen  by  the  library  
112 
(b)   a  Licensing document describing terms of contract  
under  which  the  rights  are  acquired.    
These two elements will control and manage the  access all through the perpetual contract. Hence, all  the  systems,  functions  and  services  of  the  library  such  as  the  library  automation  system  used  by  the library, circulation of e-content, access through  discovery services like J-Gate or library’s OPaC or  a federated search systems, renewal tracking, local  archiving,  etc.,  will  have  to  be  redefined  to  work  through  controls  of  these  rights  and  licenses.  
5. PErPEtUAl  ACCEss vs. trUE 
OWNErshIP 
The  print  world  has  created  a  ownership  myth  for  the  libraries  which  is  a  result  of  the  social  responsibility  that  the  libraries  assumed  as  social  memories of the civilisation. It was a limited ownership  of the physical copy that the library acquired through  purchase.  The  real  owner  remained  the  IP  rights  owner  (author  represented  by  his  publisher).  The  physical ownership guaranteed perpetual access to  the  content  by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  first  sale  right  doctrine  of  the  copyright  law  as  mentioned  earlier  in  this  paper.  With  that  came  the  perpetual  maintenance  responsibility  to  the  library  and  the  associated  costs. 
When  the  libraries  purchases  a  digital  copy  of  a  book,  the  privilege  of  perpetual  access  should  be  applicable  to  this  purchase  also  through  this  doctrine  of  first  sale  right.    But,  there  is  a  serious  technology bottleneck for exercising this right at the  usage level, particularly in the function of lending the  digital  book.  Copyrighted  works  donot  comfortably  fit within the constraints of the first sale doctrine1.  Copyright laws completely restrict substantial copying  of the copyrighted material. When the library loans  a printed book to its patrons, it involves no copying.  But,  when  it  lends  a  copy  of  the  digital  book,  the  lending process creates additional digital copies at  the delivery and usage point.  The library retains the  source copy unless deleted/deactivated temporarily  from  its  digital  content  repository  through  some  special technology and restores only after the user  returns  the  digital  copy.  There  must  be  a  control  at  the  user’s  end  to  permanently  delete  the  copy  from  the  user’s  machine  once  the  loan  period  is  expired. While the digital rights management (DRM)  technologies  exist  to  manage  this  process,  it  is  expensive  and  often  proves  to  be  an  irritation  to  the  user. 
The perpetual access is highly desirable to libraries  from the century-old mind set of retention for re-use.  However,  in  the  e-content  world  libraries  have  an  opportunity to bring in a paradigm shift in the pricing  models for digital content as service rentals. Some  disruptive economic model like Google needs to emerge  for  the  paid  content  to  make  this  happen. 

========4========

SaTHyaNaRayaNa: COLLECTION  D EVELOPMENT IN THE  E-C ONTENT  W ORLD 
6.   CONC lUsIONs 
Nothing explains the implications of the changes  the  digital  technology  and  the  internet  are  driving,  better than the recent uproar in the massive digital  lending  of  e-books.  When  a  library  buys  a  print  book,  by  the  doctrine  of  first  sale  right  it  acquires  unlimited  lending  privilege  except  that  the  nature  of the medium puts a restriction on lending to one- user-at-a-time and only until the copy gets mutilated  through circulation to a point of non-use. Normally,   a book survives 20-50 circulations depending on the  quality of paper and binding. This system of lending  is  undergoing  fundamental  change  with  e-books.  Overdrive  is  a  company  that  provides  a  platform  for facilitating and managing lending of e-books as  a  technology  service  to  the  libraries.  In  just  one  year (2011), american libraries checked out loaned  350 lakhs digital titles, with 170 lakhs reservations  pending2! Threatened by potential loss of new sales  due  to  the  massive  upsurge  in  digital  lending  by  libraries, several publishers have withdrawn selling  e-books  to  libraries.  In  an  open  letter  to  librarians  explaining  its  switch  to  limit  the  number  of  check- outs a library can offer on an e-book, Harper Collins  said  that  its  previous  policy  of  “selling  e-books  to  libraries  in  perpetuity,  if  left  unchanged,  would  undermine  the  emerging  e-book  eco-system,  hurt  the  growing  e-book  channel,  place  the  additional  pressure  on  physical  bookstores,  and  in  the  end  
lead to a decrease in book sales and royalties paid  to  authors”3.  When  a  library  now  buys  (licenses),  an e-book with perpetual access rights, technically  it can use one copy (one license) to lend the book  to any-number-of-its-members-at-a-time  with no fear  of  loss  or  mutilation.  Extend  this  concept  to  the  public library system of a country. The implications  could  be  disastrous  to  the  publishing  system  of  the  world.  Obviously,  the  e-content  access  and  delivery  system  needs  to  invent  a  new  model  for  library  buying.      
Libraries will be increasingly buying the e-content  through new form of  licensing for a fee. But, what  will not change is, that library’s users will continue  to  access  the  content  free  unless  the  libraries  also  shift  to  commercial  eco-system  of  charging  for  usage. 
rEfErENCEs 
1. First-sale-doctrine. Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia. 
org/wiki/first-sale_doctrine. 
2. e-book  discovery  and  sampling  skyrocketing  
at public libraries. http://overdrive.com/news/e- 
book-discovery-and-sampling-skyrocketing-at- 
public-libraries. 
3. Open letter to librarians. Harper Collins, library  
love fest blog. 3 March 2011. http://harperlibrary. 
typepad.com/my_weblog/2011/03/open-letter-to- 
librarians.html.  
113 

========5========

