DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 2, March 2014, pp. 140-146 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Impact of Academic Library Services on User Satisfaction: Case Study of Sur  
University College, Sultanate of Oman 
B. Sriram* and M.K.G. Rajev**  
*IST Department, Sur University College, PO Box: 440, PC: 411, Sur, Sultanate of Oman 
E-mail: srishan11@gmail.com, sriram@suc.edu.om 
**Learning Resources Centre, Sur University College, PO Box: 440, PC: 411, Sur, Sultanate of Oman 
E-mail: mkgrajev@gmail.com, mkgrajev@suc.edu.om 
AbStrACt 
 The  developing  countries  need  to  provide  various  services  in  the  academic  libraries  in  order  to  sustain the development. The academic libraries have to afford services based on users’ requirements.  The users are attracted towards using the academic libraries due to these amenities. These services and  facilities of the academic library users have signifcant impact on the users’ satisfaction. This research  is conducted to identify the various services and facilities required by the academic library users of Sur  University  College  and  their  degrees  of  impact  on  its  users’  satisfaction.  Primary  data  were  collected  from  the  academic  library  users. The  data  related  to  services  such  as  photocopying  facilities,  printing  facilities,  study  desk  facilities,  PC  provisions  and  library  catalogue  which  were  provided  by  the  Sur  university college  academic library were analysed  with the different statistical measures to identify the  impact levels. An impact model was constructed and developed in measuring the aforesaid factors and  the  degrees  of  impacts  on  the  users’  satisfactions.  Printing  and  photocopying  facilities  found  to  have  high signifcant impact on the Sur university college academic library users. Also, some suggestions were  made to provide quality services and increase users’ satisfactions.   
Keywords: Library users, library services and facilities, library user satisfaction, photocopying facilities,  
 printing facilities, catalogue services  
1. INtrODUCtION 
The academic libraries need to provide various  services  and  facilities  to  the  users  to  motivate  them  to  use  library.  The  developing  nations  are  nowadays  concentrating  more  in  providing  various  facilities  and  services,  in  turn,  which  will  help  the  countries in scientific and research development. The  ultimate  aim  of  providing  such  facilities  will  enable  the  users  towards  utilising  the  library  services  at  greater  potentials.  
Based on the user requirements different types  of  services  are  provided  in  the  academic  libraries.  These facilities and services have greater impact on  the users’ satisfaction. The academic library users,  in  general,  expect  some  cost  benefit  services  so  as  to  use  the  library  regularly. Apart  from  this,  the  libraries  provide  some  academic  facilities  to  have  international benchmarking. These library facilities and  services  assist  the  learners  and  the  academicians  in  educational  processes.  The  cognitive  skills  are  developed  by  making  the  users  to  use  the  library  resources. The proper utilisation of library resources  can  be  optimally  used  only  by  attracting  the  users  
to  the  library.  This  attraction  is  possible  only  by  providing  some  good  services.  
The  library  users’  satisfaction  plays  a  vital  role  in  the  development  and  provisions  of  the  library. The potential users’ feedback regarding the  library  resources,  services  and  facilities  should  be  considered  for  providing  necessary  resources  and  amenities in the library. The Middle East countries,  as  developing  nations,  need  to  concentrate  more  on the users’ satisfaction to benchmark themselves  with the international standard. The higher education  providers need to measure the users’ satisfaction to  maintain  the  quality  in  all  the  activities.  Thus,  the  study  was  undertaken  to  identify  the  major  impact  factors  of  the  services  and  facilities  provided  in  the  academic  library. 
2.  LIterAtUre SUrvey  
Martensen & Gronholdt1  evaluated the literature  and  surveyed  a  focus  group  to  identify  the  key  determinants of the academic libraries. They identified  that, the collection of printed publications, e-resources,  library  services,  technical  amenities,  and  library  
Received 18 April 2013, revised 22 January 2014, Online published 18 March 2014 

========1========

SRIRAM  &  RAJEV: IMPACT Of ACADEMIC  L IBRARy SERVICES ON  U SER  S ATISfACTION 
atmosphere are key determinant to identify the service  quality of the libraries. Lacaster2  observed that the  evaluation  of  library  based  on  the  satisfaction  of  the  library  users  can  be  identified  in  the  possible  ways of such as cost evaluation, cost effectiveness  evaluation,  cost  benefit  evaluation. 
Numerous  studies  were  conducted  by  various  authors to measure the academic library services and  the users’ satisfaction. Poll & Payne3  has conducted  the  study  and  revealed  that  the  diverse  projects  all  over  the  world  are  trying  to  establish  that  the  usage of library services can optimistically persuade  competences and skills, attitude and actions of users.  They suggested that the advantages that academic  library users practice by using library services can be  evaluated in terms of information gained, information  literacy, educational and professional achievement,  social  addition,  and  amplify  in  entity  well-being. 
Pauline4   identified  that  the  students  are  using  the library services more than the academic staffs.   Sowole5   revealed  that  by  providing  the  required  information resources and services the library users’  satisfaction  shall  be  attained.    
Nnadozie6 concluded that the facilities required  to  deliver  the  qualitative  services  of  the  library  are  either  available  in  insufficient  quantities  or  totally  not  available.  Abagai7   explored  that  the  usage  of  the  library  users  and  certainly  their  satisfaction  with  the  services  of  the  library  depends  on  the  availability of the skilled staff, knowledge materials  and accommodation in the library. Nwalo8  classified  the term evaluation of the library as the assessment  and  quantification  with  the  help  of  standards  and  regulations  of  the  library  services  and  provisions.  
Cullen & Calvert9   observed  that  the  evaluation  of input based on collection, budget, staff resources  and process competence measures are the indicators  of the library users’ perception of the resources and  services offered by the library. According to Kaur10 the academic staff distinguish that the eminence of  library services is just above the average. The library  has  positive  impact  on  academic  staff’s  research  and  teaching  and  learning  purposes.  
Simmonds & Andaleer11  found that the academic  library  usage  is  mostly  influenced  by  a  users’  awareness  and  resources  of  the  library.  fidzani12  specified that assistance is important in the usage of  library services and resources will help the students  to  meet  their  information  needs.  
Though  various  studies  were  conducted,  very  less  research  studies  were  conducted  with  respect  to  Middle  East  countries  libraries. Apart  from  that,  very  few  literatures  were  available  related  to  the  various services provided by the academic libraries  in  Middle  East  nations. Thus,  this  study  is  done  to  identify  the  impacts  of  the  services  provide  by  the  academic  library  of  Sur  University  College. 
Though various studies were conducted on user  satisfaction  of  academic  libraries,  still  there  are  some  lacking  in  services  and  facilities  provided  in  the  libraries.  There  is  a  need  to  study  separately  about  the  impact  factors  of  services  and  facilities.  Thus a study was conducted to measure the impact  of  these  facilities  on  academic  library  users  of  Sur  University  College. A  model  was  developed  to  identify  the  impacts  of  the  factors  defined  as  the  research objectives. The high and low level impact  factors  of  the  services  and  facilities  provided  in  the  academic  library  on  users’  satisfaction  were  also  identified.  
The academic libraries provide various services  ranging from self service to staff supports. In Middle  East countries, during quality audits and accreditation  processes, the library user satisfaction and other facilities  provided by the academic libraries were considered  as  key  factors  by  the  external  auditors.      
The services and facilities provided in academic  libraries are: Borrowing and lending books and other  materials, reference services, catalogue, photocopying,  printing,  study  desks,  computer  lab  facilities  and  information services, institutional membership, inter- library  loan.  Some  major  services  provided  in  Sur  University College were considered for this study. The  factors considered for this study are: Photocopying  facilities,  Printing  facilities,  Study  desks  facilities,  Library  Catalogue  and  PC  provisions.  
3. ObjeCtIveS 
The basic aim of this research is to identify the  academic  library  services  and  their  corresponding  degrees of impact on Sur University College library  users’  satisfaction.  
The following research questions were formulated  to  conduct  this  study. 
(1) What  services  provided  by  the  Sur  University  
College  academic  library  have  impact  on  the  
users’  satisfaction? 
(2) How  shall  the  academic  library  enhance  these  
services  to  increase  the  users’  satisfaction? 
3.1  Hypothesis 
H1: Photocopying facilities provided in the academic  library have significant impact on library user satisfaction  in  Sur  University  College. 
The  academic  library  provide  photocopying  facilities  of  permitted  book  materials,  academic  staff handouts and other courses related materials.  This  photocopying  facility  is  one  of  the  important  factors to attract the users to visit the library. Thus  the  degree  of  impact  of  this  photocopying  facility  on  the  library  users  was  to  be  measured.  H2:  Printing  facilities  have  imperative  impacts  on  the  library  user  satisfaction. 
141 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
Due  to  various  requirements,  the  academic  library  in  the  campus  provides  printing  facilities  to  the users to print the handouts and other resources.  The  academic  library  users,  students  in  particular,  expect  some  cost  cut  facilities  to  accommodate  themselves to the financial requirements. The degree  of impact of printing facilities on the user satisfaction  was  to  be  measured. 
H3:  The  study  desk  facility  has  highest  impact  on  the  library  user  satisfaction. 
The  study  desks  provided  in  the  library  should  have  enough  comfort  for  the  users.  In  particular,  if  the  user  happens  to  spend  more  time  of  the  day  in  the  library,  the  study  desks  should  be  properly  designed and fitted. The developing nations, though  they provide study desks, some academic libraries do  not provide with enough comfort. The management  feels  that  the  investments  on  study  desks  do  not  have  enough  financial  returns.  Thus,  to  identify  whether  the  study  desks  facilities  have  impact  on  user  satisfaction  and  to  measure  the  degree  of  impact,  hypothesis  3  has  been  set.      
collected from 640 respondents were considered and  analysed. 5 points Likert scale as 5–Highly Satisfied  to 1–Highly Dissatisfied to measure satisfaction of the  academic  library  users  in  Sur  University  College.  
5. ANALySIS AND  DISCUSSIONS 
Out of 640 respondents, 11 % of the respondents  were  staff  members  (academic  &  administration).  Nearly  22  %  of  the  respondents  were  studying  foundation programme. Around 43 % of the students  were studying diploma courses. Nearly 24 % of the  respondents found to be studying bachelor’s courses.  Approximately  42  %  of  the  respondents  were  male  and  58  %  were  female.  The  respondents  found  to  fall  in  three  different  age  groups.  About  58  %  were  between  the  ages  18  and  30.  Approximately  35  %  were  between  30  and  40.  Nearly  6  %  of  the  respondents  were  between  40  and  50.  Less  than  1  %  was  above  the  age  50  years.  
Also  it  had  been  observed  that  nearly  24  %  found  to  visit  the  library  several  times  a  day  
for  various  purposes.  Around  27  %  were  visiting  H4: PCs  provided  in  the  academic  library  have  
the  library  once  in  a  day.  Approximately  18  %  
major  impacts  on  library  user  satisfaction. 
In this modern world, the academic library need  to  provide  sufficient  number  of  computers  with  required software in the libraries. The e-databases,  e-journals, e-books, and other e-resources help the  library users in gathering information related to their  course  of  studies.  The  e-resources  are  the  most  essential  knowledge  source  in  this  technological  world.  for  these  reasons,  the  library  should  have  updated computers to satisfy the users’ requirements.  Thus  Hypothesis  4  has  been  set  to  discover  the  impacts  of  PCs  on  user  satisfaction.  
H5:  The  OPAC  has  major  impact  on  user  satisfaction. 
Earlier  card  catalogue  was  used  in  traditional  academic library. But due to the explosion of modern  information  technology,  the  library  catalogues  are  turned as Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC).  But  still  some  of  the  libraries  are  using  both  the  card  catalogue  as  well  as  the  online  public  access  catalogue  to  help  the  users.  In  Sur  University  College,  the  academic  library  is  developing  OPAC  system.  The  students  are  being  trained  to  use  this  system.  Hence,  Hypothesis  5  has  been  set  to  determine  the  impact  of  library  catalogue  in  user  satisfaction  (fig.  1). 
4.   re SeArCH  Met HODOLOG y 
A questionnaire was distributed to the respondents  with 5 demographic questions, 17 close-end questions  and overall satisfaction question as research instrument.  The  questions  related  to  services  were  considered  and analysed for this study purpose. The data were  collected  from  the  staffs  and  students  of  the  Sur  University  College,  Sultanate  of  Oman.  The  data  
142 
respondents  were  visiting  the  library  once  a  week.  Nearly  24  %  of  the  respondents  found  to  visit  the  library  several  times  a  week.  Only  less  than  8  %  of the respondents were visiting once a month. The  students  visit  library  for  various  reasons  such  as  borrowing  books,  preparing  materials  and  to  find  information.  Some  respondents  were  visiting  the  library to read newspapers, to read course books, to  prepare study materials. Student respondents stated  that  they  visit  library  to  use  various  other  services  like  printing  and  photocopying  materials,  etc.  5.1  Photocopying  Facilities  
The  analysis  showed  that  the  mean  was  3.86,  sample standard deviation 1.03, coefficient of variation  26.57  %,  standard  error  in  mean  0.09,  skewness  -0.86,  and  the  kurtosis  were  0.38.  
5.2  Printing  Facilities 
The  statistical  analysis  showed  that  the  mean  was 3.90, sample standard deviation 0.99, coefficient  of  variation  25.29  %,  standard  error  in  mean  0.09,  skewness  -0.88,  and  the  kurtosis  were  0.49.  5.3 Study  Desk  Facilities 
The  statistical  analysis  showed  that  the  mean  was 3.43, sample standard deviation 1.21, coefficient  of  variation  35.37  %,  standard  error  in  mean  0.11,  skewness  -0.39,  and  the  kurtosis  were  -0.83.  5.4 PC  Provision 
The  statistical  analysis  showed  that  the  mean  was 3.82, sample standard deviation 1.07, coefficient  of  variation  28  %,  standard  error  in  mean  0.10,  skewness  -0.80  and  the  kurtosis  were  0.17. 

========3========

SRIRAM  &  RAJEV: IMPACT Of ACADEMIC  L IBRARy SERVICES ON  U SER  S ATISfACTION 
5.5 Library  Catalogue  Facilities 
The  statistical  analysis  showed  that  the  mean  was 3.70, sample standard deviation 1.16, coefficient  of  variation  31.35  %,  standard  error  in  mean  0.10,  skewness  -0.74,  and  the  kurtosis  were  -0.15.    5.6   r egression  and  Impact  Analysis    
To measure the impact level, simple linear and  multiple regression analysis were conducted. Table 2  shows  the  mean,  standard  deviation  (SD),  r2,  p 
that the variables are linear with 72.4 % significance  (r2   =  0.724,  p   <  0.001). 
Table 4 represents the correlation matrix and the  rank  with  respect  to  the  impact  of  factors  over  the  overall satisfaction of the users of the Sur University  College.  It  is  clear  that  the  printing  facilities  have  the  highest  impact  on  user  satisfaction  of  Sur  University  College  and  study  desk  facilities  have  the  least  impact  on  the  user  satisfaction. 
values  of  independent  impact  factors. The  impacts 5.7 
Discussions  
from Table 2, all the construct variables selected  
have  been  ranked  based  on  the  highest r2   value.  Table 1 shows that printing facilities have 1st  position  with  highest  mean  value,  higher  than  the  average  of  means  ( X = 3.74 )  with  59.4  %  significance  (r2 =  
have  p   <  0.001.  Thus,  it  is  clear  that  the  all  the  impact  factors  selected  have  considerable  impact  on library users. The impacts may be classified into  
0.294, p   <  0.001).  The  least  SD  showed  that  the  
two major categories such as high impact variables  
data  were  more  consistent  than  all  other  factors. 
Photocopying facilities provided in the academic  library holds the 2nd  position with mean 3.86 higher  than the average ( X = 3.74 ) with 54.8 % significance  (r2 =  0.594,  p   <  0.001).  The  PC  provided  in  the  academic library have the 3rd   rank  with  mean  3.82  which  is  also  higher  than  the  average  ( X = 3.74 )  
and  low  impact  variables.  
H1:  Photocopying  Facilities  
from Table 2, it can be observed that photocopying  facilities  provided  in  the  academic  library  have  second  highest  mean  and  r2.  The  photocopying  facilities  are  provided  in  most  of  the  academic  
with  44.3  %  significance.  The  library  catalogue libraries with minimum rate. Some academic libraries  
provide these services with the help of commercial  
facilities  hold  4th   rank  with  mean  3.70  lesser  than  the  average  with  20.2  %  significance  (r2   =  20.2,    p < 0.001). The study desk facilities have the least  impact  on  the  library  user  satisfaction  with  mean  3.43  which  is  lesser  than  the  average  at  12.6  %  significance  (r2   =  0.126,  p   <  0.001).  To  check  the  
vendors.  Also,  self-service  photocopying  facilities  are provided in most of the Sur University College.  The  users  are  allowed  to  take  single  side  and/or  double  side  photocopies  on  their  convenience  with  low  costs.  As  the  users  are  allowed  to  photocopy  
consistency  between  the  independent  variables,  the  authorised  materials  with  low  cost,  it  has  the  multiple  regression  analysis  was  conducted  and  second  highest  impact  on  library  user  satisfaction  
represented  in  Table  3. from  Table  3,  it  is  clear  
Facilities Photocopying Printing Study desk PC provision 
Strongly agreed 30 % 
30 % 
22 % 
30 % 
table 1. Facilities at Sur University College 
Disagree/strongly disagree 
Agreed 40 % 43 % 33 % 37 % 
19 % 9 % 7 % 11 % 
Library catalogue 
28 % 
35 % 
6 % 
in  Sur  University  College. from  Table  3,  as  mean 
No opinion - - - - 
Not answered 10 % 18 % 18 % 22 % 
21 % 
10 % 
Facilities Photocopying  Printing  Study desk  PC provision Library catalogue Average 
table 2. Mean, standard deviation (SD), Simple linear regression analysis 
regression equation 
0.75X1  + 0.87 
0.81X2  + 0.60 
0.31X3  + 2.73 
0.65X4  + 1.30 
0.40X5  + 2.28 
Mean 3.86 3.90 3.43 3.82 3.70 3.74 
SD 1.03 0.99 1.21 1.07 1.16 1.09 
table 3. Multiple linear regression analysis 
regression equation 
Yi  = -0.27 + 0.32 X1 + 0.43X2  + 0.07 X3  + 0.17 X4 + 0.07X5    
r2 0.548 0.594 0.126 0.443 0.202 
p  -value 6.01E-23 7.23E-26 4.97E-05 2.64E-17 1.46E-07 
rank 2 1 5 3 4 
r2 0.724 
p  -value 1.10E-31 
143 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
table 4. Correlation matrix 
Overall  1.000   .740   .771   .355   .665   .449  640 
Photocopy 
Print 
Overall Photocopy Print Study desk PC  Catalogue 
 1.00   .663   .332   .594   .331  sample size 
 1.00   .223   .610   .418  
± .176 ± .230 
 critical value .05 (two-tail)  critical value .01 (two-tail) 
is  greater  than  the  average  and  p   <  0.05,  H1  is  accepted  as  2nd   highest  impact  factor  of  user  satisfaction  in  Sur  University  College.                    H2:  Printing  Facilities  
The  printing  facilities  have  the  highest  mean  
Study desk 
PC  
Catalogue 
rank 
 1.00   .313   .358  
 1.00   .418  
 1.00  
2 1 5 3 4 
the  education  field  for  knowledge  acquisition  and  dissemination. The PC support the users in accessing  e-journals,  e-databases,  other  resources  and  the  library catalogue. The electronic environment helps  in availing the maximum potentials of multimedia and  
Table  2  shows  that  library  catalogue  facility  
educational software. Thus H4 is accepted with medium  with  highest  r2   value.  It  can  also  be  observed  
significant  impacts  on  the  user  satisfaction.  
that  coefficient  of  variation  is  nearer  to  zero  with H5:  Library  Catalogues 
highest negative skewness. This shows that most of  
the  respondents  either  highly  satisfied  or  satisfied  
with the printing facilities provided in the library. In provided  in  the  library  has  the  fourth  highest  general,  printing  facilities  were  provided  as  one  of impact on the user satisfaction with mean 3.70 and  the  major  services  in  Sur  University  College.  The r2 
 = 0.202. The mean is less than the average. The  users,  in  particular  students,  are  allowed  to  take correlation  matrix  shows  that  the  library  catalogue  printouts of required course materials, printing their has  the  fourth  highest  correlation  of  0.449  with  projects  and  related  materials  with  minimum  cost the  overall  satisfaction  of  the  user. The  SD  =  1.16  price. This facility has been provided in recent years and  the  skewness  -0.74.  The  academic  library  of  in  Sur  University  College.  This  is  highly  helpful  to Sur  university  college  provide  online  catalogue  the  users  in  collecting  their  respective  materials facilities to the users. As p 
  <  0.05,  H5  is  accepted  in  time  at  their  door  steps.  The  students  do  not with  lower  impact  on  the  user  satisfaction  of  Sur  need  to  go  out  far  away  shops  or  cafes  to  print University  College. 
the  required  materials.  Thus,  this  printing  facility 4.8 
has  the  highest  impact  on  the  user  satisfaction.  
Impact  Model 
As  p   <  0.05,  H2  is  accepted  as  the  1 
st 
  highest  impact  factor.  
H3:  Study  Desk  Facility  
Various  types  of  study  desks  are  provided  in  the  academic  library  with  closed  access  and  open  access.  from  the  analyses,  it  is  evident  that  the  study  desk  facilities  provided  in  the  library  have  the  least  impact  on  the  users.  The  mean  value  is  lesser  than  the  average  and  r2   is  nearer  to  zero.  As  p   <  0.05,  H3  is  accepted  with  lowest  impact  on  the  users.    
H4:  PC  Provision 
from  Table  2,  it  can  be  derived  that  the  PCs  provided in the library has the 3rd  highest impact on  the  user  satisfaction.  Table  2  shows  that  the  PCs  available in the library have p  < 0.05 with SD 1.07.  Table 4 shows that the PCs have correlation of 0.665  
figure 1 shows the model on impact factors on  library  users  in  Sur  University  College.  
Figure 1. Impact factors signifcance model. 
5. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The study identified that all the services provided  
with the overall satisfaction. The mean is higher than  
by the academic library have significant impacts on  
the average. The technology   significantly  supports  
144 
the  Sur  University  College  users’  satisfaction.  The  

========5========

SRIRAM  &  RAJEV: IMPACT Of ACADEMIC  L IBRARy SERVICES ON  U SER  S ATISfACTION 
academic library have to provide numerous facilities  and  services  that  justify  more  interest  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  users.  The  academic  library  has  to  deal  with  the  problems  and  train  the  users  on  various  areas  for  better  usage.  The  findings  and  suggestions  of  this  study  provide  effective  insights  for library to take essential steps to strengthen the  existing  services  and  facilities  to  optimise  the  use.  Currently various facilities are provided in the academic  library of Sur University College. But, still the users,  managers and the management may suggest more  services  based  on  the  requirements  and  purposes  with  respect  to  international  benchmarking.    
The  printing  facilities  provided  in  the  library  should be used by the user to print the selected and  permitted materials. The basic principle of providing  photocopying facilities at academic library is to help  the students to acquire the required materials. But,  the  users  should  abide  the  copyright  rules  and  regulations.  The  users  should  use  the  computers  provided in the academic library in information and  knowledge seeking. The PC’s in the academic library  should  not  be  used  for  checking  personal  emails  and  other  unwanted  uses.  The  library  manager  shall block the unwanted and unauthorised websites  in  order  to  provide  more  advanced  services.  The  management should provide sufficiently sized study  desks  with  other  facilities  to  keep  the  books  and  other  materials.    
As  King13   revealed,  the  libraries  should  be  in  position  to  re-orient  their  services,  collections  and  facilities  to  keep  rapidity  with  respect  to  current  progression and developments. Based on the above  findings,  the  following  suggestions  were  made  for  the academic library to provide committed services  to the users. In the current electronic environment,  the  computers  with  proper  network  facilities  are  most  important  source  for  finding  out  the  relevant  information. But at the same time the management  and library managers should take initiative to upgrade  the systems time to time and ensure to keep update  the  antivirus.  The  budget  of  the  library  should  be  increased  year  by  year  to  meet  the  growing  needs  of the users and it will help the library professionals  to  provide  the  users  the  best  services  and  should  explicitly  linked  to  strategic  plans. 
The  academic  library  should  inform  the  users  with their reservation facilities in the library catalogue  as  and  when  the  reserved  materials  are  available.  Mahawar14,  et  al .  conducted  a  study  and  found  out  that  the  resources  availability  in  the  library  make the users partially satisfied with the services  provided  by  the  library. As  they  said  the  academic  library  should  improve  computer-based  services  of  the  library.  
The academic library management system should  provide necessary information regarding the availabilities  of  the  resources  and  probable  available  dates  if  
currently  lent  to  the  users.  The  libraries  should  have  separate  discussion  rooms  for  the  students  to  discuss  their  projects  and  assignments.  The  libraries  should  have  separate  rooms  for  teachers  and  students  for  their  research  work  and  it  should  be accommodate with the latest configuration system  with Wi-fi facility and also with the statistical software  like  SPSS,  MATLAB  and  MEGASTAT. 
ACKNOWL eDGeMeNt S 
Authors would like to thank the Management and  Dean of Sur University College for the financial and  research supports; Ms Sudha of English department  for her supports in editing and language corrections;  and  all  respondents  for  their  valuable  inputs. 
reFereNCeS  
1. Martensen  A,  Gronholdt  L.Improving  library  
users perceived quality, satisfaction and loyalty:  
An  integrated  measurement  and  management  
system.  J.  Acad.  Librarianship ,  2003,  29(3),  
140-47. 
2. Lancaster,  f.W.  Guidelines  for  the  evaluation  
of  Information  systems  and  services.  Paris,  
UNESCO,  1978.  p.  15. 
3. Poll,  R.  &  Payne,  P.  Impact  measures  for  
libraries  and  information  services,  Library  Hi  
Tech,  2006, 24(4),  547-62. 
4. Pauline,  A.  User  satisfaction  with  academic  
libraries  services: Academic  staff  and  students  
perspectives,  2010. 
5. Sowole I.A. Information needs of farm management  
personnel: A case study of two universities and  
two  agricultural  research  institutes  in  Western  
Nigerian. Lagos  Librarian,  1995, 16(1),  9-12. 6. Nnadozie  C.  Evaluation  of  library  resources  
and services in federal medical central, Owerri,  
Nigeria  Coal  City  Libraries  (3), April  2006,  pp.  
39-50. 
7. Abagai T. The use of library in a non-residential  
college: A  case  study  of  Kaduna  State  college  
of education. forum Academia: Multidisciplinary  
J.  Edu.,  1993, 1(1),  104. 
8. Nwalo, K.I.N. Measures of library effectiveness  
in  Nigerian  polytechnic  libraries  with  emphasis  
on user satisfaction. University of Ibadan, 1997.  
Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation. 
9. Cullen, R.J. & Calvert, P.J. further dimensions of  
public library effectiveness: Report on a parallel  
New  Zealand  Study.  Library  and  Information  
Science  Research,  1993, 5(2),  143-64. 
10. Kaur,  Kiran  Service  quality  and  customer  
satisfaction in academic libraries: Perspectives  
from  a  Malaysian  university.  Library  Review,  
2010, 59(4),  261-73. 
11. Simmonds,  Patience  &  Syed  Saad  Andaleer.  
Usage of academic libraries: The role of service  
145 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCH   2014 
quality,  resources,  and  user  characteristics.  
Library  Trends,  2001,  49(4),  626-34. 
12.   f idzani, B.T. Information needs and information  
seeking  behaviour  of  graduate  students  at  the  
University  of  Botswana.  J.  Lib.  Rev. ,  1998,  
47(7),  329-40. 
13. King,  D.B.  User  surveys:  Libraries  ask,  hey,  
how  am  I  doing?  Law  Lib.  J.,  2005,  97(1),  
103-15. 
14. Mahawar, K.L.; Verma, Shilpi & Narayan Raj. Library  
services via-a-vis satisfaction among student of  
Tagore Library, University of Lucknow: A study. In 
ICAL-2009: International Conference on Academic  
Libraries, 5-8 October 2009, Delhi. http://crl.du.ac. 
in/ical09/papers/index_files/ ical-115_131_289_3_ 
RV.pdf/    (accessed  on  28  June  2012). 
About  the Authors 
Mr b. Sriram   is working for Sur University College,  Sultanate  of  Oman  as  Lecturer  since  2004  and  
146 
Quality  Assurance  Officer  since  2009.  He  has  20  years  of  teaching  experience  in  Mathematics  and  IT  subjects.  He  has  published  17  research  papers  in  peer-reviewed  national  and  international  journals  and  presented  14  papers  in  national  and  international  conferences  and  symposiums.  He  is  an  active  researcher  in  his  work  profile  (Quality  assurance),  teaching  areas  (Information  systems  and technology) and in specialisation (Mathematics  and  Education). 
Mr M.K.G. rajev   is  working  as  Manager,  Learning  Resources  Centre  and faculty,  IST  Department  at  Sur University College, Sultanate of Oman. He holds  Master  of  Commerce,  MPhil  (Commerce),  MLIS,  MPhil  (LIS)  and  also  has  many  certifications  in  computer and technology. He has contributed many  research papers in international journals, national and  international conferences, and seminars. His current  area of Interest includes: Digital libraries, consumer  behaviour, marketing, knowledge management, and  information  seeking  behaviour. 

========7========

