DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 3, May 2013, pp. 168-175 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Turning Visitors into Users: Challenge for Virtual Exhibition on Genetics  
- ‘Reading the book of life’ 
Jordi Domènech Casal 
Òliba Research Group (Universitat Oberta de Catalunya) 
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Avda. Tibidabo, 39-43, 08035 Barcelona, Spain 
E-mail: jdomenechca@uoc.edu 
AbsTRACT 
In this paper, the construction and main goals of a virtual exhibition on genetics has been described.  A frst attempt based in html and fash formats is described followed by a frst evaluation by the users.  The  current  developed  version  is  based  on  the  Joomla  1.5. The  content  management  system  (CMS)  includes eight virtual exhibition halls,and interactive resources like news and multimedia. The navigation  is improved by the use of metatags and other automated tools of Joomla1.5. Web 2.0 tools are used to  increase participation by the users, as well as Wikipedia and Facebook resources, are being set. The  virtual exhibition has received 101,977 visitors from several countries in one year. The paradigm for virtual  exhibitions has been discussed and the real exhibition can be seen at http://oliba.uoc.edu/adn. 
Keywords: Virtual exhibitions, Joomla 1.5, content management system 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
The fast scientific advances have made evident  to wide a gap in the current concept of culture: while  disciplines such as art, philosophy, and history are  considered fundamental parts of the culture, scientific  disciplines  remain  as  technical  skills  instead  of  cultural  elements.  This  definition  of  culture  collide  with  reality:  the  boundary  between  science  and  society  is  very  close,  and  science  has  important  effects in other cultural demonstrations, to such an  extent that some of these demonstrations can only  be  understood  through  the  eyes  of  science.  The  discovery of America or Heliocentrism, the discovery  of  antibiotics  and  vaccines,  the  arrival  of  the  man  on to moon, the atomic bomb, etc. are technological  and  scientific  milestones  that  have  changed  our  world  and  have  become  cultural  archetypes. 
This  is  exceptionally  clear  in  the  case  of  
a  development  so  fast  that  has  put  the  society  in  
the creation of virtual exhibitions through the use of  content management systems (CMS), which facilitate  the  updating  and  interactiveness  of  websites1,  2. 
The  virtual  exhibition  about  genetics  ‘Reading  the  book  of  life’  was  initiated  as  an  exploration  of  the  possibilities  of  virtual  exhibitions  to  present  science  as  cultural  element.  The  initial  aim  was  to  generate interest about genetics among the public,  to make it more proactive for posterior contacts with  news  related  to  genetics  published  in  conventional  scientific  media.  Therefore,  the  main  goal  was  not  to obtain public, but to generate it for other science  communication efforts. The project has experienced  several  technical  modifications  as  new  goals  were  proposed (and viceversa), and the result has been  a  particular  vision  of  interactive  virtual  exhibition  connected  with  the  present. 
2.  pORTAl  sTRUCTURE 
genetics. This branch of knowledge has experienced  
The  project  to  create  the  exhibition  started  in  front  of  ethical  questions  to  which  was  not  still  
2007.  The  exhibition  did  not  have  any  associated  
physical exhibition, and had the goal to generate a  For  the  public,  the  sheep  ‘Dolly’  and  the  structure  
draft  model  to  test  three  main  working  pathways: 
(i) Attractive approach to genetics, using sensationalist  
prepared, like transgenics, cloning, or gene therapy.  
of the DNA have become cultural archetypes before  scientific concepts. The creation of effective strategies  of science dissemination and communication of the  current research in genetics has become indispensable.  The  use  of  virtual  exhibitions  is  a  tool  that  has  demonstrated its potential in culture popularisation.  In  the  Òliba  Research  Group,  from  2003  awards  onwards, have developed several tools for facilitating  
Received 28 January 2013, online published 20 May 2013     
headlines  to  pick  up  the  attention  of  visitors;  (ii) Division of the subject in several and independent,  
but  interrelated,  virtual  ‘Exhibition  Halls’;  (iii) Effort to make evident the relationship between genetics  
and science history and other cultural demonstrations  
(art,  history,  cinema,  literature,  etc.). 

========1========

DoMènECH: TuRnInG  v ISIToRS InTo uSERS: A CHAllEnGE FoR  v IRTuAl ExHIbITIon  
This draft model was carried out exclusively in  Catalan language and is still available at http://oliba. uoc.edu/adn_old/principal.html.  The  draft  model  of  the  exhibition  was  constructed  using  two  different  web publishing languages, Html and flash, each of  them bringing different advantages to the portal. The  contents  of  the  portal  were  constituted  by  several  flash  animations,  which  appeared  inside  the  Html  frames, and gave dynamism and interactiveness to  the exhibition. Flash animations are downloaded in  .swf  format,  which  allows  the  partial  download  of  the file, while playing (streaming). The html frames  facilitated the search engines (Google, Altavista, etc.)  to select the portal, due to the insertion of metatags  (keywords). 
based on the contents, they were divided into 8  ‘virtual  exhibition  halls’,  each  of  them  dealing  with  one  of  the  main  topics  of  genetics  like  (evolution,  genetic  engineering,  cloning,  etc.).  Each  virtual  exhibition hall was constituted by a flash file, which  showed sequentially several virtual exhibition panels.  Each  panel  dealt  with  one  or  more  conceptual  aspects  of  the  topic,  and,  in  addition,  some  of  them  where  dedicated  to  the  researchers  (science  history)  or  to  the  relationship  between  the  science  and society. In the flash files of each exhibition hall,  we  inserted  several  points  where  the  visitor  could  jump into another exhibition hall, making transversal  pathways of visit through the panels of the different  exhibition halls dealing with researchers or science  and  society.  
At  the  entrance  to  the  virtual  exhibition  the  different halls were represented through an image,  a  title,  and  a  brief  sensationalist  introductory  text,  trying  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  visitor. 
Figure  1  shows  the  main  menu  (on  the  top)  allowed to select resources, while at the bottom, the  flash  file  allowed    to  move  forward  and  backward  inside  this  hall  by  using  cursor  buttons  pointer  1  of  fig.1,  or  jump  from  a  hall  to  another  in  selected  points  of  the  visit.  Contents  were  divided  in  two  spaces: at the left, the Hall's introductory text. pointer  2  in  fig.  1,  At  the  right,  the  contents,  animations  and  images  appeared  sequentially.  An  internal  menu  pointer  4  in  fig.1,allowed  moving  directly  to  a  chosen  panel  of  the  Hall.  
2.1  Model Analysis 
In  January  2008,  the  exhibition  was  available,  even  though  only  three  out  of  the  eight  exhibition  halls  had  been  developed  which  were: 
• “Will I develop scales on my skin if I eat transgenic  
tomatoes?”  (about  genetic  engineering);  • ‘The  Spell  of  Tsars’  (about  genetic  heredity);  
and  
• ‘The Mysterious elf of leewenhoek’ (about DnA  
structure) 
A  very  simple  diffusion  was  made  by  e-mailing  some  educational  centres  and  students  of  the  Universitat  Oberta  de  Catalunya.  Moreover,  the  diffusion  was  carried  out  for  a  very  brief  period  
Figure 1. Image of an exhibition hall from the frst version of the virtual exhibition. 
169 

========2========

of  15  days,  during  the  Christmas  holidays,  which  hampers the visits, since in all virtual projects it was  detected that the number of virtual visitors decreases  during the holidays3. However, the portal registered  more  than  400  visitors  during  the  15  days  of  the  study.  A  study  of  the  accesses  was  made  and  60  visitors  filled  in  a  poll  about  the  virtual  exhibition.  Regarding the accesses, the independent html frames  for  each  exhibition  hall  allowed  detecting  visits  for  every  hall  navigated. besides  the  three  disposable  exhibition halls, many visitors tried to access to the  exhibition  halls  which  were  non  available  by  that  time,  especially  those  pertaining  to  evolution  and  mutation. visitors made more transversal pathways  selecting  panels  belonging  to  different  exhibition  halls  than  itineraries  following  the  sequence  inside  the  exhibition  halls,  which  indicates  that  proposing  transversal  pathways  is  a  successful  strategy. 
The  results  of  the  poll  showed  that  98  %  of  the visitors felt that the portal was interesting, even  though only 75 % approved the interactiveness and  its  value  as  a  source  of  information.  More  than  95 % agreed the contents were of high quality, and  considered  them  as  good  educational  resources,  and  useful  for  improving  the  understanding  of  the  concepts  of  genetics. 
The  level  of  interest  and  knowledge  about  the  genetics  was  worked  out  before  and  after  visiting  the website. both parameters improved qualitatively,  since  the  percentage  of  individuals  who  had  high  
exhibition,  the  platform  decided  to  use  the  CMS  is  Joomla1.5!.  The  CMS  is  platform  for  website  publication which allows working independently with  the  contents  and  their  presentation,  thanks  to  a  database.  This  facilitates  the  same  contents  to  be  presented  in  several  ways,  even  depending  on  the  user, and interrelate themselves much more easily.  Moreover,  the  application  has  elements  allowing  the generation of contents by the users. Therefore,  CMS  is  often  being  used  as  a  platform  for  virtual  exhibitions4.  
2.3  Current  CMs   Exhibition:  Interrelation  and  
plasticity  of  Contents  
Regarding  the  contents  structure,  it  has  been  decided  to  keep  the  structure  in  8  exhibition  halls.  The content of the three exhibition halls performed  in  the  previous  version  has  been  introduced  in  the  Joomla1.5! platform, and the remaining five exhibition  halls  have  been  displayed:  
The  current  virtual  exhibition  hence  has  the  following  eight  exhibition  halls: 
(a) “Will  I  develop  scales  on  my  skin  if  I  eat  
transgenic  tomatoes?  ”  (Genetic  engineering), (b) ‘The  Spell  of  Tsars’  (Genetic  heredity), 
(c) ‘The  Mysterious  elf  of  leewenhoek’  (DnA  
structure), 
(d) The  mark  of  Hiroshima  horror  (for  mutation), 
with  the  level  of  knowledge  of  genetics.  This  is  important,  since  the  virtual  exhibition  pursued,  
(e)   l ucy's  long  journey  (Phylogeny  and  forensic  interest  for  genetics  became  almost  double  after  
genetics), 
having  visited  the  portal  and  the  same  happened  
(f) 
The  attack  of  the  clones  (Cloning  and  stem  cells), 
mainly,  to  increase  the  interest  of  the  public  in  the  (g) “If  I  study  a  lot,  will  I  have  cleverer  children?  
field  of  genetics.  The  visitors  proposed  to  add  an  
“(Evolution),  and  
internal search engine, translate the portal into other  
(h) What does ATGGTATTCCACTATGGTC mean?”  
languages,  and  somehow  link  the  contents  to  the  current  research  in  the  field.  Regarding  technical  
(Genome  project  and  genetic  code) 
Moreover,  the  two  selections  of  transversal  
text,  and  the  operation  of  some  buttons. 
2.2 Current  CMS  Exhibition:  Interactiveness  
With  the  experience  and  evaluation  obtained  
• in  the  previous  phase,  and  thanks  to  the  funding  obtained from the FECYT (Fundación Española Para  
• la  Ciencia  y  la  Tecnología),  the  virtual  exhibition  has  been  improved  and  consolidated. 
The  former  version  had  demonstrated  that  the  three working lines of ‘Reading the book of the life’  were a good strategy for science divulgation, but it  was necessary to improve its interactiveness. This led  us to tackle changes in the aims and in the technical  aspects  of  the  virtual  exhibition.  The  new  version  of  the  virtual  exhibition  has  been  available  since  January  2009  till  date  at  http://oliba.uoc.edu/adn. 
As a platform for this new version of the virtual  
aspects, the visitors suggested that it is necessary  
to  improve  the  colours  and  the  resolution  of  the  
contents of researchers and science and society are  
still offered. The navigation in the virtual exhibition  
is facilitated by a horizontal main menu, with three  main  sections: 
H o m e   ( i n f o r m a t i o n   a b o u t   t h e   v i r t u a l  
exhibition); 
Resources (offering several multimedia elements  
that,  not  being  a  part  of  the  virtual  exhibition,  
serve  as  support  to  the  contents); 
• Exhibition halls (access to the eight exhibition halls  
and  the  two  additional  transversal  selections). 
Moreover, at the portal entrance, the Main hall  show (Fig. 2) an animated panel wtih the title of each  exhibition hall, together with a related image and a  brief text describing its content. This animated panel  aims  to  generate  interest  and  allows  the  visitor  to  select  directly  the  exhibition  hall  of  his  interest. 

========3========

DoMènECH: TuRnInG  v ISIToRS InTo uSERS: A CHAllEnGE FoR  v IRTuAl ExHIbITIon  
Figure 2. screenshot of the main hall. 
As  the  former  version,  each  exhibition  hall  has  several  panels,  which  present  sequentially  explanations,  images  and  animations  that  develop  the  topic.  Some  of  the  panels  of  each  exhibition  halls make reference to the researchers, and some  to  the  relationships  between  science  and  society,  always  related  to  the  topic  of  this  exhibition  hall. 
Each panel finishes with a suggesting phrase or  a  question  inviting  the  visitor  to  follow  to  the  next  panel to keep the interest of the visitors. At the bottom  of  each  panel,  arrow  buttons  allow  to  go  forward  and  backward  through  the  hall  along  its  panels. 
At  the  top,  the  Main  Menu  allows  selecting  a  topic.  At  the  body,  an  animated  content-manager  shows  texts  and  images  presenting  the  content  of  each  exhibition  hall.  
In  some  panels,  fash  animations  are  offered.  These  animations  can  be  initiated,  paused,  and  reloaded  by  the  visitor.  At  the  left  of  each  panel,  a Guide-Menu of the exhibition hall allows the user  to  select  directly  the  panel  of  his  interest,  instead  of  following  the  panels  in  a  sequence.  
Joomla1.5 allows each panel to be identified at  the  data  base  as  an  independent  article.  It  allows  each panel being available as a part of an ordered  sequence of panels (as is presented in each exhibition  hall),  but  also  grouped  by  other  criteria. 
one of these criteria is the addition of ‘metatags’,  or keywords, which are not visible by the user. These  ‘metatags’  are  used  to  describe  to  the  Joomla1.5  
module  ‘Related  articles’,  when  we  visualise  a  
research on the topic described in this exhibition hall).  At  the  right  the  menu  ‘Related  Articles’  allows  the  user  to  configure  its  own  pathway  through  the  exhibition,  presenting  the  panels  related  to  the  current  by  metatags.    
The contents of the 8 exhibition halls were initially  available only in Spanish. Thanks to a funding from  the AGAuR (Agència de Gestió d'Ajuts universitaris  i  de  Recerca-Generalitat  de  Catalunya),  and  with  effect  from  December  of  2009,  the  translation  in  Catalan  has  been  offered. 
The Joomla1.5 allows us the effective management  of the translations from the different elements of the  contents through the module Joomfish. At the right  of the horizontal Main Menu, icons allowing change  from spanish to catalan  at any moment are shown.  Given  that  the  linguistic  politics  on  the  subject  of  education  in  Catalonia  favours  the  use  of  Catalan  at school, which will show an increase in the use of  the  virtual  exhibition  as  an  educational  resource. 2.4.Current  CMs   Exhibition:  Multimedia  
Resources  
The digital support of the virtual exhibition ‘Reading  the book of the life’ allows us to incorporate several  resources  in  the  form  of  videos,  PDF  documents,  educational  materials,  interviews,  and  animations.  These  contents  have  been  incorporated,  and  are  available  at  the  Main  Menu  as  resources.  These  contents  are  also  related  with  the  rest  of  contents  through metatags, so that when the user visualises a determinate Panel, the resources related with the  visualised Panel appear in the menu at the right of  the panel, together with the related panels. This allows  to access of the contents (panels, videos, animations,  interviews) in a transversal way, independent of the  type  of  contents.  The  tool  Wikiboot,  in  Joomla1.5!   allows  to  make  automated  searches  in  Wikipedia  in  a  simple  way,  and  that  some  terms  come  off  automatically linked to the definitions of Wikipedia.  These terms appear in red in the virtual exhibition,  and  the  definition  can  be  obtained  by  clicking  on  
them.  Even  though  initially  the  virtual  exhibition  programme  the  content  of  each  panel.  With  the  
had a Glossary, Wikiboot favours the topicality and  
connectivity  of  the  contents. 
panel, Joomla1.5 search automatically other panels  
2.5 Current  CMs   Exhibition  :  Generating  
sharing  with  the  visualised  panel  one  or  more  metatags. The resulting panels are listed as a Menu  as  ‘Related  Articles’  at  the  right  of  the  visualised  
public,  Communicators,  Towards  Web  2.0 One  of  the  most  important  challenges  of  the  
panel,  so  the  user  have  also  the  choice  to  make  scientific  divulgation  in  the  present  is  to  serve  as  
his  own  personalised  transversal  pathway  through  the  virtual  exhibition  by  following  these  related  articles  selection. 
At  the  middle,  the  panel  with  text,  images  and  animations.  At  the  left,  two  menus:  the  top  is  the  menu  of  the  exhibition  hall  (where  a  list  of  the  panels of this hall is shown), and the bottom is the  ADnews menu (showing the last news on the current  
a  tool  for  the  communication  of  current  scientific  research.  It  is  of  no  use  to  popularise  the  concept  of  the  gene  if  it  does  not  communicate  the  last  advances in genetics. Scientific dissemination should  direct the public towards the communication of the  scientific  present.  
This,  together  with  the  technical  possibilities  of  the  Joomla1.5!  has  allowed  us  to  consider  a  
171 

========4========

DJlIT, vol.  33, no.  3, MAY   2013 
new  goal:  Constituting  the  virtual  exhibition  as  a  meeting  place  for  researchers,  public,  students,  teachers  and  the  science  communicators,  so  that  the  contents  of  the  virtual  exhibition  would  not  be  static,  but  only  the  axes  for  helping  the  visitors  to  construct  the  virtual  exhibition. 
This implies a change of role for the visitor, who  would transform from visitor to user, while the virtual  exhibition would become simply a pole attracting these  users,  and  giving  them  an  adequate  environment. 
The public accesses by the exhibition halls, from  where  additional  contents  of  different  sections  are  proposed; ADnews  (current  research  on  genetics),  Resources (interviews, videos, animation, etc.) and  virtual  laboratories  (Pedagogic  resources).  The  virtual exhibition intends eventually, these additional  contents  to  be  generated  and  to  be  updated  by  different types of users. This outline works in parallel  and  independently  for  each  of  the  eight  exhibition  halls  (Fig.  3). 
Figure 3. screenshot of a panel of an exhibition. 
the  exhibition  halls  can  see  in  a  lateral  menu  at  the  left  of  the  visualised  panel  a  list  of  the  latest  news  on  genetics  research  in  the  topics  related  to  the  exhibition  hall  they  are  visiting  (Fig.  4).  These  news can also be visited directly from the ADnews  section, and, when a news is visualised, the virtual  exhibition propose to the user to visit the exhibition  hall  related  to  this  news. 
Figure 4. Outline of proposed user's participation in the  
virtual exhibition. 
 Therefore, synergic dynamics among the different  content  has    been  generated  at  present,  the  news  of the ADnews section are being introduced to make  the  researchers  and  research  in  ADnews  
Researchers  might  publish  directly  their  news,  without being concerned about explaining the basic  concepts,  which  would  be  automatically  offered  by  the  virtual  exhibition  together  with  the  news.  
    To  achieve  this,  the  work  is  in  progress  so  that  the  virtual  exhibition  allows  the  creation  of  contents by the users and allows them to catalogue  the contents in one of the eight topics corresponding  to  the  eight  exhibition  halls.  The  first  contact  with  Spanish Research Centres (Department of Genetics  of  the  universitat  de  barcelona,  Parc  de  Recerca  biomèdica  de  barcelona,  etc.)  showed  interest  in  these centres in an option of scientific communication  of this type, even though they do not seem disposed  to  make  a  great  effort  in  this  sense.  
the  creation  of  user  accounts,  so  that  the  users  can  improve  and  add  contents. 
To workout these possibilities, areas of participation  
How  to  achieve  this  aim?  Joomla1.5!  allows  
2.5.2  Virtual  Laboratories 
virtual environments can be a powerful strategy  to  improve  teaching  processes5. An  important  part  
under  the  name  of  Resources. 
2.5.1. ADNews 
    In this section brief news of current research  on genetics is presented. Even though these news  are already published in other portals, in ‘Reading the  book of the - these news are catalogued according  to  different  categories  that  correspond  with  the  
for  the  users  are  being  develop.  These  areas  are  
of  the  visitors  in  the  virtual  exhibition  are  students  accessible  at  the  horizontal  main  develops  menu,  
and their teachers. As in the ‘Physical Exhibitions’,  
one  of  the  roles  of  the  virtual  exhibition  is  to  be  
a  pedagogic  resource.  To  facilitate  the  use  of  the  virtual  exhibition  in  this  sense,  a  new  section  has been established, named Virtual  Laboratories,  where  the  teachers  will  be  able  to  find  activities  for  learning  and  evaluation  for  the  visits  of  their  students  to  the  virtual  exhibition  and  allso  enable  them  to  create  contents. 
topics  of  the  eight  exhibition  halls.  Through  the ‘Associations  of  Teachers  and  Pedagogues’  automated  menus  of  the  Joomla1.5!  the  users  of have been contacted to propose them to participate,  
172 

========5========

DoMènECH: TuRnInG  v ISIToRS InTo uSERS: A CHAllEnGE FoR  v IRTuAl ExHIbITIon  
though  with  scarce  response  till  now.  May  be  because  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  the  final  result  and  the  advantages  of  this  initiative. 
both  ADnews  and  virtual  laboratories  are  
is  added  as  a  link  in  terms  others  than  those  we  have worked with (‘biogenetics’, ‘Recombinant DnA  Technology’...).  This  indicates  that  visitors  of  the  virtual  exhibition  already  act  as  users,  by  adding  
at  the  present  being  constructed  and  maintained  links  to  the  virtual  exhibition  in  Wikipedia.  This  by  the  Oliba  Research  Group.  When  they'll  be  
suggests  that  the  structure  of  participation  that  we  
completely functional, a new diffusion campaign will  be  undertaken  to  get  users  who  would,  eventually,  participate  in  the  creation  of  contents. 
2.6  Current  CMs   Exhibition:  Diffusion  of  the  
Virtual  Exhibition 
upto now, the virtual exhibition has been published  in the website of Òliba and have sent press releases  
propose  for  ADnews,  Multimedia  Resources  and  virtual  laboratories  sections  might  work  perfectly  once  the  elements  for  creation  are  completed  with  participation  of  users. 
At present, the terms in Catalan are not introduced  to the Catalan Wikipedia, but will be done soon. As  Wikipedia  has  showed  to  be  a  good  way  to  make  
divulgation.  The  press  releases  have  appeared  at  
to some local media, and made an e-mailing campaign  
diffusion  of  the  virtual  exhibition,  with  each  new  for the diffusion in distribution lists related to science to  the  definitions  in  the  respective  Wikipedia. 
language  of  the  portal  we  will  also  add  the  links  
The  virtual  exhibition  has  also  a  blog  in  its  
the  portal  of  the  Universitat  Oberta  de  Catalunya  
Home  menu  where  the  news  about  the  exhibition  
(http://www.uoc.edu) and at the local newspaper El  Punt  (http://www.elpunt.cat/). 
Additionally, the press notes to local associations  and  institutions  related  to  Scientific  Divulgation,  like  the  ACCC  (Catalan  Association  of  Scientific  
presented  to  a  Congress  on  Scientific  Divulgation  
was  publicised,  but,  as  it  is  publicised  inside  the  virtual  exhibition,  it  is  not  useful  to  make  diffusion  of the exhibition. As a solution, we are constructing  an  account  in  Facebook.  Facebook  is  a  tool  of  
Communication, http://www.acccnet.net/) were sent.  
social connection that allows us to keep updated the  Moreover,  the  virtual  exhibition  was  selected  to  be  
information about an individual or entity. Many entities  
and serious institutions have adopted Facebook as a  ‘Ciencia in Acción’ celebrated in Granada in September  
measure to improve the contact with their customers.  2009,  where  it  was  selected  as  a  finalist.  The  
The  virtual  exhibition  Facebook  account  will  at  the  
beginning show only images and links to the virtual  participants of Spain, Portugal and South America)  
Exhibition  links,  and  we  are  trying  to  connect  it  to  
the Facebook accounts of other Science Divulgation,  
jury  and  the  assistants  to  the  Congress  (including  
highlighted that the virtual exhibition is attractive and  easily-used,  besides  its  scientific  rigor.  The  virtual  exhibition  has  also  been  included  in  a  collection  of  educational  materials  created  by  the  organisers  of  the  Congress. 
Moreover,  we  have  also  undertaken  action  to  
Research  and  educative  institutions. 
The  initiatives  like  Facebook  and  Wikipedia  have  the  advantage  of  being  sustained,  and  once  set,  its  capacity  of  diffusion  can  surely  increase  with  the  time. 
and Facebook. Wikipedia is a virtual Encyclopaedia  carried  out  by  the  users.  Definition  of  each  term  
promote  the  virtual  exhibition  through  Wikipedia  
2.7 Current  CMs   Exhibition:  Visitors  to  
‘Cloning’, ‘Transgenic’, ‘Mutation’ ...) we have added  
‘Reading  the book  of life’ 
The  visits  to  the  Virtual  Exhibition  have  been  
usually  includes  a  section  to  add  external  links  
inside encyclopaedia. To make diffusion of the virtual  
monitored using two counters (Webaliser and AWStats)  exhibition,  during  April  2009,  in  the  definitions  of  
including information about the origin and duration of  several  terms  related  to  the  virtual  exhibition  (like  
the visits, and about the search words and the links  
coming  from  external  places.  Data  since  January  the related exhibition hall as an external link in the  
2009  up  to  now  has  been  analysed. 
Spanish Wikipedia. Even though the moderators of  
Regarding  the  number  of  visitors,  during  2009  Wikipedia  vetoed  these  links  at  the  beginning,  for  
the vrtual exhibition has received a total of 101.977  considering them spam, after some explanations and  
visitors, corresponding to an average of 284 visitors  
per day. This average has experienced oscillations  
realising  the  quality  of  the  contents  they  accepted  to  include  these  links,  with  the  condition  that  each  
that  have  reached  its  maximum  in  October  2009,  
link  should  refer  to  the  concrete  part  of  the  virtual  
when  it  achieved  470  visits  per  day. 
exhibition that referred to the defined term, and that  
At  all  times,  the  number  of  visits  has  been  
the  link  should  be  put  in  the  last  position  in  the  
nearly  three  times  the  number  of  visitors,  which  external links list. At present, the links remain active indicates that the visitors visit the page again several  in the corresponding articles of Wikipedia and many  
times.  However,  cybermetric  data  indicates  that  a  hits to the virtual exhibition came from these links.  
very  high  percentage  (about  70  %  of  the  visitors)  Moreover, through the study of the accesses to the  
remain  less  than  2  minutes  at  the  portal.  This  
portal,  we  have  detected  that  the  virtual  exhibition  
indicates  that  the  main  Hall  page  and  the  access 
173 

========6========

DJlIT, vol.  33, no.  3, MAY   2013 
to  the  contents  should  be  improved  to  keep  the  attention  of  the  visitor.  Even  though  an  important  increase  was  expected  by  the  addition  of  links  at  Wikipedia  (April  2009),  no  significant  increase  is  produced  until  August.  This  increase  is  still  more  surprising  when  taking  into  account  that  during  holidays a general decrease in the traffic is usually  observed  (Fig.  5). 
Figure 5. Visitors  ranking  for  the  virtual  exhibition  
‘Reading  the  book  of  life’.  During  
A p r i l   a n d   D e c e m b e r   2 0 0 9 ,   c o n t e n t s  
were linked through Facebook and Wikipedia. 
We  estimate  that  after  the  diffusion  of  the  Catalan  version  of  the  portal  and  the  introduction  of news started to work in the section ADnews, the  visitors  might  stabilise  at  500  visitors  per  day.  Our  project  to  translate  the  virtual  exhibition  to  English  should  increase  this  rate  substantially. 
The  search  words  used  by  the  visitors  to  find  the  virtual  exhibition  make  mostly  reference  to  researchers, basic concepts of genetics, and multimedia  
Southern  America.  The  rate  of  visits  from  United  States  is  overestimated,  since  many  users  placed  in other countries connect through servers placed in  this country. In any case, the visits from Spain are  still  higher  than  those  from  Southern America,  this  suggesting that a compaign of diffusion directed to  Southern America. In Southern America (data not shown)  Mexico  and  Argentina  make  more  visits  to  the  virtual  exhibition. 
As  a  general  appraisal,  taking  in  account  that  the virtual exhibition does not have a corresponding  physical  museum,  the  rate  of  visits  and  interest  of  the users is high. As mentioned, the new challenges  of  the  virtual  exhibition  are  focused  mainly  in  increasing  the  interactiveness  and  facilitate  the  participation  of  the  users  through  the  creation  of  users in the virtual exhibition. As soon as this new  model for the virtual exhibition is applied, it will be  necessary  to  make  a  new  campaign  of  diffusion,  possibly  at  the  same  time  as  the  virtual  exhibition  is  translated  to  English (Fig.  6). 
Figure 6. Geographical distribution of the visitors. 
resources.  Other  semantic  fields  or  resources,  like  
2.8  Reversing  the  Paradigm,  Back  from  
the  relationship  between  science  and  society,  and  the  interviews  are  not  so  much  used  as  search  words  to  arrive  to  the  portal.  Most  of  the  searches  
Virtual  to physic:  A physic  Exhibition  of  Reading  the book  of life? 
The goals of virtual exhibitions have experienced  
contain  terms  or  expressions  that  indicate  profile  
of  a  student.  This  indicates  that  the  creation  of  
a  very  fast  evolution. At  first,  static  supports  were  the  virtual  laboratories  can  increase  and  make  the  
constructed as a promotion of an exhibition placed in  
a museum (which in difference in the virtual ones, is  
visits  to  the  portal  more  fruitful. 
besides the pages of Wikipedia, the portal has  been  connected  from  several  external  web  pages,  
named physical exhibitions). Later on, they started to  offer additional contents that were difficult to offer in  
regions  of  Spain  (A  Coruña,  barcelona,  etc.)  and  Southern America. However, the number of links is  
like the pages of educational institutions of different  
the physical exhibition6. At present, the goal of virtual  
exhibitions is both, to attract visitors to the physical  
exhibition and to complement its content. Therefore,  
relatively  small,  possibly  because  in  these  areas  
the paradigm establishes that: the physical exhibition  
is set firstly, and the corresponding virtual exhibition  
education  vehicular  language  is  Catalan,  and  not  Spanish. Several pages related with science divulgation  
(if  this  exists)  is  usually  a  derivative  product  from  
and  scientific  communication  publish  the  link  and  
the physical exhibition, which complements it, often  even  make  a  brief  abstract  about  it  (MedCiències,  
with  materials  that  the  physical  exhibition  cannot  
Icientificats, Scicom, School of biologists of Catalonia,  Global  Talent,  etc.). 
The data present only slight variations between  the  different  months  of  the  year.  Data  showed  correspond  to  September  2009. 
because of the Spanish language of the virtual  
offer  (music,  videos,  PDF  documents,  interactive  maps,  forums,  etc.). 
The idiosyncrasy of the virtual exhibition presented  here (which does not have its corresponding physic  exhibition)  creates  an  interesting  situation,  since  it  opens a new way for the virtual exhibitions: would it  
exhibition,  as  expected,  most  of  the  visitors  come  
be feasible to use the contents and the information  from  countries  such  as  United  States,  Spain,  and  
of  the  users  to  generate  a  physical  exhibition  from  
174 

========7========

DoMènECH: TuRnInG  v ISIToRS InTo uSERS: A CHAllEnGE FoR  v IRTuAl ExHIbITIon  
this  virtual  exhibition?  Can  we  use  the  virtual  exhibitions  as  a  first  approach  to  test  possible  physical  exhibitions?  This  new  perspective  about  the  virtual  exhibitions  would  allow  to  an  exhibition  to  test  the  interest  or  opportunity  of  an  exhibition  before  carrying  it  out,  with  the  consequent  saving.  According  to  this  system,  when  a  virtual  exhibition  had  success,  a  physical  exhibition  with  materials  and/or elements that the virtual exhibition could not  offer might be generated a posteriori (touch, taste,  space  3D,  laboratory  experiments  in  situ,  etc.). 
This  would  generate  a  new  paradigm  for  the  virtual exhibitions: the virtual exhibition is set firstly,  and  the  corresponding  physical  exhibition  (if  it  
exists)  is  usually  a  derivative  product  from  the  
5. 
virtual  exhibition,  which  complements  it,  often  with  materials  that  the  virtual  exhibition  cannot  offer. 
ACKNOWl EDGEMENT s 
This work was supported by the grant FCT-08-0550  of  the  Fundación  Española  para  la  Ciencia  y  la  Tecnología (FECYT) from the Spanish Government  and an ACDC grant from the Agència de Gestió dels  Ajuts Universitaris i de la Recerca (AGAUR) of the  Catalan Government. Author is grateful to Dr Piero  berni (Archaeology Department, barcelona university)  for technical help and advices about Joomla1.5 and  to  Prof.  César  Carreras for advice  and supervision  during  the  construction  of  virtual  exhibition. 
REFERENCEs 
1. Carreras  C.  &  berni,  P.  Difusió  del  patrimoni  
cultural  a  través  de  les  TIC:  el  cas  del  portal  
de  la  vall  de boí. Digit-Hum,  2003,  5. 
2. Cuerda, x.  &  Minguillón,  J.  Introducción  a  los  
Sistemas  de  Gestión  de  Contenidos  (CMS)  de  
código  abierto’. Mosaic, 36,  2004. 
3. Carreras,  C.  &  Munilla,  G.  Patrimonio  digital.  
uoC  Editorial  (barcelona),  2005. 
4. Carreras, C. & báscones, P. Managing memory  
institutions  portals:  From  HTMl   to  CMS  and  
towards applications in xMl  for multiplatforms.  
Int. J. Digital Culture and Elect. Tourism, 2008,  
1(1),  18-36. 
Campás,  J.  Teaching  and  learning  in  virtual  
environments. In  E-Learning Methodologies and  
Computer  Applications  in  Archaeology,  edited  
by  Dionysios  Politis.  IGI  Global,  Hershey, new  
York,  2008.    
6. Carreras, C. & Museos Enredados. Nuevos dilemas,  
nuevos  horizontes  en  internet.  In   Patrimonio  
cultural  y  tecnologías  de  la  información  y  la  
comunicación,  edited  by  C.  Carreras.    A  la  
búsqueda  de  nuevas  fronteras.  Tendencias  2,  
Cartagena,  2005,  pp.161-82. 
175 

========8========

