DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 3, May 2013, pp. 176-182 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Online (Virtual) Exhibitions Applicatıon in Education 
Hurşit Cem Salar*, Hüseyin Özçınar*, Cihan Çolak** and Alev Coşkun Kitis*** *Pamukkale Üniversitesi, Eğitim Fakültesi, Bilgisayar ve Öğretim Teknolojileri Eğitimi Bölümü, Turkey  
E-mail: hursitcs@gmail.com, hozcinar@pau.edu.tr 
**Istanbul Health Museum, Istanbul, Turkey 
E-mail: ccolak@yildiz.edu.tr 
***Ataturk Technical and Vocational High School, Denizli, Turkey 
AbstrAct 
Online or virtual exhibitions are no more new tools to libraries, museums, art galleries and particularly  to education institutions. The National Library of Medicine, United States, Holocaust Memorial Museum,  Smithsonian Information, many counties national archives, etc. started exhibiting their information resources  through  these  tools. These  education  resources  provide  instructional  templates  that  present  and  use  exhibition materials to engage students’ interest in historical and scientifc perspectives. Educators are  welcome to review and use the module or lesson plans in whole or in part, as appropriate for their students’  interests, levels, and academic goals. This paper studied how virtual or online exhibitions could be used  for instructional purpose to the graduate students of painting programme at university level. This study  found useful for using of virtual museums for teacher education. The teachers had positive approaches  in  terms  of  acquiring  culture  and  constructing  knowledge  regarding  painting,  art,  recognising  painters  and paintings, producing original art works, interacting between individual, society and artist, providing  information sources to their students in teacher profciency and career. 
Keywords: Online exhibitions, virtual exhibitions, virtual museums, educational applications 
1. INtrODUctION 
Concept of museum brings to mind exhibition of  objects  which  is  frozen  in  time.  It  is  acknowledged  that  exploring  these  collections  of  objects  provide  students information and cognitive gain1  and positive  attitudes toward learning2. However, there could be  some  difficulties  in  visiting  museums  for  students  like  time  and  cost  constraints  for  travelling.  The  development  of  information  and  communication  technologies (ICTs) offers alternatives for eliminating  these  difficulties  and  exploring  museums.  In  this  context, virtual museums provide great opportunities  for  students  and  educators.  
1.1  Museums  and  Virtual  Museums 
Museums  are  public  institutions  researching,  collecting, and saving the objects witnessed to human  and human life. They are the nonprofit bodies that share  information, provide exploration, education and enjoyment  opportunities  concerning  to  the  services  of  social  development in contemporary meaning3. Also museums  have educational dimensions including pedagogical,  sociological,  and  psychological  components4. 
Received 28 January 2013, online published 20 May 2013 
Museums  are  the  most  dominant  culture  corporations  in  which  cultural  memory  stored  and  exhibited  to  people  especially  gained  a  political  power  feature  with  the  release  of  nation-state  concept. This process opened the way of becoming  museums  close  to  society  and  beginning  from  1960s converging to society process has picked up.  This  state  related  with  the  varying  socio-economic  structure  at  the  same  time. 
As the computer and communication technologies  are  being  used  in  all  fields  of  life,  education,  research  and  culture  institutions  have  begun  to  use  those  technologies.  Initially  museums  used  computers  for  keeping  art  objects  records.  After  the  developments  in  the  ICTs,  museums  started  exhibiting  art  works  in  virtual  environments.  In  1990’s,  after  the  introduction  of  internet,  virtual  museum  concept  came  into  existence. 
Schweibenz 
5 
  has  defined  virtual  museums  as  ‘…a  logically  related  collection  of  digital  objects  composed  in  a  variety  of  media  which,  because  of  its  capacity  to  provide  connectedness  and  various  points of access, lends itself to transcending traditional  methods  of  communicating  and  interacting  with  

========1========

SAlAr, et al.: ONlINE (vIrTUAl) EXHIBITIONS APPlICATIONS IN EDUCATION 
visitors…; it has no real place or space, its objects  and  the  related  information  can  be  disseminated  all  over  the  world’. 
In the literal sense, a museum’s web application,  whether being a virtual museum or not, is a divisive  issue and is not related with having a real museum  structure.  Presenting  a  museums  collection  online  doesn’t mean that museum’s application can be defined  as  ‘virtual  museum’  whether  it  has  a  real  location  or  not.  likewise  the  applications  that  give  virtual  navigation to visitors are not a virtual museum. These  two applications should be evaluated as museum’s  website  and  can  be  seen  as  museum’s  printed  catalog  application.  So,  what  is  the  actual  virtual  museum? It will come true by online presentation of  the similar objects which have not physical integrity  in real world in an artificial environment. This takes  us from Malroux’s concept of ‘museum without walls’  to  Schweibenz’s  virtual  museum  definition.  The  phenomenon which Schweibenz describes as virtual  
and  real  museum  experience  and  therefore  virtual  museums  is  no  ‘competitor’  for  real  museums.  This  argument  is  relevant  with  its  own  sense  of  divisions. Especially, in developed countries museum  is  no  more  an  organisation  of  high  culture  and  visited  seductively.  Classical  museum  experience  has  been  changed  like  museum’s  structure. virtual  museums  take  an  important  place  in  this  change.  More  successful  museum  experiences  lived  by  the  information  which  virtual  museum  provides.  In  this  regard one can easily see that virtual museums add  new  meanings  to  real  museum  experience.  Virtual  museums  not  only  bring  museums  to  people  who  don’t visit museums in traditional meanings but also  give an extensive museum experience to traditional  museum  visitors  by  using  virtual  collections  in  the  real  museum  with  wireless  network  technologies. 
One of the other arguments which are indicated  above is around the aura of museum object. Museum  object  has  integrity  with  its  own  aura.  Dissolutions  
museum and Malroux as ‘museum without walls’, will  
of the object in its aura are the cause of conceptual  be  operative  with  the  applications  which  is  related  
corruptions  on  the  object.  This  discussion,  about  
the  museum  object,  is  related  with  the  objects  has  
with  digital  collections  beside  its  own  collection. 
1.2  Virtual  Museum Arguments 
On  the  basis  of  virtual  museum  arguments  there  is  a  question:  Can  every  museum  structure  which  performs  applications  could  be  defined  as  virtual museum or not? For identifying a museum’s  web  application  as  virtual  museum,  first  it  should  digitalise  its  collection  to  serve  them  online  and  it  should give an opportunity of virtual tour to visitors.   A  different  point  of  view  can  be  improved  and  this  approach  is  connected  with  what  is  understood  by  ‘virtual’ concept. One of the definitions of virtual word  means  ‘offered  as  a  potential’.  This  sub  concept  can  be  defined  as  something  that  does  not  really  exist but it has opportunity to exist, a utility that an  organisation displayed. It is an operating unit which  appears  with  the  need  of  organisation  structure  and  that  can  be  restructured.  This  explanation  is  overlapped  with  an  association  which  has  non-real  building  but  it  develops  its  collection  digitalised.  
One  of  the  other  meanings  which  virtual  word  hosts is, ‘surreal, watching the fact’. ‘Virtual Reality’  is a good example of this sub-virtual concept. This  expression suggests that a virtual organisation looks  like real (traditional) but does not really exist, virtual  organisation only formed by a cluster of independent  partner  networks. And  this  definition  overlaps  with  the  form  of  a  network  of  virtual  museums  which  is  formed  by  similar  objects  which  are  not  integrated  in real world physically but associated in an artificial  environment  and  serving  integrated  online. 
Another dimension in virtual museum arguments  is the comparison between virtual museum experience 
importance for whom. When the problematic of aura  corruption arised because of art works photographs  copied extensively, museum-society relationship was  being  discussed  also.  For  this  reason  a  new  aura  attached  to  the  art  work  expression  developed  in  spite of the expression of aura, should be protected.  Skeptical approach is not as strong as in the past in  current conditions in which socialist museum concept  which  aims  to  provide  objects  and  information  to  the  widest  possible  audience  is  active  although  this  intellectual  argument  didn’t  completely  lose  the  importance.  In  breaking  this  suspicion  and  prejudice, technological development in the spread  of  social  life  and  conversion  of  outlook  to  an  art  work  is  relational. 
Another argument for virtual museums is about the  necessity of designing virtual museums considering  certain criteria. The criteria which performed by Wallace6 later  was  used  in  evaluation  of  library  web  pages  by  Love  and  Feather7.  Garzotto,  Matera  &  Paolini   developed a system known as ‘Systematic Usability  Evaluation (SUE)’  in 19988. With these system forms  of serving the information and interpreting the site is  provided together with evaluating virtual museum’s  information  structure.  Moreover,  SUE  recommends  evaluating the factors like learnability and efficiency.  The  modal  developed  by  Dyson  &  Moran  regards  pre-modals  as  inception  and  suggests  evaluating  virtual museum applications in two major headings:  Formal  and  informal9.  Where  formal  evaluation  is  one as the investigation of what titles should be in  a  virtual  museum,  informal  evaluation  is  done  as  investigation  of  user-centered  criteria  like  usability  of  webpages  in  virtual  museum  applications. 
177 

========2========

DJlIT, vOl.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
Formal  evaluation  in  terms  of  content  is  made  to  test  the  needful  headings  in  applications  for  a  functional implementation of a virtual museum. The  main  sections  which  should  be  in  virtual  museum  applications consist of collections and presentation  features  of  virtual  navigation.  Three  main  sections  are  divided  into  sub-captions.  
(i)  Main  Sections 
•   v ision  &  mission 
• Collection  policy 
• Applications  built  according  to  the  target  
audience 
• General  contact  information 
• Plan  or  map 
• Searching 
(ii)  Collection  Titles 
• Presentation  of  collection  (list,  information  
bank) 
• Nature  of  collection,  home  page  to  link  page • Testing  for  connections  to  other 
• Presentation  options  according  to  different  
user 
(iii)  Presentation  Features  of  virtual  Navigation • Mapping:  Museum  floor  plans  submitted  with  
the  virtual  navigation 
• Informing: Both navigation and information made  
by  multimedia 
Informal  evaluation  models  formed  for  virtual  museums,  show  similarities  with  usability  tests  which  arise  as  a  result  of  the  joining  internet  into  all  areas  of  life.  So,  museums  can  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  learnability,  effective  accessibility,  and  consistency  of  presentation.  
1.2.1 Learnability 
The  most  important  caption  in  evaluating  a  site  for  usability  is  ‘learnability’.  It  is  defined  as  aspects  which  should  be  considered  for  users  to  easily  understand  the  site  when  they  first  enter  
1.3 Advantages  of  Virtual  Museums 
(a)  Virtual  museums  provide  worldwide  access.  
Today  it  is  acknowledged  that  a  museum’s  
knowledge is not only the local community’s but  
also world’s heritage. Nowadays, many museums  
are  digitising  their  collections  and  putting  on  
internet  to  provide  access  to  entire  world. (b)  Virtual museums provide a nonstop communication  
to users. At times in which communication is in  
the forefront, museums have used classical media  
instruments.  However,  these  media  structures  
provided  opportunities  but  they  were  slow  and  
limited.  Through  internet,  remote  users  get  
chance  to  connect  museums  in  a  quick  way. (c) Virtual museums, if designed correctly, can be used  
for  distance  learning  and  lifelong  learning. (d)  Virtual  museums  contributes  to  close  digital  
discrimination.  Advancements  in  information  
technology  have  brought  new  problems.  The  
most  important  and  the  first  comes  to  mind  
of  these  problems  is  digital  discrimination.  An  
e-culture  activity  which  is  formed  by  virtual  
museum  applications  could  provide  possibility  
to  close  digital  discrimination.  
(e)  Virtual  museums  are  correct  and  trustworthy  
information  sources.  Internet  facilities  provide  
opportunity to reach the information and also to  
publish information. Consequently the reliability  
of the information on internet is decreasing day  
by  day.  Museums  become  reliable  information  
sources on Internet by developing virtual museum  
applications.  
1.4  Types  of  Virtual  Museums 
Schweibenz5   has  categorised  virtual  museums  on  the  internet  as  follows:  
(i) Brochure  museum;  
(ii) Content  museum;  
(iii) Learning  museum;  and  
the  site.  A  site’s  learnability  is  related  to  user’s  
(iv) Virtual  museum.  
establishing  proximity  with  site,  consistency  of  design  and  presentation,  generality  of  items  used  for  design  and  simplicity  of  design. 
1.2.2 Effective Accessibility 
Effective accessibility is defined as captions  which  provide  a  rapid  access  to  information  that  
Brochure museums are the websites containing  basic  information  like  types  of  collection,  contact  details  for  informing  potential  visitors5.  
They are also internet applications which contain  the  basic  information  about  the  museum.  As  they  give  limited  information  about  museum  collection,  
user  look  for.  Effective  accessibility  should  orient  
they are likely a promotional webpage rather than a  
virtual museum. Content museums are the websites  
users  correctly. 
1.2.3 Consistency  of  Presentation 
Similar  elements’  presentations  should  be  consistent.  Typography  should  help  to  reach  the  
presenting collections online. Art objects are presented  with  identical  database  information.  That  kind  of  museums designed for experts to provide a detailed  portrayal  of  the  collections  and  has  no  didactical  
between  pictures  and  text  should  be  clear. 
information which user is looking for. The relationship  
mission5. Content museum application presents the  
museum’s  collections  and  invites  the  virtual  visitor  
178 

========3========

SAlAr, et al.: ONlINE (vIrTUAl) EXHIBITIONS APPlICATIONS IN EDUCATION 
to  explore  them  online.  In  this  application,  content  is  presented  in  an  object-oriented  way.  It  is  more  useful  for  experts  than  for  laymen  because  the  content  is  not  didactically  enhanced.  
Learning  museums  are  the  websites  designed  for virtual visitors to interact in a context-based way.  Information is presented according to visitors’ age,  background and knowledge. The site is didactically  enhanced  and  the  goal  of  the  learning  museum  is  to  make  the  virtual  visitor  revisit  and  come  to  the  museum  to  see  the  real  objects5.  In  the  learning  museum’s visitors can play games, see the virtual object  and  places  in  2D  or  3D.  Virtual  reality  applications  can create objects and situations those are not real  and  make  the  visitors  feel  in  real  environment.  In  this  kind  of  applications  there  is  no  danger  of  art  works  to  break,  loose  or  damage. visitors  have  no  opportunity  to  touch  the  objects  but  they  can  look  in  different  angles  or  situations4.    
The  virtual  museum  is  the  next  step  to  the  learning  museum,  provides  not  only  information  about  the  institution’s  collection  but  link  to  digital  collections of others. In this way, digital collections  are created which have no counterparts in the real  world5. 
Although  there  are  some  discussions  about  the  virtual  museums  in  point  of  definition,  visitor  experience and exhibiting objects, but it can be said  that, initially a web museum application must present  virtual objects and give virtual tour opportunities to  visitors  then  it  can  be  called  a  virtual  museum. 
1.5  Virtual  Museums  and  Education 
Experince  is  important  in  learning  precess.  Extraordinary experiences can provide greater effects  in  learning10.  Museums  can  provide  appropriate  environments for education process by experiences.  virtual  museum  activities  make  visitors  live  more  different experiences but the same goals. Meaningful  learning  is  dependent  to  some  principals.  Some  of  them  are:  
•   l earning  requires  a  cognitive  process, • individual  engage  in  a  social  environment,  • I n d i v i d u a l   c o m m u n i c a t e s   i n   a   s o c i a l  
environment,  
• Individual  is  active,  
• Individual manages knowledge and time according  
to  own  character,  
• Motivation  is  important3. 
in classroom learning activities utilising that potential.  virtual  museums  can  break  the  source  and  time  constraints.  They  can  provide  accessing  to  rich  and  more  different  learning  materials  beyond  the  classroom  walls  to  learners  and  teachers.  Virtual  museums  are  useful  in  child  and  adult  education,  social  development,  recognising  historical  heritage  and  other  societies.  
lepouras  &  vassilakis4   have  emphasised  that  participants  reported  their  pleasure  regarding  3D  game  based  virtual  museum.  They  also  expressed  virtual  museums  are  prominence  conceptions  in  edutainment.  Okolo11, et  al.  suggested  that  virtual  museums are beneficial in history learning. Teacher  and  students  can  directly  access  to  art  works,  historical objects, photos, texts, videos. Handicapped  students  can  have  the  same  opportunities.  They  also reported that there is an increase on achieving  learning goals in education curriculums when virtual  museums  used.  
2.  A  CAsE sTudy:  PErCEPTiOns  Of  
PAinTing  TEAChing  PrOgrAMME 
sTudEnTs AbOuT VirTuAl ExhibiTiOns 
In  the  IT  age,  information  is  about  change  in  terms of amount and quantity. So, individuals need  to find direction, master, analyse, share and present  information, collaborate by appropriate technologies  and be life-long learners. Also societies need people  qualifying those attributes. In the process of shifting  from teacher oriented education to learner oriented  education, people must acquire 21st century knowledge  capabilities12. 
Teachers  have  great  responsibilities  in  point  of  individuals  to  obtain  those  qualifications  and  to  be  a  model  to  other  people.  So  it  is  important  for  teacher  candidates  to  obtain  the  skills  for  using  information  technologies  and  recognise  different  cultures. Teacher candidates should be able to realise  teaching applications using information technologies  with  appropriate  pedagogical  approaches  in  their  own fields. Teacher education programmes are being  designed  and  implemented  according  to  changing  teacher and learner roles12. There are lessons including  usage  of  basic  information  technologies  and  how  to  use  those  technologies  in  educational  activities,  computer supported distance education applications  such  as  virtual  museums.  Virtual  museums  are  found to be important in personal and occupational  development  of  art  teacher  candidates.  
According to the above principles, virtual museums  
2.1  Purpose 
can  provide  not  only  learning  environments  but  also  discovering,  interaction,  and  participation  opportunities. 
Museums  have  an  important  potential  on  enhancing learning. Virtual museums can contribute  
The main purpose of this research is to determine  and  evaluate  how  painting  teaching  programme  students,  attending  the  Basic  Computer  2  course,  perceive  virtual  museums  and  their  perceptions  about  contributions  of  the  virtual  exhibitions  to 
179 

========4========

DJlIT, vOl.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
personal and occupational development in education  process. 
2.2  definitions 
Blog:  
A  blog  (a  contraction  of  the  term  ‘web  log’)  is  
3.1.2 Participants 
Data was gathered from second undergraduate  students of Pamukkale University Painting Teaching  Programme  in  2007-2008  academic  years.  
3.1.3 Data  Collection  Process 
Computer  1  and  2  lessons  took  place  in  
a web site, usually maintained by an individual with  
regular entries of commentary, descriptions of events,  
the  programme  of  education  faculties  for  4  hours  
a  week.  The  goals  of  these  lessons  were  to  make  
or  other  material  such  as  graphics  or  video13.  
Occupational  Development:  
Development  of  teacher  candidates  regarding  teaching  profession. 
Personal  Development: 
  Development  of  teacher  candidates  regarding  art  knowledge  and  applications.  
2.3   i mportance  of study 
This research is important because of following  points:    
• Gives hints to instructors lecturing basic computer  
education, 
• Contributes  personal  developments  of  teacher  
candidates, 
• Contributes occupational developments of teacher  
candidates, 
• Contributes  cultural  developments  of  teacher  
candidates, 
• Give  hints  to  individuals  and  institutions  in  
developing  and  designing  virtual  museums. 
2.4   r esearch  Questions 
(i) What are the perceptions of teacher candidates  
towards  virtual  museums? 
(ii) How does teacher candidates estimates virtual  
museums  and  virtual  paintings? 
(iii) What are the views of teacher candidates about  
the  contributions  of  virtual  museums  to  their  
occupational  and  personal  development?  
3.  METhOd 
3.1.1 Research  Design 
Research was designed as ‘action research’  and  ‘qualitative  method’  was  used  to  analyse  the  data.  Action  research  can  be  used  when  there  is  a  need  to  improve  a  process  or  try  to  a  new  approach14. In this context, researchers considered  virtual museums as a new approach and with Painting  Teaching  Programme  candidates  in  Computer  2  lesson  visited  a  virtual  painting  museum.  Teacher  candidates  reflected  their  views  towards  virtual  museums  in  their  blogs.  
180 
the teacher candidates to recognise basic computer  technologies, to gain knowledge and experience about  computer literature and computer supported education.  There  are  also  distance  education  applications  in  the  curriculum  of  these  lessons.  So,  a  virtual  museum  visiting  activity  was  realised  according  to  Painting  Teaching  Programme  as  a  distance  education application. Visiting activity realised in 2  weeks  means  8  lesson  hours.  Teacher  candidates  visited exhibitions; used tools designed to look into  paintings  and  created  their  own  collections. 
3.1.4  Data  Collection 
Data was gathered from the blogs of participants.  Willing  candidates  participated  in  the  research.  20  of the 32 teacher candidates created their own blog  page  and  17  of  them  expressed  their  own  views.  Teacher  candidates  expressed  their  views  about  research  questions. 
4.  DAtA ANALYsIs 
Content analysis was used to analyse the data  gathered  from  the  blogs.  
4.1   f indings 
4.1.1 Natural  Perceptions  of  Teachers  Towards  
Virtual  Museums 
Teachers  considered  virtual  museums  like  an  access  tool  to  art  objects  and  paintings.  Virtual  museums  and  the  virtual  exhibitions  provide  easy  access opportunities in terms of time and source to  individuals. Virtual museums also can provide visitors to  see various and multiple paintings and look into them.  These opportunities can open a door to new visitors,  individuals  interested  in  paintings,  and  artists.  
Teachers also give a point to the interaction  capability of virtual museums. This interaction may  occur  between  individual,  society  and  the  artists  and virtual museums can be ideal environments for  interaction. This interaction can make the societies  and cultures to be conscious, develop, give chance  to  catch  developed  countries.  Also  artist  and  art  can  get  more  valuable  and  change  the  views  of  people  regarding  art  and  artist  in  society. 
According  to  teachers  virtual  museums  can  provide  cultural  values  to  present  wide  mass  of  people.  In  this  context,  virtual  museums  have  an 

========5========

SAlAr, et al.: ONlINE (vIrTUAl) EXHIBITIONS APPlICATIONS IN EDUCATION 
important  role  in  recognising  and  meeting  other  cultures  and  societies.  Real  or  virtual  museums  have  a  potential  on  creating  individual  and  social  awareness about cultural richness. Cultural knowledge  can be transferred between cultures and generations  with  virtual  museums  too. 
Virtual museums can contribute on introducing  and  presenting  cultural  richness  and  extend  the  activities  and  the  effectiveness  of  real  museums.  Convenience on individual or institutional presenting  art  works  is  important  for  society  at  large. 
4.1.2 Views  of  Teachers  Towards  Virtual  Art  
Works  in  Virtual  Museums 
 According to teachers, virtual paintings cannot  create  the  same  impression  like  real  ones.  This  is  because of indirect interaction between human and  virtual object. Seeing and looking in an art work on  a brochure or display causes a dimension constraint.  Brush  strokes,  patterns,  volume,  and  dimension  details are the important parameters when exploring  a  painting.  Virtual  paintings  cannot  provide  those  parameters  and  reflect  the  same  effect.  
4.1.3 Views  about  Use  of  Virtual  Museums  to  
Occupational  and  Personal  Development 
In the process of occupational development,  teachers  looked  into  the  paintings  and  recognise  painters  as  many  as  they  and.  It  was  possible  to  criticise,  comment  and  compare  the  paintings  in  virtual  museums  so  teachers  were  able  to  cherish.  Thus, teachers improved their imagination, creativity,  extend  viewpoint  and  reflect  to  their  paintings  and  drawings.  Recognising  different  painters,  styles,  drawing  and  painting  techniques  are  the  requisites  in  the  process  of  developing  self  style.  
Creating original paintings need visual experience  and  visual  richness.  Virtual  museums  can  provide  visual  experience  and  visual  richness  on  account  of  quality  and  quantity.  
Another point that teachers were impressed was  getting general and detailed culture and knowledge  regarding their field. Having efficient knowledge about  painters, art works, art philosophies, and art trends, it is  important both to their and their students’ development. It is  a necessity in the way of being a teacher and an artist. 
Virtual  museums  can  provide  up-to-date  information to teachers and students. Virtual museums  present more comprehensive information in comparison  with  printed  materials  such  books  and  magazines.  Virtual  museums  can  be  considered  as  a  useful  lecture  material  for  the  lessons. 
5.  cONcLUsIONs 
This research performed for seeing contribution  of virtual museums and determining views of teachers  towards virtual museums for teacher education. As  
a  result,  lecturers  and  the  teachers  had  confident  attitudes towards virtual museums and had a positive  effect  on  the  education  process.  In  this  context,  teachers had positive approaches in terms of acquiring  culture and constructing knowledge regarding painting,  art,  recognising  painters  and  paintings,  producing  original  art  works,  interacting  between  individual,  society  and  artist,  providing  information  sources  to  their  students  in  teacher  proficiency  and  career.  They  also  stated  that  virtual  museums  have  a  positive  impact  on  social  development.  Teachers  had no confident attitudes towards virtual art works  and  paintings. According  to  them,  virtual  paintings  cannot  create  the  same  effect  and  impression  in  terms  of  sensation,  emotion  and  perception  like  real  ones  on  the  visitors.  
Since  curriculums  are  including  field  specific  applications,  this  research  can  give  some  light  to  educators  those  are  providing  teaching  computer  lessons in teacher education programmes like virtual  museums for Painting Teaching Programme. Positive  or negative attitudes are one of the factors affecting  the  success  of  the  applications  based  on  which  they  can  be  rejected  or  included. 
Also  this  research  can  contribute  design  process  of  virtual  museums  which  are  not  only  presenting  places  of  the  artworks  but  also  providing  interaction,  information  about  artworks,  including  tools  for  looking  in  them.  
rEfErEnCEs 
1. Stronck, D.r. The comparative effects of different  
museum tours on children’s attitudes and learning.  
J.  Res.  in  Sci.  Teach.,  1983, 20(4),  283–90. 2. Orion,  N.  &  Hofstein,  A.  The  measurement  of  
students’  attitudes  towards  scientifc feld  trips,  
1991. 
3. Şahan, M. Müze ve Eğitim. Gazi Üniversitesi Türk  
Eğitim Bilimleri Dergisi, 2005, 3(4), 487-501. http:// 
www.tebd.gazi.edu.tr/arsiv/2005_cilt3/sayi_4/487- 
501.pdf/  (accessed  on  23  September  2008). 4.   l epouras, G. & vassilakis, C. virtual museums for  
all: Employing game technology for edutainment.  
J. of Virtual Reality, 2004, 8, 96-106. (accessed  
on  23  September  2008).  
5. S c h w e i b e n z ,   W.   T h e   d e v e l o p m e n t   o f  
virtual  museums,  2004.  http://icom. 
museum/ pdf/E_news2004/p3_2004-3.pdf/ (accessed  
on  23  September  2008). 
6. Wallace,  D.  Archival  repositories  on  the  world  
wide  web:  A  preliminary  survey  and  analysis.  
Archive  and  Museum  Inf.,  1995, 9(2),  150-75.   
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog/  (accessed  on  
25  September  2008). 
181 

========6========

DJlIT, vOl.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
7. Love, C. & Feather, J. J. of Lib. Inf. Sci. , 1998,  
30(4). 
8. Garzotto  F.;  Matera  M.  &  Paolini  P.  Use  or  not  
to use? Evaluating ,museum web sites. Museums   
and    the  web,  1998.  http://www.archimuse. 
com/mw98/papers/garzotto/garzotto_paper.html/  
(accessed  on  8  June  2006). 
9. Dyson, C.M. & Moran, K. Informing the design of  
web interfaces to museum collections. Museum  
Manag.  and  Curatorship,  2000,  18(4),  391– 
406.  
10. Hein, G.E. Learning in the museum. http://site. 
ebrary.com/lib/anadolu/Top?channelName=anad 
olu&cpage=1&docID=10056149&f00=text&frm=s 
mp.x&hitsPerPage=20&layout=document&p00=le 
arning+in+the+museum&sch=sch&sch.x=0&sch. 
y=0&sortBy=score&sortOrder=desc/  (accessed  
on  23  September  2008). 
11. Okolo, S.M.,  et al. Web-based History learning  
environments:Helping  all  students  learn  and  
like  History.  Sage  Journals  Online,  2007,  43,  
3-11. Intervention in School and Clinic database  
(accessed  on  23  December  2008). 
12. UNESCO information and communication technologies  
in teacher education: A planning guide, 2002. http:// 
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001295/129533e. 
pdf/  (Accessed  on  23  September  2008). 13. Blog. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog/ (accessed  
on  25  September  2008). 
14.   y ıldırım,  A.  &  Şimşek,  H.  Sosyal  Bilimlerde  
Nitel  Araştırma  yöntemleri.  Seçkin  yayıncılık,  
Ankara,  2008. 
15.   y ılmaz, Hüseyin. Sanal Organizasyonlar ve Stratejik  
İş Birliği Modeli Olarak Sanal Ağ Organizasyonu,  
http://www.bilgiyonetimi.org/cm/pages/mkl_gos. 
php?nt=426  (accessed  on  5  June  2006). 16. Science Education, 75(5),  513-23. 
182 
About  the Authors 
Mr  hurşit  Cem  salar   received  BSc  degree  from   Anadolu  University  Education  Faculty,  Department  of Computer and Instructional Technologies in 2002  and  MSc  in  Educational Technology  in  2006.  He  is  a PhD student in Distance Education Department of  Anadolu University since 2009. Currently, he is working  as Lecturer, Department of Computer Education and  Instructional  Technology  Department,  Educational  Faculty, Pamukkale University, Turkey. His research  interests include: Distance learning, e-learning, adult  learning,  and  online  learning  competencies. 
Mr  hüseyin  Özçınar   received  BSc  degree  in  Electronics  and  Communication  Engineering  in  2003;  MSc  in  Computer  Science  in  2006  and  PhD  in Educational Technology in 2009. Currently, he is  working as Assistant Professor, Computer Education  and Instructional Technology Department, Educational  Faculty, Pamukkale University, Turkey. His research  interests  include:  Knowledge  analytics,  e-learning,  higher  order  thinking  skills,  and  social  networks. 
Mr cihan Çolak  received BSc degree from Istanbul  University  Department  of  Archeology.  Graduated  from yildiz Technical University in Museum Studies,  with  his  thesis  on  ‘University  Art  Museum’s  and  worked  as  a  research  Assistant  for  three  years  in  the  same  department.  His  areas  of  expertise  are:  Use  of  technology  among  the  museums,  the  nation-state  museum  relations  and  communication  and exhibiton on museums. Currently, he is working  as  a  Collection  Management  and  Documentation  Chief  at  İstanbul  Health  Museum. 
Ms Alev  Coşkun  Kitis   received  BSc  degree  from  Suleyman  Demirel  University,  Technical  Education  Faculty, Department of Information Technologies in  2004 and MEd from Pamukkale University, Instıtute  of  Social  Sciences,  Department  of    Educational  Management  in  2010.  She  is  working  as lecturer  of  Information  Technologies,  Ataturk  Technical  and vocational  High  School,  Denizli,  Turkey.  Her  research  interests  include:  Intercultural  learning,  life-long  learning,  e-learning,  and  online  museum  education. 

========7========

