DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 3, May 2013, pp. 183-198 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Adaptive Virtual Exhibitions 
Bill Bonis*, Spyros Vosinakis**, Ioannis Andreou* and Themis Panayiotopoulos* 
*Deptt. of Informatics, University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece 
E-mail: bonisb@unipi.gr, iandreou@unipi.gr, themisp@unipi.gr 
**Deptt. of Product and System Design Engineering University of the Aegean Hermoupolis, Syros, Greece 
E-mail: spyrosv@unipi.gr 
AbstrAct 
 The paper presents a generic framework for designing and implementing multiuser virtual exhibitions  that  adapt  visitors’  preferences  and  goals  and  foster  the  emergence  of  communities  with  common  interests. A user-oriented platform for designing and executing virtual exhibitions has been presented in  which implicit generation and adjustment of user profle allows exhibition to dynamically adapt content  
presentation to users’ interest and preferences. 
Keywords: Virtual exhibitions, adaption techniques, semantic graph, taxonomy 
1. 
introduction 
Virtual  exhibitions  are  single-  or  multi-user  realistic  three  dimensional  (3D)  representations  of  artifact  collections,  in  which  visitors  navigate,  observe  the  exhibits,  learn  related  information  presented  in  various  media,  and  in  some  cases  interact with them. Given that virtual exhibitions have  no  physical  restrictions,  they  may  host  a  limitless  number  of  exhibits  in  a  very  large  presentation  space.  On  the  other  hand,studies  have  shown  that  visitors  have  various  goals  concerning  their  experience  within  an  exhibition  space,  they  follow  different navigation strategies in browsing the exhibits,  and  they  may  be  interested  only  in  parts  of  the  collection. These differentiations among online users  raise  a  need  for  adaptation  and  personalisation  of  the  3D  environment  and  its  content. 
Researchers in adaptive hypermedia distinguish  between adaptation of content, adaptation of presentation  and modality, and adaptation of structure. In the case  of  virtual  exhibitions  the  content  can  be  adapted  by  dynamically  altering  the  artifacts  presented  in  the  exhibition  spaces  based  on  given  criteria,  e.g.  user interests. The presentation and modality of the  exhibition  collection  can  be  adapted  by  selecting  between  different  media  that  may  accompany  the  artifacts  and  by  adjusting  the  presentation  text  to  the  visitors’  preferences  and  goals.  Finally,  the  adaptation of structure of 3D environments is not as  trivial as in the case of web-based and hypermedia  
Received 28 January 2013, online published 20 May 2013 
presentations,  where  hyperlinks  can  be  added  or  removed  and  navigation  maps  can  be  dynamically  generated.  In  the  case  of  virtual  exhibitions  the  environment is assisting visitors’ navigation towards  places  of  interest  rather  than  restructuring  the  space.  This  assistance  can  be  based  on  animated  agents,  drawn  paths,  etc. 
The  paper  presents  a  generic  framework  for  designing and implementing multi-user virtual exhibitions  that adapt to the visitors’ preferences and goals and  foster the emergence of communities with common  interests. In the proposed architecture the exhibition  content  is  dynamically  arranged  in  thematic  rooms  based on semantic proximity, and visitors can optionally  enter  personalised  spaces  containing  exhibits  that  may possibly interest them. The recommendation of  artifacts takes place according to information implicitly  collected about the users through their interactions  with  the  museum.  The  proposed  framework  uses  stereotypes  to  initialise  user  models,  adapts  user  profiles  dynamically  and  clusters  users  into  similar  interest groups, thus allowing virtual communities to  emerge. The PeVEP platform has been implemented  as a prototype of the proposed framework. It offers  tools  for  the  interactive  design  and  maintenance  of  virtual  exhibitions  containing  2D  or  3D  artifacts  with  related  information  pages.  
2. 
VirtuAl  Exhibitions 
The main objectives of exhibitions are to provide  a public space for the presentation of artifacts and 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
to  serve  as  a  centre  of  knowledge  specialised  in  a thematic area1. The 2D interfaces (e.g., museum  websites)  limit  the  user  experience  to  simple  page  viewing and sequential browsing and leave no room  for  any  immersive  experience.  On  the  other  hand,  a  3D  representation  of  an  exhibition  environment  places the artifacts in a natural-looking setting and  may  offer  a  much  more  realistic  and  entertaining  experience2.  The  notion  of  virtual  museums  and  exhibitions  has  been  introduced  by  Tsichritzis  &  Gibbs3   as  a  means  to  overcome  the  limitations  of  the physical space and to provide a vivid experience  to remote visitors. A synthetic collection of artifacts,  which  incorporates  multimedia  and  virtual  reality  technologies,  alleviates  the  problem  of  storage,  preserving and protecting the real artifacts and allows  virtual spaces to contain a limitless number of exhibits,  to  which  users  have  access  at  any  time  and  from  any place. Furthermore, it may introduce new forms  of  presentation  and  interactivity  that  stand  beyond  the passive viewing of the artifacts and reading the  accompanying  legend,  which  is  typically  the  case  with traditional museum and exhibition visits. Digital  artifacts  may  be  presented  using  a  combination  of  various forms of media, such as 3D representations  and  rich  hypermedia  annotations  and  may  also  let  the  user  interact  with  them  in  many  intuitive  and  creative  ways  in  order  to  learn  and  entertain  themselves. Examples of rich interactive experiences  could be the utilisation, assembly and disassembly  of mechanical artifacts in a science museum, or the  inclusion of educational games that are thematically  related  to  the  museum  collection.  
Various virtual exhibitions have been implemented  as  commercial  or  research  projects  during  the  last  decade, taking advantage of the tremendous increase  in the efficiency of graphics rendering and processing  of modern PCs and of the availability of 3D scanning  hardware.  In  some  cases  these  applications  serve  as  complementary  information  source  to  existing  exhibitions  and  they  are  usually  found  in  the  web  pages of museums or galleries and contain artifacts  that  belong  to  their  collection.  On  the  other  hand,  there are virtual exhibitions that host collections of  artifacts that may be abstract, imaginary, restorations  of  damaged  objects,  hypothetical  models  of  real  artifacts  that  no  longer  exist,  etc.4 
There is a great diversity in terms of visualisation  and  user  interactivity  in  the  available  approaches,  as  a  multitude  of  different  technologies  has  been  employed. As  per  the  presentation  of  artifacts,  the  approaches include simple images, panoramic views,  video  and  hypermedia  presentations,  and  detailed  3D  models.  In  terms  of  user  interface,  a  variety  of  systems  have  been  presented,  ranging  from  a  sequence  of  2D  pages  containing  the  artifacts  to  immersive  3D  environments  in  which  users  
184 
can  navigate,  explore  the  virtual  space  and  get  haptic feedback from the exhibits5, using specialised  hardware.  The  interaction  modalities  vary  from  simply  viewing  the  artifacts  to  letting  users  have  rich  educative  interactions  with  them6. 
Concerning  implementation  technology,  virtual  museums have been developed either as standalone  multimedia applications or as web-based environments  using  various  standards,  such  as  Flash,  Quicktime  VR, VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language) and  X3D.  They  may  run  remotely  in  the  users’  home  computers  or  in  public  installations  inside  existing  exhibition  spaces.  Virtual  exhibitions  may  also  be  presented  in  multi-user  environments,  where  users  are represented with avatars and may communicate  using  text  or  voice  chat.  In  this  case,  users  can  have a collaborative visiting experience by meeting  people  with  similar  interests,  commenting  on  the  exhibits,  exchanging  information  about  the  area  of  interest,  making  new  friends,  etc.  Virtual  museums  and  galleries  are  also  being  built  inside  persistent  virtual  worlds,  such  as  the  popular  second  life  platform7,  thus  making  the  exhibition  accessible  to  a  large,  already  established,  user  community,  with  no  need  to  install  any  additional  software  or  plug-in. An overview of virtual museum technologies  is  presented  by  Sylaiou8, et  al. 
3. 
AdAptiVity  of  Exhibition spAcEs 
Distribution of artifacts in predetermined placeholders  in  physical  exhibitions  may  not  match  all  visitors’  expectations, as it is practically impossible to present  different  subsets  of  the  collection  to  individual  visitors.  Virtual  exhibitions,  on  the  other  hand,  have  no  such  limitations,  as  the  content  can  be  dynamically distributed and rearranged resulting to  an  infinite  number  of  varied  presentations  of  the  same collection. Furthermore, it is significantly hard  to  extend  or  alter  a  physical  collection,  at  least  on  a  regular  basis,  whilst  virtual  exhibitions  can  offer  the  ability  to  perform  instant  changes  on  the  collection  presentation  and  to  expand  the  museum  space infinitely. As a result, virtual exhibitions may  enhance  traditional  museum  visits  by  offering  the  ability to adapt, expand, and personalise the artifact  collections. 
The  presentation  and  categorisation  of  large  collections has been effectively addressed in web9-12  and  multimedia applications13. User modeling techniques  have  been  employed  in  order  to  personalise  the  content  presentation  according  to  the  users’  own  interests. Virtual exhibitions could also benefit from  user  modeling  and  adaptation  methodologies,  in  order  to  make  assumptions  about  user  interests  and  intentions  concerning  the  application,  and  to  construct  the  virtual  space  accordingly.  Such a  personalised  space  is  expected  to  reduce  the  

========2========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS 
navigational  burden  and  still  retain  the  metaphor  of  being  immersed  in  a  3D  environment. 3.1 Visitor  behaviour  and  Goals 
Visitors of exhibitions may have varied interests;  some  may  be  specifically  interested  in  a  subset  of  the  categories,  e.g.,  a  student  doing  research  in  a  specific  historical  period,  and  some  may  have  broader  interests,  or  may  just  wish  to  wander  around  until  they  find  something  that  captures  their  attention.  Parker  &  Ballantyne14   studied  the  motivational  factors  of  physical  exhibition  visitors  using  questionnaires  in  three  different  exhibition  sites. The results show that exhibition visitors have  various  goals,  such  as  learning  and  discovery,  passive  enjoyment,  restoration,  social  interaction  and  self  fulfillment.  Furthermore,  findings  indicate  a dependency between the visiting experience and  the  theme  of  the  exhibition.  For  example,  most  aquarium  visitors  perceived  their  experience  as  entertaining, whilst most museum visitors appreciated  the  educational  aspects  of  their  visit.  
Concerning  their  behaviour  inside  the  physical  space, Veron & Levasseur15  identified four different  visiting styles using metaphors form animal motion  behaviours:  
- The  ant  visitor,  who  spends  a  long  time  to  
observe  all  exhibits  and  moves  close  to  walls  
and  exhibits  avoiding  empty  space, 
- 
The fish visitor, who walks mostly through empty  space  making  just  a  few  stops  and  sees  most  of  the  exhibits  but  for  short  time, 
- 
The grasshopper visitor, who sees only exhibits  he/she  is  interested  in.  he/she  walks  through  empty  space  and  stays  for  long  time  only  in  front  of  selected  exhibits,  and 
- 
The butterfly visitor, who changes frequently the  direction of visit, usually avoiding empty space.  he/she sees almost all exhibits, but times vary  between  exhibits.  
Umiker-Sebeok16   presented  four  major  visitor  types  with  respect  to  their  interpretation  of  the  exhibition  space: 
- The  Pragmatic  interprets  the  exhibition  as  a  
classroom  or  workshop  and  is  interested  in  
‘useful’  information, 
- 
The  Critical  visitor  interprets  the  exhibition  as  a  museum  and  is  interested  in  the  aesthetics  of  displays,  the  structure  of  the  collection  and  the  classification  of  exhibits, 
- 
The  Utopian  visitor  interprets  the  exhibition  as  an  encounter  session  and  his/her  main  goal  is  the  social  interaction,  and 
- 
The  Diversionary  visitor  sees  the  exhibition  as  an amusement park and his/her goal is to have  fun  during  the  visit. 
Finally, if physical or virtual exhibitis are considered  as  information  placeholders,  one  may  interpret  the  visiting experience as browsing an information space.  Dourish  and  Chalmers17   present  three  modes  of  navigation  in  information  spaces:  spatial,  semantic  and  social.  Spatial  navigation  is  based  on  the  arrangement of artifacts in their presentation space,  semantic  navigation  is  the  browsing  of  artifacts  based on semantic relevance, and social navigation  is  driven  by  the  actions  and  preferences  of  other  users  in  the  information  space.  
Following from the study of the categorisations  presented above, one may notice the great diversity  between the needs and behavior of various exhibition  visitors. Some visitors are focusing on the learning  aspect of their visiting experience, may be interested  in  specific  categories  of  exhibits,  and  may  wish  to  discover all relevant information. Other visitors are  more interested in the aesthetics of the experience  and  perceive  their  exhibition  visit  as  a  means  of  restoration,  and  finally  some  users  are  primarily  interested  in  the  social  aspects  of  their  visit  and  may possibly need to discuss their experience with  others,  meet  other  people  with  similar  interests,  etc.  This  diversity  of  interests  could  be  supported  in multi-user virtual exhibitions by offering adaptive  content  that  satisfies  the  semantic  browsing  and  social  interaction  needs  of  users  based  on  their  own  preferences. 
3.2 Adaptation  techniques 
According to Kobsa18, et al. the personalisation  process is divided in three major tasks: the acquisition  of  information  about  users’  characteristics  and  behavior, the representation of that data in a formal  system  that  allows  the  drawing  of  assumptions  about  user  preferences,  and  the  production  of  personalised content. A number of successful adaptive  systems have been developed using web-based and  hypermedia technologies that provide personalised  content  to  users?.  however,  in  the  case  of  3D  environments,  the  tasks  of  recoding  user  behavior  and dynamically producing the content introduces a  significant amount of complexity, due to the fact that  the degrees of freedom in navigation and interaction  are significantly increased, compared to navigating  and  interacting  with  page-based  content. 
Virtual  environments  are  a  special  kind  of  medium,  not  widely  used  until  a  few  years  ago,  which  has  major  differences  from  the  well  known  hypermedia  metaphor  used  in  web  and  multimedia  applications. The elements are not arranged within  a  page  (which  can  be  easily  explored  using  the  
185 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
scroll  bar  and  hyperlinks),  but  within  a  shared  3D  space.  Given  that  the  visibility  is  limited  (e.g.,  one  cannot  see  behind  walls),  a  lot  of  traveling  is  required from the users to explore the environment  and  search  for  information  artifacts.  Furthermore,  virtual worlds cannot be ‘hyperlinked’ to each other  due to a lack of common platform; each world has its  own  user  base  and  content  and  sharing  is  not  possible. The only equivalent of hyperlinking in 3D  environments  is  the  ability  to  “teleport”  the  user  to  distant  places.  however,  similarly  to  the  hyperlink  metaphor,  extensive  use  of  this  kind  of  navigation  may distort the users’ sense of presence and cause  disorientation19. 
The  collection  of  user  interests  can  be  based  either on user supplied information, e.g., by explicitly  asking  the  user  before  entering  the  environment,  or  on  observation  of  user  behavior  that  may  form  assumptions  about  his/her  likes  and  dislikes.  The  second case is not as straightforward as in hypermedia  applications, because users are not explicitly clicking  on hyperlinks and media elements; they are simply  navigating  inside  the  3D  space  and  observing  areas  of  the  environment.  Therefore,  the  system  has  to  adopt  strategies,  such  as  the  user’s  field  of  view  calculation  of  total  viewing  times  to  infer  the  elements  of  the  environment  that  are  possibly  capturing  the  users’  interest.  Chitaro  &  Ieronutti20  have proposed a tool for recording user behavior in  virtual environments. It can collect information about  the  places  the  user  has  visited  and  the  time  spent  in  each  position,  as  well  as  about  the  parts  of  the  environment  that  he  has  seen  during  his  visit.  
Adaptation  in  hypermedia  systems  is  generally  applied  in  the  following  categories:  
(a)  Adaptation of content: Personalisation of content  
based  on  users,  usage  and  environment, 
(b) Adaptation of presentation: Changing the presentation  
and media format and the interaction elements,  
and 
(c) Adaptation  of  structure:  Personalising  the  
presentation  of  links. 
In the case of 3D environments, the adaptation  of  content  and  structure  is  not  as  simple  as  the  process  of  generating  a  dynamic  web  page.  The  form and topology of the interior and exterior spaces  cannot be easily adjusted to custom content sise. One  approach is to use placeholders in predefined places  of  the  virtual  exhibition  and  to  change  the  exhibits  based on some criteria, however, this approach can  only be applied for a static number of exhibits. This  method  has  been  used  in  the AWE3D  environment  where the contents of an on-line store are dynamically  arranged  based  on  visitor  preferences21.  Another  approach  for  structure  adaptation  is  the  use  of  a  
186 
‘rooms  and  corridors’  metaphor  and  the  dynamic  arrangement of the rooms based on some criteria. A  prototype virtual environment for distance learning22 has  been  implemented  using  this  metaphor,  where  each  thematic  area  is  represented  as  a  different  room  and  visitors  walk  through  a  corridor  with  the  rooms  arranged  based  on  their  interests.  
Probably the most widely used adaptation technique  in 3D environments is the adaptive user navigation.  Systems adopting this technique are either generating  automated tours based on user interests or contain  embodied agents as virtual guides with which users  can  interact  using  dialogs  or  natural  language.  A  first  approach  towards  personalised  3D  exhibition  environments is JubilEasy23, a system that generates  virtual visits in the city of Rome based on information  received explicitly by the user. Chittaro24, et al. present  a Virtual Museum of Computer Science in which an  embodied agent offers guided tours to visitors using  natural language to present the exhibits. Finally, an  agent  that  presents  a  virtual  exhibition  in  second  life is being presented by Oberlander25.  The  agent  can  adjust  the  language  and  style  of  presentation  based  on  user  preferences.  
3.3 related Approaches 
Chittaro  &  Ranon21   propose  an  approach  for  the  development  of  adaptive  3D  websites.  They  present the AWE3D architecture for the generation of  dynamic VRML worlds that adapt to user preferences.  Their  proposed  data  acquisition  process  is  based  on  sensors  that  record  proximity  and  visibility  to  infer  whether  a  user  has  seen  an  element  of  the  environment  or  how  much  time  she  has  spent  in  a  place.  User  data  are  submitted  to  the  server,  recorded  in  a  database,  and  processed  by  a  rule- based  system  that  updates  the  user  model.  The  personalised  environment  is  generated  using  a  world  generator  process  that  selects  elements  from  a  VRML  content  database  and  generates  the  personalised environment. AWE3D has been used for  the development of a personalised 3D e-commerce  site and for automatically generated tours in virtual  museums26. Another approach towards personalisation  in  virtual  environments  is  the  intelligent  virtual  environment presented22, which adapts its structure  and presentation according to the visitor preferences  by inserting and deleting content. It uses a rule-based  system with certainty factors to draw inferences and  to update the user model accordingly. Furthermore,  it  contains  an  automated  content  categorisation  system based on machine learning techniques that  aims  to  assist  the  spatial  distribution  of  content  in  the  environment.  The  system  has  been  used  in  a  prototype  distant  learning  environment.  
Celentano  &  Pittarello27   propose  an  approach  to  facilitate  adaptive  interaction  with  the  virtual  

========4========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS 
environment, which is based on a structured design  of the 3D interaction space, the distinction between  a basic virtual world layer and an interaction layer,  and  the  recording  of  the  environment’s  usage  by  the  user  in  order  to  find  interaction  patterns.  The  aim is to facilitate the system’s usage by monitoring  user  behaviour  and  predicting  future  needs  for  interaction  purposes.  When  the  system  recognises  the initial state of an interaction pattern, it executes  the  final  state  without  letting  the  user  engage  in  the  intermediate  ones.  
Lepouras  &  Vasilakis28   present  an  overview  of  adaptive  virtual  museums  on  the  web  and  propose  the  architecture  of  an  adaptive  virtual  environment  creation system. In their proposed approach, designers  provide templates of rooms, objects and interaction  techniques and an environment generator is generating  personalised  museums  based  on  user  models.  A  usage  data  recorder  is  monitoring  user  motion  in the environment and is updating the user profile  accordingly.  
4. 
ModElinG  Ad AptiVE   Virtu Al  Exhibitions 
This  work  presents  a  framework  for  virtual  exhibitions,  which  adapt  to  user  preferences  and  experience. Exhibits are selected and presented in  the  context  of  a  hypothetical  user’s  interests.  An  abstract model represents the interests of each user.  This  model  must  be  initialised  upon  entering  the  exhibition  environment  and  must  be  subsequently  updated  to  reflect  to  its  owner.  In  order  to  satisfy  these  requirements  the  user  model  encapsulates  user  characteristics  as  they  are  deducted  by  her  initial  preferences  and  her  recorded  actions  inside  the presentation space itself. Overall, the proposed  framework contemplates on generating and updating  the user model, presenting content and grouping of  users based on similar characteristics. The retrieval  approach  can  be  classified  as  content-based29.  
Ontologies are used in a wide variety of applications,  as  they  can  effectively  describe  classes,  objects  and  relations  among  them  in  a  high  level  in  a  representation  usable  by  humans  and  algorithms.  Gruber30  defines Ontology as an explicit specification  of a conceptualisation. Ontology-based profiles have  been used in web-search31, in which case a hierarchical  taxonomy of human interests is adapted over time to  improve retrieval precision.  Knowledge management  systems also employ ontologies in user modeling32 while  others33   attempt  to  incorporate  abstract  user  concepts  and  properties  into  ontology-based  user  profiles.  In  our  framework,  the  exhibitions  as  well  as  the  users  are  modeled  as  ontologies,  with  the  latter’s  structure  relying  on  the  former’s.  On  the  most  abstract  level,  the  design  of  virtual  exhibition  
is  addressed  by  organising  the  exhibits  domain  into  categories  (classes)  and  specifying  relations  of  generalisation/specialisation  and  affinity  among  categories.  The  basis  of  the  exhibition  design  is  therefore  a  hierarchical  taxonomy  of  the  content  categories. Utilising the degree of a user’s interest  in categories it is possible to deduce her degree of  interest  in  the  actual  contents.  Furthermore,  these  categories  (classes)  and  relations  among  them  participate  in  both  exhibition  and  user  models. 
User  models  are  initialised  through  a  process  that assigns degrees of interest to the categories of  the exhibition’s content taxonomy. The initialisation  method should be both user and context dependent34 and preferable implicit thus facilitating users without  posing  any  extra  burden. The  degree  of  interest  in  each of those categories are the dynamic components  of  the  user  model.  however,  the  importance  of  adaptivity  in  virtual  exhibitions  of  large  scale  can  be as important as in hypermedia systems35.  While  the user is browsing the environment, her navigation  and interaction with content are monitored and the  recorded  behavior  is  utilised  to  make  assumptions  about her interests and preferences, which are then  incorporated  into  the  user’s  model.  Combining  the  contents  of  the  user  ontology  and  the  exhibition  ontology  it  is  possible  to  produce  a  personalised  environment,  which  reflects  the  user’s  assumed  preferences and to recommend new content that might  be of her interest. Overall, the exhibition framework  can be implemented using only transparent processes  for personalisation36. Additionally, user groups can be  formed by comparing user models, thus introducing  social  awareness  and  interaction  in  the  virtual  environment.  Figure  1  presents  an  overview  of  the  Adaptive Virtual Exhibitions Framework. To elaborate  on this framework, a virtual exhibition platform has  been implemented; an analytical description of this  platform  follows.  
figure 1. An adaptive virtual exhibitions framework. 
5. 
peVEp plAtforM   for  contEnt  pErsonAlisAtion 
PeVEP (Personalised Virtual Exhibition Platform)  is a platform for designing and implementing virtual  
187 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
exhibitions  with  content  personalisation.  When  a  new  user  enters  the  PeVEP  environment  for  the  first  time,  a  user  model  is  assigned  to  her  based  on  a  selection  of  an  avatar.  her  user  model  is  consequently  updated  according  to  her  monitored  behavior  as  she  is  browsing  the  environment.  At  any  time,  the  user  can  ask  to  be  transported  to  a  personalised  environment,  which  reflects  her  assumed preferences and recommends new content  that  might  be  of  her  interest.  The  user  can  also  join  communities  with  similar  preferences,  visit  other  personalised  environments,  and  exchange  opinions about the content. User interest groups are  proposed by the environment through an automated  clustering  process. 
From the designer’s point of view, the platform  can  be  employed  to  construct  new  dynamic  virtual  museums without having to define explicit rules for  content personalisation and adaptation. The designer  has  to  provide  the  3D  content,  i.e.,  the  rooms  and  objects of the environment, the semantic graph, i.e.  an  ontological  description  of  the  content,  and  the  user stereotypes that contain templates of estimated  initial  user  preferences  concerning  the  content.  A  presentation  process  then  creates  the  exhibition  rooms and distributes the exhibits dynamically based  on the above data. The personalised environments  depend  on  the  interaction  history  of  the  respective  users.  Furthermore,  exhibitions  generated  using  the  proposed  framework  can  be  easily  adapted  or  enhanced  by  altering  or  inserting  new  3D  content  and  making  appropriate  changes  in  the  semantic  graph  and/or  the  user  stereotypes. 
5.1  the  semantic  Graph 
A  vast  number  of  applications  that  utilise  user  modeling  methodologies  try  to  address  the  user’s  need  for  quick  and  efficient  access  to  a  subset  of  information that meets her interests and preferences,  without  having  to  search  through  a  larger  set  of  objects.  A  widely  used  term  in  the  literature  for  describing these applications is recommender systems  37-43.  A  distinctive  characteristic  of  these  systems,  compared to information retrieval and filtering systems  and  search  engines,  is  the  output  of  individualised  information  based  on  a  priori  knowledge  about  the  content  and  assumptions  about  user  preferences. 
A  thematically  uniform  set  of  objects  can  be  grouped  together  and  categorised  based  on  a  number  of  criteria;  relations  can  be  determined  between objects and categories or between categories  themselves, e.g., relations of affinity and inheritance.  For  example,  in  an  art  exhibition,  exhibits  can  be  grouped with respect to their creators, the epoch or  the style. These categories can be generalised into  broader categories or specialised into subcategories.  A  categorical  hierarchy  of  this  type  forms  a  tree  
188 
with  nodes  being  the  categories  and  edges  being  the  relations  between  them.  The  entirety  of  the  categories  can  thus  be  represented  as  a  forest  (a  set  of  distinct  trees).  Parent  nodes  in  each  tree  imply  categories  with  broader  meaning  than  their  children,  and  the  respective  relations  can  be  viewed  as  inheritance  relations.  Let  level  1  be  the  level  of  the  most  specialised  categorisation  nodes  for  each  tree  and  the  parent  of  each  node  at  level  N  be  placed  at  level  N+1.  The  actual  objects  are  attached, as nodes, to the categorisation trees using  connection(s)  with  one  or  more  level  1  category  nodes  via  an  instance  relation.  Thus,  the  resulting  ontology formulates a directional graph, the Semantic  Graph (SG), and its core is a hierarchical semantic  taxonomy. In the semantic graph the nodes (distributed  into  levels)  stand  for  objects  and  concepts,  edges  represent the relations between them42, 44, 45  and the  levels  represent  the  degree  of  generalisation.  In  this taxonomy, the actual objects are considered as  level  0  nodes  and  they  do  not  necessarily  belong  to  only  one  tree. 
Figure  2  presents  a  sample  part  of  a  semantic  graph  that  is  used  for  categorising  movies-related  content. In the example the node ‘Genre’ is divided  into two subcategories, the nodes ‘Science Fiction’  and  ‘Comedy’.  The  ‘Extra  Terrestrial’  appears  in  a  science fiction movie directed by Stephen Spielberg.  Thus, its 3D representation can be connected to the  nodes  ‘Science  Fiction’  and  ‘Stephen  Spielberg’. 
figure  2. A  part  of  a  semantic  graph  for  categorising 
 movies.  level 0 is the objects level. 
Let  A  be  the  node  at  the  lower  end  of  a  categorisation  edge  and  B  the  node  at  the  upper  end. All edges (which represent the aforementioned  relations)  have  a  numerical  weight  in  the  range  of  (0,  1],  which  is  the  degree  of  membership  of  the  object or concept that node A represents to the set  that  the  node  B  portrays.  The  use  of  the  degree  of  membership  is  analogous  to  the  respective  term  from  the  Fuzzy  Set  Theory44.  For  example,  Stephen  Spielberg  can  be  said  to  be  a  well  known  American  Director,  so  the  degree  of  membership  of this director in the ‘American Directors’ category  is  significant.  The  choice  of  weights  can  be  made  by  using  expert  knowledge  or  by  using  machine  learning  techniques.  The  degrees  of  membership  

========6========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS 
and the degrees of association are used during the  execution  of  the  personalisation-recommendation  algorithm. 
In  the  PeVEP  platform,  the  SG  is  the  core  element,  because  it  drives  most  computational  procedures: 
• M o d e l i n g   u s e r   p r e f e r e n c e s   i n   t h e  
environment, 
• 
Providing  recommendations  to  users, 
• 
Grouping (and searching for) users with similar  preferences,  and 
• 
Dynamically  distributing  the  content  into  s e p a r a t e   r o o m s   a n d   d e t e r m i n i n g   t h e  connections  between  them. 
The authors argue that the SG facilitates the access  to  the  exhibition’s  content  repository,  by  reflecting  a  natural  content  interpretation,  effectively  serving  the  users’  informational  needs  and  preferences. 5.2  dynamic  content  Generation  and  
rendering 
The hierarchical structure of the SG is used for  the creation of the virtual exhibition’s spatial structure.  Each categorisation node can be represented by a  set of interconnected rooms. Rooms that represent  conceptually  relevant  nodes  (as  portrayed  in  the  graph)  are  connected  via  doors.  This  approach  provides a multidimensional navigation paradigm, in  which rooms are connected based on their semantic  similarity. A user can navigate inside the exhibition  environment  and  browse  the  content  by  following  paths  that  correspond  to  any  of  the  concepts  that  can  characterise  it.  For  example,  a  room  with  objects from Steven Spielberg movies is connected  with  the  room  of  American  directors  (at  a  higher  level).  By  dynamically  structuring  the  environment,  the  effort  of  designing  and  creating  every  room  in  the  exhibition  is  reduced  to  a  minimum. 
The designer provides a number of template rooms  that  are  used  by  the  client  application  to  construct  the actual exhibition rooms. A default template room  is required and, optionally, any number of thematic  rooms related to existing categories of the semantic  graph.  Each  template  room  is  a  3D  model  of  a  section  of  the  museum  environment,  in  which  two  types  of  objects  are  inserted:  doors  and  exhibit  containers. When the application has to construct a  thematic room, it searches for a predefined template  that  matches  the  respective  category.  In  the  case  that  there  are  no  such  template  exists,  the  default  room  is  used.  Each  room’s  name  is  derived  by  the  corresponding  node  it  represents.  The  system  dynamically links the room with related ones using  doors,  each  labeled  by  the  name  of  the  room  it  leads to. Finally, the exhibits are dynamically placed  
in  exhibit  containers  whose  positions  are  defined  by  the  designer. A  default  exhibition  is  constructed  by  creating  an  entrance  room  that  is  connected  to  all  the  general  (top-level)  category  rooms  of  the  semantic  graph. 
The  collection  of  objects  that  will  populate  each  room  is  generated  by  traversing  the  graph  downwards,  from  the  respective  categorisation  node  to  the  set  of  object  nodes.  The  number  of  objects  can  be  significantly  large,  especially  when  browsing  the  content  of  higher-level  nodes.  In  that  case,  objects  are  distributed  into  a  set  of  interconnected  rooms,  each  containing  a  subset  of  the  total  exhibits  of  the  same  node.  In  a  real  exhibition, thematically related exhibits are, ideally,  placed  in  adjacent  rooms.  Similarly,  the  doors  in  the  virtual  exhibition  connect  rooms  that  belong  to  the  same  categorisation  node,  the  parent  node,  or  sibling  categorisation  nodes  i.e.  nodes  with  the  same  parent  node  in  the  SG.  The  metaphor  of  a  navigation  panel  provides  access  to  rooms  that  represent  lowest  levels  of  categorisation  i.e.  these  rooms  represent  specialised  categorisation  nodes  that are connected via a generalisation edge to the  current room’s node. This approach is used in order  to  avoid  overwhelming  the  user  with  a  potentially  vast plethora of doors. A navigation panel can also  be  viewed  as  a  dynamic  door,  since  the  room  that  the  user  will  be  led  to  depends  on  her  choice. 
Figure 3 sketches a room in the virtual museum,  which  could  have  been  generated  for  a  part  of  the  graph  in  Fig.  2.  This  room  is  the  second  thematic  room  that  corresponds  to  the  ‘American  Directors’  categorisation node, which is a level 2 categorisation  node.  The  room  contains  exhibits  that  are  related  (indirectly) with the room’s node, through that node’s  children,  which  correspond  to  American  directors.  The  user  can  navigate  sequentially  to  the  rest  of  the  rooms  that  belong  to  this  categorisation  node,  through doors that exist in this room, i.e. there are two  doors in this room that lead to the next and previous  rooms for this node, since more than one  room was  generated  for  the  ‘American  Directors’  node. 
figure 3. schema of a thematic room, generated from a  
semantic graph that categorises movies. 
189 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
To  facilitate  horizontal  navigation,  each  node  should  be  linked  to  the  previous  and  next  sibling  nodes  (if  any).  This  is  implemented  using  doors  in  the corresponding rooms, i.e., each room of a node  contains two doors that lead to the first room of the  previous  and  next  sibling  nodes.  In  the  diagram,  the previous and next sibling rooms are the ‘French  Directors #1’ and ‘British Directors #1’ rooms. There  is  also  a  door  that  leads  to  a  room  of  the  parent  node, the ‘Directors’ node. Finally, as the ‘American  Directors’  node  is  not  a  lowest  level  categorisation  node,  a  navigation  panel  exists,  to  provide  options  for  moving  to  more  specialised  rooms,  i.e.,  rooms  of  specific American  directors. 
This arrangement allows every room, regardless  of generalisation (level) to contain exhibits. however,  the  rooms  of  the  lowest  level  nodes  provide  the  greatest degree of specialisation. While navigating,  the  user  moves  between  rooms  of  the  same  generalisation  level,  as  she  would  move  inside  a  real  exhibition.  She  uses  the  parent  door  and  the  navigation panel in order to move between different  levels  of  generalisation  (as  they  are  represented  by  levels  in  the  graph)  and  browse  rooms  using  different  subtrees  of  the  graph. 
5.3  personalisation 
All available objects in the PeVEP platform are  categorised by the SG in a semantic taxonomy. When  and if a user is interested in a certain object, it can  be  assumed  that  she  is  also  interested  in  one  or  more categories to which the object belongs (e.g., she  likes the movie series Star Wars because she likes  sci-fi  movies).  If  this  belief  is  reinforced  during  the  interaction  with  the  system  by  showing  a  tendency  to  interact  with  similar  objects,  a  recommendation  set  with  members  originating  from  this  particular  category  would  probably  be  a  preferable  choice.  The  user  model  is  an  instance  of  the  SG,  with  all  nodes  being  given  a  numerical  value  (positive  or  negative),  which  represents  the  degree  of  interest  that  the  user  is  assumed  to  have  for  the  term  or  object  that  the  node  portrays.  The  process  of  calculating  these  degrees  of  interest  is  analytically  explained  in  the  next  paragraphs. 
5.3.1  User  Stereotypes 
    As  stated  by  Rongen 
46,  
et  al. ,  the  explicit  creation  of  a  user  profile  may  annoy  users  that  are  unwilling  to  state  their  interests  and  to  provide  information  about  themselves  and  thus  lead  to  user  models  that  do  not  actually  reflect  the  user  preferences.  Therefore,  an  indirect  method  for  creating  an  initial  user  profile  has  been  utilised,  in  which a set of stereotypes 41, 47   is  used  to  initialise  the  model  of  a  new  user.  At  registration  time,  the  user selects an avatar from a provided library. Each  
190 
avatar  is  related  with  assumptions  about  a  user,  which  are  lexical  values  of  properties  defined  by  the  designer.  A  possible  set  of  properties  can  be  age,  sex,  education  or  anything  that  is  considered  to characterise the users and the respective values  can  be  young,  old,  female,  male,  high,  low  etc.  The  stereotypes  are  rules  that  relate  each  value  of each property with estimated degrees of interest  for  a  set  of  nodes  in  the  SG. 
    The  degree  of  interest  in  the  categorisation  nodes  is  calculated  as  follows.  Initially  all  the  categorisation  nodes  have  a  zero  value.  For  each  value of each property, the degree of interest declared  in  a  stereotype  (if  any)  is  added  to  the  respective  categorisation node. This initial user profile is used  for  the  formation  of  a  recommendation  set  (which  will be explained in the following paragraphs) prior  to  the  user  interaction  with  the  3D  environment.  This  approach  deals  with  the  new  user  problem40,  with  a  reduced  accuracy  nevertheless.  This  is  an  initial estimation, however, and as the user interacts  with  the  system,  information  is  accumulated  in  the  user  model,  updating  it  and  thereby  increasing  its  accuracy.  The  aforementioned  methodology  is  based  on  researches48-49   that  state  the  possible  relation  between  the  choice  of  an  avatar  by  the  user  and  the  users’  intrinsic  characteristics  and  personality  trades.  Expert  knowledge  and/or  user  segmentation  researches  can  be  used  to  create  the  set  of  stereotypes. 
5.3.2  Data Acquisition 
    The  algorithm  that  updates  the  user  profile  based  on  her  interactions  uses  a  mechanism  that  propagates  from  the  lowest  levels  of  the  semantic  graph  towards  the  upper  levels,  i.e.  an  upward  propagation  mechanism.  Initially,  it  collects  the  summing  degree  of  interest  for  each  object  node  of the SG that the user has interacted with. This is  the  result  of  a  monitoring  process  that  takes  place  on  the  virtual  exhibition’s  application.  A  variety  of  acquisition methods is used, such as measuring the  time  spent  by  the  user  observing  an  object,  taking  into account the type of interaction, providing a rating  system that lets users express their preferences, etc.  The framework supports various types of acquisition  methods and interpretations. At the end of this step,  all  object  nodes  have  a  degree  of  interest  ranging  from negative values (dislike for the particular object)  to  positive  values  (positive  interest). 
 Objects in the virtual environment can provide  a  multitude  of  interaction  modalities  which  may  vary between the available set of objects. Because  some objects may be considered to be of significant  importance  compared  to  others,  the  designer  can  assign  an  initial  degree  of  interest  for  the  objects  of his choice. Exhibits with higher initial degree will  

========8========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS    
have  a  comparative  advantage,  especially  for  new  users’  profiles,  given  the  fact  that  the  system  will  not have sufficient information about their interests.  The  values  for  the  initial  degrees  can  be  arbitrary,  although there should not be significant differences  between  objects  in  order  to  avoid  producing  over- biased  recommendations.  The  default  value  is  1.  
  The total degree of interest for each object is calculated  
nature of the previous equation, without normalisation  each  profile  update  would  gradually  increase  the  profile’s  degrees  of  interest  and  the  effect  of  the  objects’  interaction  data  to  the  profile  would  in  time  decrease. This  normalisation  allows  for  newly  acquired changes of interest to be able to significantly  modify  the  interest  values,  even  after  a  graph  has  been  active  for  a  long  time. 
N 
TDIn InD F SR =by:  ..( ) 
 
K 
+ 
lnf 
∑∑ 
moda lity 
OutR 
n1n == k1 
where,  TDIn   is  the  total  degree  of  interest  for  a  specific object, InD  is the initial degree of interest,   InfF   is  the  influence  factor  of  the  objects,  n   is  interaction  modality,  SR   (special  rating)  is  the  degree  of  interest  for  the  n   interaction  modality  and  OutR   (outside  rating)  is  any  rating  provided  by  outside  factors  (if  any)  like  user-rating.  The  influence  factor  determines  the  extend  in  which  a  particular interaction modality effects the total degree  of  interest.  The  default  value  is  1.  The  special  rating  varies  between  interaction  modalities.  If  for  example,  an  interaction  takes  a  certain  amount  of  time to be completed, the special rating can be the  time  interval,  or  if  it  is  a  goal  oriented  interaction,  the  special  rating  can  be  0  if  the  goal  was  not  achieved  or  a  non  zero  value  otherwise. 
5.3.3  User  Profile  Updating 
    The  first  step  in  the  user  profile  updating  process  is  to  normalise  the  objects’  degrees  of  interest  from  the  previous  monitoring  process  by  dividing  with  the  maximum  degree.  
    Let  SN   be  a  semantic  node  and  DI(SN)t   the  degree  of  interest  for  node  SN  at  time  instance  t.  
Figure 4. Updating the user profle 
  The  algorithm’s  next  step  uses  two  additional  set of data, the maximum recorded degree of interest  for  all  nodes  in  each  user  profile  and  the  previous  degrees  of  interest  i.e.,  the  previous  profile.  First,  the  new  user  profile  is  compared  node  by  node  with the corresponding maximum degrees of interest  and  nodes  that  have  decreased  degrees  by  50  %  or more are flagged to be downgraded. The rest of  the  nodes  are  compared  with  the  previous  profile.  If  a  node  exhibits  a  decrease  by  70  %  or  more,  a  flag  called  pre-reduction  indicator  is  checked  and  if  true  the  node  is  also  flagged  to  be  downgraded.  If  the  indicator  was  false  then  it  is  given  the  value  true.  The  degrees  of  interest  for  all  nodes  flagged  with  the  downgrade  indicator  are  reduced  by  half.  Both  indicators  are  initialised  to  false  before  the  process starts. A less than 70 % decreased degree  of interest is not considered an adequate indication  of indifference because a user can have short term  
Let CSN  = { CSN1, CSN2,  …, CSNN}  be  the  set  of  
lack  of  interest  periods  and  at  the  same  time  she  children  nodes  of  node  SN,  with  DI(CSNi)t,  i  ∈can maintain a long term interest. The pre-reduction  [1,N]  being  the  respective  degrees  of  interest.  Let  
indicator  introduces  a  delay  for  one  calculation  
also  Wi   be  the  weight  of  the  edge  that  connects  CSNi to  SN.  Then,  the  degree  of  interest  at  time  instance  t+1  for  node SN   is  calculated  by:  
circle  for  any  needed  downgrades. 
  The  previous  process  enables  the  system  to  react  to  the  users’  interest  dynamics  and  to  base  its recommendation decisions not only in the current  
DI SN DI CSN W DI SN( )Nt+1=i∑=1( )( )iit .+( )information  collected  in  previous  steps,  but  also  in tthe  immediate  short  term  interests’  history. 
   Calculations begin at level 0 (the object nodes level)  and  they  proceed  level  by  level  until  the  maximum  level  of  the  SG.  The  resulting  degrees  of  interest  comprise  the  updated  user  profile.  This  process  is  depicted  in  Fig.  4. 
  After  the  completion  of  the  calculations,  the  new degrees of interest are normalised by dividing  with the maximum degree. Because of the additive  
5.3.4 Adaptation  of  Environment 
   For the creation of a personalised room, a set  of objects are chosen to be recommended to the user  by populating the room with them. This task is realised  using a downward propagation mechanism based on  the user model. This mechanism is computationally  equivalent  to  the  upward  propagation  mechanism  described before, having only the opposite direction.  
191 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
During  the  downward  propagation  procedure,  an  estimated  degree  of  interest  is  assigned  to  the  object  nodes.  The  choice  of  objects  that  will  be  part  of  the  user’s  personalised  room  depends  on  the  ratings  of  the  respective  object  nodes.  The M  
5.4  Grouping  and  formation  of  user  
communities 
In  Internet-based  applications,  added  grouping  capabilities can promote the formation of e-communities,  
top  rated  nodes  of  level  zero  (the  level  with  the  
thus increasing the sense of immersion in the virtual  
object nodes), where M  is the capacity of the room,  
environment, enhancing communication opportunities,  
are  chosen.  Variations  of  the  proposed  exhibits  
and  satisfying  the  need  for  social  interaction  and  can  be  produced  by  employing  methods,  such  as  
awareness. The main goal of the grouping subsystem  to  insert  a  few  random  elements  to  increase  the  
in the proposed framework is to create interest groups,  diversity, or to avoid selecting objects that the user  
each  member  of  which  would  have  similar  objects  
proposed  to  her  by  the  personalisation  algorithm.  
has  already  interacted  with. 
  Let  us  describe  the  downward  propagation  mechanism. The following computations begin from  the top level in the graph and reach level 1 (lowest  concept  nodes  level).  Let SN   be  a  semantic  node  
The user model, i.e. an arbitrary set of nodes from  the SG   with  a  specific  degree  of  interest  for  each  node, and the set of proposed objects for each user  provide  the  needed  data  for  the  grouping  process.  Since  all  registered  users  have  a  working  profile  
and DI(SN)t    is  the  degree  of  interest  for  node  SN  
at  time  instance  t.  Let  PSN  =  {PSN1,  PSN2,  …,  
and  the  personalisation  algorithm  can  produce  a  PSNN} be the set of parent nodes of node SN, with  
recommendation when needed, all data are readily  DI(PSNi)t, i ∈   [1, N]  being  the  respective  degrees  
available.  All  degrees  of  interest,  object  and  user  
model  alike  will  be  normalised  before  being  used  of  interest.  Note  that  the  values  of  the  nodes  in  
by the grouping subsystem, thus maintaining a level  the  upper  levels  have  already  been  calculated  for  
ground  for  the  comparisons  between  user  data. 
To calculate the interest proximity or dissimilarity  between two users we need first to define a distance  metric. A metric like the Euclidean distance used on  indexed  user  models,  therefore  viewed  as  vectors,  
time  instance  t.   Let  also  W 
i 
  be  the  weight  of  the  edge  that  connects PSNi   to  SN.  Then,  the  degree  of  interest  at  time  instance  t+1  for  node  SN   is  calculated  by: 
N 
1( )( ) 
. ( ) 
DI SN DI CSN W DI SN( )t+1=i∑= 
iit 
+provides  a  relatively  simplistic  approach  because, t 
(a) Measurements represent geometric distances in  
Subsequently, the degrees of interest for object  (level  0)  nodes  are  calculated  by: 
DI SN DI CSN W( )t+1=i∑= 
N 
1( )( ) 
iit 
. 
Last  equation  certifies  that  the  contents  of   
a two-dimensional space deprived of knowledge  insight,  and  
(b) Comparison data have high informational content  
that should be taken into consideration, content  
that  is  stripped  from  the  data  if  viewed  as  
simple  vectors.  
As  mentioned  before,  there  are  two  different  
personalised  rooms  depend  only  on  the  interest  
values for concepts. Thus different exhibits may be  
comparison  data  sets,  the  recommended  objects  selected with each visit or update, as long as they  
and the user model. First let us define the distance  
between  two  sets  of  recommended  objects.  The  
relate  closely  to  the  concepts  of  user  interest. 
Besides  the  selection  of  the  recommendation  set, a personal room should also have connections  to  other  rooms  of  the  virtual  environment,  allowing  the  user  to  further  explore  the  exhibition.  The  set  of  rooms  that  are  connected  to  the  personalised  room  should  also  reflect  the  user’s  preferences.  As  mentioned  earlier,  every  categorisation  node  is  represented  as  a  set  of  rooms.  So,  to  connect  the  personal  room  with  the  rest  of  the  environment, L 
metric should be affected by the ordering of objects  based on their degrees of interest since dissimilarity  between  highly  rated  objects  is  more  important  compared  to  dissimilarity  between  objects  lower  in  the  interest  ordering.  Let  k   be  the  number  of  the  first  k   objects  in  each  object  ordering  used  for  the  distance  measurement.  Different  exhibition  characteristics e.g. the room’s objects capacity, can  be taken into account for the choice of k. Let n  be  a  specific  position  in  both  object  orderings.  If  the  
doors, where L  is the door capacity of the personal  
same object resides in n  then the distance will not  room,  are  dynamically  created.  These  doors  are  
be increased. If there are different objects in n then  connected  to  a  single  room  of  each  room  set  from  
the distance will be increased by  
k-(n-1) 
/k, a fraction  the L   top-rated  level  1  categorisation  nodes  of  the  
that decreases by  
1/kth for each position further down  
user  model. 
192 
the  ordering.  Thus,  the  object  distance  metric  is: 

========10========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS    
                                                                                                    
   
dist x where n k andnobj = ≤≤∑ ,1i=1 
i 
xi 
s 
           dist dist dist=+ 
tot obj um 
There is no need for a dedicated process for the  removal of outliers in the data due to the usage of  the  quality  metric  mentioned  earlier.  A  user  model  
that  does  not  satisfy  that  requirement  will  not  be  0, 
included  in  a  group. 
= 
if identical object in n  
kn−−( )1 
The  grouping  process  itself  needs  a  specific  
k 
, if different objects in n 
grouping algorithm that will use the aforementioned  
distance  metric  and  create  the  actual  groups.  
This  particular  distance  metric  has  a  pair  wise  comparative  value  and  does  not  reveal  the  degree  in  which  two  user  models  or  recommendation  sets  are  similar.  
By  calculating  the  percentage  of  objects  in  the  set  of  k   objects  that  are  contained  in  both  
There  are  some  limitations  posed  to  the  candidate  algorithm.  
(1)  Number  of  groups  is  not  known  beforehand,  
and  
(2)  Number  of  users  in  each  group  is  also  not  
known  beforehand.  
Even though there might be a substantial number  
a  more  demanding  quality  metric. 
If the main goal of the grouping process was only  the formation of interest groups or more accurately  groups with similar recommendation sets, the previous  distance  metric  would  be  sufficient.  Because  there  is a need for formation of groups with users having  similar user models, an added user model distance  metric  should  be  introduced.  The  reason  for  that  resides in the fact that even though two similar user  models  will  produce  similar  recommendation  sets,  two similar recommendation sets are not necessarily  originated by similar user models. This means that  the  object  distance  metric  does  not  portray  an  accurate grouping based on user interests. Let l be  the  number  of  nodes  in  the SG   that  will  be  used  in the pair wise user model comparison. Let m   be  
recommendation sets and have a degree of interest  
greater  than  a  certain  limit,  a  quality  metric  is of  registered  users  in  the  system,  the  volume  of  stemmed and for small values two recommendation the  comparison  data  is  not  very  big  thus  posing  sets  cannot  be  considered  similar  enough.  The no  serious  calculating  restrictions.  
minimum  percentage  and  the  minimum  degree  of agglomerative  clustering  algorithms50 
hierarchical  interest can be adjusted according specific exhibition arbitrary  number  of  clusters  with  arbitrary  number  
  can  find  requirements,  e.g.,  room  object  capacity.  A  higher of members each in a multidimensional dataset, thus  percentage and a higher degree of interest formulate being  ideal  for  this  application.  The  process  starts  
with  each  user  data  set  being  a  single  cluster  and  terminates  when  every  new  merging  violates  the  aforementioned  quality  percentage  criterion. 
The  system  supports  two  different  techniques  for  choosing  the  distance  between  clusters  during  the  merging  process,  complete  link  and  average  link  technique50.  The  single  link  technique  is  not  used because it suffers from a chain effect (clusters  straggly and elongated)50, 51  that eventually will leave  user  data  not  being  included  in  any  cluster  due  to  the quality criterion, data that otherwise under certain  conditions  could  form  an  individual  cluster. 
The user can choose a personalised room from  a  subset  of  recommended  rooms,  the  owners  of  which  have  been  linked  with  her  by  the  system,  
a  specific  position  in  both  node  orderings  based  
based on their interests. By using this approach, a  
on  the  respective  degrees  of  interest.  
personalised  room  can  become  a  public  space,  in  which  different  users  can  meet  and  communicate.  
Let  dif dt diAB A=−B ,  where dix is  the degree  of  The  same  holds  for  the  rest  of  the  exhibition.  interest  for  the  node  X  and  nodes  A  and  B,  the  Considering  the  above,  an  environment  created  same  nodes  in  the  SG  for  each  user  model.  The  using the PeVEP platform can be viewed as a public  
user  model  distance  metric  is  defined  : 
exhibition space enriched with an arbitrary number  
of  personal  rooms,  all  being  easily  accessible. [ ]dist um t m y i where m l and y i( )1,1 
↑ 
↓= = ≡ ≤≤∑↓ ↓↓5.5  designing  process-Maintenance  of  
={(0,if nodes Aand Bbothin mand dif A↑↓ [ ] 
The  total  distance  is  defined  by: 
Exhibition 
The main purpose of PeVEP platform is to provide  users with an enhanced experience through the virtual  exhibition  and  with  its  central  entity  the  content  
193 

========11========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
itself. Thus, the designer’s primary task is to collect  the  3D  content,  i.e.,  the  exhibits,  the  set  of  which  will  define  the  exhibition’s  theme. After  all  content  is collected, the designer has to create a semantic  graph  that  represents  a  hierarchical  categorisation  of the content, using the provided authoring tool. A  screenshot  of  this  tool  is  provided  in  Fig.  5. 
figure 5. iVEx  3 d  authoring tool. 
This  process  can  be  viewed  as  a  series  of  distinct  steps.  The  designer  first  has  to  formulate  a  natural  categorisation  of  the  content  based  on  domain  specific  criteria  and  the  available  content.  Next,  the  categorisation  will  be  structured  into  a  hierarchy. After  all  categories  have  been  identified  and  linked  where  necessary,  the  content  will  be  correlated with the corresponding nodes/categories  of  the  lowest  level  in  the  newly  formulated  SG.  Since  the  SG  not  only  facilitates  the  content’s  categorisation, but also the user modeling process,  it  should  also  reflect  the  users’  possible  interests.  This  would,  at  some  cases,  lead  to  the  deletion  of  higher  level  nodes  which  group  categories  into  more  generalised  ones  that  do  not  provide  any  further information. An added reason to avoid over  generalised  nodes  is  the  fact  that  all  nodes  will  eventually produce a room (or set of rooms) in the  exhibition  and  these  particular  rooms  will  probably  not  illustrate  a  clear  thematic  cohesion,  as  viewed  from the users’ standpoint. As soon as the structuring  of  the  SG  is  finalised,  the  degrees  of  membership  between linked nodes should be chosen.  This last  step  concludes  the  process  of  designing  the  SG. 
The  designer’s  next  task  is  to  create  a  set  of  rooms  for  the  exhibition  using  a  3D  modeling  software tool of his choice. At run-time, the system  will choose the room, the exhibits and the links with  other  rooms,  depending  on  the  user’s  navigation 
194 
through  the  environment  and  available  data.  The  actual position of the objects and doors is defined by  the designer using a special kind of object called a  placeholder. Special conventions are used inside the  room template models to denote these placeholders.  The  graphical  properties  of  these  placeholders  (translation,  orientation  and  bounding  boxes)  are  
defined  through  the  use  of  3D  primitives  (such  as  the  cones  in  Fig.  6)  that  are  invisible  during  the  rendering  by  the  application  (Fig.  7). Another  task  for  the  designer  is  to  construct  a  set  of  avatars,  which  includes  designing/selecting  the  respective  3D  models,  defining  the  avatar  characteristics  and  to compose the stereotype rules that connect these  characteristics  to  assumed  user  preferences,  i.e.,  to  nodes  in  the  SG.  
figure  6. construction of an exhibition room. the cones 
 represent exhibit placeholders. 
The  final  task  is  to  adjust  the  various  system  specific  variables  like  the  interaction  modalities  degrees and clustering variables. All data structures,  files  and  system  variables  can  be  altered,  refined  

========12========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS 
(a)                                                                       (b) 
figure 7. An exhibition room at (a) design time and at (b) run time. the cones represent exhibit placeholders. 
or  enriched  while  the  exhibition  is  online.  Special  consideration should be taken if any changes in the  SG are deemed necessary. Because the user’s profile  is  stored  in  an  instance  of  the  SG,  the  deletion  of  nodes will probably, under certain circumstances, lead  to  a  significant  diversification  of  the  recommended  content.  Furthermore,  new  node  additions  in  the  SG,  although  they  will  not  alter  the  user’s  profile,  they  will  exhibit  a  handicap  compared  to  existing  nodes  because  of  the  latter’s  head  start. As  more  usage  data  are  gathered,  any  differences  will  be  eventually  assimilated. 
6.  cAsE studi Es 
To  assess  the  PeVEP  platform,  two  virtual  exhibitions have been developed, a Virtual Museum  about  science  fiction  movies  and  one  about  the  space  exploration  program.  In  both  museums  the  users  can  navigate  in  thematically  different  rooms,  enter a personalised room with various exhibits that  the user might enjoy, according to her interests, or  enter  online  personal  rooms  of  users  with  similar  interests. The exhibitions’ content (3D models) has  been  created  using  external  modeling  tools  and  imported to the environment, while the authoring tool  presented in Section 3.5 facilitated the construction,  manipulation and maintenance of the each SG and  the  systems’  database  management. 
As  the  users  navigate  inside  virtual  museums,  they  look  at  exhibits  that  fall  inside  their  field  of  view.  Furthermore,  the  users  have  the  option  of  manipulating  an  exhibit,  i.e.  rotating  it  in  order  to  gain  a  full  perspective.  Presentation  of  additional  information concerning the exhibit is achieved through  description  pages  in  a  provided  panel.  The  users  are  also  able  to  provide  feedback  about  an  exhibit  by  rating  it  and  entering  their  personal  message/ comment. At the same time, users can view comments  
written  by  others,  chat  with  them,  observe  their  actions  in  the  virtual  space  (via  their  avatars)  and  enter  their  personalised  room. 
The initial assumptions concerning user preferences  are  based  on  stereotypes  related  to  the  avatar  gallery, and consequent interaction in the exhibitions’  space  provides  the  appropriate  degrees  of  interest  for  the  profile  update.  Three  types  of  interaction  are  monitored  (ordered  by  the  degree  of  influence  upon  the  rating  of  an  object,  ascending): (a) Viewing time: The time spent looking at an exhibit.  
It is considered that the more time the user looks  
at  an  exhibit,  the  more  interested  she  is  in  it. 
(b) Manipulation  of  an  exhibit:  Interaction  with  an  
exhibit has a stronger impact than viewing time,  
as  the  user  expresses  her  preferences  more  
explicitly. 
(c) Commenting and rating exhibits: Users can write  
comments  that  others  can  read  and  rate  the  
exhibits  accordingly.  There  are  three  available  
rating values: positive, negative and indifferent,  
which  can  reveal  the  user’s  opinion  directly. 
User interactions produce degrees of interest that  are used by the server to assembly the personalised  room  and  to  distribute  its  contents  dynamically  upon  user  request.  Users  have  the  added  ability  to  be  instantly  transported  to  any  exhibition  room  (including the personalised room), in order to access  rapidly  a  desired  category/exhibit  room. 
The Science Fiction museum’s content reached a  total of 115 exhibits, whereas the Space Exploration  museum’s  content  reached  a  total  of  104  exhibits.  Because of the intrinsic limitations of virtual environments  that  run  over  the  internet,  the  files  have  been  processed by a polygon reducing tool. The content's  categorisation  that  produced  the  semantic  graph  
195 

========13========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
in  either  case  was  inspired  by  reviewing  various  sources  regarding  science-fiction  movies  for  the  Science  Fiction  museum  and  on-line  resources  for  the Space Exploration museum, like NASA’s site and  Wikipedia. Another important issue was the creation  of the museums’ rooms and their structure (position  of  the  placeholders,  etc.).  For  the  Science  Fiction  museum five room templates were designed, three  of them for generic use and two of them for specific  categories and for the Space Exploration museum four  room templates were designed, three for generic use  and  one  for  specific  categories.  Finally,  to  account  for  different  interests  and  preferences  among  the  users  of  the  target  (user)  group,  a  small  number  of  avatars  were  chosen  for  both  museums,  along  with  their  characteristic  attributes.  An  appropriate  set  of  stereotypes  was  also  formed,  in  order  to  associate  these  attributes  to  initial  user  interests,  aiming  to  provide  a  smooth  new  user  experience.  Figure  8  presents  a  screenshot  of  the  Science  Fiction  museum  application  and  Fig.  9  presents  a  screenshot  of  the  Space  Exploration  museum. 
The  applications  were  based  on  client/server  architecture and have been implemented using Web  technologies,  i.e.,  VRML,  Java,  Java3D,  and  TCP  sockets. The users interact with the environment on  the  client  side  and  user  modeling  takes  place  on  
figure 8. science fiction museum. 
figure 9. space Exploration museum. 
196 
the  server  side. This  schema  follows  the  paradigm  of  decentralised  user  modeling  architectures52. 
7.   c onclusions 
This  paper  presented  an  overview  of  virtual  exhibition  technologies  and  the  related  work  in  content presentation adaptivity and personalisation.  A user-oriented platform for designing and executing  virtual  exhibitions  has  been  presented,  in  which  implicit  generation  and  adjustment  of  user  profiles  allows  exhibitions  to  dynamically  adapt  content  presentation  to  user  interests  and  preferences.  A  semantic taxonomy of content simplifies the alteration  and/or extension of existing environments and enhances  presentation capabilities. Additionally, it is possible  to  detect  similarities  among  user  models,  leading  to  the  formulation  of  user  interest  communities.  Two  case  studies,  a  science  fiction  and  a  space  exploration  museum,  have  been  implemented,  in  order  to  gain  insight  about  the  effectiveness  of  this  approach. 
rEfErEncEs 
1. Economou, D. Virtual reality and museums: The  
development of a collaborative virtual environment  
for  learning  about  ancient  Egypt. Museology  - 
Inter.  Sci.  Electr.  J.,  2004,  14(2). 
2. Lepouras, G. & Vassilakis, C. Virtual museums for  
all: Employing game technology for edutainment.  
Virtual  Reality,  2004,  8(2),  96-106. 
3. Tsichritzis, D. & Gibbs, S. Virtual museums and  
virtual realities. In Proceedings of International  
Conference  on hypermedia  and  Interactivity  in  
Museums,  1991,  pp.  17-25. 
4. Ciabatti,  E.,  et  al.   Towards  a  distributed  
3D  virtual  museum.  In  P r o c e e d i n g s  
o f   Wo r k i n g   C o n f e r e n c e   o n   A d v a n c e d  
Visual  Interfaces,  1998,  pp.  264-66. 
5. Kim, y.S.; Kesavadas, T. & Paley, S. The virtual  
site museum: A multi-purpose, authoritative, and  
functional  virtual  heritage  resource. Presence,  
2006, 15(3),  245-61. 
6. Petridis, P., et al.  Exploring and interacting with virtual  
museums. In Proceedings of Computer Applications and  
Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA), 2005. 7. Marty,  P.F.;  Twidale,  M.  &  Urban,  R.A.  Second  
life  for  your  museum:  3D  multi-user  virtual  
environments  and  museums.  In  Proceedings  
of  Museums  and  the  Web,  2007. 
8. Sylaiou,  S.,  et  al.   Virtual  museums:  A  survey  
and  some  issues  for  consideration. J.  Cultural  
Heritage,  2009, 10(4),  520-28 
9. Mukherjee,  R.;  Sajja,  E.  &  Sen,  S.  A  movie  
recommendation system: An application of voting  
theory  in  user  modeling.  User  Model.  User- 
Adapted  Interaction,  2003, 13(1-2),  5-33. 

========14========

BONIS, et al.: ADAPTIVE  V IRTUAL  E XhIBITIONS 
10. Mobasher, B.; Cooley, R. & Srivastava, J. Automatic  
personalisation  based  on  web  usage  mining.  
Communications of ACM, 2000,  43(8), 142-51. 11. Eirinaki,  M.  &  Vazirgiannis,  M.  Web  mining  for  
web  personalisation.  ACM  Trans.  on  Internet  
Technol.,  2003, 3(1),  1-27. 
12. Schafer, J.B.; Konstan, J.A. &  Riedl, J. E-commerce  
recommendation applications. Data Mining and  
Knowl.  Discov.,  2001, 5,  115-53. 
13. Raskutti,  B.;  Beitz,  A.  &  Ward,  B.  A  feature- 
based  approach  to  recommending  selections  
based on past preferences. User Model. User- 
Adapted  Interaction,  1997, 7,  179-218. 
14. Packer, J. & Ballantyne, R. Motivational factors  
and  the  visitor  experience:  A  comparison  of  
three  sites.  Curator:  The  Museum  J. ,  2002,  
45(3),  183-98. 
15. Veron,  E.  &  Levasseur,  M.  Ethnographie  de  
l'Exposition. Bibliothque publique d'Information,  
Centre  Georges  Pompidou,  Paris,  1983. 16. Umiker-Sebeok,  J.  Behavior  in  a  museum:  A  
semio-cognitive approach to museum consumption  
experiences. Signifying Behavior. J. Res. Sem.,  
Comm.  Theo,  and  Cognitive  Sci.,  1994,  1(1),  
52-100. 
17. Dourish,  P.  &  Chalmers  M.  Running  out  of  
space:  Models  of  information  navigation.  In  
Proceeding  of hCI  94,  1994. 
18. Kobsa, A.; Koenemann, J. & Pohl W. Personalised  
hypermedia presentation techniques for improving  
online customer relationships. The Know. Eng. 
Rev.,  2001, 16(2),  111-55. 
19. Bowman, D.; Koller, D. & hodges, L.F. Travel in  
immersive virtual environments: An evaluation of  
viewpoint motion control techniques.  In  Proceeding  
of Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium  
(VRAIS),  1997. 
20. Chittaro,  L.  &  Ieronutti,  L.  A  visual  tool  for  
tracing users' behavior in virtual environments. In  
Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced  
Visual  interfaces AVI  2004,  2004.  pp.  40-47. 21. Chittaro, L. & Ranon, R. Dynamic generation of  
personalised VRML content: A general approach  
and  its  application  to  3D  e-Commerce.  In  
Proceedings  of  7th   International  Conference  
on  3D  Web  Technology,  2002,  pp.  145-54.  22. dos Santos, C. & Osorio, F. An intelligent and adaptive  
virtual environment and its application in distance  
learning. In Proceedings  of  Working Conference on  
Advanced Visual Interfaces, 2004, pp. 362-65. 23. Schaerf,  M.  &  Tessicini,  A.  JubilEasy:  Build  a  
personalised 3D visit of Rome. In   Proceedings  
of  VRML  1999:  4th   Symposium  on  the  VRML,  
1999,  pp.  105-12. 
24. Chittaro, L.; Ieronutti, L. & Ranon, R. Navigating  
3D virtual environments by following embodied  
agents:  A  proposal  and  its  informal  evaluation  
on  a  virtual  museum  application.  Psychology  
Journal,  2004, 2(1),  24-42. 
25. Oberlander,  J.,  et  al.   Building  an  adaptive  
museum gallery in second life. In Proceedings  
of  Museums  and  the  Web  2008. 
26. Chittaro,  L.;  Ranon,  R.  &  Ieronutti,  L.  Guiding  
visitors  of  web3D  worlds  through  automatically  
generated  tours.  In  Proceedings  of  Web3D  
2003:  8th   International  Conference  on  3D  Web  
Technology,  2003.  pp.  27-38. 
27. Celentano, A. & Pittarello, F. Observing and adapting  
user behavior in navigational 3D interfaces. In  
Proceedings  of AVI  2004,  2004.  pp.  275-82. 28. Lepouras,  G.  &  Vassilakis  C.  Adaptive  virtual  
reality museums on the web. In  Adaptable and  
Adaptive  hypermedia  Systems,  edited  by  S.y.  
Chen  &  G.D.  Magoulas,  2005. 
29. Burke, R.  hybrid recommender systems: Survey  
and  experiments.  User  Model.  User-Adapted  
Interaction,  2002, 12,  331-70. 
30. Gruber, T.R. A translation approach to portable  
ontology specifications.  Knowledge Acquisition,  
1993, 5(2),  199-220. 
31. Trajkova,  J.  &  Gauch,  S.  Improving  ontology- 
based  user  profiles.  In  Proceedings  of  RIAO,  
2004,  pp.  380-89. 
32. Razmerita,  L.;  Angehrn,  A.  &  Maedche,  A.  
Ontology  based  user  modeling  for  Knowledge  
Management Systems. In Proceedings  of  User  
Modeling  Conference,  2003,  pp.  213-17. 33. Golemati  M.,  et  al.   Creating  an  ontology  for  
the  user  profile:  Method  and  applications.  In  
Proceedings of 1st  IEEE International Conference  
on Research Challenges in Information Science  
(RCIS),  2007. 
34. Nguyen,  Q.N.  &  Ricci,  F.  User  preferences  
initialisation and integration in critique-based mobile  
recommender systems. In Proceedings of Workshop on  
Artificial  Intelligence  in  Mobile  Systems,  2004. 35. Brusilovsky, P. Adaptive hypermedia. User Model.  
User-adapted Interaction,  2001,  11(1-2), 87-110. 36. Kühme, T. A user-centred approach to adaptive  
interfaces. Knowledge-based  Sys.,  1993, 6(4),  
239-48. 
37. Mukherjee,  R.;  Sajja  E.  &  Sen  S.  A  movie  
recommendation  system:  An  application  of  
voting  theory  in  user  modeling.  User  Model.  
User-Adapted  Interaction,  2003, 13(1-2),  5-33. 38. Schafer, J.B.; Konstan J. A. & Riedl J.  E-commerce  
recommendation  applications.  Data  Mining  
Knowl.  Discov.,  2001, 5,  115-53. 
39. Raskutti,  B.;  Beitz,  A.  &  Ward,  B.  A  feature- 
based  approach  to  recommending  selections  
based on past preferences. User Model. User- 
Adapted  Interaction,  1997, 7,  179-218. 
197 

========15========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAy  2013 
40. Burke, R. hybrid recommender systems: Survey  
and  expiriments.  User  Model.  User-Adapted  
Interaction,  2002, 12,  331-70. 
41. Rich, E. User modeling via stereotypes. Cognitive  
Science,  1979,  3,  329-54. 
42. Kim,  W.;  Kerschberg,  L.  &  Scime, A.  Learning  
for  automatic  personalisation  in  a  semantic  
taxonomy-based  meta-search  agent.  Electr.  
Commerce  Res. Appli., 2002, 1,  150-73. 43. Perugini,  S.;  Goncalves,  M.A.  &  Fox,  E.A.   
Recommender systems research: A connection- 
centric survey. J. Intelli. Inf. Sys., 2004, 23(2),  
107-43. 
44. Minsky, M.  A framework for representing knowledge.  
The  Psychology  of  Computer  Vision,  McGraw- 
hill,  1975,  pp.  211-77. 
45. Itzkovich, I. & hawkes, L.W. Fuzzy extension of  
inheritance  hierarchies.  Fuzzy  Sets  and  Sys.,  
1994, 62,  143-53. 
46. Rongen, P.h.h., et al.  Multi agent approach to interest  
profiling of users.  In  Proceedings of Multi-Agent  
Systems and Applications IV, 2005, pp. 326-55. 
198 
47. Lock, Z. Performance and flexibility of stereotype- 
based  user  models.  University  of  york,  2005,   
PhD  Thesis. 
48. Kang,  h.  &  yang,  h.  The  effect  of  anonymity  
on the usage of avatar: Comparison of internet  
relay chat and instant messenger. In Proceedings  
of  10th Americas  Conference  on  Information  
Systems,  2004,  pp.  2734-43. 
49. Nowak,  K.L.  &  Rauh  C.  The  influence  of  the  
avatar on online perceptions of anthropomorphism,  
androgyny, credibility, homophily, and attraction. J.  
Comp.  Mediated  Comm., 2005,  11(1),  153-78. 50. Jain,  Α.Κ.;  Murty,  M.N.  &  Flynn,  P.J.  Data  
clustering: A review. ACM Comp. Surveys, 1999,  
31(3),  264-323. 
51. Dunham, M.h. Data mining and advanced topics.  
Prentice hall,  2004. 
52. Fink,  J.  &  Kobsa,  A.  A  review  and  analysis  of  
commercial user modeling servers for personalisation  
on  the  world  wide  web.  User  Model.  User- 
Adapted  Interaction,  2000, 10,  209-49. 

========16========

