DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 3, May 2013, pp. 208-221 
  2013, DESIDOC 
From the Picture Press: An Online Exhibition of the  
SPH Photographs Collection 
Phan Koo Yuen* & Chennupati K. Ramaiah** 
*Wawasan Open University, School of Science and Technology.  
Interim Headquarters: 51-20 Menara BHL, Jalan Sultan Ahmad Shah, 10050, Penang, Malaysia 
 E-mail: stevenphan@wou.edu.my 
**Deptt. of Library & Information Science, Pondicherry University, Puducherry-605 014 
E-mail: ckramaiah.lis@pondiuni.edu.in 
AbStrACt 
  ‘From  the  Picture  Press:  the  SPH  Photographs  Collection’  is  an  online  exhibition  based  on  the  Singapore Press Holdings (SPH) archive of photographs covering the pre-indepencence period, i.e., 1950-65.  It  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to  take  a  journey  back  in  time,  to  experience  through  these  black  and  white images, before Singapore’s rapid modernisation and transformation to become one of the Asia’s  most affuent and technologically sophisticated city-states. The main aim of this paper is to develop and  evaluate an online exhibition system and to fnd out its usefulness to teachers and students. From the  user point of view, they would like to have detailed information about the Singapore including its history to  the present. It was noticed that online exhibitions’ user interfaces depend on the authoring tools that the  institutions used. It was also found that internet is a very convenient medium for the teacher and public  to  deliver  heritage  and  cultural  information.  School  children  are  defnitely  excited  over  the  opportunity  to visit the online exhibition at home alongwith their parents. The fndings show that teachers liked the  online exhibition systems which had lot of cultural heritage information and also felt that it is a way to  go forward for knowledge transfer in the future for the children. 
Keywords: Online exhibitions, history, Singapore 
1. 
INtrODUCtION 
A picture is worth a thousand words and hence  is  a  powerful  tool  of  communication  to  direct  the  ideas, to stir emotion and bring back the experience  of the moment captured during that time. Since the  number of people using internet increased drastically  in  Singapore  for  various  purposes,  the  National  Archives of Singapore (NAS) sought to explore the  possibilities of technology-based information resources  that could enhance the ways in which professionals  performed their jobs.  By creating online exhibitions  they  want  to  break  down  the  traditional  walls  of  an  exhibition  to  create  a  ‘24  hours/7  days  a  week  available  exhibition’  that  could  cater  to  different  levels of interest and expertise found in the visitors  of the exhibition1. In contrast to a physical exhibition  which  is  bound  by  sufficient  physical  space,  the  online/virtual exhibition holds limitless data. Online  exhibition perceived as a powerful medium to make  accessible  to  the  Singapore  heritage  collections  of  photographs  that  are  not  usually  available  to  the  public  and  probably  would  not  have  been  feasible  in  a  physical  exhibitions.  
Received 28 January 2013, online published 20 May 2013 
Since  1980,  the  NAS  has  been  holding  static  exhibitions  covering  a  wide  range  of  history  and  heritage  related  subjects.  The  exhibitions  are  an  integral part of the National Heritage Board’s (NHB)  mission to explore and present Singapore’s heritage  to  the  public.  They  are  also  an  important  channel  through  which  vast  archival  collections  are  made  accessible  as  packaged,  thematic  resources  for  national  education  and  social  studies  in  schools  and  institutions  of  higher  learning.  To  keep  pace  with  Singapore’s  move  into  the  new  world  of  the  IT  age,  and  with  the  current  emphasis  on  creative  and  continual  learning  through  IT,  the  NAS  is  harnessing  this  new  technology  to  deliver  the  exhibitions  to  a  wider  audience.  The  NAS  and  the  Nanyang Technological University (NTU), a leading  educational  institution  in  Singapore  came  together  and collaboratevily developed a few online exhibition  to promote Singapore’s history and heritage through  the  internet. 
The  aim  of  this  project  is  to  develop  ‘From  the  picture  press:  A  web-based  online  exhibition  system  on  the  SPH  photographs  collection’,  and  find out its impact on school teachers and students.  

========1========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
The  target  audience  for  the  history  photographs  of  Singapore  covers  a  broad  spectrum  of  people  including  tourists,  teacher  and  young  children.  Online  exhibitions  are  also  useful  to  a  variety  of  guests,  including  those  who  would  not  traditionally  go  to  museums  such  as  the  disabled,  elderly,  etc.  The most important aspect in this exhibition is that  remote visitors (people who are not geographically  close  to  the  museums)  can  also  visit  the  online  exhibition  such  as  media  researcher,  conservation  scientists, customs officers, university lecturers and  students and many people with personal rather than  professional  or  educational  interests  in  history. 
1.1  benefits  of  Online  Exhibition 
Some  benefits  of  online  exhibition  are:  (i) It  will  contribute  to  cultural  preservation  and  
maintenance of Singapore’s historic photographic  
collection; 
(ii) It  will  help  to  develop  and  participate  in  online  
exhibitions  locally  and  globally; 
(iii) Increase  public  awareness  about    history  of  
Singapore; 
(iv) Increase  public  knowledge  and  understanding  
of  Singaporean’s  cultures  and  heritage; (v) Attract  visitors  to  museums  and  archives; (vi) Exhibition content can be used for teaching and  
learning  purposes  at  different  levels.  This  can  
stimulate  visitors  to  enrich  their  experience; (vii) Visitors  to  the  exhibits  are  not  limited  to  a  
particular  location.  Online  exhibitions  can  be  
seen  by  many  people,  including  those  who  do  
not  go  to  museums  in  person; 
(viii) It  will act as a test bed for Singapore artists to display  
their  work  through  online  exhibitions;  and (ix) Introduce  new knowledge and skills in the use of  
technologies  and  tools  for  online  exhibitions. 
1.2  Cultural  and  Heritage  Information 
Singapore is changing daily at an ever-increasing  pace. Contemporary society with its computer chips  and  mass  media  dependence  will  generate  an  all- embracing international valued system and lifestyle.   This inevitable process poses serious challenges to  their social values, culture, work and leisure attitudes,  family  ties,  interpersonal  relationships  and  so  on.  To  counteract  this,  individuals  and  communities  today must consciously improve the awareness and  appreciation of their own cultural heritage. Broadly,  the  cultural  heritage  may  be  identified  as:  • Landscapes  and  sites;  
• Buildings  (architecture);  
• Movable  objects  (artefacts,  museum  objects); • Documents  (archival  documents,  literature,  
sheet  music,  still  and  moving  images,  sound  
documents);  and  
• Abstract  concepts. 
Cultural  heritage  Information  can  be  seen  as  the  information  resulting  from  several  different  formats  such  as:  
• Text  (catalogues,  item  history);  
• 2-D  still  images  (photographs,  drawings);  • 3-D  still  images;  and 
• Audio  recordings  and  moving  images  
(film,  video,  virtual  reality). 
The major players in cultural heritage information  include universities, industrial organisations, broadcasting  companies  and  training  centres. The  main  roles  of  these  institutions  are: 
(a) Archives  deal  with:  
•    historical, evidential, information and research  
value  records  having  continuous/  long  term  
use;  and 
•    t h o s e   r e c o r d s   i n c l u d i n g   t e x t s   ( b ) ,  
manuscripts, photos and audio-visual records.  (b)  Museums  typically  have  2-  and  3-D  artifacts  
collections  on:  
•    Art  (including  contemporary); 
•    Ethnography  (including  folk); 
•    History  (including  maritime,  archaeology,  
daily  life);  
•    Technique  (including  railways,  industries);  
and  
•    Natural  history  (including  palaeontology).  (c) Libraries  deal  with: 
•    Current  and  old  books;  and 
•    Cartography  and  other  forms  of  literature.  (d) Sites and monument agencies have landscapes  
and  structures  such  as:  
•    N a t u r e   p a r k s   ( i n c l u d i n g   p r o t e c t e d  
landscapes);  
•    Archaeological  sites  (including  under  
water);  
•    Historical monuments and buildings (including  
cityscapes);  and  
•    Industrial  sites.  
(e) Cultural  and  heritage  centres  including  art  
cultural  centres  and  government  departments,  
and  heritage  institutions  or  agencies. 
(f)  Documentation centres mainly collect, organise  
and disseminate cultural information such as the  
ASEAN documentation centres. Universities have  
their own museums, libraries and archives which  
are  used  for  teaching  and  research  purposes.  
209 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
Online  exhibitions  are  being  used  as  a  flexible  and modern tool for delivering heritage information  to  the  children  and  public.  Online  exhibition  offer  children access to a variety of information sources and  give an opportunity to them to contribute additional  information  from  their  personal  experience2.  Much  effort has been done in encoding text, still images,  audio recordings and moving images in digital form  with  the  majority  of  information  made  available  as  electronic  data  archives. 
2.  rEQUI rEMENt  ANALYSIS 
Requirement  analysis  involves  end  users  and  system designers  interacting in an effort to recognise  and  specify  the  data  and  information  needed  to  develop  a  web-based  online  exhibition  system.  Proper  identification  of  user’s  information  needs,  proior  to  the  design  process,  lead  to  developing  successful  system  and  also  allows  for  an  early  correction  of  errors  while  the  cost  of  correction  is  lower.  In  this  case,  a  requirement  gathering  study  was  not  conducted  because  an  exhasutive  survey  was  already  done  so  those  results  were  used  in  developing  of  this  online  exhibition3.  In  that  study,  a  total  of  77  users  were  surveyed  who  were  in  their mid-to-late-20s and graduated with bachelor’s  degree. The majority of them were IT professionals  and  a  few  librarians.  From  the  survey,  it  was  noticed  that  users  would  like  a  textual  site  with  a  moderate  amount  of  graphics  and  interactivity.  Based on these requirements, a decision was taken  to  incorporate  a  content  description  (metadata)  of  historical  photographs  so  that  user  can  navigate  around  the  website,  read  the  information  and  get  better understanding about the county during those  days. Regarding to various media types to be added,  83  %  of  the  respondents  considered  images  over  other  media  elements  however,  more  than  half  of  them showed interest for animation 60 %. They felt  that  too  much  animations  even  hard  to  use  and  would  make  the  screen  layout  confusing.    
From  the  system’s  perspective,  users  prefered  brief description with additional links to more detailed  information. Accordingly, project design was carried  out  where  user  can  click  on  the  thumbnail  images  to  show  the  large  size  and  high  quality  image  and  its  catalogue  record  button  will  further  provide  more  detailed  information  about  that  image.  Users  agreed  that  online  exhibitions  have  educational  value that can promote awareness of the country’s  culture and heritage so that students can access to  archives  materials  for  their  social  studies  projects  in  secondary  schools.  This  survey  showed  that  80  %  of  the  respondents  requested  that  they  want  photographs  and  information  on  historic  sites.  In  view of this, this project covered all the photographs  
210 
covered  during  the  period  (i.e.  1950  to  1965),  pre-independence  Singapore.  Since  most  94  %  of them stressed the need for a search engine for an  effective  information  retrieval  from  the  website,  a  search engine was decided to provide to search the  content  of  the  online  exhibition  for  the  users. 
3.  MEtHODOLOGY  
Development of online exhibition system involves  a  sequence  of  phases  of  a  system’s  life  cycle,  which  includes:  requirement  analysis,  design,  implementation  and  maintenance4.  Requirement  analysis  enables  the  web  designer  to  specify  the  web-based  information  function  and  performance,  and establish the design constraints that the web- based system must meet, subsequently to refine the  information  system  allocation  and  build  models  of  the  process,  data,  and  behavioural  domains. 
Design provides us the representations of web- based information system that can be assessed for  quality  and  thus  transforms  the  user  requirements  into system’s design specifications. For developing  this system, PastPerfect Museum Ver 3.0 and Virtual  Exhibit  software  tools  were  selected  to  implement  the  online  exhibition.  From  the  literature  review,  it  is  found  that  this  software  is  able  to  handle  images and metadata in a much better way. Though  there  are  many  better  software  but  they  are  very  expensive  and  needs  lot  of  experience  to  use  and  are  also  not  locally  available.  Virtual  Exhibit  is  a  moderately priced software ($1314.00) amongst the  other  developing  tools.  Moreover,  this  authoring  tool is suitable for small museums and archives as  compared  to  other  popular  tools  such  as  KE  Emu,  Contentdm  and  Multi  Mimsy,  which  are  meant  for  developing  large  size  systems. 
3.1  System  Development  Method  
Prototyping model was used for the development  of  this  online  exhibition.  One  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  is  unfamiliarity  of  the  system’s  functions  and  capabilities.  In  this  case,  a  prototype  of  web- based  online  exhibition  system  was  built  using  Macromedia’s Dreamweaver and tested with real users.  Later,  the  same  system  design  was  implemented  in  virtual  exhibition  system  and  then  tested  with  real  users. 
Due to time constraints, the evolutionary prototype  is discarded and in this case, the actual web-based  system  is  seen  as  evolving  from  a  very  limited  initial  version  to  its  final  release.  The  evolutionary  prototyping also will fit in well with the modifications  that must be made to the system which arise during  the  operation  and  maintenance  activities  of  its  life  cycle. This  prototype  will  serve  as  a  benchmark  to  evaluate  the  completed  system. 

========3========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
3.2  System  Evaluation  Method 
Evaluation  is  an  integral  part  of  the  design  and  should  take  place  throughout  the  design  life  cycle  with  the  aim  to  test  the  functionality  and  usability  of  the  design  and  to  identify  and  rectify  any  problem5.  There  are  four  possible  approaches  for  evaluating  design: 
(a)  Cognitive  walkthrough 
(b)  Heuristic  evaluation 
(c)  Review-based  evaluation,  and 
(d)  Model-based  evaluation 
In the evaluation of the online exhibition system,  the  heuristic  evaluation  technique  is  used.  The  heuristic  evaluation  technique  is  used  to  evaluate  the design phase, while questionnaire technique is  used to evaluate the implemented system5. Heuristic  evaluation  was  selected  because  it  is  best  used  for  evaluating  early  stages  of  design  and  it  is  easier  to  fix  lot  of  the  usability  problems  that  are  identified. To do this, a set of storyboards giving an  overview of the system to a fully functional system  is designed. Evaluators independently critique a web- based  system  to  come  up  with  potential  usability  problems.  Most  importantly  the  designer  does  not  need  to  worry  about  the  heuristics  used  for  the  design  of  the  system,  because  several  evaluators  independently  critiqued  system  to  come  up  with  potential usability problems. Once all of the problems  are  collected,  the  designer  can  determine  which  ones  are  the  most  important  and  then  rectifying  them  in  the  system. 
After  implementation  to  evaluate  the  usability  of  a  web-based  online  exhibition  system,  survey  method and questionanire tool is used. The benefits  of using questionnaires are that they can get user’s  viewpoint directly and may reveal issues that have  not  been  considered  by  the  designer.  In  addition,  questionnaires  are  relatively  cheap  and  simple  to  administer.  It  can  be  used  to  reach  out  to  wider  subject groups and can be analysed more rigorously  during  requirements  capture,  task  analysis  and  evaluation.  Unstructured  interviews  are  not  used  because it may waste respondents and interviewer’s  time.  Furthermore,  respondent’s  bias  in  questions  or  reporting  of  results  is  more  likely.  
The  validity  of  the  findings  depends  on  the  sample selected and also on successfully obtaining  data from those selected for study. Individually one  has to follows up those who are non-responsive to  the initial contact. The rule of thumb for survey is to  gather data from at least 80 % of those sampled6. Usability  tests  may  include  both  performance  and  preference testing. For the performance testing, we  observed  how  easily  participants  performed  tasks.  For  the  preference  testing,  an  opinion  about  the  
interface, functionality, and workflow was collected.  The  survey  covers  both  objective  and  subjective  questions  to  get  broader  picture  from  the  users.  To  collect  qualitative  data,  the  project  used  a  combination of protocol analysis (also called ‘thinking  aloud’ protocol) and observations of usability. While  thinking  aloud,  participants  vocalise  their  thoughts  and  impressions  as  they  perform  the  tasks.  To  collect quantitative data, participants’ recorded their  views  on  the  questionnaire  on  various  aspects  of  the  online  exhibition  system  including  its  interface  design,  usability  and  oveall  design  of  the  system.  The final evaluation survey used seven-point Likert- scale  questionnaires  that  enable  the  researcher  to  quantify  participants’  preferences. 
4. 
DESIGN  AND  DEVELOPMENt   OF  ONLINE  EXHIbItION 
The design and development of online exhibitions  for archives is made to be dynamic and encourages  explorations; it should respond differently to different  viewers.  If  the  visitor  explores,  the  exhibition  will  respond  accordingly.  While  the  visitors  do  not  interact  with  the  material,  the  exhibition  acts  autonomously  to  bring  an  array  of  images  to  the  viewer’s  attention.  
4.1  Design 
Planning  a  websites  requires  a  grasp  of  the  essential  areas  including:  Content,  navigation  and  the  layout  of  appearance7.  Content  generally  need to be considered first, navigation second and  appearance  last.  Based  on  the  users  requirement,  with  the  help  of  Macromedia  Dreamweaver  online  exhibition,  prototype  was  made  and  presented  to  the real users includung NAS staff who are involved  in  organising  both  physical  and  onlne  exhibitions.  After  getting  their  approval  on  the  design  of  the  online  exhibition,  actual  system  was  developed  using  professional  authoring  tools. 
4.2  Development 
The development of the online exhibition system  was  successfully  completed  and  implemented  on  Information Studies Lab Web Server at http://islab. sas.ntu.edu.sg:8000/vewebsite/index.htm. The users  suggested  some  enhancements:  
(i) Appropriate  colour  may  be  applied  to  text  
buttons;  
(ii)  Provide  flash  animation  and  embed  audio  to  
the  website;  
(iii)  Embed  audio-video  clips  to  make  the  website  
more  interesting;  
(iv) Provide other related URLs to particular pictures  
on  the  screen; 
211 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
(v)  Use  of  thumbnail  pictures  to  reduce  the  down  
loading  time;  
(vi) Need  to  have  an  advanced  search  tool;  and  (vii) The  icons  of  the  previous  and  next  buttons  
may  be  changed.  
All  these  features  were  decided  to  implement  in  the  revised  online  exhibition  website. Additional  features  including  browse  option  was  added  into  the  ‘Search  page’  and  ‘convert  all  the  hypertext’  to  navigation  buttons. 
Before  the  start  of  the  development  of  online  exhibition  website,  PastPerfect  Museum  Software  was  used  to  record  all  metadata  records  with  a  separate  catalogue  screen  designed  specifically  for  each  photograph.  The  photo  screen  was  used  to  record  metadata  each  item  for  collection  of  the  photographs including the object type, photographer,  place, people, description, event, etc. The following  are the steps involved in the registration, cataloguing  and  posting  onto  the  website: 
(i) Registration  Object  ID:  It  is  the  process  of  
developing and maintaining an immediate, brief, and  
permanent  means  of  identifying  an  object. (ii) Data Entry: A detailed description of the object  
in the accession list is catalogued and compiled  
as  per  the  collection  items. 
(iii) Cataloguing of Photographs: All photos must be  
marked with their object ID number. Object name  
based  on  the  Library  of  Congress  Thesaurus  
for  graphical  Materials  (LCT  gM)  –  Subject  
Terms, or LCT gM 1. This subject file provides  
terms for subject indexing of pictorial materials,  
particularly  historic  photographs.  The  object  
name  used  in  the  project  images  was  ‘Print  
and  Photographic’.  
(iv) Detailed  Information: It  included  photograph’s  
description,  early  date,  negative  number,  
photographer,  place,  event,  copyright,  search  
term,  and  picture  number.  
(v) Digital Image Management: PastPerfect software  
is equipped with a digital imaging management  
option. 162 photographs were attached for each  
metadata  record. 
(vi) Virtual Exhibit Software:  In the final process, Virtual  
Exhibit software was used to convert metadata  
records  and  images  stored  in  PastPerfect  to  
html   for  posting  onto  the  exhibition  website.  
The  limitation  of  Virtual  Exhibit  software  is  lack  of  excellent  screen  design  capabilities  for  user  interface,  hence  automatically  generated  web  pages were customised using FrontPage 2000 and  Macromedia  Dreamweaver  4  to  enhance  the  look  and  feel  of  the  interface.  
212 
4.2.1  Interface  Design  Issue 
  The  online  exhibition  system  is  hosted  on  the  web  server  Windows  platform  available  in  the  Information  Studies  Laboratory.  The  website  was  decided to design at 800x600 pixels resolution and has a moderately interactive interface that involves  text and still images. Currently, the online exhibition  had  more  than  160  still  images. 
4.2.2  Organisation  of  Information 
  In  the  online  exhibition,  all  the  SPH  photographs  collection  was  organised  into  three  main  components:  
(i) Panel  page,  
(ii) Catalogue  record  page,  and  
(iii)  Image  page 
Panel 1 contained 29 catalogue records; Panel  2 contained 5 catalogue records; Panel 3 contained  18 catalogue records; Panel 4 contained 8 catalogue  records;  Panel  5  contained  9  catalogue  records;  Panel  6  contained  6  catalogue  records;  Panel  7  contained 19 catalogue records; Panel 8 contained 13  catalogue records; Panel 9 contained 13 catalogue  records;  Panel  10  contained  8  catalogue  records  and  Panel  11  contained  32  catalogue  records.  Each  record  has  both  image  and  metadata  fields  to  describe  the  image. 
The interaction sequence in the online exhibition  is shown in Fig. 1. For security reasons, the website  does  not  included  sensitive  data  fields  in  the  catalogue  content.  The  following  metadata  fields  were  included:  copyright,  credit  line,  description,  early  date,  event,  negative  no.,  object  Id,  object  name,  people,  photographer,  place,  search  terms,  source,  sub-category  and  the  picture  number. 
Information search page using client-side search  engine,  written  in  Java  Script,  which  allow  visitors  to  conduct  two  types  of  searches:  
(i) Entire  exhibition  site,  and  
(ii) Individual  exhibit  (Fig.  2).  
While there is no limit to the number of catalogue  pages  that  can  be  included  in  an  exhibit  however,  the ‘Search engine’ does have some limitations. The  speed at which the ‘Search page’ displays depends  on  the  number  of  records  and  also  the  speed  of  the visitor’s internet connection. For visitors of low  speed  internet  connections,  a  search  page  with  a  large  number  of  catalogue  records  may  slow  down  the process however, after implementing a server- side  search  engine  this  problem  was  solved.  The  search  engine  can  search  each  of  the  following  field lists: Credit line, description, early date, event,  negative  number,  object  id,  object  name,  people,  photographer,  place  and  search  terms. 

========5========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
Home page (1) 
Home page (4) 
Figure 1. Interaction fow in the online exhibition. 
Search results will list all the keywords specified  in  the  search  engine  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  If  the  keyword does not match, the search result will display  a  message  ‘0  matching  record  found’.  The  search  output will show the object name and the thumbnail  images  along with hyperlinks to the corresponding  pages.  The  keyword  will  be  highlighted  in  bold  on  the  search  results  output  page. 
4.2.3  Exhibition  Structure 
  This website was well structured into panels/ sections  based  on  its  photo  collections,  metadata  of  images  to  find  information  about  an  object,  collection or subject. In order to avoid confusing and  cluttering  on  the  home  page,  the  online  exhibition  was  designed  with  balanced  number  of  links  on  the  home  page  to  give  viewer  an  idea  of  what  the  site  contains,  and  making  sure  the  website  have  required information only. This website has 12 text  button links to 11 panels, the rest were the external  links making a total of 15  however, the page does  not  look  cluttered. 
The  ‘home  page’  has  ‘eleven  panel  sites’  and  leads  to  ‘catalogue  record  page’.  The  following  are  the  panels  and  their  subject  coverage  in  the  exhibition: 
Panel page (2) 
Catalogue record page (3) 
(i)  Our Celebration:  It provides all the photographs  
of how the cultural and religious festivals were  
celebrated  during  that  period.  This  section  
contained 29 photographs and their corresponding   
thumbnail  images.  
(ii)  Food  Glorious  Food:   This  section  explained  
how  during  the  difficult  days  of  the  1950s  and  
1960s,  the  locals  turned  into  hawking  to  earn  
their  living.  Rows  of  roadside  stalls  were  lined  
up on the streets outside shop houses, offering a  
variety of delectable dishes to famished passers- 
by.  This  section  contained  5  photographs  and  
their  thumbnail  images. 
(iii) Fun  and  Games:   This  panel  provides  a  brief  
account  of  ordinary  folks  indulged  in  a  variety  
of recreational activities. Many took part in ‘Sea  
Sports’ which was organised annually for sea- 
faring people of Singapore and its surrounding  
islands.  It  contained  18  photographs  and  their  
thumbnail  images. 
(iv) Momentous  Occasions:   Covers  the  specific  
collection  of  information  about  the  residents  
of  pre-independent  Singapore    who  were  not  
politically  unified.  Many  pledged  allegiance  to  
the  King  or  Queen  of  England  while  others  
213 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
Option 1: Search entire exhibition 
Option 2: Search individual panel only 
Search results 
Figure 2. Inforamtion seraching in the online exhibition. 
maintained  links  with  the  countries  they  had  
come  from.  It  contained  8  photographs  and  
their  thumbnail  images. 
(v)  My Alma  Mater:    A  section  presented  how  the  
students learned reading, writing and arithmetic in  
schools. They also took part in school activities  
and forged links with their alma mater. This site  
contained  9  photographs  and  their  thumbnail  
images. 
(vi)  A  Helping  Hand:   It  covers    existing  services  
provided  by  voluntary  bodies.  The  bodies  
dealt  with  post-war  hardships  by  setting-up  
of  restaurants,  children’s  feeding  centres  and  
to  provide  healthcare  services.  It  contained  6  
photographs  and  their  thumbnail  images. (vii) My Home, My Family: presents the information  
during  the  post-war  years  in  which  Singapore  
214 
experienced  rapid  population  growth  amidst  
poverty,  leading  to  acute  housing  shortage.  
Shophouse  owners  would  partition  rooms  into  
tiny,  windowless  cubicles  and  rent  them  out  to  
families of eight or more. Furthermore, the lack  
of sanitation in the dwellings resulted in the rapid  
spread of diseases, especially tuberculosis during  
that  period.  This  panel  contained  a  total  of  19  
photographs  and  their  thumbnail  images. (viii)When  Disaster  Struck:   Presented  an  account  
on how Singapore was prone to major disasters  
both  natural  and  created  by  men.  It  contained  
13  photographs  and  their  thumbnail  images.  (ix) And Life Goes On:  Section features the turbulent  
times in the history of Singapore.  Many familiar  
and  often  violent  images  of  these  episodes  
were  seen,  such  as  the  Maria  Hertogh  riots,  

========7========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
the  Hock  Lee  bus  strikes  and  the  unrest  of  
Chinese school students. This section contained  
13  photographs  and  their  thumbnail  images. (x) Changing Landscapes:  Information on changing  
Singapore,  as  it  is  now  an  island  dotted  with  
towering  skyscrapers  and  lined  with  busy  
highways  –  how  it  transformed  into  a  modern  
metropolis. 
(xi)  Making  A  Living:  Features  many  people  with 
little  or  no  education  look  a  variety  of  jobs,  
mainly by making a living on the streets.  They  
earned barely enough for themselves and their  
families. This section contained 32 photographs  
and  their  thumbnail  images. 
4.2.4  Screen  Layout 
    The  home  page  of  the  online  exhibition  contained  11  exhibits  or  panels,  each  panel  had  varying  number  of  associated  records.  Each  panel  also  has  its  own  ‘Search  page’  and  a  ‘Contents  Exhibition  page’  (Table  of  Contents).  These  pages  can  be  selected  from  the  menu  bar  at  the  top  of  the  exhibit  page.  Unlike  the  search  page  selected  from  the  home  page,  which  will  search  the  entire  website, the exhibit search page allows the visitors  to  search  that  exhibit  only  (Fig.  3). 
Figure 3.  Panel page of online exhibition. 
Figure 4. Contents of an exhibition. 
Each  panel  layout  of  the  screen  is  made  out  of  the  following  components: 
(i) Thumbnail  Images:   Each  panel  page  displays  
three  sample  images  from  the  exhibition  along  
with  captions  on  the  panel  main  page;  (ii) Description:  A  brief  description  of  text  appears  
just  below  the  banner  and  to  the  right  of  the  
sample  images;  and  
(iii) Footer:  The footer text font face is Arial of font  
size  is  2. 
The Exhibition contents (i.e., table of contents) is  a list of all records included in an exhibition. Visitors  can click on the column headers to change and sort  order  or  click  on  the  underlined  ID#  to  jump  to  the  corresponding catalogue record page. The hyperlinks  at the bottom of the screen return back to the panel  page,  or  access  the  search  page  (Fig.  4). 
A separate webpage is created for each catalogue  record  which  includes  the  following  components: (i) Hyperlinks:  The image with a border is hyperlinked  
as  well  as  the  text  and  buttons  navigating  to  
previous  and  next  records. 
(ii) Menu  Bar:  A  title  appears  on  the  catalogue  
record  page  with  a  font  face  Verdana,  point  
size  5  and  bold  in  navy  colour. 
(iii) Metadata  Fields:   Used  the  font  face  Verdana  
with  12  point  size.  The  title  field  is  in  navy  
colour  and  the  metadata  is  in  dark  colour. (iv) Copyright Statement:  The statement used Arial  
Font face with size of 10 points and is in Aqua  
colour. 
(v) Footer:   The  footer  text  font  face  is  Arial  with  
font  size  2. 
Consistency  is  very  important  in  the  ‘look  and  feel’ of the online exhibition system. It includes the  
215 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
colours, layout and fonts, and the use of consistent  buttons  throughout  the  website.  The  NAS  online  exhibition had a mixed balance of text and pictures  however,  it  is  very  difficult  to  cater  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  the  users. 
4.2.5  Navigation 
    The  online  exhibition  system  website  follows  the  ‘three  click  rule’,  which  means  that  a  visitor  is  able  to  get  from  the  home  page  to  the  desired  item in three clicks. In addition to that, the website  made  very  good  use  of  graphical  aids  (buttons)  to  navigate  around  the  exhibition.  Buttons  were  used  because they help the visitor to speed up movement  around screens as well as improvides the look of a  page,  especially  popular  among  younger  visitors7.   
This website employed both linear and nonlinear  navigation  patterns;  the  linear  navigation  allows  the  visitor  to  follow  navigation  in  the  exhibition  by  clicking  the  Panel  →   Record  →   Image,  using  
Figure 5. Navigational scheme. 
resource systems. Metadata is widely used outside  
combination  of  ‘next’  and  ‘previous’  links  (Fig.  5).  libraries  including  archives,  museums  and  for  Nonlinear navigation is used to facilitate the casual  document  and  data  management  in  companies  
and impulsive browsing which is efficient for cross- referencing. This website had text with many cross- referencing  hyperlinks,  and  entire  exhibition  is  having consistent section headings. The use of the  thumbnail  for  each  photograph  is  visual  focused  on  the  page.  Besides  that,  the  catalogue  record  page  also  provides  the  number  of  records  in  that  panel e.g. 1 of 30 records along with links to each  page. 
4.2.6  Content  Coverage 
Dublin  Core  metadata  standard  provides  card  catalogue-like definitions for defining the properties  of  objects,  documents  or  services  for  web-based  
Figure 6. Contents format. 
216 
and  research  institutions.  The  reason  for  creating  metadata  is  normally  to  improve  the  possibilities  of  document  retrieval  (i.e.  the  search  precision)  and  indexing  to  support  control  and  management  of  collections8.  For  the  purpose  of  this  project,  PastPerfect  Catalogue  software  and  Dublin  Core  ver  1.1  were  used  to  catalogue  photographs  after  customising some of its elements to suit users needs.  The  customised  contents  format  of  the  metadata  fields  are  shown  in  Fig.  6. 
The most important aspects in the online exhibition  system is providing detailed contents of both textual  and visual objects. A detailed metadata is provided  describing the images to explain to the visitors why  

========9========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
and what events occurred during the particular period.  It  can  directly  provide  some  connection  to  visitor’s  everyday life and knowledge. It is useful to include  references  and  interesting  links,  especially  if  the  visitors are students, who want help in doing further  research.  At  this  moment  due  to  time  constraints,  this feature was not implemented and left for phase  2  of  its  development.  To  enhance  the  uniqueness  of  the  online  exhibition,  it  included  links  to  other  external  sites. 
4.2.7  Implementation 
  After completing the design and development  of the online exhibition, it was being hosted on two  servers  of  Information  Studies  Lab  and  their  URLs  are: (a) http://islab2.sas.ntu.edu.sg:/8000/vewebsite/ index.htm and (b) http://islab.sas.ntu.edu.sg:/8000/ vewebsite/index.htm.  
Some of the system efficiency tests were performed  on the exhibition system by the designer and users  during the development stage to keep the errors at  a minimum. Due to time constraints, a lot of features  have not been implemented in the prototype system,  before releasing for evaluation. However, browsing  images, converting all the hypertext to buttons; site  map, help page, etc., were implemented during the  support  phase. 
5.  EVALUAtION  OF  ONLINE  EXHI bItION 
The evaluation of this online exhibition was carried  out through survey method using questionnaire tool.  A  total  of  79  participants  comprising  of  Diploma  students,  from  Informatics  Computer  School,  NTU  undergraduates and Singapore public. The evaluation  was  carried  out  at  the  NTU  Library  and  at  the  Informatics  Computer  School  where  both  full-time  and part-time diploma students participate. However,  due  to  time  constraints,  all  the  staffs  of  NAS  and  SPH  did  not  participate  in  the  evaluation.  The  questionnaire covered the respondents’ profile, design,  content and organisation of information, navigation,  system  capabilities,  information  searching  and  the  overall design of the online exhibition. The purpose  of this evaluation was to find out the strengths and  weaknesses  in  the  design  of  the  online  exhibition.  The total evaluation exercise was completed in two  weeks in April 2002. The data is fed into computer  using MS Exel software and analysed. Based on the  evaluation  results,  the  developed  system’s  design  was  modified  to  meet  to  the  users’  needs.  
5.1 Personal  Profile 
Of  the  total,  64  percent  of  them  were  in  their  mid-twenties,  with  males  outnumbering  to  females  by 23 numbers (65 % males versus 35 % females).  thirty-nine  percent  were  NTU  undergraduates  and  
working adults, thirty-seven percent of respondents  were  studying  Diploma  courses  at  Informatics  and  the  remaining  (11  %)  were  graduate  students  and  public.  Less  than  half  (41  %)  had  4  to  6  years,  over  a  fifth  (22  %)  had  more  than  7  years  and  the remaining (37 %) had 1-3 years prior computer  experience. Most of the participants of this evaluation  were  students  and  a  small  percentage  of  them  were  IT  trainers,  lecturers  and  officers  working  in  various  departments.  Survey  sample  consists  of  a  good  mix  of  different  backgrounds  of  professions,  students  and  public  so  that  they  could  provide  valuable  feedback  on  the  online  exhibition  system  from  different  perspectives.  Students  are  good  in  pointing  out  the  problems  in  design,  attractiveness  while  the  technical  IT  people  are  good  in  pointing  out the technical efficiency on delivery of the online  exhibition system. The staffs of NAS and SPH, who  are  regular  users  of  this  system  suggested  a  few  improvements to meet the users’ needs. The mean  age of participants was 20-25 years. The youngest  respondent who evaluated the system was 17 years  old.  In  this  case,  primary  and  secondary  school  students,  poly  students  and  public  were  allowed  to  access  and  evaluate  the  exhibition. 
5.2 Interface  Design 
The  second  part  of  the  survey  deals  with  interface  design  characteristics  such  as  the  text  readability, appropriate use of colours and buttons,  visual  consistency  and  sequencing  of  screens,  attractiveness  of  exhibition,  pleasant  interface,  user  friendliness,  ease  of  use  and  learning  of  the  exhibition and the gaps in the information provided  and its level of understanding (Table 1). More than  half  54  percent  of  the  respondents  were  of  the  opinion  that  the  text  size  chosen  were  readable  and  clear.  The  appropriate  use  of  colour  on  the  website was generally satisfactory to very good 89  percent however, 11 percent of the respondents felt  that the background colour was pale and plain and  the  overall  colour  was  not  striking  enough.  
Most (96 %) of them felt that the buttons used  were acceptable because they were indicating their  functions  when  the  mouse  moves  over  the  button.  However, the yellow colour used to the text buttons  was  not  acceptable  and  made  the  text  difficult  to  read.  So,  the  text  colour  of  website  was  changed  later according to the user’s preferences. The online  exhibition had a good visual consistency and sequencing  of screens, all the colours and layouts of the screens  used  in  the  website  was  generally  consistent.  
The  majority  (88  %)  of  the  respondents  felt  that the site was attractive and acceptable because  minimum required information was provided on the  screen which made the screen please in appreance.  
217 

========10========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
table 1. Interface design evaluation results 
                                                   rating Design Issue 
Text readability 
Appropriate use of colour 
Appropriate use of button 
Visual consistency and sequencing of screens Attractiveness of exhibition 
Interface is pleasant 
User friendliness of Exhibition 
Ease of use of Exhibition 
Ease of learning the exhibition 
Information provided suffcient 
Information easy to understand 
Very Poor 
- 3 % 1 % - 3 % - - - 1 % - - 
A  few  respondents  suggested  to  provide  some  flash  animation  in  appropriate  places  and  also  to  embed  audio  clips  to  the  website  so  the  sites  will  look  more  attractive. 
95  %  respondents  found  the  screen  interface  pleasant  and  user-friendly  due  to  the  use  of  cool  colour  scheme  of  the  backgrounds  and  simplicity  maintained  in  the  design.  Due  to  its  simple  screen  design and good navigational links, 94 % respondents  felt  that  the  exhibition  system  is  easy  to  use  and  learn    (96  %).  However,  a  few  (10  %)  felt  that  the  information  provided  was  not  sufficient  to  describe  the panels but that indirectly affects the layout and  attractiveness of the design of an exhibition. On the  other hand, the information was easy to understand  and  brief  enough  to  describe  the  photographs  in  the  exhibition.  
Overall  the  look  and  feel  of  the  exhibition  seemed to be effective but a few of the respondents  made suggestions to improve the visual appreance  of  exhibition.  Some  visitors  felt  that  the  exhibition  website is a bit simple though it has a friendly and  pleasant  interface. According  to  the  screen  design  Huristics,  the  length  of  the  scrolling  filed  is  kept  1.5  screen  size  so  that  the  visitors  are  not  forced  to  continuously  scroll  down  or  up  to  reach  the  required  information.  In  general,  dark  text  on  light  backgrounds  is  generally  more  readable  than  light  on  dark.  Verdana  font  with  10  points  size  used  in  the  exhibition  website  was  large  enough  to  read  and legible on all platforms9.  Most  of  the  contents  consisted  of  black  and  white  photographs,  so  to  compensate  that  backgrounds  of  the  screens  were  created in sober colours. About half of the respondents  felt that the use of colours were appropriate. During  the  evaluation,  some  students  pointed  out  that  the  rainbow effects at the home page ‘looked colourful  and  fun,  but  they  were  too  bright,  and  gave  a  childish  look’. 
218 
Poor 
Acceptable 
Good 
Very Good 
1 % 8 % 3 % 6 % 9 % 5 % 5 % 6 % 3 % 10 % 5 % 
40 % 39 % 44 % 35 % 47 % 34 % 35 % 39 % 33 % 41 % 37 % 
54 % 40 % 42 % 51 % 34 % 55 % 54 % 42 % 53 % 43 % 52 % 
5 % 10 % 10 % 8 % 7 % 6 % 6 % 13 % 10 % 6 % 6 % 
The  criteria  of  linking  appropriate  external  or  valuable sites, the home page contains the external  links to NAS, SPH, NTU and other exhibit websites.  However,  the  feedback  was  generally  satisfactory,  with  37  %  of  the  respondents  agreeing  that  the  links  were  somewhat  relevant  and  useful  to  them. The  majority  (84  %)  of  respondents  were  happy  with the content coverage but a few (16 %) wanted  more  detailed  information  but  that  may  put  off  the  general  public  and  casual  visitors  who  may  not  want  exhaustive  information  on  these  events.  To  satisfy  them  an  extra  link  may  be  provided  in  the  next  phase  by  providing  detailed  information.    
5.4 Navigation 
The navigation criteria used were ease of navigation  from  one  screen  to  another,  ease  of  tracking  back  to  the  records,  helpful  navigational  aids  and  an  effort  to  reduce  the  problems  encountered  by  the  visitors  during  their  navigation. The  majority  of  the  respondents (63 %) found that the navigation links  were  easy  to  use  and  for  another  quarter  (27  %)  acceptable who were able to return to the previous  record  easily.  The  ‘Previous’  and  ‘Next’  buttons  are  the  main  navigational  aids  to  performed  this  task  however,  some  of  the  respondents  felt  that  the  font  face  of  the  text  buttons  were  not  so  clear  due  to  text  shadowing  effect.  Hence,  these  two  buttons  were  later  changed  as  per  respondent’s  suggestions.  The  whole  design  was  simple  and  intuitive,  so  the  respondents  felt  that  ‘Help  pages’  were  not  necessary  to  use  the  website.  
More  than  half  of  respondents  (57  %)  found  that  the  buttons  are  helpful  and  sufficient.  Some  of  the  respondents  pointed  out  that  shape  of   the  buttons  was  not  attractive  and  it  would  be  more  helpful  if  all  the  text  buttons  are  changed  to  graphic  buttons.  In  general,  the  respondents  did  not  encounter  any  problems  while  using  the  online  

========11========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
table 2. Content coverage vs. organisation 
                                        rating 
Very Poor Content 
Organisation of information - Content coverage - 
                                         rating Strongly  Content Disagree Ease to fnd information 10 % Appropriate link - Link to related valuable sites - 
Poor 
5 % 16 % Somewhat  Disagree 34 % 9 % 9 % 
exhibition system except the thumbnail images were  not  so  clear.  The  consistency  within  the  website  facilitates  navigability  and  overall  understanding  of  the  information  presented.  
5.5 System  Capabilities 
Regarding the system capabilities, the respondents  felt  that  the  loadings  of  image  pages  are  fast  and  acceptable.  This  is  because  both  the  NTU  Library1   and  Informatics  Computer  School  were  having high bandwidth Internet connection. However,  the  respondents  with  a  modem  of  56  kbps  had  encountered some problems of slower down loading  of  the  images  which  led  them  to  frustration.  In  general, they felt the system is still reliable (86 %)  though the speed of images downloading a bit slow  for  the  56  kbps  users. 
A  good  website  should  avoid  unnecessarily  increasing  its  loading  time  for  images  and  other  content. For this reason, the website was designed  using thumbnail images to avoid the longer downing  loading  time.  If  the  visitors  are  interested  to  view  the  actual  image,  they  can  click  on  the  thumbnails  to see enlarged pictures. The respondents felt that  the loadings of pages with high resoultion and large  size  images  are  fast  enough  and  reliable. 
5.6 Information  Searching 
Most  (95  %)  of  the  respondents  agreed  that  the existing search engine is good enough for their  work.  They  were  also  happy  with  the  display  of  search results given a choice for the visitor to click  on  the  images  or  thesaurus. At  the  same  time,  the  keywords  were  also  highlighted  in  the  text  results.  Only 5 % respondents felt that search engine need  to  include  more  search  options.  Some  respondent  felt that the search text box should be provided on  the  home  page  and  the  visitors  can  then  search 
table 3. Information searching 
Information search 
Very poor 
Poor 
Photograph 
1 % 
4 % 
Thumbnail 
1 % 
10 % 
Keyword 
1 % 
5 % 
Acceptable 
Good 
Very Good 
48 % 40 % Neutral 
43 % 41 % Somewhat  Agree 6 % 37 % 37 % 
4 % 
3 % 
Strongly Agree 
50 % 47 % 47 % 
- 7 % 7 % 
directly.  Though  this  is  not  really  a  problem  for  disigners  but  home  page  interface  will  not  look  simple  and  may  result  into  confusion.  
Overall, the photographs, thumbnails and keywords  were  able  to  search  by  the  search  engine,  so  the  users  were  satisfactory  (Table  3).  This  is  because  the  search  terms  or  keywords  are  provided  in  the  metadata fields, so that visitors need not worry about  the keywords used for the search. The keywords were  common  terms  used  by  the    Singaporeans  in  their   daily life. However, some respondents were confused  about the ‘Search All’ and ‘Search Individual Panel’  so the same was explained in the ‘help page’. There  are three major tools for accessing specific information  on  website:  Site  map,  search  engine,  and  inverted  index.  generally,  a  website  with  huge  volume  of  information should provide all three searching tools,  however,  ‘site  map’  may  be  an  easy  way  to  use  amongst these three tools. In this project, all these  three searching tools were included to facilitate better  information searching. So 95 % respondents agreed  that the search engine was good enough and  were  happy  with  the  display  of  search  results.  Browsing  facility is also available if the visitors do not know the  keywords. All these facilities are available on the home  page to help the visitors to find out the information  in  the  exhibition.  In  addition  to  that,  ‘Help  page’  is  available,  if  any  visitor  encounters  any  problems  however,  survey  results  shows  that  people  did  not  face  any  difficulties  while  using  this  system. 
5.7 Overall  Design 
One  of  the  limitations  of  this  survey  was  not  covering  good  sample  size  postgraduate  students  (11 %) because the questionnaire was sent through  email  and  the  response  rate  was  poor  from  that group.  The  respondents  felt  that  the  design  is  simple  to  use  and  the  user  interface  is  attractive  
Acceptable 
Good 
Very good 
46 % 
40 % 
9 % 
32 % 
50 % 
7 % 
46 % 
43 % 
5 % 
219 

========12========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  3, MAY   2013 
with  the  cool  colour  backgrounds.  Overall  design  of  the  online  exhibition  was  satisfactory  however,  42  %  of  the  respondents  felt  the  uniqueness  and  49  %  of  respondents  felt  that  the  online  exhibition  met  their  expectations  (Table  4). 
table 4. Overall design 
                          rating                        System Design  
Uniqueness of design Met my expectation 
Strongly  Disagree 
Somewhat  Disagree 
6 % 3 % 
12 % 13 % 
6. 
IMPACt   ON  S tUDENtS AND tEACHErS 
The online exhibition is particularly useful as a  part  of  the  education  program  for  school  children  and  teachers.  Teachers  found  useful  links  to  the  online exhibition as part of the teaching material or  could  be  integrated  with  other  teaching  activities.  Using  the  online  exhibition,  teachers  can  assess  the  students’  competencies  and  knowledge  at  different  levels.  The  SPH  photograph  collection  online  exhibition  is  basically  divided  into  eleven  panel sites that are easy to navigate. For example,  ‘In  the  My  Home,  My  Family  panel’,  students  have  the opportunity to experience and gain an insight on  how Singapore has transformed from poor nation to  one  of  the Asia’s  most  affluent  and  technologically  sophisticated  nation.  Furthermore,  students  can  study how the historical events over 50 years have  showcased about modern Singapore. There are over  160  photographs  illustrating  the  various  facets  of  life  in  Singapore  accompanied  with  the  transcripts  that make it easier for students to learn about these  events. The  learning  outcome  can  be  assessed  on  different  levels  of  difficulty  based  on  the  student’s  level  of  education.  For  example,  at  the  primary  school  level,  the  exhibition  can  be  presented  in  an  adventure  game  or  comic  book  with  fascinating  heritage photographs. At the secondary school level,  the  teacher  can  use  the  online  exhibition  to  create   students’  awareness  on  Singapore’s  heritage  and  culture.  At the tertiary level, the historical materials  can  be  used  as  part  of  the  students’  research  projects. Students thus can locate information about  the  consequences  as  well  as  witness  the  actors  involved  in  those  historical  events.  
All  teachers  felt  that  the  online  exhibition  is  an  important  mode  to  transfer  knowledge  to  their  children in today’s society. They are of the opinion  that the online exhibitions can stimulate and facilitate  students’  learning. The  collaboration  between  NAS  and NTU on developing online exhibitions definitely  generated  a  great  impact  on  the  students  and  teachers  in  secondary  schools.  The  teachers  felt  that  the  implementation  of  online  exhibition  and  associated activities would broaden their student’s 
220 
learning  skills.  It  was  found  that  this  exhibition  inculcated  a  sense  of  critical  appreciation  among  school  students  towards  the  aesthetic  values  of  a  diversified  culture  of  Singapore. 
Neutral 
Somewhat  Agree 
Strongly  Agree 
40 % 35 % 
36 % 36 % 
6 % 13 % 
7. 
CONCLUSIONS 
It  was  noticed  that  online  exhibitions’  user  interfaces  depend  on  the  tools  that  the  institutions  used.  Most  of  the  interfaces  were  adaptive  and  there are different methods for retrieving the same  information depending on user’s preferences. There  is a provision for the users to determine fields that  are  displayed  in  query  and  retrieval  screens.  This  feature  is  good  because  most  of  the  visitors  range  from  school  children  to  advanced  users,  so  they  can select the fields they like to use for querying. If  the  online  exhibition  is  used  by  the  young  primary  school children, it is unlikely a teacher would want  them to see the full text displayed with images. The  teacher might prefer children to search using visual  cues  rather  than  completing  a  database  search.  It  was  found  that  not  many  or  none  of  the  online  exhibition  system  were  using  natural  language  search  capabilities10.  Perhaps,  the  most  natural  way  to  learn  about  history  is  to  ask  a  question  to  the  system.  But  none  of  the  systems  are  able  to  allow  visitors  to  ask  questions.  Another  finding  is  that  the  online  exhibition  user  interfaces  are  slowly  moving  towards  incorporating  virtual  reality  and flash animation content to attract their visitors.  The  exhibitions  are  moving  from  static  hypertext  environment to animated interface with full of media and  virtual  environments. 
rEFErENCES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Jones,  K.T.  Online  professional  development:  Challenges  and  rewards,  2000,  http://www. archimuse.com/mw2000/papers/tallyjones/tallyjones. html  (accessed  on  20  May  2007). 
Reynolds, S. Have you seen art recently? Library  Talk,  1999,  12(5),  32-33. 
Leong, C.K.; Ramaiah, C.K. & Foo, S. The design  and development of an online exhibition for heritage  information awareness in Singapore. Program:  Elect.  Lib.  &  Inf.  Sys. 2003,  37(2),  85-93. Christian,  P.  6-D, A  process  framework  for  the  design and development of web-based systems.  In   Proceedings  of  the  ASIST  Annual  Meeting,  2001,  38,  pp.  472-80. 

========13========

YUEN AND RAMAIAH: FROM THE  P ICTURE  P RESS: AN  O NLINE  Ex HIBITION OF THE  SPH P HOTOgRAPHS  C OLLECTION 
5. Dix,  A.J.,  et  al.  Human-computer  Interaction.  
Ed.  2.  Pearson  Education  Limited,  Harlow,  
England,  1998. 
6. Frechtling, J. The 2002 user friendly handbook   
for project evaluation, 2002. http://www.nsf.gov/ 
pubs/2002/nsf02057/start.htm  (accessed  on  5  
July  2007). 
7. Nuttall, S. & Dawson, A. Building digital content:  
A  study  in  the  selection,  presentation  and  use  
of  museum  web  content  for  schools,  2001.  
http://www.mda.org.uk/bdc_intro.htm/ (accessed  
on  19  May  2007). 
8. Christensen,  D. golden  retrievers. School  Lib.  
J.,  1999, 45(11),  38-41. 
9. Cahalan,  Kathleen  J.  &  Levin,  J.  The  design  
of  a  graphical  user  interface  for  an  electronic  
classroom.  J.  Instruction  Delivery  Sys.,  2000,  
15(3),  15-20. 
10. MacKenzie,  D.  Beyond  hypertext:  Adaptive  
interfaces  for  virtual  museums.  TAMH  Project  
Report,  Tayside,  Scotland,  1996.  http://www. 
dmcsoft.com/tamh/papers/evaf.php3/ (accessed  
on  21  May  2007). 
About  the Author 
Mr. Phan Koo Yuen  is working as Senior Lecturer in  the School of Science and Technology at Wawasan  Open University, Malaysia. He is a course coordinator  and also a course writer for Wawasan Open University.  He  received  his  Master  of  Science  in  Information  Studies  from  Nanyang  Technological  University,  Singapore.  He  is  currently  pursuing  his  PhD  in  Computer Science at University Malaya. In his 10 years  of academic teaching experience, he has delivered  various  computing  and  IT  courses  to  diploma  and  undergraduate  students  in  private  colleges.  Some  of  his  achievements  were  Best  Lecturer  awards  in  the  years  2000  and  2001  and  1st  position  for  unit  leader awards in the Year 2000.  He has also been  Diploma and Advanced Diploma Course Leader and  Certified  E-learning  Professional  and  worked  with  Informatics  Computer  School,  Singapore  and  KDU  College,  PJ  Campus,  Malaysia. 
221 

========14========

