DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 265-276  
  2013, DESIDOC 
Colon Classifcation: A Requiem 
M.P. Satija* and Jagtar Singh** 
*Dept. of Library & Information Science, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar-143 005  
E-mail: satija_mp@yahoo.com 
**Dept. of Library & Information Science, Punjabi University, Patiala-147 002  
E-mail: jagtardeep@gmail.com 
AbstRACt 
 This paper lists important publications on classifcation by S. R. Ranganathan (1892-1972), veritably  called the father of Indian library movement. It outlines brief history of the seven editions of his revolutionary  colon classifcation (CC) from 1928 to 1987. Seven editions are grouped into three evolutionary versions. It  states the unique features of the CC as based on his deep study of the nature and growth of knowledge,  and explains the work of designing a classifcation system into three successive but demarcated planes  of  work,  namely,  idea,  verbal,  and  notional  planes. Tools  for  designing  and  evaluating  a  system  are  enshrined in his 55 canons, 22 principles, 13 postulates and 10 devices. Further, this paper discusses  the division and mapping of knowledge, types of subjects, and modes of their formation in the universe of  knowledge as envisaged by Ranganathan. Semantic and syntactic relations are enshrined in his PMEST  facet formula ftted with rounds and levels of facets, and other principles, such as the famous Wall-Picture  principle, for citation order of facets. It also briefy explains facet analysis and number building with its  notational  base  of  74  digits,  and  concludes  with  extent  of  its  use  and  its  enduring  contribution  to  the  
science of classifcation and its future.   
Keywords: Classifcation, library classifcation, faceted classifcation, facet analysis Ranganathan’s theory 
 of classifcation, colon classifcation, classifcation design and evaluation 
1. INtRODUCtION  
Dr S.R. Ranganathan (1892-1972), father of the  Indian library movement, was the most prolific writer  and librarian of his time. His exemplary dedication and  uncanny insights won him the acclaims of his peers  the world over. His testament forms the bedrock of  the current theory of the discipline. Extensive work  on classification he did is epoch-making, and creates  a  paradigm  next  in  importance  only  to  pioneering  work  of  Melvil  Dewey  (1851-1931).  Views,  appeals  and research findings, that he communicated through  the medium of books, journals, reports, international,  seminars  and  lectures,  have  pervaded  and  still  constitute the core of our current knowledge of the  subject.  His  books  are  librarians'  lore.  His  major  books  on  classification  are1:  
•	 Colon Classification. Madras Library Association,  
Madras, 1933. The last edition done by Ranganathan  
was the 6th  (1959), again issued with amendments  
in 1963, and published by Asia Publishing House,  
Bombay.  (Now  in  its  7th   Ed.,  1987) 
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 
•	 
Prolegomena  to  Library  Classification.  Madras  Library  Association,  Madras,  1937.  (Now  in  its  3rd   Ed.)  (1967)  published  by  Asia  Publishing  House, Bombay. Its 2nd  Ed. (1957) was brought  out  by  the  Library Association,  London. 
•	 
Library Classification: Fundamentals and Procedures,  with  1,008  graded  examples  and  exercises.  Madras  Library Association,  Madras,  1944. 
•	 
Elements of Library Classification. NK Publishing  House, Pune, 1945. (Now in its 3rd   Ed.,  1967),  published  by Asia  Publishing  House,  Bombay. 
•	 
Classification and Communication. University of  Delhi,  Delhi,  1951. 
•	 
Philosophy  of  Library  Classification.  Ejnar  Munksgaard,  Copenhagen,1951. 
•	 
A Descriptive Account of the Colon Classification.  Graduate  School  of  Library  Science,  Rutgers  State  University,  New  Brunswick,  N.J.,  1965.  (Published again in 1967 in India by Asia Publishing  House,  Bombay). 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
2.   b RIEF  HIstORY  OF  COLON  
CLAssIFICAtION  
The  colon  classification  (CC),  conceived  and  developed  from  1924  to  1928,  was  first  published  by  the  Madras  Library  Association  in  1933.  The  latest and the first edition published after the death  of  Ranganathan  was  the  7th   in  1987. 
Being  a  mathematician  and  a  close  student  of  an  inspiring  teacher  WCB  Sayers  (1881-1960)  in  the School of Librarianship and Archives, University  College,  London,  classification  studies  attracted  him  most.  In  his  later  work  he  perceived  many  similarities between classification and mathematics.  At  the  same  time  practical  classification  by  the  DDC  did  not  slake  his  orderly  mind.  That  being  a  mark  and  park  system,  he  could  assign  more  than  one  class  number  to  a  document  —  especially  enshrining  compound  and  complex  subjects.  For  example ‘Anatomy of Flowering plants’ could either  be  given  the  class  number  of  ‘Plant  anatomy’,  or  ‘Flowering plants’. It was an option by default for all  such compound subject. This defeated the purpose  of  classification  itself.  Besides  this,  Ranganathan  also  found  only  a  nominal  representation  of  Indian  subjects  in  the  scheme.  WASPish  bias  in  Dewey’s  system  is  too  well  known,  even  today. 
First, he realised that the aftermath of World War-I  (1914-1919) had brought in its wake the emergence  
nature was a classification suited to the 19th  century  
Secretary.  Second  edition  published  in  1939  was  important  as  it  clearly  laid  down  the  theory  and  methods of CC as already published in his magnum  opus,  the  ‘Prolegomena  to  Library  Classification’  (1937). Third edition came out in 1950 when he had  migrated  to  Delhi  University.  There  he  attracted  a  band  of  young  and  faithful  follower  librarians  who  considerably furthered research in classification and  applied  his  systems  and  methods  in  their  libraries.  It  was  widely  adopted  in  Delhi  libraries.  It  led  him  to  delve  at  somewhat  more  abstract  level  of  his  classification theory published in conference volumes  and serials of the Indian Library Association of which  he  was  the  president. After  a  long  experience  and  constant  quest  to  generalise  the  various  facets,  Ranganathan in 1952 came out with his famous but  debatable theory of “five and only five fundamental  categories  in  the  universe  of  knowledge”.  In  the  earlier  editions  the  facets  were  named  variously  in  different  main  classes.  In  the  4th   edition  these  were named as Personality, Matter, Energy, Space,  and  Time,  well  known  as  PMEST.  Nevertheless,  it  was a masterstroke in generalisation of facets, and  is  considered  as  the  least  number  of  categories  for  any  bibliographic  classification,  so  far.  The  5th  edition  (1957)  was  proposed  in  two  volumes  of  basic  and  depth  versions,  but  only  basic  version  was  published.  By  the  time  6th   edition  in  1960  
in  London,  and  keenly  watched  a  demonstration  of  a  Meccano  toy  kit.  The  salesman  was  making  different  toys  from  the  same  kit  by  permutation  of  the blocks, strips, nuts, and bolts. That triggered his  mind  to  adapt  similar  technique  to  design  different  class  numbers  from  same  subject  concepts  to  suit  the  individually  documents.  And  that  idea  clicked  which later brought a paradigm shift in classification  theory, practice, and research. He visualised that all  knowledge is comprised of some basic and discrete  concepts,  which  could  be  combined  to  construct  class number to specifically suit a document, instead  of  assigning  it  a  predetermined  readymade  class  number. Connecting symbols in the form of punctuation  marks  served  his  nuts  and  bolts.  Sayers  at  once  commended  the  idea  of  a  new  technique,  but  also  warned  him  of  labour  and  patience  required  for  the  huge  task  ahead.  Back  home  in  1925,  as  the  
3. first  trained  librarian  of  the  Madras  University,  he  applied  his  scheme  to  the  library,  and  gained  long  and  single  handed  experience  of  its  development  
of  specialised,  micro  and  interdisciplinary  subjects  
was  published  the  CC  had  reached  its  pinnacle  of  which the existing classifications failed to cope with.  
glory  brought  by  the  international  conference  on  He diagnosed that the DDC due to its enumerative  
classification study and research at Dorking, England  
in 1957. The Classification Research Group (CRG,  linear  kind  of  literature.  In  1924,  Ranganathan  
London  formed  in  1952)  declared  its  manifesto  happened  to  visit  Selfridge’s  departmental  store  
of  faceted  classification  as  the  basis  of  all  future  
information retrieval systems. Philosophy and method  
of facet analysis got wide acceptance, though only  a  few  believed  the  doctrine  of  ‘Five  and  only  five  fundamental  categories’.  The  term  facet  was  used  differently  by  different  scholars  and  classification  schemes.  The  6th   edition  (1960)  later  issued  with  amendments  (1963),  remains  most  popular,  used  and stable edition. It is the one taught in all Indian  library  schools.  The  7th   edition  published  after  the  death  of  Ranganathan  in  1987,  edited  by  his  long  time  research  assistant  Professor  MA  Gopinath,  was  found  confusing  and  inconsistent  in  structure  and  notation.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  been  discarded  by  the  Indian  library  profession.  Nevertheless, it brought many metamorphic changes  in  basic  subjects,  categories,  common  isolates,  and  notation2.  
VERsIONs     
Gopinath3  conveniently divides all the seven editions  into  three  versions  in  the  line  of  evolution: 
and  application.  It  was  first  published  in  1933  by  
3.1  Version  1  (1933-1950):  Rigidly  Faceted  Era  
the  Madras  Library  Association  (founded  in  1928)  of  which  Ranganathan  was  the  founder  General  
266 
During  this  period  the  facet  formula  was  rigid  and pre-determined. Colon was the only connecting  

========2========

SATIJA AND SINGH: COLON  C LASSIFICATION: A REqUIEM 
symbol  for  all  the  facets.  That  is  until  the  fourth  edition  (1952)  only  connecting  symbol  was  the  colon;  even  the  absent  facets  had  to  be  indicated  by  the  dummy  colons,  e.g.,  2:::N  ‘Libraries  in  20th  century’.  Here  the  first  two  colons  indicate  the  absence  of  matter  and  space  facets,  the  third  is  the connecting symbol for the Time facet, i.e., 20th Ccentury. It made the class numbers unwieldy, and  even  slippery.  An  extra  colon  could  land  the  book  in  an  alien  place,  thus  misplacing  it. 
3.2  Version  2  (1950-1963):  Analytico-synthetic  
Era  
the message, verbal its expression; notational plane  its  visible  representation  in  short  hand  symbols.  4.1 three  Planes  of  Work 
Prior to Ranganathan classification design was  considered  as  an  intuitive  field  of  a  few  inspired  geniuses.  This  is  quite  obvious  from  the  work  of  Melvil  Dewey  (1851-1931),  CA  Cutter  (1837-1903)  and  JD  Brown  (1862-1914).  HE  Bliss  (1870-1955),  who was singularly dedicated to classification studies,  did base his ‘Bibliographic Classification’ (1944-1953)  on  some  concretely  formulated  principles.  Though  the  first  edition  of  the  CC  was  mostly  based  on  
As  said  earlier,  the  fourth  edition  became  a  
intuition,  and  elusive  principles,  but  Ranganathan  milestone with the postulation of the five fundamental  
soon  crystallised  the  unconscious  theory  that  categories  and  generalising  them  as  concretely  as  
went  into  making  of  his  CC  from  1928  to  1933.  PMEST.  Each  category  was  indicated  by  a  distinct  
The  theory  was  precipitated  in  his  magnum  opus  connecting symbol. Hence the absence or presence  
‘Prolegomena  to  Library  Classification’  (Madras  of any category was self or automatically indicated.   
Library  Association,  1937).  Through  comparative  For example, the above class number was denoted  
approach  and  by  identifying  the  best  practiced  in  
existing  systems,  he  formulated  whole  panoply  of  Time.  It  means  all  other  categories;  namely,  P,  
canons and postulates for designing and evaluating  M,  E,  and  S  are  absent.  It  brought  simplicity  and  
classification systems. In 1950 a great breakthrough  
was achieved in the design of classification by dividing  
as  2’N,  ’  apostrophe  being  the  indicator  digit  for  
brevity  in  notation. 
3.3  Version  three  (1963-1987):  Freely-faceted  
Era  
it  in  three  succeeding  phases,  called  Planes:  (a)  Idea  plane,  
Guided by the overarching Five Laws of Library  
This  period  was  devoted  to  the  close  study  
(b)  Verbal  plane,  and  
of  the  properties  and  structure  of  the  universe  of  (c)  National  plane.  
knowledge.  Splitting  the  Matter  category  into  three  
kinds, discovery of new facets, concept of speciators,  
development of highly hospitable sector notation led  
Science (1931), the work in each plane is executed  to  declare  it  as  a  freely-faceted  analytico-synthetic  
by  55  Canons,  22  Principles  and  13  Postulates  scheme,  which  is  a  sort  of  a  self-perpetuating  
–  Ranganathan  makes  clear  distinction  between  scheme.  A  self  perpetuating  system  is  one  which  
these  terms4.  In  addition  there  are  ten  Devices  to  needs least revision. The new version has a virtually  
improvise  notations  for  non-existing  concepts  in  infinite capacity to incorporate new subjects at their  
the  schedules. 
proper places with the help of hospitality devices for  
4.1.1  Idea  Plane 
creation of new isolate numbers. The CC is a truly  
postulate-based analytico-synthetic classification as  
phase. It is a paramount plane. The quality of work  well  as  a  highly-faceted  classification.  But  history  
done here will determine the quality of the ultimate  
has  proved  that  no  classification  can  be  self- perpetuating. 
4. FEAtUREs   OF  COLON  CLA ssIFICA tION 
The  CC  is  a  general  scheme,  which  aims  to  classify  by  discipline  all  subjects  and  all  forms  of  documents — books, periodicals, reports, pamphlets,  microforms,  and  electronic  media  in  all  kinds  of  libraries.  For  bibliographic  records,  requiring  depth  classification,  it  is  especially  suitable.  Scheme  is  described as analytico-synthetic which implies that it  does not go in for making any exhaustive list of all  possible  subjects  known  at  a  time,  as  was  usually  done in those days. This objectively formulated and  dynamic  theory  is  enshrined  comprehensively  in  his ‘Prolegomena’ (1937/1957/1967). For designing  a  classification  system,  Ranganathan  divided  the  work  into  three  successive  planes.  Idea  plane  is  
    It  is  a  thinking,  policy,  and  decision  making  
product.  Here  is  made  intellectual  analysis  of  the  subject;  characteristics  are  selected  to  break  a  subject  into  categories  facets  and  ultimately  into  isolates arranged discretely and systematically into  arrays and chains. An ‘isolate’ is the smallest unit of  knowledge  in  the  CC;  whereas  a  ‘facet’  is  a  group  of  isolates  obtained  by  the  application  of  a  single  characteristic. The type and quality of characteristics,  and  the  order  in  which  these  are  to  be  applied  is  determined  by  Canons  of  Characteristics.  These  canons  mandate  that  characteristic  chosen  as  the  basis of division should be relevant, objective, and  permanent; characteristics should be applied in order  of  general  to  specific  and  one  at  a  time. 
  Once facets and their isolates are formed with  the  application  of  characteristics,  the  next  set  of  canons is to arrange terms in arrays and chains. An  array is a set of entities of equal rank arranged in a  
267 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
systematic order. For this, Ranganathan formulated  rules for formation of arrays of entities. These are:  ‘Canon of Exhaustiveness’ that is an array should be  inclusive of all the classes. ‘Canon of Exclusiveness’  lays  down  that  an  entity  should  belong  to  one  and  only  one  array—it  will  avoid  cross-classification.  This  is  only  required  for  shelf  classification.  For  classifying databases and designing OPACs cross- classification  is  a  boon.  ‘Helpful  sequence’  canon  
represent  complex  ideas.  He  vainly  aspired  that the  notation  should  faithfully  and  comprehensively  translate  the  subject  of  a  document  in  a  language  of  ordinal  digits.  For  him  classification  is  also  a  sort  of  translation.  He  overloaded  it  with  work  but  relegated it as servant of the idea plane. However,  he lays down that notation in a class number should  be  brief,  simple  easy  to  write,  remember  (for  a  
short time) and pronounce. It should be expressive  means that facets and isolates should be arranged  
of subject structure (both hierarchical and faceted),  in a predetermined logical sequence but one which  
and  above  all  it  should  be  hospitable  to  the  new  is  expected  by  the  majority  of  the  users.  Historical  
subjects. Latter quality in Raganathan’s notation is in  events  should  be  chronological,  while  UN  member  
abundance —got   at a high price of being unwieldy  states  can  be  in  alphabetical  order;  living  species  
and too complex. Considered a high water mark in  may  be  arrayed  in  the  order  of  their  evolution;  
chemical elements can be arranged by their atomic  
the  development  of  library  classification  notations,  numbers. Geographical entities can be arranged by  
his  notation  is  highly  mixed,  uses  decimal,  sector  
and  group  notation.    It  is  hierarchical,  extremely  arranged  by  their  face  value.  He  discovered  eight  
hospitable  which  transparently  depicts  the  facets  options to arrange entities in a helpful order. Chain  
and  categories.  Above  all  his  notation  is  highly  is a sequence of entities in a constantly decreasing  
mnemonical  even  to  the  seminal  level–i.e.,  unity,  
God, world are always denoted by 1; diseases and  
the  ‘principal  of  spatial  contiguity’.  Coins  can  be  
order  of  their  extension.  World--Asia--South Asia-- India--North India--Delhi is a chain of classes. The  
mechanical breakdown will get the same number, so  
in  the  chain  should  be  missed.  Division  should  be  gradual and finely calibrated. In the above chain, we  should  not  jump  form  India  to  Delhi  omitting  North  India. At the end of the work here we have a finely  woven and exhaustive network of all concepts. But  still  all  is  nebulous. 
4.1.2  Verbal  Plane  
  Then the theater moves to the verbal plane— to  articulate  the  findings  of  the  idea  plane  in  an  unambiguous  language.  Language  is  the  dress  of  thought, aptly said Dr Samuel Johnson (1709-84), so  believed and acted Ranganathan who always exhorted  librarians  to  learn  and  use  technical  terminology.   Terms used to express a science should be current  and  free  of  homonyms  and  synonyms  making  an  utopian  ideal  of  one  to  one  correspondence  in  concept-term relations. Ranganathan laid down that  terms  used  for  classification  systems  should  be  made  free  of  homonyms  and  synonyms,  and  must  be expressed and read in their context; and mostly  should be neutral not opinionated or critical. Latter  means  a  classification  should  not  be  value-ridden.  As  an  example,  classification  systems  should  not  
‘Canon of Decreasing Extension’ means chain should  
will  do  cures  and  repairs  in  different  main  classes;    move from ‘broader to narrower’ or ‘general to specific  
whereas G; 3, I; 3, K; 3, and L; 3 represent general,  classes’;  and  ‘Canon  of  Modulation’  means  no  link  
plant,  animal  and  human  physiology,  respectively.  
Ultimately,  it  is  frighteningly  complex  and  much  
advance  of  its  time  for  shelf  classification.  It  is  quite  suited  for  computerised  databases. 
5. NOtAtIONs 
The notation in the CC-7 comprising of 74 digits  (60  semantic  and  14  indicator  digits)  has  been  divided  into  the  following  six  species5: 
A/Z (Roman capitals) 
Δ (Greek Delta)    
0/9 Indo-Arabic numerals 
a/z  Roman smalls (i, l, o excluded)  Indicator digits with anteriorising value   *   “  
Ordinary indicator digits 
&’. : ; , - =   + ( )     
26 01 10 23 03 
11= 74 
The  notational  base  of  the  CC  is  the  widest  ever in any classification system. On this count, the  CC-7 notation is wide-based, thus very spacious and  accommodating,  though  it  has  made  the  notation  and  consequently  the  system  quite  complicated. 
use  the  terms  major/minor  authors  to  categorise  
6. 
them,  as  Dewey  did  in  his  14th   edition.  Ironically,  the terminology in the CC is now quite dated, which  poses  problems  in  chain-indexing. 
4.1.3    Notational  Plane 
DIVIsION  OF  KNOWLEDGE  IN  CC 
The CC presumes the entire body of knowledge  woven in a system vis-à-vis, sees an underlying unity  in it. All knowledge is one he learnt from the Vedas  (1500 BC). The structure that ultimately emerges from  
    Of  the  three  planes,  it  is  the  most  visible  the  CC  is  both  traditional  and  revolutionary.  But  it  plane. Ranganathan expected much from a notational  is not Vedic or Eastern. The fact that Ranganathan  system  in  terms  of  capacity  and  sophistication  to  recognises  and  honours  the  existence  of  time- 
268 

========4========

SATIJA AND SINGH: COLON  C LASSIFICATION: A REqUIEM 
honoured  main  and  canonical  classes,  makes  his  scheme look steeped in Western disciplinary tradition.  Ranganathan  identified  three  types  of  subjects  in  the  universe  of  knowledge:  Basic,  Compound  and  Complex analogous to chemical substances. ‘Basic  subjects’  are  unitary  subjects,  such  as  Physics,  Thermodynamics,  Economics,  Marxian  Economics,  Music, Law, and Library Science. ‘Compound subjects’  are  basic  subjects  with  subdivisions  or  additional  facets, e.g., Velocity of light, Transport economics,  Guitar  music,  or  Law  of  marriage,  and  Libraries  in  India.  Compound  subjects  are  virtually  infinite  in  number. ‘Complex subjects’ are mostly interdisciplinary  in nature, e.g., Mathematics for engineers, Russian  for librarians, or Comparative physiology. Ranganathan  postulated  that  every  subject,  be  it  of  any  type  or  level,  has  a  basic  subject  which  forms  the  first  facet  in  constructing  a  class  number.  
6.1 basic subjects 
Ranganathan  further  divided  basic  subjects  into: 
1. Main  basic  subjects 
2.  Non-main  basic  subjects 
And  further  divided  them  into  ten  species.  On  the  basis  of  their  modes  of  formation  the  following  10  types  of  basic  subjects  have  been  identified. 
1.    Main  basic  subjects       
1.1  Traditional  (Law,  Physics)     
1.2  Newly  emerging  (Library  &  Inf.  Sc.) 
1.3  Fused  (Biotechnology)     
1.4  Distilled  (Research  methodology) 
1.5  Subject  bundles  (Ocean  sciences)          Agglomerates  (Social  sciences) 
2.    Non-main  basic  subjects 
2.1  Canonical  classes  (Algebra,  Geometry) 
2.2  System  constituents  (Marxian  economy) 
2.3  Environment  constituents  (Desert  farming) 
2.4  Special  constituents  (Gerontology) 6.2  Complex subjects 
A  ‘complex  subject’  is  a  two-phased  subject  
These  relations  can  occur  at  three  levels:  (a) Between  two  main  classes  for  interdisciplinary  
subjects (e.g., Chemistry and Physics), (Phase  
relation);  
(b) Between two facets of the same category (e.g., Islam  
and  Hinduism)  (intra  facet  relation),  and 
(c) Between  two  isolates  of  the  same  array  within  
a facet (Catholics and Protestants), (intra-array  
relation).  
Therefore,  there  are    6  x  3  =  18  relations  in  all.  The  number  of  relations  does  not  seem  comprehensive,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  phase  relations  supplement  other  relationships  depicted  through PMEST, citation order, hierarchy and helpful  sequence  principals.  The  general  phase  relation  comprehends any relationship not expressed through  the  other  five,  while  other  relations  are  obvious.  Definitive  rules  for  primary  and  secondary  phases  and  constructing  their  class  numbers  ensure  the  expression  of  the  relationships  in  mathematically  precise  and  consistent  way6.  Ampersand  “&”  is  the  indicator  digit  for  phase  relation,  while  each  of  eighteen  relations  has  its  own  indicator  digit  a/y. 6.3  Main  Classes  and  their  Order  
Knowledge is librarians’ merchandise. Understanding  of  its  nature  and  ways  of  growth  is  vital  to  a  classificationist.  Ranganathan’s  research  in  social  epistemology  has  been  lauded  as  an  everlasting  “intellectual contribution to the underlying philosophy  of librarian” by late Dean Jesse H Shera (1903-1982)7.  Ranganathan  laid  great  emphasis  on  the  order  of  knowledge  and  consequently  on  the  arrangement  of  basic  subjects  in  his  CC.  For  him  the  essence  of  library  classification  lay  in  a  helpful  sequence  of  subjects  and  documents.  A  classification  must  depict  the  structure  of  knowledge.  First  division  of  knowledge  in  the  CC  is  into  traditional  disciplines,  which  he  arranges  in  the  order  of  their  evolution  as  academic  studies,  namely:  
(a) Science  and  Technology 
(b) Humanities 
(c) Social  Sciences 
The social sciences are the most recent academic  
depicting mostly interdisciplinary relations. Six types disciplines to emerge; science and technology, however,  
of  phase  relations  have  been  identified:  
s. No. type 
Indicator digits Example 
1. General phase a 2. Bias phase b 3. Comparison phase c 
Relation of Political Science with History Psychology for Doctors 
Physics compared with Chemistry 
4. Difference phase d 5. Tool phase e 
Difference between Christianity and Islam Mathematical Physics 
were studies (of curiosity) of even primitive humans.  
Class number 
V & a W S & b L C & c E 
q, 6 & d7 C & e B 
6. 
Infuencing phase 
g 
Infuence of Mahatma Gandhi on Barack Obama V, 73 ”w N61&g z G 
269 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
Now the disciplines are divided into sub disciplines, namely, 
B*Z      Physical  Sciences 
G*Z     Bio  Sciences 
K*Z      Animal  Sciences 
L*Z     Medical  Sciences  
MZ*Z     H u m a n i t i e s   a n d   S o c i a l  
        Sciences 
S*Z     Behavioral  Sciences  
T*Z      Social  Sciences 
Within  each  discipline  the  CC  has  an  order  of  main  classes  meticulously  based  on  objectively  
by  Auguste  Comte  (1798-1857).  Unlike  Dewey,  Ranganathan  preferred  to  collocate  the  theory  with  the  practice  of  a  subject.  Indeed  the  Library  of  Congress  Classification  (1899/1940+)  followed  this  principle  earlier  to  him.  In  the  humanities,  which  are  spread  over  main  classes  N  to  S,  the  arrangement  is  in  order  of  ‘increasing  richness  of  subject  contents’.  The  order  of  social  sciences,  in  main classes T to Z, is of ‘increasing artificiality of  their laws’: Z (Law) being legislative and subject to  frequent modifications are considered most artificial  of  the  social  laws. 
One  may  fault  this  arrangement.  For  example,  
stated  principles.  An  overview  of  main  classes  in  
economic  and  social  laws  are  not  artificial,  but  
the  CC  is  follow: 
A/B Science/Mathematics           C/D    Physics/Engineering       
E/F  Chemistry/Chemical  technology 
G/H  Biology/Geology       
I/J/  K  Botany/Agriculture/Zoology     
L            Medicine          
M        Useful Arts 
Δ    Spiritual  experience  &  Mysticism 
N/O/P  Fine Arts/Literature/Language 
Q/R      Religion/Philosophy 
S/T  Psychology/Education 
U/V  Geography/History 
W/X  Political  Science/Economics 
Y/Z    Sociology/Law 
These  main  classes  are  in  fact  preceded  by  
are  based  on  long  observed  human  nature  and  thus  should  not  come  so  far  down  in  the  order  of  classes. 
In  an  article  published  prior  to  the  release  of  CC, R.S. Parkhi commended its arrangement of main  classes as logical and evolutionary8. Elucidating his  viewpoint, he described the Generalia class as the  complete miniatured view of knowledge that precedes  the  entire  universe  of  knowledge.  B  ()  pervades  every  science.  Physical  sciences  (C-F)  study  the  matter  and  forces,  which  constitute  this  universe.  G  (Biology_  is  vital  science.  Classes  H-K  are  in  evolutionary  order  of  life  on  our  planet.  Classes  L-P  are  application  subjects  for  the  well  being  and  prosperity of humankind. Classes from Q (Religion)  to  T  (Education)  are  for  the  moral  and  social  development  of  individuals,  which  in  fact  depend  
Generalalia and Form classes a/z, and newly emerging  
upon the correct application of classes L-P, which in  
classes  1/9,  e.g.  
a            Bibliography       
k           General  encyclopedias     
m          General  periodicals       
p           Conference  proceedings     
w        Biographies         
z           Generalia  classes 
1       Universe  of  knowledge 
2       Library  science 
3       Book  science 
4       Mass  communication 
8      Management  science 
Sciences  (including  technologies),  in  classes  A  to  M,  have  been  arranged  in  order  of  ‘their  increasing  concreteness’:  B,  Mathematics,  is  the  most abstract of the sciences, while M, Useful arts  (which includes crafts and applied technologies) is the  most concrete in the group. Within  A/M, theory and  practice alternate: ‘theory always preceding practice  or  its  applications’.  For  example,  B  (Mathematics),  precedes  C  (Physics),  which  in  turn  precedes  D  (Engineering). E (Chemistry) precedes F (Chemical  technology).  Similarly,  I  (Botany)  is  followed  by  J  (Agriculture).  This  internal  arrangement  is  based  on  the  ‘principle  of  dependency’,  first  promulgated  
270 
turn depend on classes A-K. Classes U-Z study the  geographical  and  social  sciences,  the  latest  areas  of  knowledge  to  engage  the  human  mind.  Here  W  (Politics,  and  Government)  precedes  the  creation  and  distribution  of  wealth  in  X  (Economics),  while  Y  (Sociology),  and  Z  (Law)  keep  society  intact  and  going. 
6.3.1  Triangular  Representation  of  Main  Classes 
  Ranganathan  subsequently  added  the  main  class  Δ  (Greek  letter  Delta)  Spiritual  experience  
Z 
A 
        ____        a/z,  1/9 Figure 1. triangular representation. 

========6========

SATIJA AND SINGH: COLON  C LASSIFICATION: A REqUIEM 
and  mysticism  positioned  between  the  sciences  on  the  one  hand  and  the  humanities  and  social  sciences  on  the  other.  Δ  is  at  the  confluence  of  two  different  streams  of  knowledge,  the  sciences  and  the  humanities,  the  two  different  cultures  of  C.P.  Snow  (1905-80).  Ranganathan  treats  spiritual  experience  as  the  fountainhead  and  summation  of  all  knowledge,  thus  refuting  Snow's  theory.  
The  library  philosopher  and  classificationist  H.E.  Bliss  (1870-1955)  endeavored  to  discover  a  permanent order of main classed based upon, what  he  called,  scientific  and  educational  consensus.  In  fact  no  consensus,  if  any  can  ever  be  permanent.  Knowledge  is  social  in  character.  Therefore,  their  cannot  be  any  order  of  main  classes  in  Nature.  Spatial  position  of  subjects  in  an  order  and  their  social  value  varies  from  society  to  society  and  from  time  to  time.  Renaissance  placed  premium  on  humanities,  while  the  industrial  revolution  era  gave  prime  of  place  to  science  and  technology.  Theology was the queen of academic subjects only  to be dethroned in the post – world wars academic  research.  In  classification  system  of  Soviet  Union  (BBK) Marxism got the first place in any division of  knowledge.  Ranganathan  based  his  order  instead  on concrete and objectively stated principles. These  principles are helpful in placing ever emerging new  main  classes  at  their  logical  places  in  the  array  of  main  classes.  Number  of  basic  subjects  has  increased  to  about  eight  hundred  in  CC-7  without  any  problem  of  placing  them  at  their  rightful  place  in  the  lengthy  array  of  basic  subjects9. 
6.3.2  Division  of  a  Main  Class 
  A  main  class  is  further  split  into  [P],  [M]  and  [E]  categories  whereas  categories  of  [S]  and  [T],  are  common  to  the  universe  of  knowledge.  Categories  are  further  divided  into  facets,  and  facets  into  the  ultimate  isolates.  Very  traditional  main  classes  are  divided  into  canonical  classes,  not  directly  into  categories.  Obviously  canonical  classes are traditional or classic divisions of an old  main class (Fig. 2). For example, Mathematics has  been  divided  into  canonical  classes  of  arithmetic,  algebra,  geometry,  etc,  whereas  physics  into  heat,  light, sound, electricity, etc. Canonical classes have  their  on  categories.  Some  of  the  main  classes  have systems, specials, environmental constituents  preceding  the  categories.          
    
11 
122 
123 
2 
3 
  1,  2,  3,  4  or  121,122,123  form  an Array 
4      11,111  or  12,121  form  a  Chain 
111 
12 
121 
Figure 2. Division of the universe of knowledge (UK). 6.4  Facet Analysis 
Facet  analysis  as  developed  by  Ranganathan  is  the  core  of  the  CC  philosophy  and  methods.  No  class  number  for  compound  or  complex  subjects  is  available  readymade.  It  has  to  be  synthesised.  Ranganathan has given eight standard and locked-up  steps  to  turn  a  raw  title  (as  it  appears  on  the  document) into a co-extensive class number based  on  the  subject  content  and  form  of  the  document.  First  of  all,  specific  subject  of  a  document  has  to  the determined for which there are no specific rules.  Ranganathan calls it intuitive or trial and error act.  It  indeed  requires  flair.  Nevertheless,  a  specific  subject  is  to  be  determined  from  the  title,  subtitle,  preface,  table  of  contents,  or  even  by  reading  the  text. The raw title may be augmented by keywords  or phrases, if necessary, to fully indicate the subject  of  the  document. 
Next to the determination of the specific subject,  the  subject  proper  is  separated  from  the  common  isolates – which represent the tangible elements of  the  document  or  viewpoint  of  the    author.  Then  in  
271 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
the process is determined the main class, in which  the  specific  subject  falls.  Main  classes  and  other  basic classes are postulated by the system—these  are  the  givens.  Ranganathan  postulates  that  every  subject  has  a  basic  subject  which  forms  the  first  facet.  Then  starts  the  facet  analysis  per  se  into  PMEST.  Ranganathan  has  suggested  identification  of  categories  in  a  subject  in  the  order  from  [T]  to  [P], moving from facile category to the most elusive  one.  Broader  categories  are  further  resolved  into  specific  facets. 
Categories tend to evade definitions. Their nature  is somewhat elusive, though not metaphysical. These  are still postulated and require much experience and  flair  to  recognise  them.  For  example,  the  category  Personality  occurs  in  all  the  main  classes,  yet  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  generally  it  is.  Nature  of  categories  varies  from  main  class  to  main  class.  Their deceptive nature is clear from the fact that what  had been the energy category in editions 4 to 6 has  become  all  of  a  sudden  matter  category  in  the  7th  edition. At times it is utterly confusing to categorise  an  entity  clearly.  For  example,  in  the  class  music,  musical  instruments  such  as  guitar,  drum,  flute,  etc., are designated as matter category. Therefore,  if  something  puzzles  us,  the  only  solace  seems  to  acquiesce  the  way  desired  by  Ranganathan. 
In practical classification, one has to start with  identifying [T] and come down to [P] via [S], [E] and  [M]. Time indicated by apostrophe, is chronological,  diurnal or seasonal. For example, 20th  century, medieval  period,  summer  season  or  morning  time.  Space  indicated  by  a  dot  is  manifestation  of  geographical  and political areas or population clusters. For example,  Asia, London, French speaking countries, NATO, G-8,  Hilly  areas,  Iberian  peninsula,  or  Colorado  valley.  Energy,  indicated  by  a  colon,  manifests  actions,  activities,  processes  and  problems.  For  example,  treatment, storage, diseases, teaching, management,  grammar, etc., are instances of Energy. Earlier [M]  was  confined  to  material  of  the  entity,  as  wooden  chairs,  marble  sculpture,  gold  coins.  In  the  latest  edition  Ranganathan  has  widened  its  scope  by  recognising  three  variants  of      this  category: 
Matter-Property  [M-P] 
Matter-Method  [M-M] 
Matter-Material  [M-Mt] 
For  all  three  of  them  the  indicator  digits  is  “;”  semicolon.  Of  all  the  fundamental  categories  Personality  [P]  is  most  concrete  but  paradoxically  most difficult to be recognised. Like human personality  it  is  a  complex  entity  and  thus  elusive  something.  Ranganathan recommended Residual Method to spot  it  in  a  subject.  It  means  that  after  identifying  the  bit  obvious  [T],  [S],  [E]  and  [M],  categories  if  any  thing  still  remains  in  the  residue,  then  it  might  be  
272 
personality  –  as  a  corollary  of  “five  and  only  five  fundamental categories”. Personality incarnates itself  in  persons  (individuals  or  groups),  communities,  institutions, animal and plant families, body organs,  chemical elements, agricultural produce, languages,  religions,  art  styles  systems,  ideologies,  and  the  like.  It  is  indicated  by  a  comma. 
6.4.1 Facet  Formula:  Citation  Order 
(a) Rounds  and  Levels  
A  category  may  manifest  itself  in  more  than  one  concept  in  a  mirco  subjects.  Recurrence  of  a  category is accounted for by the ingenious postulate  of rounds and levels. The PMEST formula is infact  comprised  of  many  rounds  and  levels  of  facets.  For  example,  in  class  O  (Literature),  the  category  [P] personality occurs four times (Language, Form,  Author,  and  Work),  each  at  a  different  level.  In  the  subject,  Treatment  of  human  diseases,  both  Diseases  and  Treatment  were  manifestations  of  the  first  and  second  round  of  energy,  respectively  in  the  sixth  edition.  Thus  in  a  facet  formula  facets  of  the  same  category  may  occur  more  than  once  to  be  accommodated  in  a  logical  citation  order.  Ranganathan postulated that space and time occur  in  the  last  round  of  the  facet  formula.  Categories  [P],  [M],  and  [E]  can  occur  in  various  rounds  and  at  various  levels.  Levels  occur  within  a  round.  Within a round [P] and [M] can also occur at many  levels.  Energy  always  completes  a  round  and  has  no  level,  but  only  rounds.  
To mechanise the arrangement of categories and  their scattered facets, Ranganathan after a long trial,  finally  settled  on  a  general  and  all  encompassing  and  very  handy  facet  formula,  popularly  known  as  PMEST  (Personality/Matter/Energy/Space/Time).  Rounds of categories and within a round levels are  arranged  by  the  ‘Principle  of  dependency’,  which  Ranganathan formulated as the Wall-Picture principle:  Since there cannot be any mural without a wall, so  the  wall  is  made  the  first  facet. The  master  ‘Wall- Picture principle’ has various corollaries formulated  in  such  axiomatically  worded  principles  as  the  ‘Whole-Organ principle’ (whole-part relationship) and  the Cow-Calf principle (principle of appurtenance) to  arrange round and levels of facets; the more complex  ‘Actand-Action-Actor-Tool  principle’  is  obtained  by  of  mix  of  the  above  principles.      
In the sequence, the basic facet-usually represented  by main class-- or its amplification by system (Sm),  environment (Env), or specialisation (Sp), precedes  other  facets. The  grand  general  facet  formula  may  be  represented  as  follows  (numbers  preceding  a  category indicate its round, while subscripted numbers  following  a  category  indicate  its  level): 
(BF), [1P1], [1P2], [1P3], [1P4]; [1M1]; [1M2]; [1M3]:  [E],  [2P1],  [2P2];  [2M1];  [2E],  [3P1]…:[3E].  [S1]. [S2]’[T1]’[T2] 

========8========

SATIJA AND SINGH: COLON  C LASSIFICATION: A REqUIEM 
In the-current edition of the CC, the total number of  facets  and  their  general  sequence  is  as  follows10: 
Field  of  study   System     Environment    Specials     Object  of  study     Kinds/Parts  of   Objects     Properties  of  object     Action  on  the  object     Kind  of  action     Method  of  action    Agent of action   Instrument of action    Space     Space  qualifier     Time  Time  qualifier. 
(b) Absolute  Syntax:  Quest  for  a  Holy  Grail 
In  his  spirited  quest  for  discovering  a  natural  order of facets, Ranganathan proposed the idea of  an  ‘absolute  syntax  of  facets’,  by  which  he  meant  a sequence in which component facets of a subject  ‘arrange  themselves  in  the  minds  of  the  majority  of persons’11.  Indeed,  he  conjectured  that  absolute  syntax  may  be  the  ‘same  for  a  large  majority  of  persons  irrespective  of  their  mother  tongues’,  so  that  absolute  syntax  and  linguistic  syntax  do  not  necessarily coincide. He further believed that absolute  syntax was close to his own PMEST citation order,  arrived  at  by  rigorous  postulates  and  principles.  The  basic  question  is  whether  there  exists  such  an  absolute  syntax  of  ideas  in  the  minds  of  the  majority of adults, free from the incessant impact of  the mother tongue and its grammar as impressed on  human  minds  since  infancy.  There  is  no  empirical  evidence  that  it  exists  at  all.  Nevertheless,  as  Iyer  asserts, "If a particular way of structuring a subject  can  be  easily  understood  in  translation  to  another  language,  regardless  of  the  linguistic  variations  of  individual  tongues,  then  an  absolute  syntax  may  exist  at  some  level"12.  Arthur  Maltby  points  out  that Ranganathan believed in knowledge synthesis  rather  than  in  its  mere  division  for  mapping  and  information retrieval; this makes the search for the  absolute  syntax  of  ideas  worth  pursuing.13 
(c)  Synthesis 
Analysis  is  followed  by  synthesis  of  facets.   In  a  document  first  of  all  subject  per  se  is  to  be  separated  from  common  isolates  denoted  by  roman  malls  and  added  after  the  subject  facets  with  their  own  indicator  digit.  These  are  the  two  types:  anteriorising  and  posteriorising. 
Anteriorising  common  isolates,  e.g., 
a      bibliography        k      encyclopedia         m     periodical        
r     administration  report s     statistics 
t                  commission  report 
x     collected  works 
These  are  added  with  the  connecting  symbol  double inverted comma “”, and bring the documents  to  its  anterior  position.  
Posteriorising common isolates are further of three  types:  Personality,  Matter-Property,  and  Energy. 
b14          calculation 
aTc              critical  study 
t      educational/research  institutions  or      learned  societies.  
These are added with their respective indicator  digit comma, semi colon and colon, respectively and  take  the  document  to  a  backward  position:  
2;5  ‘P”a      
      
Bibliography  of  21st   Century Classification 
2”k73,N9     
      
      
Francis  and  Taylor  Encyclopedia of  Library  & Information  Science 
2.73,g,M7    
      
American  Library  Association 
2,J1*Z.  73:a  T  
      
Assessment  of  US  Academic  Libraries 
E*Z:  aR     
      
Research  in  Chemical  Sciences  
y;aa     
Theory  of  Sociology  
Class numbers look lengthy like algebraic equations,  even  unwieldy  and  surrealistic  such  as: 
O,111,  2J64,  M+V”  aN  
        
        
        
20th   Century  Bibliography  of  Merchant  of  Venice  by  Shakespeare 
L-L-9Un4-9F,  32;  4:6 
        
        
        
Homeopathy  for  Heart  Diseases  of  Old  People  Living  in  High Altitudes 
T,18.1=CN48,g,  9N”  v 
        
        
        
A  History  of  the  Association  of Commonwealth Universities 
V,  73;  1844X=M1    
        
US  Armament  Policy  towards  Pakistan 
V,44;  181=(Q,7)     
        
        
India’s  Foreign  Policy  toward  Muslim  Countries  
y”  a”  m73,  N      
        
Sociological  abstracts 
273 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
Ranganathan sacrificed the brevity and simplicity  of notation to make the notation extremely hospitable,  and  to  produce  finely  co-extensive  class  numbers.  Most  of  the  classifiers  are  afraid  of  its  notation,  which  makes  the  system  unpopular. 
7.   s HELF ARRANGEMENt 
7.1  Principle  of  Inversion 
The  CC  follows  the  Principle  of  Inversion  first  used by the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC).   It  means  that  the  citation  order  of  facets  in  the  facet  formula  is  reverse  of  their  arrangement  on  the  shelves.  To  elaborate,  [T]  is  the  last  facet  in  the PMEST citation, but the subjects fitted with only  [T]  will  file  before  [S]  category  which  in  turn  will  file  before  [E],  and  so  on.  In  the  PMEST  citation  order categories are arranged in order of ‘decreasing  concreteness’: [P] Personality is the most concrete  and  [T]  Time  the  most  abstract;  [E]  Energy  lies  midway being as concrete as it is abstract. On the  shelves  or  in  a  classified  bibliographic  database,  however,  the  order  of  subjects  is  from  general  to  specific,  that  is,  from  abstract  to  concrete,  i.e.,  from  [T]  to  [P].  Overall  order  within  a  class  comes  out  to  be: 
General  treated  generally  General  treated  specially  Special  treated  generally  Special  treated  specially 
This  order  is  achieved  by  ingeniously  fixing  the  ordinal  value  of  semantic  and  indicator  digits,  e.g.,  ordinal  value  of  the  indicator  digit  for  [T]  is  less  than  that  of  [S],  and  so  on.  The  other  digits  are  arranged  in  the  order  a/g,  0/9, A/Z. 
7.2 APUPA  Pattern 
Within a given specific class he arranged documents  on  the  shelves  in  what  he  termed  as  the  APUPA  pattern. The letters of the acronym stand for different  pockets of documents in a given and related class:  A  on  both  the  sides  represents  Alien  (or  related)  subject  zones;  P  is  a  Penumbral  region.  First  Penumbral area comprises of approach documents  such as bibliographies, dictionaries to comprehend  the U (region). U is the Umbral region, having core  documents  on  the  subjects.  The  second  P  region  enshrines advance document such as, advances in  the subject, critical studies, organisations or centre  for  the  advancement  of  the  discipline.  Obviously,  such  documents  are  studied  after  comprehending  the  core  documents  in  the  U  region.    The  general  APUPA pattern is achieved by postulating two kinds  of (common isolates): Anteriorising Common Isolates  (ACIs) and Posteriorising Common Isolates (PCIs).  
274 
Common isolates are like the standard subdivisions  of DDC or form and view point common auxiliaries  of the UDC which and are attachable to any class,  irrespective  of  its  specificity.  ACIs  are  not  the  subject  proper,  but  form  approaches  to  a  subject.  They include, for example, bibliographies, synopsis,  histories,  and  glossaries  of  a  subject.    Documents  fitted  with  ACIs  are  filed  anterior  to  the  subject  proper. This forms a penumbral region, having less  of the subject proper. Then follows the proper pure  subject with all its subdivisions. For example, basic  and compound subjects could constitute the umbral  region  in  the  pattern.  This  is  followed  by  another  penumbral  region,  formed  by  fitting  documents  of  the umbral region with PCIs. These are documents  about  the  subject  that  are  best  read  by  advanced  students  or  researchers  after  the  mastery  of  the  core subject. These include educational and research  institutes on the subject, critical reviews, and recent  advances in the subject. Thus the umbral region is  surrounded  on  both  sides  by  penumbral  regions  of  differing  natures,  which  in  turn  are  flanked  by  two  different  alien  regions. 
The  APUPA  pattern,  (Fig.  3)  unique  to  the  CC,  is  one  of  the  logical,  pedagogically  useful  and  beautiful  arrangements  of  documents  on  the  shelves.  It  uniformly  and  constantly  weaves  a  perceptible  useful  pattern  of  documents  on  the  shelves or of their surrogates in a bibliography. The  arrangement is so impeccable that it is appropriate  to  say  that  to  browse  a  CC  classified  library  is  itself  an  education.  This  has  been  achieved  by  investigating deeply the structure of knowledge and  arranging  its  components  in  a  way  most  useful  to  the  most  users  is  a  continuum  from A/Z. 
Figure 3. APUPA on the shelves. 
7.3  Index          
The 6th  edition had many subject indexes, but the  7th   has  none  attached  to  it.  Later  in  2002  CINDEX  a  machine  readable  index  to  the  CC-7  on  a  CD  in  UNESCO’S WINISIS was issued. It is waiting to be  incorporated  into  the  print  edition  (1987). 
8. REVIsION,  UsE  AND  stAtUs 
Despite  being  projected  as  India's  national  scheme  of  classification,  it  is  not  a  widely  used  system in India. The DDC outranks any other system  in  popularity.  Though  no  register  of  its  users  has 

========10========

SATIJA AND SINGH: COLON  C LASSIFICATION: A REqUIEM 
been maintained, but according to a very favorable  estimate some 24 % of the libraries were using this  system  in  India  in  1960s.  The  editions  used  vary  from the 2nd  (1939, University of Pune) to 4 
th 
 (1950,  University  of  Delhi).  They  have  never  employed  Ranganthan’s  Method  of  Osmosis  to  implement  the  revise  version  of  a  scheme.  Inertia  prevails  above  any  excuse. The  7th   (1987)  is  used  only  by  
achieved  nirvana  from  bodily  form—transcending  the cycle of life and death. It subliminally pervades  the  universe  of  knowledge  organisation. 
REFERENCEs 
1. Satija, M.P. Classification and Ranganathan: A  
chronology 1924-1992. International  Classification,  
1992, 19(1),  3-6. 
the  DRTC.  No  new  library  is  adopting  it.  CC  class  
2.    Satija,  M.P.  A  critical  introduction  to  the  7th 
numbers are also given as a bibliographic element  in the entries of the Indian National Bibliography14.  There  is  no  national  committee  or  a  substantive  institutional backing to advise or to take responsibility  of its revision or publication15.  It  is  now  repeatedly  reprinted  by  a  commercial  publisher  for  students. 
9. FUtURE 
The system is based on postulates and principles  integrated  into  a  coherent  and  fully  and  finely  developed theory of classification. Fran Miksa aptly  says that, “Ranganathan treated library classification  as a single unified structure of ideas which followed  from a cohesive set of basic principles"16.  For  this  Ranganathan  evolved  apt  principles  and  forged  precise  tools.  The  theory  of  the  CC  is  in  fact  considered as the theory of classification in general  which  is  taught  in  many  library  schools  the  world  over.  The  contribution  of  the  CC  lies  in  its  facet  analysis  technique,  the  concept  of  fundamental  categories  and  hordes  of  practical  postulates  and  hospitality  devices.  It  provides  scientific  guidelines  for  construction  of  any  new  classification  system.  Many  depth  and  special  classification  systems  have  been  designed  using  the  CC  methods17.  It  can  be  used  to  design  other  indexing  vocabularies  such  as  thesauri  or  depth  classification  for  micro  subjects.  Its  facet  analysis  is  immensely  helpful  in  query  formulation  for  better  recall  and  precision  of  output18.  Some  of  the  search  engines  or  web  directories invariably  use Ranganathan’s approach  with  good  result  in  retrieving  on  the  web.  One  wonders if Ranganathan anticipated the WWW and  search engines19. Advances  in  classification  theory  and  practice  in  the  online  environment  very  much  depend  on  facet  analysis20-21. 
 Many plans to revise it came out still born due  to  lack  of  proper  planning  and  resources  needed  for  this  gigantic  task.  Officially,  a  recent  Kannada  version has been published in collaboration with the  Central Institute of Indian Languages, Mysore22. It is  based on latest developments in the CC. But survival  of  the  system  in  its  present  body  seems  uncertain  due to long neglect. Already subtly pervaded in the  making  of  new  systems  and  revision  and  the  old  once,  and  getting  sublimated  into  a  theory,  it  has  
edition (1987) of the Colon Classification. Cata.  
Classif.  Quarter.,  1990, 12(2),  135-38. 
3.  Gopinath,  M.A.  The  Colon  Classification.  In  
Classification in the 1970’s, edited by Arthur Maltby.  
Clive  Bingley,  London,  1972,  pp.  53-85. 
4.  Ranganathan,  S.R.  Prolegomena  to  library  
classification.  Ed.  3.  Asia  Publishing  House,  
Mumbai,  1967,  pp.  143-323. 
5. Ranganatiha,  S.R.  Colon  Classification,  Ed.  7,  
edited by M.A.  Gopinath. Sarada Ranganathan  
Endowment,  Bangalore,  1987,  33p.  
6.  Satija,  M.  P.  Extension  of  two  phased  subjects  
in Colon Classification. Herald of Lib. Sci., 1979,  
18(4),  344-48. 
7. Shera, J.H. Sociological foundation of librarianship.  
Asia,  Bombay,  1970,  106  p. 
8.  Parkhi, R.S. Colon scheme of library classification.  
Modern  Librarian,  1933,  3(2),  87. 
9.  Ranganathan, S.R. Colon Classificaiton, Ed. 7.  
edited by M.A. Gopinath, Sarada Ranganathan  
Endowment,  Bangalore,  1987,  pp.  57-66. 
10. Ranganathan, S.R. Colon Classification, Ed. 7.   
edited by M.A. Gopinath, Sarada Ranganathan   
Endowment,  Bangalore,  1987,  pp.  49-51. 
11. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Prolegomena  to  library  
classification,  Ed.  3.  Asia  Publishing  House,    
Mumbai,  1967,  pp.  143-323. 
12. Iyer, H. Classification Structures. Indeks Verlags,  
Frankfurt  a/M,  1995,  184p. 
13. Maltby, Arthur.  Sayers  manual  of  classification  
for  libraries,  Ed.  5.  Andre  Deutch,  London,  
1975. 
14. Satija, M.P. Use of Colon Classification. International  
Classification,  1986, 13(2),  88-92. 
15. Satija,  M.P.  Future  and  revision  of  colon  
classification.  Knowledge  Organization,  1997,  
24(1),  18-25. 
16.  Miksa,  Francis  L.  The  DDC,  the  universe  of  
knowledge  and  the  post-modern  library,  Forest  
Press,  Albany,  NY,  1998,  67p.  
17.  Vickery,  B.C.  Faceted  classification: A  guide  to  
the  construction  and  use  of  special  schemes. 
Aslib,  London,  1960. 
18.  Satija, M.P. Ranaganathan and the classification  
of  electronic  documents.  DLIBCOM:  Digital  
Library  Communication,  2007, 2(8-9),  4-7. 
275 

========11========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
19. Glassel,  Aimee.  Was  Ranganathan  a  Yahoo.  
http://  scout.wisc.edu/project/  (accessed  on  20  
March  2008). 
20. Slavic, Aida. Faceted classifications: Management  
and  use. Axiomathes,  2008,  18(2),  1-15.  
http://www.springerlink.com/content/n7hk67u52078/   
(accessed  on  20  October  2008). 
276 
21.  Suman, Aparajita.  From  knowledge  abstraction  
to  management:  Using  Rangantghan’s  faceted  
schema to develop conceptual frameworks for digital  
libraries.  Chandos,  Oxford,  2013,  200p. 
22.  Vargikaran,  Dwibndu.  Kannada  translation  of  
S.R. Ranganathan’s Colon Classification. Ed. 7.  
edited  by  M.A.  Gopinath.  CIIL,  Mysore,  2012. 

========12========

