DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 289-294 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Multilingual Thesaurus and Interoperability 
A. Neelameghan and S.K. Lalitha 
Sarada Ranganathan Endowment for Library Science 702, Upstairs, III Block, Rajajinagar, Bangalore-560 010, Karnataka  
E-mail: anm2002@vsnl.net 
AbsTrAcT 
 This paper briefy describes a pilot project to design and develop a multilingual- English and eight  other languages of India – thesaurus for ‘Education’. The thesaurus is derived from the bilingual (English- Kannada) Colon Classifcation (CC), (Ed. 7 revised). The CC number and Dewey Decimal Classifcation  (DDC) number are metadata in the thesaurus strtucture. The thesaurus for each language is separately  built using Greenstone Digital Library software. The descriptors are hyperlinked. Descriptor terms, terms in  the Scope Note (text), CC and DDC numbers are indexed. Two or more of the thesauri can be searched  simultaneously. The advantages of using class number in the search and retrieval are mentioned. Other  issues discussed include interoperability as key to effective interlinking among knowledge organising tools  (KOTs) and in integrating two or more KOTs, and issues and problems  in building multilingual thesaurus  (thesauri) with particular reference to the cultural frames and languages of India. 
Keywords: Multilingual thesauri, class number, interoperability 
1. INTrODUcTION 
Information  resources  are  of  various  kinds– books, chapters in books, papers in periodicals and  conference volumes, newspapers, case records, data  tables,  graphs,  images,  maps,  music  sheets,  etc.  The contents may be in different languages. One or  more  of  such  resources  may  be  required  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  information  seekers.  These  may  be  available in their conventional physical document forms  and/or in digital form, and as audio, video records,  
standardising and/or managing vocabulary in indexes,  formulating  search  expressions  and  retrieval  from  databases (including online web-enabled databases)  and also in organising information resources mentioned  above and their surrogates (e.g. entries in catalogues  and bibliographies) in a helpful sequence. Some of  the KOTs, e.g. classification schemes and thesauri  for  specific  domains  can  also  provide  a  map  of  the  content  of  the  related  domain  and  to  learn  about  inter-relationships  among  the  components  
CDs, transparencies, power point presentations, etc.  and  concepts  of  the  domain. 
We  may  also  include  e-mail  messages,  websites,  
virtual  dialogues/conferences,  social  networks  (by  
2. 
blogs,  twitter,  facebook,  You-Tube,  etc.)  together  
ObJEcTIVEs 
The  objectives  of  this  paper  are  to: 
with  their  printed  versions,  if  any.  To  know  about  
(a) Show  with  a  pilot  project  that  ‘Interoperability’  
their  respective  contents  and  to  facilitate  retrieval  of  desired  information  directories,  indexes,  lists,  catalogues  and  such  other  tools  are  used.  These  may  be  on  conventional  paper  medium  and/or  in  digital  form. 
With a view to managing the vocabulary/terminology  of  directories,  indexes,  lists,  catalogues,  etc.,  and  
is key to effective interlinking among knowledge  organising  tools  (KOTs)  and  in  integrating  two  or  more  KOTs;  
(b)  Affirm  that  use  of  a  classification  code  (e.g.  
class  number)  has  advantages  specially  in  a  
multilingual  thesaurus  system. 
for  enhancing  and  supplementing  their  capabilities  
(c)  Discuss selected issues and problems in building  
KOTs  are  useful.  The  KOTs  include  ontologies,  taxonomies,  lexicons,  dictionaries,  schemes  for  subject classifications, thesauri, wordnets, semantic  nets,  self-organising  systems,  etc.  These  help  in  
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 
multilingual thesaurus (thesauri) with particular  reference to the cultural frames and languages  of  India. 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLY   2013 
3.    MULTILINGUAL  THE sAUrUs:  PILOT  
PrOJEcT 
A collaborative pilot project for developing thesauri  in  different  languages  for    a  subject  domain  is  in  progress.  In  this  pilot  thesaurus  a  part  of  the  ‘Education’  domain  is  covered.  Currently  thesauri  in  English,  Tamil,  Kannada,  Tulu,  Malayalam  have  been  completed;  Thesauri  in  Punjabi  (gurumuki),  Hindi  (devnagari),  Sanskrit  (devnagari), 
urdu  and  Arabic  will  be  added.  The  initial  thesaurus is built using the English CC Personality  Facet  schedule.  
The starting point, that is, collection of relevant  concepts/terms  to  create  a  corpus  of  terms  for  the  subject  domain  was  facilitated  with  the  availability  of  the  bilingual  (English-Kannada)  version  of  S.R.  Ranganathan’s  Colon  Classification  (CC)  scheme  (English edition 7, partly revised) in print and machine- readable  form1.  The  schedule  for  ‘Education’  was  enriched  with  terms  selected  from  ERIC  thesaurus  and  the  UNESCO/IBE  thesaurus. 
Each  descriptor  is  given  a  CC  number  and  corresponding Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)  number, and Scope Note (SN), Broader Term (BT),  Narrower Term (NT) as applicable. The pilot thesaurus  for  each  language  is  separately  built.  In  the  pilot  version the SN is given only in the English language  thesaurus.  The  terms  in  the  schedules  in  each  language  are  hyperlinked  among  themselves  and  with  corresponding  terms  in  the  thesauri  for  the  other  languages.  
The descriptor, class number, and terms in the  SN  (in  each  language)  are  indexed.  The  terms  in  the  schedule  of  each  thesaurus  can  be  browsed;  and  searching  by  any  of  the  language  term(s)  and  by  class  number  (CC  or  DDC)  is  provided  for.  By  clicking  on  a  selected  term  or  class  number  the  corresponding terms in the other languages may be  displayed and used in a search. Display of schedule of  terms in one or more than one language is provided  for.  A  thesaurus  descriptor  can  be  hyperlinked  to  online/web-based databases for Education and allied  domains;  term(s)  from  the  thesaurus  can  be  cut  and  pasted  or  dragged  and  dropped  in  the  search  box  of  the  database(s)  for  search  and  retrieval  of  hit  records  from  the  database(s).  Selected  screen  shots  are  given  in  the Annex. 
4.   sOFTWArE 
The Greenstone Digital Library Software (GSDL)  
Human Info NGO. It is an open source, multilingual  software, issued under the terms of the GNu  General  Public  License.  GSDL  is  Unicode-compliant.  User  interfaces have been prepared in several languages,  including languages of India through collaboration with  institutions  and  individuals  in  different  countries. 
Several institutions and individuals have input terms  to the Education thesauri in the different languages  and  also  have  assisted  in  editing  the  inputs. 
5.  DIscUssIONs 
5.1  Need  for  Knowledge  Organising  Tools 
Ontologies “firstly, help sustain a communications  framework around the domains of interest between  people,  organisations,  and  systems  by  providing  a  shared  and  common  understanding  of  the  domain.  Secondly, they enable knowledge re-use and sharing  since  other  researchers  can  adopt  or  integrate  an  ontology  for  their  own  purposes…..  They  facilitate  inter-operability  among  systems  by  specifying  and  translating  different  concepts  and  languages  in  a  domain  (or  across  several  domains).  A  well- developed ontology produces cost-time benefits by  eliminating  or  reducing  the  cost  of  re-inventing  a  knowledge-base system for each use. Furthermore,  ontologies help users learn domain knowledge, and,  in  addition,  browse  and  search  for  information  by  providing  structured  knowledge  representation”2 
A knowledge organising system (KOS) consists of  two or more KOTs (or other information sources–e.g.  full-texts,  abstracts,  images,  audio,  video  material  -  that  are  interlinked  or  integrated.  These  assist  vocabulary  management  functions  in  information/ subject indexing, searching, retrieval, and presentation,  to  provide  additional  information  and  to  support  knowledge discovery, enhance the scope for research  in the subject domain and in the field of KOS theory  and  practice. 
5.2  Interoperability 
Interoperability is the key to simultaneous search  and retrieval from two or more databases containing  a  single  or  multi-genre  resource,  in  one  or  more  languages.  Interoperability  capability  is  required  to  merge  or  integrate  databases  holding  multi-genre  and/or  multi-lingual  records. 
Interoperability is the ability of diverse systems  and  organisations  to  work  together.  The  term  is  usually  used  in  a  technical  systems  engineering  sense, or alternatively in a broad sense, taking into  
is used for building the different language thesauri.  
account social, political, and organisational factors that  
The  GSDL  is  a  suite  of  software  for  building  and  
impact system performance. Initially, interoperability  
distributing  digital  library  collections.  It  provides  
was  defined  for  IT  systems  and  services  restricted  for  organising  information  records  and  publishing  
for  information  exchange  between  systems.  it  on  the  iInternet  or  on  CD-ROM.  It  is  produced  
5.2.1  Interoperability:  General 
by  the  New  Zealand  Digital  Library  Project  at  the  university of Waikato, New Zealand and developed  and distributed in cooperation with uNESCO and the  
290 
• 
  A  property  of  a  product  or  system,  whose  interfaces are completely understood/transparent,  

========2========

NEELAmEGHAN AND  L ALITHA: muLTILINGuAL  T HESAuRuS AND  I NTEROPERAbILITY 
to work with other products or systems, present  
or  future,  without  any  restricted  access  or  
implementation. 
• The ability of two or more systems or components  
to exchange information and to use that information3 
(IEEE  Glossary). 
• Enable end-user applications using different types  
of  computer  systems,  operating  systems,  and  
application software, interconnected by different  
types  of  local  and  wide  area  networks4. 
           This  generalised  definition  can  be  applied  to  any  system.  It  defines  several  criteria  that  can  be  used  to  discriminate  between  systems  that  are  ‘really’  inter-operable  and  systems  available  as  
• such  but  are  not  so  as  they  may  not  comply  with  one  or  more  criteria,  namely:  non-disclosure  of  one  or  several  interfaces,  and/or  implementation  or  access  restriction  built  in  the  product/system/ service. Two aspects of interoperability are: Syntactic  interoperability  and  semantic  interoperability. 
5.2.2    Syntactic  Interoperability 
            Two  or  more  systems  should  be  capable  of  communicating and exchanging data, using specified  data formats communication protocols, etc. XML or  SQL standards are tools of syntactic interoperability.  This applies to ASCII or a Unicode format (for English  or    text  in  other  languages)  in  all  communicating  systems. 
5.2.3    Semantic  Interoperability 
            The  ability  of  systems  to  automatically  interpret  the  information  exchanged  meaningfully  and  accurately  to  produce  results  as  defined  by  the end users of the systems. To achieve this, both  sides must refer to a common information exchange  reference model: what is sent is the same as what  is  understood  (e.g.  ISO  2709). 
    Interoperability  between  KOSs  has  become  crucial in facilitating simultaneous searches in several  databases or to merge different databases into one.  The standards for KOS design and development, the  American Z39.19:2005 and the british 8723-4:2007,  provide detailed recommendations for interoperability. A  new ISO standard about thesauri and interoperability  is  ISO  25964-1. 
    The  available  technology  provides  tools  for  interoperability, e.g. formats and functional requirements  for subject authority, as well as those for Semantic  Web  RDF/OWL,  SKOS  Core  and  XML.  Given  the  
• Interoperability  –  Terminology  management;  
terminology  mapping;  terminology  authoring;  
and  terminology  browsing. 
• Compatibility/convertibility  between  databases  
usually  require  these  capabilities  in  respect  of  
following: 
  •     Field:  Tag; metadata;  Name 
  •     Field:  Structure 
  •     Field:  Demarcation/Delimiters 
  •     Language and presentation of text of different  
genres 
•   u se  of  interface  (e.g.  bSO,  GSDL  language  
interfaces)  
Programming  (e.g.  Pascal  programmes  for  
CDS/ISIS) for facilitating exchanges of records/ 
information  among  databases 
•   u nicode  compliance  to  handle  different  
languages 
• Codes/standards  for  rendering  of  names,  etc. • Input and retrieval: use of standards, dictionaries,  
glossaries, lexicons, etc. as vocabulary management  
tools. 
6.   b ILINGUAL/MULTILINGUAL  KOT s:  IssUEs • Identifying  equivalent/near-equivalent  concept  
terms  in  all  the  languages  of  the  KOT.  If  such  
bi-lingual  (online)  dictionaries  are  available  or  
prepared,  the  system  may  be  enabled  to  pick  
up  all  the  equivalents  (and  near-equivalents)  
from the dictionary for matching with the search  
term(s)6. 
• Hyper-linking of terms in a KOT, e.g., glossary,  
thesaurus and map tree structure of the subject  
field  to  other  KOTs,  data  collections,  images,  
etc., can be provided to enable comprehensive  
search  and  knowledge  discovery. 
6.1  Multilingual  KOTs  
Absence  of  equivalent  concepts;  meaning  of  concept  terms  not  exact  equivalents  in  different  languages; cultural constraints and frames are issues  to  be  taken  into  account.  So  also  with  homonyms,  homographs  and  synonyms. 
6.2  semantic  relationships  in  culture-specific  
Domains  
Conceptual relationships between terms especially  
high  cost  of  designing  and  developing  new  KOSs,  
in the subjects in the Humanities (religion, philosophy,  interoperability techniques makes it possible to take  
socio-cultural topics, etc.) are not as precisely defined  
advantage of the existing ones. Martinez Tamayo5,  et  al.  review  basic  concepts,  models  and  methods  recommended  by  the  standards  as  well  as  several  experiences  on  interoperability  between  KOS  -  monolingual  and  multilingual.  
as  in  the  physical  or  life  sciences.  In  addition  to  this general issue, building a multilingual thesaurus  for  a  culture-specific  domain  raises  certain  issues  that  are  related  to  the  nature  of  such  domains.  Firstly, concepts encountered in and associated with  
291 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLY   2013 
culture-specific domains in particular are abstract in  nature  and  rarely  can  they  be  related    to  concrete  referents. Secondly, a large number of concepts of  a culture-specific domain are those that have some  meaning in the life of the members of the community  belonging to the culture. These have implications for  a multilingual thesaurus. A language is a product of,  and reflects the culture of the particular community.  In other words, it is the culture and lifestyle prevalent  among the members of a particular community that  necessitates and results in the formation of lexemes/ expressions  (words/terms)  for  concepts  associated  with  that  culture  and  lifestyle.  It  is  therefore  very  likely  that,  unless  the  communities  that  speak  two  
Therefore,  in  building  multilingual  thesauri,  it  was  
(e) These  enables  corrections  and  improvements  
in  the  classification  schemes  used. 
AcKNOWLEDGEMENT s 
The authors thank the following for their respective  inputs to the preparation of the multilingual Education  thesasurus: Dr b.A. Sharada – the Kannada-English  version of Colon Classification (CC), and the initial  Kannada  Education  thesaurus;  Dr  K.S.  Raghavan  and Dr K.N. Prasad for their inputs to the Kannada- English version of CC; Dr I.K. Ravichandra Rao for  arranging  to  get  the  Tulu  version  of  the  thesaurus  (in  progress);  Dr  m.P.  Satija,  et  al.  for  preparing  
‘equivalence relationship’ widely used in information  
(Synonyms  in  Tamil  for  Tamil  terms)  and  terms  in  English  denoting  near-equivalent/similar  concepts.  The  second  major  issue,  also  related  to  the  notion  of ‘equivalence relationship’, was the occurrence of  several  different  terms,  for  instance,  in  Tamil  with  closely similar meanings/connotations. Neelameghan  and  Raghavan  have  discussed  such  issues  more  elaborately  in  a  recent  paper7. 
6.3  Advantages  of  using  class  number  
The main advantages from a scheme for subject  classification  such  as  DDC,  CC,  etc.,  include: (a) If  in  a  language  a  single  term  or  phrase  is  not  
available  as  equivalent  or  near-equivalent  to,  
say,  an  term  in  English  but  a  description  or  
meaning is given, say,  in the Scope Note  the  
class code can be given in this field (metadata);  
the  system  will  pick  up  this  class  code  in  the  
sear and display the field content. This can be  
done  irrespective  of  the  language  of  the  KOT  
schedules. 
(b) The  hierarchical  division(s)  of  a  concept  can  
be  displayed. 
(c) The  interlinks  among  a  concept/term  and  the  
narrower, broader and other associatively related  
different languages share the same culture, certain  
the  Punjabi  and  Hindi  versions  of  the  thesaurus  concepts  in  culture-specific  domains  may  have  
(in  progress);  Mr  Vinod  Kumar  for  preparing  the  verbal  expressions  only  in  a  particular  language.  
Sanskrit  version  of  the  thesaurus  (in  progress); mr  
and mrs  Abdul  Rahman  Kamaruddin  for  reviewing  indeed difficult to find exact equivalent concepts in  
and  editing  the  Urdu  and  Arabic  versions;  and  Dr  the the different languages language. The notion of  
A.Y.  Asundi  for  assigning  DDC  numbers  to  the  
descriptors. 
retrieval  thesauri  had  to  be  extended  to  include  
both  equivalent  terms  in  the  source  language  
rEFErENcEs 
1. 
concepts/terms  can  be  mapped  for  a  visual  
7. 
display.  
(d) The  class  numbers  from  different  classification  
schemes asssigned to the descriptors facilitates  
comparative study of the strength and weaknesses  
of  the  schemes,  and  
292 
Sharada, b.A. Ranganathan’s Colon Classification:  
Kannada-english version ‘dwibindu vargikaraNa’.  In 
Categories, Contexts and Relations. Proceedings  
of  the  12th   International  ISKO  Conference,  6-9  
August 2012, Mysore, edited by A. Neelameghan  
and K.S. Raghavan, Ergon Verlag GMBH, Wurzburg  
2012,  pp.  63-68. 
2. Ok nam Park. Opening ontology design: A study  
of  the  implications  of  knowledge  organisation  
for  ontology  design.  Knowledge  Organisation,  
2008, 35,  209-21. 
3. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.  
IEEE Standard Computer Dictionary: A compilation  
of  IEEE  standard  computer  glossaries.  New  
York,  NY,  1990. 
4. O'brien, James & marakas, George. Introduction  
to  information  systems.  Ed.  13,  mcGraw-Hill/ 
Irwin;  ISbN  0-07-304355-9. 
5.   m artinez Tamayo, Ana m; et al.  Interoperability of  
knowledge organization systems: The state of the  
art. Información, cultura y sociedad  [ Information  
Culture  and  Society],  2011,  24,  15-37. 
6. Neelameghan, A. & Lalitha, S.K. Searching in and  
retrieval from GSDL multilingual multimedia databases  
simultaneously  using  a  multilingual  dictionary.  
Information  Studies,  2011,  17,  47-64. 
Neelameghan, A. & Raghavan, K.S. Frames of  
knowledge:  A  perspectivde  of  vedic  hinduism  
and  dravidian  culture.  In   Cultural  frames  and  
knowledge,  edited  by  Richard  P.  Smiraglia  &  
Hur-Li  Lee.  Ergon  Verlag  GMBH,  Wurzburg,  
2012,  19-62.  

========4========

NEELAmEGHAN AND  L ALITHA: muLTILINGuAL  T HESAuRuS AND  I NTEROPERAbILITY 
Annexure 
Figure 1. Thesaurus–Five languages and demo DDc  line clicking on T, 15 primary level will retrieve as in Fig. 2 
Figure 2. clicking on T,12 Prepartory school Level in Fig. 1 will retrieve as in Fig. 2. 
293 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLY   2013 
Figure 3. clicking on T,12 which is hyperlinked internally will retrieve as in Fig. 3.  
Figure 4. clicking on the icon against T,12                                  in Fig. 3 will retrieve as in Fig. 4.  
Figure 5. showing search by DDc  number.  
294 

========6========

