DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 300-305 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Dynamics of Managing Electronic Resources: Electronic Resource  
Management System (ERMS) Initiatives 
John Paul Anbu K.*, Sanjay Kataria** and Shri Ram*** 
*University of Swaziland Libraries, Swaziland 
E-mail: anbuj@uniswa.sz 
**Central Library, Banasthali University, P.O. Banasthali Vidyapith-304 022 (Rajasthan) India 
E-mail: sanjay.kataria@banasthali.in 
***Jaypee University of Information Technology, Waknaghat 
 Distt-Solan-173 215 (Himachal Pradesh) India 
E-mail: shriram2576@gmail.com 
AbStRAct 
  Even  after  two  decades  of  digital  presence  in  libraries  and  proliferation  of  electronic  resources  (e-resources) in terms of production, acquisition and usage the management of e-resources remains a  cumbersome process. The process involved in the management of e-resources has often overwhelmed  the library personnel. The life cycle of e-resources, especially in the academic institutions begin with the  discovery and identifcation of the resource and moves on to the trial access, selecting the specifc resource  from the gamut of other resources followed by acquisition of the specifc resource into the library realm  and then felicitating access to the users and then the follow-up of studying the usage of the resource for  further continuation of those resources. In between these processes there is the cumbersome chore of  going through the licensing agreements and keeping the records correct. All these processes are time  consuming and involve a lot of work. These relentless arrays of work have made librarians to look for  systems which can save their time and energy and provide effcient management of e-resources. This  paper looks at the origin of the ERMS (E-resource Management Systems) and the available ERMS in  
the library digital landscape. 
Keywords: ERMS, electronic resource management systems, digital libraries, collection management 
1.  INtRODUctION 
Almost  two  centuries  after  the  invention  of  movable  printing  press  by  Guttenberg  the  first  printed peer-reviewed periodical appeared in 16651.   From  then  on  it  took  another  three  centuries  for  the  electronic  version  (e-version)  of  the  scholarly  publication  to  be  made  available  for  scholars  and  researchers.  Currently the e-resources have become  an  inseparable  part  of  libraries  and  researchers.   They  are  often  described  as  resources  which  are  published through the e-media and accessed through  e-media.  They  may  be  broadly  defined  as  any  peer-reviewed publications that are digitally created  and stored in e-form either as a standalone or in a  database  for  the  purpose  of  delivery  and  retrieval  electronically through various communication media  for  either  networked  access  (through  the  Internet)  or  offline  access  through  the  CD-ROM  or  floppy  disk  etc)  in  various  formats  like  HTML,  PDF,  text,  
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 
Postscript,  etc.  Skaggs2   observes  that  e-resource  is  a  simple  and  generic  term  that  can  include  ‘anything from a PDF of a government report to an  aggregated database, and the research on the topic  is  as  varied  as  the  types  of  e-resources  that  can  be  discussed’.  With  its  myriad  formats  and  types  and with the successful adaptation and acceptance  of these formats amongst the academia there is no  doubt that the e-resources are here to stay. The main  reason for the acceptance of e-resources as part of  the mainstream channel of scholarly communication  is  the  nature  of  these  e-resources. 
The  e-resources  provide  an  enviable  comfort  which  its  print  counterpart  failed  to  provide.  The  advent  of  e-journals  and  databases  provided  the  users with an array of advantages which prompted  them to accept the e-media as the prime channel of  scholarly  communication.  The  e-resources  allowed  users  to  cross  search  the  entire  database  with  keywords and free text search to narrow down their  

========1========

JOHN  P AuL, et al.: DyNAMICS OF  M ANAGING  E LECTRONIC  R ESOuRCES 
research  material.  With  its  easy  and  quick  search  and display capabilities, the e-resources brought the  research findings into the researcher’s desktop and the  time consumed on accessing the desired documents  became  predominantly  less.  The  e-resources  over  the internet further enhanced the quality of service  delivery in libraries. Jewell3  points to a study where  nearly half of the undergraduate students surveyed  in  that  study  indicated  that  they  used  e-resources  either  exclusively  or  almost  exclusively.  Liew,  Foo  and Chennupati’s4  study  in 2000 shows a whopping  73 % of graduate students preferring e-journals over  print  journals  mainly  because  of  the  availability  of  links  to  additional  resources,  searching  capability,  currency,  availability  and  ease  of  access.  With  the  acceleration  of  mobile  and  handheld  access  to  e-resources  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  e-resources  have earned its rightful prime position at academic  libraries  and  amongst  the  academia. 
While  e-resources  are  much  easy  to  use  and  have a significant research value to the researchers,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  complicated  for  the  library  administrators.  They  are  complicated  to  catalogue,  manage  and  administer.  Even  after  two  decades  since  the  advent  of  e-resources  into  the  library  mainstream,  the  librarians  still  grapple  to  manage  them.  Sadeh  &  Ellingsen5   admits  that  the  struggle  is  mainly  due  to  the  amazing  growth  of  e-resources  which  have  taken  the  centre  stage  in  today’s  libraries.  The  e-resources  landscape  is  further  complicated  with  the  ‘endless  variation  in  the  packages  offered  by  the  hundreds  of  players  in  the  market’  and  ‘frequently  changing  business  models’.  The concept of ‘Big deal and aggregated  databases’6, where big deals often refer to ‘one price,  one size, fits all packages’7   model  and  aggregated  databases where the e-resources are assembled to  the convenience of libraries from different publishers  are  the  main  culprits  in  the  complex  e-resources  mayhem. The  advent  of  resources  as  open  access  and  open  access  business  models  has  further  complicated the management of e-resources. Open  access  models  suddenly  brought  in  access  to  thousands of journals into library mainstream. These  developments converted the static webpage interface  of the libraries into web-enabled dynamic database  mode  of  access. 
2.  ELEct RONIc   RESOUR cES  LIFE-cYcLE 
To  understand  the  dynamics  of  e-resources,  especially  in  the  realm  of  an  academic  library,  it’s  pertinent  that  its  life-cycle  is  analysed.  Sadeh  &  Ellingsen5  points to six different processes; starting  from the discovery of e-resources to its trial period,  selecting the resource, acquiring the resource for the  library, providing access to it for the users and the  successive  decision  of  continuation  and  renewals.  Figure  1.  shows  the  life-cycle  of  e-resources. 
Figure 1. Life-cycle of e-resources 
Whole process of electronic resource Management  (ERM)  the  most  important  aspect  is  the  discovery  and  identification  of  the  resource.  Identification  of  the  resource  for  an  academic  institution  starts  from  various  sources;  from  the  faculty,  from  the  subject  librarian,  from  an  online  advertisement,  an  e-mail  alert  forwarded  by  a  forum  member,  from  the  publishers  or  from  the  search  for  a  substantial  resource  for  a  genuine  project.  The  second  stage  of  the  discovery  is  the  relationship  of  the  resource  among the individual resources, packages, licenses,  online interfaces, prices, and accessibility issues. This  discovery paves way for the rest of the e-resources  life-cycle. Once the discovery stage is accomplished  the  rest  of  the  process  runs  a  smooth  way  until  the  resource  reaches  the  access-level.  The  life  of  e-resources doesn’t stop with providing access alone  to  the  users,  but  it  goes  beyond  in  monitoring  its  usage and continuation of the same with the usage  justification  by  providing  relevant  user  statistics.  
A glance at the life-cycle of e-resources clearly  portrays  the  enormity  of  the  task  for  the  librarian  to  manage  them.  The  task  becomes  cumbersome  when  hundreds  of  e-resources  are  added  to  the  library list. They are cumbersome because it is not  physically possible for libraries to provide access to  all  the  e-resources  titles  through  their  catalogues.  Also, they have different business models attached  to  them,  as  bundles,  as  open  access  and  some  as  partly  open  access.  So  the  early  e-resources  management started with custom made webpages by  the librarians. Holly yu6  observes that when electronic  journals  first  appeared  in  the  library  horizon,  two  different  kinds  of  access  were  given  to  them,  one  through static webpages and the other through library  catalogues.  Static  webpages  often  necessitated  a  dedicated  person  to  monitor  and  update  the  links  and access.  Thus maintaining the e-resources has  become  another  job  of  librarians.  
The initial e-resources management concentrated  with attempts from the librarians to keep e-records  using  spreadsheets  or  linked  lists.  The  amount  of  information  needed  to  manage  these  resources  
301 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
mostly  overwhelmed  the  library  managers.  Sadeh  & Ellingsen5     observes  that  too  often  the  librarians  depended  on  their  memory  to  co-ordinate  systems  with  passwords,  uRLs,  costs,  contacts  and  other  related  issues.  But  the  overwhelming  amount  of  data  along  with  the  inability  to  meaningfully  convert  the  metrics  especially  the  cost  analysis  or  user  statistics  of  the  subscribed  e-resources  have  driven  the  librarians  to  look  for  better  solutions  in  managing e-resources. A system which can support  the  administrators  to  manage  the  e-information  and  its  workflows,  by  allowing  ‘to  select,  evaluate,  acquire,  maintain  and  provide  information  access  to  e-resources  in  accordance  with  their  business  and  license  terms’8. 
The  early  ERMS  points  to  an  effort  by  Digital  Library  Federation  (DLF)  and  National  Information  Standards  Office  (NISO)  in  May  2002  to  create  a  Steering  Group  that  would  guide  the  development  of e-resource management. The deliberations were  drafted  and  made  publically  available  via  Cornell  university’s web site management9. The objective of  this initiative is to provide a set of specifications that  would encourage the development of ERMS based  on the standards and best practices. The end result  of  the  May  2002  workshop  was  that  a  roadmap  was  formed  with  the  specification  of  functional  requirements along with a workflow diagram, Entity  Relationship Diagram, Data elements and Definition  and  XML  Schema10.  Since  then  new  tools  were  developed  in  the  management  of  e-resources. The  first E-resource Management module was developed  by  Innovative  Interfaces  for  their  ILS  (Integrated  Library System). Since then many other ILS vendors  and  open  source  products  have  started  adorning  the  E-Resource  Management  sector.  While  most  libraries want ERM as part of the library catalogue  process  some  feel  it  needs  to  be  a  standalone  endeavor because of the complexities it brings into  the  library  realm. 
3.   tE chNIqUES FOR   E- RESOURcE 
MANAgEMENt 
In 2011, Stone, Graham and Emery Jill11  suggested  a  6  point  technique  for  E-resource  Management  which  is  widely  considered  as  the  corner  stone  of  creating  ERMS.  They  are  broadly  classified  as • Investigation  and  Document  selection 
• Acquisition 
• Implementation 
• Evaluation  
• Annual  review 
• Continuation/Cancellation  
print based resource selection. Finding new electronic  content for a specific subject or target group involves  knowledge  of  different  vendors  their  subscription  model, their access controls to name a few. Setting  up trials are basic pre-requisites of document selection  in  ERM.  Acquisition  of  the  selected  material  is  very straightforward as it follows the print resource  acquisition  pattern,  but  the  important  aspect  of  e-resource acquisition is the terms and conditions of  e-resources, license agreements, signing of licensing  and  more  importantly  reading  and  reassuring  the  legal  finer  prints  of  license  agreements.    The  next  step  to  acquisition  is  implementation,  though  both  these work very closely. In the case of e-resources  the  implementation  stage  will  be  longer  if  the  resources  are  vast  in  size.  Implementation  also  includes  training  and  marketing. 
Many  librarians  believe  that  their  job  is  done  with  the  implementation  of  the  e-resources  into  their  library  stream.  But  the  real  work  starts  after  implementation.  Evaluation  and  ongoing  access  are  critical  in  finding  the  relevance  and  usage  of  the  resources.  Most  of  the  e-resources  come  with  a  usage  statistics,  but  the  real  evaluation  stems  from user satisfaction with regards to the relevance,  ease  and  currency  of  the  resource. The  evaluation  process  paves  way  for  the  review  of  the  resource  which  will  ensure  the  continuation  or  cancellation  of  the  resource. 
4. ERM  SYStEMS 
With  the  noble  initiatives  of  DLF  and  NISO  and  the  subsequent  streamlining  of  the  functional  requirements  for  good  ERM  systems  a  host  of  new developments started adorning the information  landscape12. While most of them are commercial and  integrated  with  library  systems,  some  independent  and  open  access  systems  also  started  appearing.  Some  of  the  notable  developments  in  the  ERM  systems  are: 
4.1 cUFtS 
CUFTS (http://researcher.sfu.ca/cufts/erm) is an  open source ERMS13   which is part of the reSearcher  suite of open source library discovery tools developed  by the Simon Fraser university library. The thrust of  CuFTS is to allow the libraries to centralise all of the  details about their e-collections, including licensing  terms,  renewal  dates,  contacts,  and  more.  CuFTS  ERM  also  features  a  renewal  notification  system,  reminding  the  approaching  deadlines  and  an  A-Z  list  of  e-resources  available  in  the  library.  CuFTS  allows  the  management  of  e-books,  evaluation  of  the  collection  and  license  management.  The  ERM  implemented  in  Simon  Fraser  university  interacts  with  the  ILS  used  in  the  library  to  basically  create  records  at  the  creation  stage  to  port  the  records  to  the  ERM  to  maintain  them.  CuFTS  also  has  
Investigation  and  document  selection  is  a  bit  
a  healthy  reporting  functionality  where  numerous  
different for libraries that are involved in traditional 
302 
reports  can  be  generated. 

========3========

JOHN  P AuL, et al.: DyNAMICS OF  M ANAGING  E LECTRONIC  R ESOuRCES 
The CuFTS knowledge base contains over 475  full text resources which can be freely downloaded  by  libraries  can  set  up  their  own  installation,  or  have  Simon  Fraser university  to  host  their  CuFTS  installation.  The  title  list  data  that  comprises  each  resource  comes  from  freely  available  resources  such  as  the  publisher’s    website. The  link  resolver  capabilities of the knowledge base work with various  title  lists  downloaded  directly  from  publisher  sites,  but some lists do have to be manipulated manually  as  the  data  provided  by  the  vendors  are  barely  enough for the purposes of CuFTS. The link resolver,  called GODOT, uses the knowledge base to resolve  to  full  text  and  uses  OpenuRLs,  digital  object  identifiers (DOIs), or its own internal linking syntax,   to  provide  article  level  linking  in  all  major  indexing  and  abstract  databases.  GODOT  also  works  with  ILL software and major ILS. The CuFTS e-journals  database  allows  for  the  creation  of  MARC  records  which  can  be  loaded  into  any  OPAC  allowing  for  immediate  display  in  the  local  OPAC 
4.2  tDNet  Open  ERAM  Old 
TDNet's  OpenERAM    (http://web.tdnet.com)  is  
the  library  market,  ERM  Essentials  integrate  the  e-resources  acquired  through  EBSCO  so  that  all  the  needed  information  for  resources  is  loaded  from the EBSCO integrated Knowledge-base which  acts  as  the  central  source  of  updating  e-resource  information.  EBSCO’s  Integrated  Knowledge  Base  serves  as  the  basic  corner  stone  on  which  the  EBSCO Management and Discovery Solutions are built  which also allows tracking e-collection development  decisions,  including  trials,  evaluations,  orders  and  renewals.  EBSCO AtoZ  and  LinkSource  along  with  EBSCO’s OpenuRL link resolver provide the needed  impetus  for  an  effective  ERM  solution.  Along  with  EBSCOnet  usage  consolidation  service,  EBSCO’s  ERM  Essential  proves  to  be  one  of  the  leaders  in  providing customer-based ERM solutions to libraries.  EBSCO claims with the use of ERM Essentials hours  of labour especially in consolidating the publisher and  license  data  and  the  human  error  are  minimised. 4.4  Ex  Libris  Verda 
Ex Libris (http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/category/ VerdeOverview)  which  has  a  very  strong  library  market  in  Europe  has  Verda  as  its  centralised  
a low cost, integrated e-resource and management  repository  product  for  ERM  which  takes  care  of  solution for providing a flexible open platform ERM.  e-resources  workflows  such  as  acquisitions,  trials,  The  core  of  OpenERAM  is  the  master  knowledge  usage, costs, access and administrative data. Verda  base  which  has  metadata  of  over  370,000  unique  boasts  a  comprehensive  knowledge  base  which  titles  covering  journals  and  ebook  manager.  This  helps  librarians  to  choose  the  desired  resources  
is  a  NISO  compliant  OpenuRL  enabled  full-text  
from  the  e-resource  market  place.  This  knowledge  
resolver which also has a powerful search analyser  base  provides  an  extensive  coverage  of  costs  for federated searching across external sources and  and  usage  which  enables  librarians  to  make  data  internal repositories, for abstracting, categorisation  driven  decision  making  and  electronic  collection  and analysis of retrieved items. It has a ‘License and  development.  Verda  confirms  to  the  open  system  Acquisition’  module  which  helps  in  the  e-resource  standards by providing SuSHI (Standardised usage  procurement  and  to  tackle  license-related  issues.  Statistics Harvesting Initiative)-based user statistics  The  ‘Advanced  Statistics’  feature  provides  various  and  other  related  reports. 
statistics  needed  for  the  evaluation  of  the  use  of  
4.5  gold  Rush 
e-resources. TDNet OpenERAM boasts a single point  
Gold Rush (http://www.coalliance.org/grinfo/) ERM  
Management’ and ‘Powerful Reporting Management’  which includes usage of resources across different  facets  with  COuNTER  (Counting  Online  usage  of  NeTworked  E-resources)  compliance.  OpenERAM  also provides acquisitions data as well as cataloging  functionality  whereby  MARC  records  are  provided  to  customers  through  its  holdings  manager. 4.3  EbScO’s  ERM  Essentials 
EBSCONet’s Essential ERM (http://www2.ebsco. com/en-us/ProductsServices/ERM/Pages/ index.aspx)  
of maintenance whereby all the relevant modules can  
be  maintained  from  a  single  point.  It  has  separate  
and  Discovery  from  Colorado Alliance  of  Research  modules  for  ‘eBook  Management’,  ‘Public  display  
Libraries is a standalone ERM originally developed  of  titles  (A  to  Z  listing)’,  ‘Collection  evaluation’,  
in  2001  for  the  member  libraries  to  organise  their  ‘Authentication  and Access  Management’,  ‘License  
e-resources.  From  2003  onwards  this  product  is  
given  to  outside  of  the  alliance  mainly  because  of  
its  cost-effective  ERM  solution.  Gold  Rush  boasts  a  fully  customisable  subscription  record  with  the  ability to order databases in the public interface and  link  resolver  page  and  the  ability  to  link  directly  to  the  article  bypassing  the  link  resolver.  Its  suit  of  functionalities include, Public Search Interface (A-Z)  listing  for  easy  listing  of  e-resources,  Subscription  Management for managing e-resource subscription,  OpenuRL link resolver for link resolving and a content  comparison module for comparing the contents. Since  
comes with the slogan ‘Manage Less, Deliver More  Gold Rush is centrally hosted it doesn’t require any  through  Smart  E-Resource  Management’.  With  its  local  server  management  and  interoperates  with  long  history  of  print  subscription  management  in  any  integrated  library  system  (ILS). 
303 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
4.6 hERMIS 
Harrassowitz  E-resources  Management  and  Information Solutions (HERMIS) (http://www.harrassowitz. de/subscription_services/hermis.html)  is  an  ERM  product from Harrassowitz booksellers and subscription  agents.  With  more  than  a  century  of  experience  in  global  print  subscription  market,  Harrassowitz  has  this  electronic  subscription  system  which  has  a  complete  workflow  for  ERM.  Tools  for  Resource  Identification and Evaluation, License Management,  Ordering, Payment, Renewal, Cancellation, Activation  of  e-resources,  Public  access  through  A-Z  listing  and  usage  tracking  are  the  complete  list  of  tools  available in HERMIS ERMS. The HERMIS also has  a technical access management tool for notification  of  uRL  changes  and  notification  of  publisher  of  library  IP  changes. 
4.7  Innovative  Interfaces  ERM 
Innovative Interface (http://www.iii.com/products/ electronic_resource.shtml)  has  a  very  powerful  
4.9  Swetswisee  Source  Manager 
eSource manager (http://www.swets.com/swetswise/ esource-manager) from the stable of Swets Subscription  Services is another commercial ERM solution which  is  highly  successful  amongst  libraries  which  use  Swets  print  subscription  systems.  From  its  years  of  experience  in  print  subscription  management,  Swets  provide  this  e-resource  manager  which  has  a  pre-populated  database  of  standard  publisher  license conditions, which enable libraries to quickly  and  efficiently  search,  view  and  maintain  licenses  for  libraries.  The  thrust  of  eSource  manage  is  to  oversee and maintain the publisher licensing. Coupled  with the library’s acquisition eSource manager is a  handy  tool  to  manage  e-resources. 
4.   c ONcLUSIONS 
While  many  commercial  ERMS  seems  to  be  the  choice  of  bigger  libraries  with  higher  rate  of  procurement  and  consumption  of  e-resources  the  
E-resource  Management  suit  which  integrates  with  
choice of small libraries still linger around the cost  its  millennium  ILS  (WebPac  Pro  and  Encore)  to  
effective open access ERM models and custom made  provide a centralised ERM Solution. Innovative ERM  
spreadsheet  and  linked  lists.  The  effective  ERMS  allows  the  librarian  to  access  all  the  assimilated  
for  any  library  depend  on  the  available  resources  technical as well as administrative details of digital  
they  have.  Since  many  ERM  solutions  provide  resources centrally so that analysis can be achieved  custom-made  knowledge-base  to  work  with  it  is  from  the  data.  Innovative  proposes  that  their  ERM  eminent  that  the  future  ERMS  will  concentrate  on  can  be  used  as  a  standalone  product  also  so  that  choice-based  solutions  streamlined  and  cut  out  for  any  library  which  doesn’t  use  millennium  can  also  individual libraries. This will be highly recommended  benefit  from  their  ERM  solution.  Interestingly  for  for  libraries  which  form  part  of  consortiums  where  libraries  which  need  complete  software  solution  
individual  procurements  are  while  their  bulk  of  for the e-resources, Innovative ERM offers Content  
resources are channeled through the consortium. In  Access Service (CASE) which populates the coverage  
the  end  the  librarians  look  forward  to  ERMS  which  database  with  extensive  information  about  the  
are  cost  effective  and  at  the  same  time  save  lot  
chosen  resources. 
4.8  360  Resource  Manager 
ProQuest Serials Solution’s 360 Resource Manager  (http://www.serialssolutions.com/en/services/360- resource-manager)  is  yet  another  powerful  ERM  system which comes with the caption ‘Control your  resources  to  streamline  workflows  and  optimise  collections’. This is a cost-effective and efficient ERM  solution to track data throughout the ERM life-cycle  to provide more meaning and sense so that it can be  effectively used by the administrators and users. It  makes use of the serials solution’s knowledge works  knowledgebase to track license terms and managing  renewal dates and all the other related workflow of  ERM. Its web-based applications allow the librarian  to  extract  subscription  data  from  documents  and  effectively manage it as spreadsheets. It also helps  to  eliminate  redundant  data  entry  and  streamline  the entire management of e-resources. Its elaborate  modules provide customisable alerts, resource notes  and provide critical solutions of notifying appropriate  personnel  of  trial  and  renewal  dates. 
304 
of  their  time  and  easy  to  manage. 
REFERENcES 
1. Szilvassy,  Judith.  Basic  serials  management  
handbook.  K.G.  Saur,  Munchen,  1996. 2. Skaggs,  Bethany  Latham;  Poe,  Jodi  Welch  
&  Stevens,  Kimberly  Weatherford.  One-stop  
shopping:  A  perspective  on  the  evolution  of  
electronic  resources  management. OCLC  Sys.  
Serv.,  2006, 22(3),  192-206. 
3. Jewell, Timothy D. & Mitchell, Anne. Electronic  
resource  management:  The  quest  for  systems  
and  standards.  The  Serials  Librarian,  2005,  
48(1/2),  137-63. 
4. Liew,  Chern  Li;  Foo,  Schubert  &  Chennupatti,  
K.R.  A  Study  of  graduate  student  end-user’s  
use and perception of electronic journals. Online  
Inf.  Rev., 24(4),  302-15. 
5. Sadeh,  Tamar  &  Ellingsen,  Mark.  Electronic  
resource management systems: The need and the  
realisation. New Library World, 2005, 106(5/6),  
208-18. 

========5========

JOHN  P AuL, et al.: DyNAMICS OF  M ANAGING  E LECTRONIC  R ESOuRCES 
6. Holly yu  &  Breivold,  Scott.  Electronic  resource  
management in libraries: Research and practice.  
IGI  Global, uK,  2008. 
7. Frazier, K. The librarians’ dilemma: Contemplating  
the  costs  of  the  “big  deal”.  D-Lib  Magazine,  
2001,  7(3).  http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march01/ 
frazier/03frazier.html/ 
8. Anderson, Ivy,  et al.  Report of the DLF electronic  
resource  management  initiative:  Appendix  A:  
Functional requirements for electronic resource  
management.  Digital  Library  Federation,  2004.  
http:www.library.cornell.edu/cts/elicensestudy/ 9. http://www.library.cornell.edu/cts/elicensestudy/ 10. Digital  Library  Federation,  Electronic  resource  
management  –  Report  of  the  DLF  Initiative,  
Digital  Library  Federation,  Washington,  DC,   
2004.  http://old.diglib.org/pubs/dlf102/ 11. Stone,  Graham  &  Emery,  Jill.  Can  we  agree  
TERMS?  Shaping  techniques  for  electronic  
resource  management  as  a  model  of  best  
practice. D-Lib  Magazine,  2011, 17. 
12. Collins, Maria. Electronic resource management  
systems (ERMS) review. Serials Review, 2008,  
38,  267-99. 
13. Taylor, Donald; Dodd, Frances & Murphy, James.  
Open-source  electronic  resource  management  
system:  A  collaborative  implementation.  The  
Serials  Librarian,  2010, 58,  61-72. 
305 

========6========

