DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 306-313 
  2013, DESIDOC 
An Overview of Classifcation Technologies  
K.S. Raghavan* and M. Krishnamurthy**  
*Centre for Knowledge Analytics & Ontological Engineering (KanOE)  
PES Institute of Technology, Bangalore-560 059 
E-mail: ksragav@hotmail.com 
**DRTC, Indian Statistical Institute, Bangalore-560 059 
E-mail: krish@isibang.ac.in 
AbsTrACT 
 Knowledge organisation is a sub-discipline of Information Studies and has its roots in Philosophy.  Being application-oriented, it is an area of major interest to librarians, webpage designers, information  architects,  and  semantic  web  community.   The  paper  examines  the  scope  of  ‘knowledge  organisation’  and  its  various  facets.  The  different  approaches  to  knowledge  organisation  are  examined  and  the  requirements in the context of digital environment are highlighted. An overview of the major trends and  
approaches is provided. 
Keywords: Knowledge organisation, library classifcation systems, classifcation technologies 
1.  KNOWLEDGE  OrGANIsATION sYsTEMs 
Knowledge  organisation  is  a  sub-discipline  of  Information  Studies.  It  has  its  roots  in  Philosophy;  however,  for  philosophers,  knowledge  organisation  was primarily an exercise in the logical mapping of  different branches of knowledge. As an application- oriented  discipline,  classification  has  been  a  major  area of interest to librarians at least since the 19th  century;  librarians  were  confronted  with  two  major  tasks: 
• Organising artifacts in the form of printed books,  
and  indexing  performed  not  only  in  libraries,  but  also in archives, databases and similar information  environments  and  institutions.  These  activities  are  carried  out  by  human  indexers  –  members  of  the  LIS  community  or  subject  specialists  –  as  also,  and  increasingly  so  in  recent  years,  by  computers  based  on  algorithms.  Smiraglia1   says:  “Knowledge  organisation  is  devoted  to  the  conceptual  order  of  knowledge.  In  the  broadest  sense  KO  is  the  arena  in  which  the  heuristics  of  ordering  knowledge  are  studied. Specifically, KO is the research community  
pamphlets, and similar knowledge resources on  
devoted to classification and ontology, thesauri and  the  shelves  of  a  library  in  a  logical  sequence  
controlled  vocabulary,  epistemology  and  warrant,  
and applied systems for all of the preceding (often,  
• 
to  support  browsing;  and 
Designing  and  building  catalogues/databases  
especially  in  North  America,  resource  description  
is  also  considered  to  be  a  part  of  KO)”.  Based  to  facilitate  search  and  retrieval  of  library  
on  an  analysis  of  the  domain  of  KO,  Smiraglia  
resources.  
suggests:  “KO  shows  remarkable  coherence  as  a  
Modern  library  classification  can  be  said  research  domain  over  time,  which  is  witnessed  …  to  have  begun  with  the  publication  of  the  first  by  commonality  of  terminology.  The  extension  of  edition  of  Dewey  Decimal  Classification  in  1876  the domain is consistently represented as including  under  the  title,  A  Classification  and  Subject  Index  theoretical  foundations,  such  as  classification  and  for  Cataloguing  and  Arranging  the  Books  and  ontology, and epistemology, which lies at the heart  Pamphlets  of  a  Library.  Henry  E.  Bliss  used  the  of both. The intension is represented by development  term ‘organisation of knowledge’ as early as in 1933  and  testing  of  applications”.  Evidently,  there  is  in his book, ‘Organisation of knowledge in libraries’.  both a theoretical dimension to KO concerned with  The  term  ‘Knowledge  Organisation’  (KO)  is  today  development of principles to serve as the foundations  used  to  designate  a  field  of  study  devoted  to  and  of the domain and a practical dimension concerned  encompassing  document  description,  classification  with the development of tools and technologies for  
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 

========1========

RAgHAVAN AND  K RISHNAMuRTHy: AN  O VERVIEw Of CLASSIfICATION  T ECHNOLOgIES 
KO. Hjorland2  mentions of several approaches and  research  traditions  in  KO,  viz.,  the  facet-analytical  approach,  the  information  retrieval  tradition,  user- oriented and cognitive views, bibliometric approaches  and the domain analytic approach. The principal goal  in all practical applications of KO is and has always  been  to  enhance  the  probability  of  a  user  seeking  information  resources  to  meet  an  information  need  finding the ‘relevant’ resources/ information objects–be  it in a physical library, a digital repository or on the  web.  The  KO  systems  seek  to  support  this  at  the  macro-level by building taxonomy of classes that will  facilitate  browsing  information  objects  themselves  or  their  metadata  records.  At  the  micro-level  KO  systems  support  information  retrieval  by  seeking  to  categorise  information  objects  usually  based  on  their ‘aboutness’ and or some other characteristic(s)  to  support  matching  with  a  query  specifying  an  ‘information  need’  to  judge  ‘relevance’.  The  aim  is  to  help  identify  objects  from  within  a  collection/ corpus  relevant  to  an  information  need  by  means  of  a  user-initiated  query.  In  institutional  repository  (IR)  the  purpose  of  classification  is  to  categorise  information  objects  in  such  a  way  that  we  achieve  acceptable  levels  of  Recall  and  Precision.  
2.  TYPEs   OF  KNOWLEDGE  O rGANIsATION  
sYsTEMs 
A  wide  range  of  tools  could  be  categorised  as  Knowledge  organisation  systems  (KOS).  Hodge3 identified  some  common  characteristics  in  KOS: • The KOS imposes a particular view of the world  
on  a  collection  and  the  items  in  it.  • Same  entity  can  be  characterised  in  different  
ways,  depending  on  the  KOS  that  is  used.  • There  must  be  sufficient  commonality  between  
the concept expressed in a KOS and the real- 
world object to which that concept refers that a  
knowledgeable  person  could  apply  the  system  
with  reasonable  reliability.  Likewise,  a  person  
seeking relevant material by using a KOS must  
be  able  to  connect  his  or  her  concept  with  its  
representation  in  the  system.  
Hodge3  also provided a taxonomy which grouped  KOS into three broad categories: ‘Term lists’, which  emphasise  lists  of  terms  often  with  definitions;  ‘Classifications  and  categories’,  which  emphasise  the creation of subject sets; and ‘Relationship lists’,  which  emphasise  the  connections  between  terms  and  concepts.  
• • • • 
Term  Lists: Authority  files  Glossaries  Dictionaries  Gazetteers  
• • • 
• 
Classifications  and  Categories: 
Subject  headings 
Classification  schemes 
Taxonomies  (According  to  Hodge  are  the  last  tree  terms  often  used  interchangeably)  Categorisation  schemes.  
relationship  Lists: 
• Thesauri  
• Semantic  networks  
• Ontologies  
Linda  Hill4, et  al.  modified  this  list  as: • Classification  and  Categorisation 
– Categorisation  schemes 
– Classification  schemes 
– Lists  of  subject  headings    
– Taxonomies 
• Metadata-like  models 
– Directories  
–   g azetteers:  geo-spatial  dictionaries  of  
places  
• Relationship  Models 
– Ontologies (Concept Spaces):  Specific concept  
models  representing  complex  relationships  
between  objects,  including  the  rules  and  
axioms  missing  from  semantic  networks.    
– Semantic networks: Sets of terms representing  
concepts, modeled as the nodes in a network  
of  variable  relationship  types. 
– Thesauri: Sets of terms representing concepts  
and the hierarchical, equivalence, and associative  
relationships  among  them.  
• Term  Lists 
– Authority  files:  Lists  of  terms  that  are  used  
to control the variant names for an entity or  
the  domain  value  for  a  particular  field.  
– Dictionaries: Alphabetical  lists  of  terms  and  
their  definitions  that  provide  variant  senses  
for  each  term,  where  applicable.    
–   g lossaries: Alphabetical lists of terms, usually  
with  definitions. 
In  a  broad  sense,  KOS  includes  even  such  systems as proprietary coding schemes used by some  electronic health record systems, road classifications  used  by  highway  departments,  classifications  used  by  sports  organisations,  etc.    
This paper is limited in scope to issues related  to  determining  and  representing  the  ‘aboutness’  of  a  resource  whose  principal  constituent  is  text  and  classing  it  on  the  basis  of  its  ‘aboutness’  into  one  or more classes. The paper also does not examine  classification and clustering based on citation practices.  It  also  does  not,  in  any  great  detail,  examine  developments  related  to  theoretical  foundations  of  
307 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
knowledge organisation. A review paper  by Dahlberg  published in ‘Advances in Librarianship’ in 1978, starts  with the section heading ‘Ranganathan started it’. She  quotes a ‘knowledgeable person’ as remarking: ‘No  developments since Ranganathan’! There has been  a  revival  of  interest  in  the  theoretical  foundations  of  knowledge  organisation  in  recent  years  and  a  great  deal  of  work  is  being  done  in  this  area.      
3.  KNOWLEDGE  OrGANIsATION  
APPrOACHEs 
Classification is and has always been ‘purpose- oriented’;  when  applied  to  information  objects  its  purposes  are  mainly  two-fold: At  the  macro-level  it  is  a  taxonomy  or  hierarchy  of  ‘classes’  to  support  browsing metadata records of information objects; or  browsing information objects themselves. Its practical  applications include: Library classification schemes  for arranging books on library shelves; yellow Pages;  Hierarchically-structured web  directories  – yahoo!,  Open  Directory  project  (ODP).  Both  manual  and  machine-based  systems,  tools  and  approaches  have been employed in performing KO tasks. These  include  applying: 
• Library  classification  systems;  semi-automatic  
indexing  systems; 
• Keyword indexing-based on H.P. Luhn’s experiments  
retrieval systems and web search engines; The  
be able to rank the information objects in an order  of  decreasing  relevance  to  the  information  need.  3.1  Traditional  KOs 
There  are  two  main  types  of  traditional  KOS:   (a) Alphabetical  (verbal)  systems,  and  
(b) Classificatory  systems.  
The  principal  difference  between  the  two  is  that  the  latter  use  notations  in  addition  to  verbal  expressions  to  support  arrangement  of  information  objects  on  shelves  or  their  metadata  records  in  a  catalogue. There are also significant differences in  terms of how subjects and their inter-relationships are  displayed in the two. Right from the times of Cutter  and  Dewey  the  relative  merits  and  demerits  of  the  two have been debated. Even the first Aslib-Cranfield  study  sought  to  compare  the  two.  It  is  now  fairly  clear that the two are complimentary; classificatory  schemes  require  alphabetical  indexes  (Dewey’s  ‘Relativ Index’ is perhaps the best example of what  an  alphabetical  index  can  do  to  supplement  and  compliment classificatory structures; Ranganathan’s  ‘Chain  Indexing’  is  based  on  ‘Relativ  Index’  and  achieves the same purpose when applied to indexing  a  classified  catalogue).  Alphabetical  schemes  can  be significantly enhanced by classificatory structures  
widely adopted by bibliographic databases, online  
(the  hierarchical  display  of  the  vocabulary  is  now  
fairly  used  by  many  alphabetical  thesauri  such  as  techniques  coming  under  this  broad  category  
‘MeSH’. All  traditional  KOS  are  artificial  languages  are  being  continuously  refined  to  improve  the  
and differ from natural languages with respect to their  
vocabulary, semantics and grammar. The vocabulary  developments  in  text  processing  and  a  variety  
of  KOS  is  normalised  and  controlled,  and  employs  
terms  with  well-defined  semantics;  in  contrast  it  is  
quality  of  indexing/metadata  extraction  using  
of  statistical  techniques; 
• Pre-publication metadata (based on e.g., Dublin  
Core  or  some  other  schemes)  by  the  author/ 
publisher  to  enable  service  providers  to  more  
accurately  identify  the  class(es)  to  which  a  
resource  belongs.  
whichever  approach  is  adopted  for  classing  and grouping information objects, its adequacy and  value is largely measured by retrieval performance.  The primary objective of the KOS is to help identify  
not uncommon to find synonyms and homographs in  natural languages. Just as natural languages classify  words  into  categories  (parts  of  speech),  KOS  also  categorise terms in their vocabulary. Ranganathan’s  schema  of  fundamental  categories  (preceded  by  Kaiser’s  categories)  carries  this  to  such  an  extent  that  it  became  the  model  for  analytico-synthetic  KOS. following the Ranganathan’s approach several  schemes of categories and associated syntactic rules  
to  an  information  need  defined  by  means  of  a  user-initiated  query.  A  document  is  relevant  if  it  contains  information  of  value  as  seen  by  the  user.  Any  evaluation  campaign  has  a  set  of  criteria  that  generally  fall  into  one  of  two  categories: • Effectiveness  (does  the  system  do  what  it  was  
designed  to  do?);  and  
• Efficiency  (how  fast,  reliable  and  economical  
is  it?) 
The purpose of KO is to categorise information  objects  in  such  a  way  that  we  achieve  acceptable  levels  of  Recall,  Precision  and  response  time  and,  in  today’s  context,  another  major  requirement  is  to  
were  developed  including  those  by  B.C.  Vickery,  objects  from  within  a  collection/corpus  relevant  
g.  Bhattacharyya,  Derek  Austin,  Jason  farradane  
308 
(although  farradane  came  up  with  a  schema  of  categories of syntactic relations (and not categories  of  concepts,  his  approach  is  analytico-synthetic  in  nature),  and  others.  The  British  Classification  Research group (CRg), while adopting Ranganathan’s  technique  of  facet  Analysis  rejected  his  schema  of  categories.  To  them  the  nature  and  number  of  categories  was  more  an  empirical  issue  and  was  largely a function of the discipline. while most KOS  employ  some  synthetic  devices,  those  that  do  not  extensively  employ  syntactic  categories  came  to  be  referred  to  as  enumerative  KOS.  In  terms  of  relationships  expressed,  most  traditional  KOS  are  

========3========

RAgHAVAN AND  K RISHNAMuRTHy: AN  O VERVIEw Of CLASSIfICATION  T ECHNOLOgIES 
restricted  to  expressing  ‘Equivalence’  (Synonymy),  ‘Hierarchical’,  and  ‘Associative  Relations  (Lateral  Relations)’.  Traditional  KOS  continue  to  be  widely  used  especially  in  libraries,  national  bibliographies  and even in many structured bibliographic databases.  what  is  however  important  to  note  is  that  the  processes of building and applying traditional KOS  have  largely  remained  manual  and  will  continue  to  be  so.  In  other  words  these  are  labour  intensive  and  do  not  scale  well.  
Major  traditional  library  classification  schemes  such as uDC, DDC and LCC continue to be widely  used  in  libraries  and  some  bibliographies  and  are  being  regularly  revised.  However,  they  have  not  been  widely  accepted  by  the  digital  world  of  the  web–Most finding aids to web resources, resources  in  digital  repositories,  indexes  to  open  access  resources (Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ),  Open  J-gate,  etc.)  depend  on  keyword  indexing.  The  application  of  universal  general  classification  schemes  such  as  uDC,  DDC  and  LCC  appears  to  be  largely  restricted  to  shelf  arrangement  of  documents on library shelves (or entries in national  bibliographies). In so far as controlled vocabularies  (verbal  indexing  languages)  are  concerned  the  idea  of  a  universal  thesaurus  was  probably  first  suggested by Soergel in the early 1970s. following  trends  can  be  seen: 
• There is a clear move among designers of lists of  
subject headings to move towards making these  
even more to the development of the semantic  
web  (Sw).  Two  levels  of  interoperability  have  
been  recognised  as  applicable  to  thesauri:  
– Presenting data in a standard way to enable  
import  and  use  in  other  systems; 
– Mapping between the terms/concepts of one  
thesaurus  and  those  of  another  to  support  
their  complementary  use.  
3.2  International standards 
ISO 25964 is the new international standard for  thesauri;  part  2  of  this  was  published  as  recently  as  in  March  2013  and  deals  with  interoperability  between  thesauri  and  other  types  of  vocabularies,  including classification schemes, taxonomies, subject  heading  schemes,  name  authority  lists,  ontologies,  terminologies, and synonym rings, more particularly  with the principles and practice of mapping between  them5. These  mappings  need  to  be  prepared  with  care as recommended in ISO 25964 part 2 so as to  ensure that semantic web inferences based on them  do  not  lead  to  misleading  conclusions  to  the web  surfer.  A  major  feature  of  these  guidelines  is  that  they include structural models for mapping, guidelines  on mapping types, and for handling pre-coordination  (which  occurs  especially  in  classification  schemes,  taxonomies  and  subject  heading  schemes).  
4.  CHANGING  CONTEXT  
The emergence of digital resources and resources  
more  thesaurus-like  and  adopt  the  schema  of  
whose principal constituent is not merely text has led  relations widely employed by thesauri (‘Equivalence’,  
to a re-examination of the tasks to be accomplished  
• 
• 
‘Hierarchical’  and  ‘Associative  Relations’); There  is  also  a  move  among  some  thesauri  to  evolve  into  faceted  ‘concept  systems’;  Controlled  vocabularies  in  the  form  of  thesauri  
by  KO.  The  contexts  in  which  KO  tasks  have  to  be performed have also grown and expanded (e.g.  knowledge management in the corporate environment,  e-governance,  e-commerce,  etc.).  Some  KO  tasks  
in  addition  to  the  more  conventional  ones  such  are trying to transform themselves into ontologies  
as  organising  documents  on  library  shelves  in  the  with  a  view  to  be  able  to  not  only  express  
present  day  context  are: 
• 
more adequately the relations between concepts  (than  is  possible  using  the  BT,  NT,  and  RT  
• types  used  in  conventional  thesauri),  but  also  support  machine  manipulation  based  on  rules  of  logical  reasoning.  
There are also attempts to integrate vocabularies  in  a  field;  perhaps  the  best  example  of  this  is  the uMLS, which is an effort to integrate major  vocabularies  in  the  field  of  medicine;  In  more  recent  times  efforts  along  this  direction  have  taken  the  form  of  building  ‘crosswalks’  among  vocabularies  and  metadata  schema.  An  issue  that  has  come  to  occupy  importance  in  recent  years is that of Interoperability.  Interoperability is  defined as the ability of two or more systems or  components to exchange information and to use  the information that has been exchanged. It has  been recognised that this ability is basic to the  effective functioning of information networks, and  
Classification of e-mails into classes, (e.g. spam  
and  non-spam) 
• Detecting a document’s encoding (ASCII, Unicode  
uTf-8  etc.)  and  categorising  them  on  that  
basis  
• Identifying  the  language  of  a  document • Ranking  retrieved  documents  (could  be  based  
on  a  document  classifier) 
• Classifying webpages–personal home page, etc.  
(genre) 
• Extracting  metadata  from  textual  e-resources. 
Even by the middle of the 20th  century, following  the  beginning  of  information  explosion  search  was  on  for  automated  systems  capable  of  indexing  large  volumes  of  information.  H.P.  Luhn’s  Keyword  Indexing could be seen as an effort in this direction.  The  simplicity  of  its  approach  and  its  ability  to  
309 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
handle  and  process  very  large  volumes  of  textual  information  made  the  system  acceptable  in  a  wide  range of information environments, particularly large  bibliographic  databases,  indexing  and  abstracting  services.  Several  different  sub-species  of  keyword  indexing came to be developed and today keyword  indexes are widely accepted despite their limitations  in effective information retrieval. The advent of world  wide  web  and  the  digital  world  have  thrown  up  many  newftable  challenges.  Information  retrieval  today  is  characterised  by:  
• Scale  at  which  it  has  to  operate; 
• Range of material/resources from which to recall  
needed information–scholarly material, e-mails,  
balance sheets, hospital patient records, crime  
records,  images,  multimedia,  etc. 
• Operational  space  of  IR–Institutional,  domain- 
specific  or  genre-specific  search 
As such today’s knowledge organisation involves  indexing  issues  that  support:  
• Building  systems  that  work  effectively  and  
efficiently  at  this  scale;  and  
• Handling the extremely broad range of document  
types 
The impact has also been on traditional libraries  as  pointed  out  by  Hjorland6:  
• There is a great deal of dependence on centralised  
agencies;  many  libraries  rely  on  classification  
codes supplied, e.g., Library of Congress, rather  
than  doing  original  classification  in  so  far  as  
their  book  collections  are  concerned; • Many library directors expect that, in the future,  
being  conducted  by google)  may  enable  full  
content. for  this  reason,  they  may  consider  
recognised  for  quite  sometime.  let  us  re-state  our  problem  and  requirements  and  illustrate  these  by  means  of  a  couple  of  examples.  The  amount  of  data available online has grown and we need to be  able  to  search  large-sized  collections  in  the  order  of  billions  to  trillions  of  words.  There  is  a  need  of  more  flexible  matching  (with  query)  facilities;  e.g.,  to  be  able  to  search  for  texts  in  which  the  word  ‘INfORMATION’ is near the word ‘RETRIEVAL’ and  to  be  able  to  define  ‘nearness’  according  to  our  requirements.  In  view  of  the  volume  of  data,  it  is  important to have a ranked output (Decreasing degree  of  relevance  to  the  query).  In  other  words,  a  KOS  that  is  capable  of  informing  which  of  the  retrieved  documents  are  more  relevant.  Some  examples  for  the  same  are: 
• The size of ‘Shakespeare’s Collected Works’ is  
about  one  million  words  of  text. going  through  
the  entire  text  to  retrieve  relevant  paragraphs  
could  be  effective,  but  it  is  time  consuming;  • ‘Reuters Corpus’, vol. 1 released on 3 November  
2000 contains about 810,000 English Language  
news stories (1996-08-20 to 1997-08-19) requiring  
about 2.5 gB for storage of the uncompressed  
files; 
• ‘Reuters Corpus’, vol. 2 - a multilingual corpus  
released  on  31  March  2005  and  distributed  on  
one  CD  contains  nearly  half  million  Reuters  
news  stories  in  13  languages  (Dutch, french,  
german, Chinese, Japanese, Russian, Portuguese,  
Spanish, Latin American Spanish, Italian, Danish,  
Norwegian,  and  Swedish)  (covering  the  period  
1996-08-20  to  1997-08-19) 
The task of organising knowledge contained in  
large  scanning  projects  (such  as  that  which  is  
such  resources  to  facilitate  their  effective  retrieval  text  searches  to  be  carried  out  of  all  available  
is  gigantic  if  it  were  to  be  carried  out  manually.  
The approach to classification has to be necessarily  it  a  waste  of  resources  to  classify  or  index  
machine-based.  The  most  elementary  approach,  
also employed by many of the web search engines,  
• 
books;    
Libraries have also come to rely on user tagging  
would  be  to  consider  every  word  (every  Keyword)  
and  classification;  and  
• Users  mostly  find  the  books  they  need  using  
tools other than the library online public access  
catalog  (OPAC);  Even  the  2010  OCLC  survey  
of users’  Perception  of  Libraries  confirms  this  
finding7.    
All  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  traditional  KOS  have become irrelevant in the present-day context. It  is only to suggest that they have limitations in terms  of the space/information environments within which  they  can  operate  and  be  effectively  employed;  we  need to look for more scalable KOS to complement  traditional  KOS  for  the  digital  environment.  This  is  not something entirely new and the need has been  
and may perhaps expect that this will somehow  
in  a  document  as  defining  a  class  to  which  the  act  as  a  substitute  for  professional  indexing  
document belongs and build a huge term-document  
matrix  as  below:  
310 
Table 1. Document-term matrix 
         Document D1 D2 D3 Term 
T1 1 0 0 T2 0 0 0 T3 1 0 0 Tn 0 0 1 
Dn 
0 1 1 0 
while  this  is  not  a  very  effective  or  efficient  method  of  classification,  it  proved  adequate  for  creating document classes (subsets of documents in  a corpus) matching an information need expressed  using Boolean operators as the Boolean model merely  

========5========

RAgHAVAN AND  K RISHNAMuRTHy: AN  O VERVIEw Of CLASSIfICATION  T ECHNOLOgIES 
views  a  document  as  a  set  of  words;  A  document  class matching an information need is formed using  Boolean operators – AND, OR, NOT.  However, the  limitations  of  such  an  approach  to  classification  were realised quite early and refinements followed.  Let  us  consider  a  realistic  situation  of  a  corpus  of  100000  documents  requiring  classification  to  support retrieval. If each document, on an average,  is  1000  words  long  and  there  are  100000  unique  words in the corpus, the term-document matrix will  have  10  billion  ‘0s’  and  ‘1s’;  the  ‘1s’  will  probably  be  less  than  10  %  of  this  with  over  90  %  of  the  cells  in  the  matrix  being  ‘0s’;  A  more  efficient  approach  is  to  record  only  the  ‘1s’  which  is  what  an  inverted  file  or  back  of  the  book  index  (with  terms arranged alphabetically) does, a classificatory  approach  extensively  used  in  today’s  database  management  systems.  This  still  left  unsolved  the  problem of ‘dodging’ irrelevant documents, a problem  frequently  faced  while  using  web  search  engines.  The  problems  could  be  traced  to: 
• Issues  arising  out  of  the  very  broad  definition  
• To  be  able  to  attach  weights  to  keywords  
extracted from documents to support ranking of  
retrieved  documents  in  contrast  with  Boolean  
logic  that  resulted  in  a  binary  classification  of  
documents  (those  that  are  relevant  and  those  
that  are  not). 
while the extended Boolean operators have been  in use by major commercial information providers /  databases, many did not support ranking of retrieved  documents based on term weight. Indexing requirements  since  the  arrival  of  the web  have  changed  in  view  of  the  volume  and  variety  of  data  to  be  handled  in  web indexing. web is multilingual. An essential step  in  full-text  indexing  is  the  process  of  tokenisation;  and  tokenisation  is  language-specific.  
The  above  sequence  of  Chinese  characters  if  read as one word mean a monk and as a sequence  
of two words mean ‘and’& ‘still’. The number of index  of  Keyword  (Any  word  that  is  not  in  the  stop  
terms that need to be inverted is the principal issue  
• 
list  is  a  Keyword); 
The  severe  limitations  of  the  Boolean  ‘AND’  in  
in  any  language  text.  It  has  been  shown  that  with  good processing technologies for stemming and case  
adequately  expressing  the  relations  between  
folding, it is possible to reduce the number of words  
concepts/terms (both in a documentary resource  and  in  a  query)  
addressing  the  two  issues  identified  above.  
to be indexed. In a language that is morphologically  richer the reduction could be substantial. However,  
related to more clearly defining the relations between  concepts  in  a  given  context.    Jason farradane’s  Relational Indexing is probably the most expressive  
Some new approaches explored were aimed at  
parts  of  speech  taggers,  stemming  algorithms,  
etc  are  yet  to  be  developed  fully  for  many  of  the  
Analytico-synthetic classifications did provide an  
languages  of  the  world.  There  are  also  cases  of  appropriate  and  useful  approach  to  the  problems  
tokens,  which  have  specific  meaning  in  certain  
domains  (e.g.,  C++,  IR  8,  B52,  etc.).  
4.1  Text  Classification  
given a set of pre-defined classes, text classification  
of  all  the  relational  indexing  systems  in  terms  of  
its  ability  to  explicitly  and  clearly  specify  relations document belongs, Basically the following two kinds  
is  essentially  determining  the  classes  to  which  a  
between concepts. However, recognising that application  of  traditional  KOS  in  the  digital  environment  is  an  expensive  proposition,  the  focus  in  research  has  been  on  further  refining  and  extending  Boolean  ‘AND’  and  ‘OR’,  and  on  improving  the  quality  of  keyword  identification  and  extraction.  Proximity  operators  and  field-specific  searches  have  been  introduced to further refine the  ‘AND’ operator and  Truncation  for  string  searching.  These  to  a  certain  extent helped in restricting/widening (depending on  the  need)  the  class  of  documents  to  be  retrieved.  There  were  also  several  experiments  aimed  at  implementing  processes  that  helped  refine  the  definition  of  keywords: 
• To restrict the words to be inverted while indexing  
full  texts  or  texts  of  abstracts,  etc.; 
• To make machines understand which phrases to  
be accepted as classes (Third world, Developing  
Countries,  etc.);  
of  technologies  are  in  use: 
(a) Supervised  learning  in  which  classes  are  
distinguished  by  word  patterns: 
An  example  can  be  that  the  documents  in  the  class China tend to have high values on dimensions  like  Chinese,  Beijing,  Shanghai  and  Mao Tse Tung  whereas documents in the class India tend to have high  values for New Delhi, gandhi and Mumbai. Enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  classifiers  has  been  the  main  focus  of  research  and  a  range  of  new  techniques  (support  vector  machines,  neural  networks,  etc.)  has  been  developed. 
(b)  Clustering:  
Algorithms  that  group  a  set  of  documents  into  subsets  or  clusters  that  are  coherent;  Documents  in a cluster should be as similar to one another as  possible. The assumption in class formation based  on clustering is that documents in the same cluster  
311 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
behave similarly in terms of relevance to information  needs. Clusty (www.clusty.com) employs Clustering  to  support  retrieval.  
In  what  has  been  presented  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  we  have  considered  a  document  as  a  set or sequence of terms. Many textual documents,  in addition, also have a structure; for example, they  carry  metadata;  names  of  authors,  title,  table  of  contents, date, abstract, format, etc; building indexes  using  these  parameters  (or  zones)  is  referred  to  as  parametric  and  zone  indexes.  The  approach  is  essentially  to  build  indexes  by  treating  each  field/ zone  as  either  a  part  of  the  term  (dictionary)  or  posting. weights could be attached to extracted terms  based  on  the  field  in  which  the  term  occurs.  
5. CONCLUsIONs 
In  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  mechanisms  that  have the aim of arriving at a better representation of  a document’s aboutness have been looked. Enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  classifiers  has  been  the  main  focus  of  research  and  a  range  of  new  techniques  (Support  Vector  Machines,  Neural  Networks,  etc)  has  been  developed..  There  are  also  technologies  that  help  enhance  queries;  some  global  methods  are  discussed  in  the  literature;  a  mention  of  these  is  appropriate  here  primarily  because  they  make  use  of  classificatory  tools.  Some  of  the  widely  employed  technologies  are: 
• Suggesting  related  queries  (by  search  
engines); 
• Relevance  feedback;  marking  the  relevant  
documents  in  the  initial  set  and  using  this  to  
reformulate  the  query;  and 
• Using lexical tools for query expansion/reformulation  
(e.g.  thesaurus  or wordNet) 
There has also been Research on genre identification  that  could  enhance  IR  effectiveness  in  the  context  of web.  Typical  examples  of  genre  include: 
• Homepages 
• Catalogue 
• Article/paper 
• News 
Another  important  area  that  has  been  given  considerable attention in recent years is to explore  how  existing  KOS  could  be  employed  and  made  us  of  in  the  web  environment,  faceted  navigation  has  been  recognised  as  an  effective  way  forward  by information architects and web designers. There  have  also  been  efforts  at  porting  KOS  to  web  (Semantic web?). The SKOS has been designed to  provide  a  low  cost  migration  path.  It  also  provides  a conceptual modeling language for developing and  sharing  new  KOS.  It  can  be  used  on  its  own,  or  in combination with more formal languages like the  
312 
web ontology language (OwL). The role of SKOS is  to bring the worlds of library classification and web  technology together. Automatic classification based  on  supervised  methods  appears  to  perform  better.  However,  availability  of  large  training  corpora  for  different domains, different languages, and different  classificatory  tasks  is  a  major  issue. for  example,  in  the  area  of wSD  (word  Sense  Disambiguation),  it  has  been  estimated  that  to  achieve  reasonable  levels of accuracy one needs about 3.2 million sense- tagged  words.  The  human  effort  for  constructing  such  a  training  corpus  has  been  estimated  to  be  27  man-years!  A  significant  portion  of  the  work  is  in  experimental  stage  and  several  approaches  are  being experimented with. when tools and applications  are designed to work focused, on a specific domain  of  interest,  the  results  appear  to  be  better. figure  1  presents  an  overview  of  the  various  approaches  to  text  classification  vis-à-vis  the  cost  and  degree  of  automation  that  can  be  achieved. 
Figure 1. Approaches to text classifcation. 
One thing that is certain is that automation will  continue to make significant advances. while more and  more intelligent search engines are being developed,  it is important to clearly identify which of the tasks  in  KO  are  amenable  for  automation  and  which  are  not. The success of attempts to automatically class  documents will undoubtedly depend upon developments  in  text-processing  technologies,  establishing  links  between  lexical  tools  and  controlled  vocabularies.  That  significant  enhancements  could  be  made  to  information retrieval by linking thesauri with lexical  tools  has  been  demonstrated  and  explained  in  a  few  recent  papers8-11. 
rEFErENCEs 
1. Smiraglia,  Richard  P.  universes,  dimensions,  
domains, intensions and extensions: Knowledge  
organisation for the 21st  century.  In Categories,  
contexts and relations in knowledge organisation,   
edited by A. Neelameghan and K.S. Raghavan.  
Ergon  Verlag,  wurzburg,  2012.  

========7========

RAgHAVAN AND  K RISHNAMuRTHy: AN  O VERVIEw Of CLASSIfICATION  T ECHNOLOgIES 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Hjørland, B. facet analysis: The logical approach to  knowledge organization. Inf. Process. Manag. ,  2012.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2012.10.001/. Hodge, g.  Systems  of  knowledge  organisation  for digital libraries: Beyond traditional authority  files.  The  Council  on  Library  and  Information  Resources,  Washington  DC,  2000.  http://www. clir.org/pubs/reports/pub91/contents.html/. Hill, L.L.;  et al . Integration of knowledge organisation  systems into digital library architectures: Position  paper. In  Advances  in  Classification  Research,  edited by J.E. Mai;  et al . Proceedings of the 13 
th ASIST SIG/CR Workshop on  Reconceptutalizing  Classification Research. Philadelphia, PA, 2002,  pp.  62-68.  http://alexandria.sdc.ucsb.edu/~lhill/ paper_drafts/KOSpaper7-2-final.doc 
http://www.oclc.org/reports/2010perceptions/20 10perceptions_all.pdf/. 
Birger Hjørland. Is classification necessary after  google? J.  Doc. ,  2012, 68(3),  299-317. 
http://www.oclc.org/reports/2010perceptions/20 10perceptions_all.pdf/. 
Neelameghan, A. & Raghavan, K.S. A knowledge  organizing system for humanistic disciplines with  
enhanced capabilities: Case studies. Information  
Studies,  2009,  15(2),  75-94.  
9. Neelameghan, A. & Raghavan, K.S. Relationships  
in multi-lingual thesauri in humanities: Issues and  
case study. In  Libraries and information systems:  
from Alexandrian heritage to social networking,  
Essays  in  honour  of  Prof.  S.  Parthasarathy  
edited  by  K.S.  Raghavan  &  K.N.  Prasad.  Ess  
Ess  Publications,  New  Delhi,  2009,  318-40. 10. Raghavan, K.S. & Neelameghan, A. A bilingual  
information retrieval thesaurus: Design and value  
addition  with  online  lexical  tools.  In   ICADL- 
2008: Digital Libraries: universal and ubiquitous  
Access to Information, edited by g. Buchanan,  
M. Masoodian & S.J. Cunningham. LNCS 5362.  
Springer  Verlag,  Berlin,  2008,  pp.  408-09. 11. Raghavan,  K.S.  &  Neelameghan,  A.  Design  
and  development  of  a  bilingual  thesaurus  for  
classical Tamil studies: Experiences and issues.  
In  Culture and Identity in knowledge organization,  
edited  by  Clement Arsenault  &  Joseph  Tennis.  
Proceedings  of  the  Tenth  ISKO  International  
Conference,  5-8 August  2008,  Montreal,  Ergon  
Verlag,  wurzburg,  germany,  2008,  pp.  70-76.  
313 

========8========

