DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 343-351  
  2013, DESIDOC 
DRDO Knowledge Repository 
Anil Kumar Singh and Sumati Sharma 
Defence Scientifc Information and Documentation Centre (DESIDOC), Delhi-100 054  
E-mail: aksinghto@gmail.com, sumati_s@yahoo.com 
ABSTRACT 
This  paper  deals  with  knowledge  management  and  its  need  and  beneft  to  R&D  organisation.  It  describe the importance of standard format or guidelines for writing and assigning uniform numbers to  technical  reports  in  DRDO.  It  Ddiscusses  in  detail  the  establishment  of  DRDO  Knowledge  Repository  (KR). Main emphasis has been given on how to use DSpace as open source software, scope of work in  DRDO KR, installation and customisation of input data feld, metadata creation, and uploading.  
Keywords: Knowledge management, DSpace, knowledge repository, report writing 
1. INTRODUCTION  
The main objective of any R&D organisation is  to conduct research in its area of work and design  and develop products based on the demand of the  users. People involved in the R&D gaine experiences  and  their  tactic  knowledge  also  gets  enriched.  So,  main driving force in any R&D organisation is people  and  their  knowledge.  Organisations  need  to  utilise  this knowledge in the most efficient way because it  is a fundamental resource that allows us to function  intelligently. On the other side, the tremendous growth  of information and communication technologies has  made  the  organisations  to  continuously  strive  to  improve  their  knowledge  and  overall  performance.  After  the  information  explosion  through  internet,  organisations have become more conscious towards  information management and now they are evolving  as  knowledge  organisations. 
As knowledge becomes the key strategic asset  for  organisations,  they  start  thinking  to  invest  in  creating, storing, and implementing the best knowledge  networks, processes, methods, tools and technologies  in  the  form  of  knowledge  management.  This  will  enable  them  to  learn,  create  new  knowledge,  and  apply the best knowledge much faster. The complete  knowledge  management  in  any  R&D  organisation  is  a  systematic  process  by  which  knowledge  is  created,  captured,  stored,  shared,  and  leveraged  as  follows:      
• Creation: Knowledge is created in R&D organisation  
by gathering some data through experimentation,  
any R&D work, improving existing work, running  
Received 21 November 2012, online published 22 July 2013 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
day  to  day  work,  etc. The  R&D  in  organisation  generates  millions  of  data/information.  
Capture: Creators of knowledge are not aware of this  and valuable information/knowledge may therefore  be  lost. To  prevent  this  information/knowledge,  one  needs  to  capture  this  knowledge. 
Storage: Once knowledge is captured, organisation  and  its  people  are  aware  of  its  existence.  If  the  captured  knowledge  is  relevant  then  it  has  to  be  stored,  so  that  it  can  be  used  by  those  who  need  it  in  the  organisation. 
Sharing  and  Application:  After  knowledge  is  properly  documented  and  stored,  it’s  needed  to  be  shared  and  applied.  This  is  the  most  important  task  in  the  knowledge  management.  It  is  not  enough  to  install  and  fill  a  knowledge  repository  (KR)  and  expect  the  organisation  to  suddenly  start  sharing  knowledge.  Particular  attention should be paid to building a knowledge  sharing  culture  in  the  organisation. 
Technology: Technology can only play a supporting  role  in  knowledge  sharing  and  application.  It  can  make  knowledge  sharing  more  effective  and  easier.  Intranets  have  emerged  as  one  of  the  most  effective  ways  of  sharing  information  and  knowledge  within  R&D  organisation. 
Innovation:  Successful  as  well  as  effective  knowledge sharing and application also stimulates  innovation,  improvement  in  existing  knowledge  and creation of new knowledge. This essentially  closes  the  knowledge  cycle. 

========1========

SINgh AND ShARMA: DRDO KNOwLEDgE  R EPOSITORy 
2.    NEED  AND  BENEFIT  OF  KNOWLEDGE  
REPOSITORY  
The R&D organisation house treasures of knowledge  that  have  been  hidden  in  archives,  almirahs,  print  formats,  and  a  variety  of  storage  media.  These  treasures  include  scientific,  technological,  cultural,  artistic and historical materials generally unavailable  to  searchers  and  the  public. This  makes  access  to  these information/ knowledge content very difficult.  The organisation ends up having tons of information/ knowledge content stored but not used. Organisations  need  to  gather  and  organise  all  the  information  that  they  need  to  know  for  their  survival  and  then  pool  the  captured  information  at  a  common  place  as  a  repository.  This  type  of  repository  is  often  known as institutional or knowledge repository which  offers  solutions  to  such  type  of  problems.  Such  an  organisational  information  repository  becomes  knowledge  repository  when  it  is  analysed,  adapted  and  used  effectively  for  the  organisational  end.  
having readily accessible, well organised centrally  located digital information in the form of KR can be  a tremendous asset for any R&D organisation. The  primary benefit of knowledge or institutional repository  is that it will enhance intellectual quality, reputation  and visibility of the organisation. Institutional manager  can  develop  procedure  for  using  the  repository  to  answer  question  such  as: 
• What result institution gets for the money which  
was  put  for  R&D  projects? 
• What  is  being  published  from  this  institution? • Who  is  producing  what? 
• Where  is  the  upward  and  downward  trend? • How  much  collaborative  work  is  being  done  
and  with  whom? 
In  nutshell  one  can  say  that  KR  benefits  are  for: 
• Contributors,  because  their  articles  are  cited  
more 
• Organisation,  because  documents  produced  
Knowledge Repository and has presently undertaken  this  pilot  project.  This  paper  discusses  some  of  the details of the initiative taken by the Knowledge  Management  Division  of  the  DESIDOC. 
3.    DRDO  KNOWLEDGE  REPOSITORY  
DRDO Knowledge Repository is a computerised  system that systematically collects, digitise, preserve,  and  disseminate  in  digital  form,  the  intellectual  output  of  DRDO.  The  focus  of  this  knowledge  repository  is  on  collecting,  digitising,  organising  knowledge  generated  by  the  DRDO  laboratories  across  India  in  the  form  of  various  types  of  R&D  reports. R&D reports are the primary and vital source  of  information  about  current  or  projected  research.  These  reports  contain  valuable  information  and  form  the  intellectual  capital  of  DRDO  which  helps  in  achieving  organisation’s  goal  and  also  acts  as  a  catalyst  for  organisation  change.  
3.1 Need  and  Purpose    
In an increasingly competitive and volatile world,  the  ability  to  share  knowledge  is  a  prerequisite  for  successful  growth,  especially  for  organisation  like  DRDO  that  prize  intellectual  capital  as  one  of  their  most  valuable  assets.  Today  DRDO  with  52  laboratories  across  India  is  engaged  in  developing  defence  technologies  covering  various  disciplines  like  aeronautics,  armaments,  electronics,  combat  vehicles,  naval  systems,  life  sciences,  training,  information  systems,  and  agriculture.  A  number  of  projects  are  taken  up  by  these  laboratories  for  carrying out R&D in these areas. As a result of this,  a  large  number  of  R&D  reports  are  generated  by  these  laboratories.  Apart  from  DRDO  laboratories,  the  Technical  Directorates,  and  Research  Boards  of  DRDO  also  generates  considerable  number  of  reports and publications through sponsored research.  A variety of reports like design report, project report,  technical  report,  feasibility  report,  progress  report,  field  test  report,  project  proposal  report,  validation  report,  trial  report,  technical  memorandum,  review  
report, research report, technical specification, interim  by  the  organisation  is  available  at  one  place,  
report, annual reports, special publications, etc. are  reflecting  the  intellectual  achievement  of  the  
brought  out  and  are  distributed  to  limited  extent. 
• 
organisation 
Users,  because  documents  in  an  institutional  
Earlier  there  was  no  centralised  mechanism  to  collate, index, provide access to and retrieve a report  
repository  can  be  found  through  a  search  when  needed  at  a  later  date.  Also,  no  standard  
engine. 
Many  organisations  have  realised  the  value  of  institutional  knowledge  and  already  initiated  knowledge  management  systems  that  collect,  store,  redistribute,  utilise  and  ultimately  leverage  the  institutional  knowledge  for  the  benefit  of  the  organisation1.  R&D  institution  like  DRDO  also  felt  the need to develop knowledge repository. Keeping  this in view, DESIDOC has planned to create DRDO  
format  was  followed  and  it  was  not  uncommon  to  find  different  formats  and  styles  in  reports  brought  by  different  Projects/Directorates  or  Divisions  in  the  same  laboratory.  Further,  there  was  no  unique  report  number,  as  in  the  case  of  NTIS  reports,  to  locate  and  retrieve  the  report  when  needed. 
Keeping this in view, Defence Research Council  tasked DESIDOC to devise a mechanism to collect,  collate, index, and digitise the unclassified/restricted  
344 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4,  JULY  2013 
reports  and  provide  access  to  them  on  DRDO  intranet.  The  main  objective  was  to  strengthen  the  knowledge-base  of  DRDO  with  uniform  style  and  procedures comparable to the international programs  for  report  documentation  like  NTIS,  NASA,  RAND,  etc. Accordingly, it was strongly proposed to create  a DRDO Knowledge Repository of technical reports  and  to  maintain  a  copy  each  of  the  unclassified  and  restricted  reports  at  DESIDOC. 
4.    GUIDELINES  FOR  WRITING  AND  
ASSIGNING  UNIFORM  NUMBERS  TO  
TECHNICAL  REPORTS  IN  DRDO 
In  DRDO,  there  was  a  need  to  have  standard  procedure  or  specification  for  writing  reports  and  assigning  appropriate  report  numbers  for  various  types  of  reports  generated  in  DRDO  laboratories2.  It could  reduce the variation in the format, style of  presentation, design, treatment, and categorisation  in  reports  being  brought  out  by  large  laboratories  and  where  a  number  of  projects  are  running,  each  one  of  them  brings  out  its  reports  with  varying  styles  and  formats. This  led  to  non-uniformity,  lack  of  identity,  as  well  as  difficulties  in  timely  retrieval  of  required  reports.  DESIDOC  entailed  to  design  a  suitable  numbering  and  control  mechanism  for  the technical reports in accordance with the Indian  Standard. 
This  guideline  includes  the  following: • Technical  reports  and  their  types 
• writing  of  technical  reports 
• Assigning standard numbers for DRDO technical  
reports  with  examples 
Figure 1. Guidelines for writing uniform numbers. 
345 
• Guidelines  for  completion  of  bibliographic  
description  sheet,  and 
• Points  to  be  considered  while  preparing  a  
technical  report 
The  purpose  of  this  guideline  (Fig.  1)  is  to  provide a uniform format for writing technical reports  and to enable DRDO Laboratories to assign uniform  report  number  to  the  reports  generated  in  their  laboratory2.  This  would  lead  to  compatibility  in  the  report numbers assigned by the DRDO Laboratories  so that the Technical Information Resource Centers  and other technical report users are able to identify,  locate,  and  organise  report  literature  according  to  a  consistent  and  accepted  pattern. 
5.    ESTABLISHMENT  OF  DRDO  KNOWLEDGE  
REPOSITORY      
while  establishing  any  repository,  institution  has  to  make  lot  of  decisions.  Policies,  system  architecture,  and  other  elements  will  depend  on  institutional  context  and  the  scope  and  purpose  of  the  repository.  Some  of  the  important  key  issues  considered  while  developing  DRDO  Knowledge  Repository  are: 
5.1  Organisation  Culture 
Organisation  culture  depends  on  how  the  organisation is structured. DRDO hQRs is situated  in New Delhi and 52 laboratories are situated across  India.  Coordinating  with  all  the  laboratories  was  a  tough  task.  It  was  decided  that  with  a  central  repository at DESIDOC, all the laboratories need to  be convinced that contributing to a central repository  will enhance their reputation in their disciplines and  result  in  wider  dissemination  of  their  work. 
5.2 Scope 
Repository  must  decide  early  on  purpose  and  scope and communicate them to all the laboratories.  It  was  decided  to  have  four  digitisation  centres  to  cover  all  DRDO  Labs  across  India  viz.  Delhi,  Bengaluru,  Pune,  hyderabad  region.  
5.3 Content  
Decision  making  on  content  can  become  a  tedious issue. Criteria for deposit into the repository  could come from each community or from a central  body with input from the users. Type of documents  to  be  included  in  the  repository  is  to  be  decided.  DRDO  Knowledge  Repository  includes  all  types  of  unclassified  and  restricted  R&D  reports  published  from  DRDO  laboratories.  
5.4 Access 
Accessibility of repository on internet or intranet  is  to  be  decided  early  on.  Knowledge  created  

========3========

SINgh AND ShARMA: DRDO KNOwLEDgE  R EPOSITORy 
by  DRDO  in  the  form  of  R&D  reports  must  be  shared on DRDO intranet server. Accordingly it was  decided to upload DRDO KR database on DRONA  (DRDO Rapid On-line Network Access). Submission  and  access  rights  have  been  given  to  all  DRDO  laboratories and DRDO hQrs. Administration power  remains  with  the  DESIDOC. 
5.5 Standards  and  Software 
Institutional repository employ standards developed  to handle issues associated with open access. These  standards include OAIS (Open Archival Information  Systems), OAI-PMh  (Open Archives Initiative Protocol  for Metadata harvesting), METS (Metadata Encoding  and  Transmission  Standards). 
Software is the key element in the construction  of  any  repository.  There  are  number  of  software  options  available  when  setting  up  an  institutional  repository e.g., ePrints, DSpace, Fedora, greenstone  Digital  Library  Software,  etc.  These  are  all  open  source  softwares.  Some  proprietary  softwares  are  also  available  in  the  market.  There  are  pros  and  cons to both proprietary and open source platforms.  Although  setting  up  the  repository  is  fairly  quick  and  easy  on  a  proprietary  platform,  it  can  be  very  expensive  to  pay  annual  fees  for  hosting  and  using  the  service.  For  the  open  source  software,  it  may  appear  to  be  ‘free’,  however,  installing  and  customising  the  repository  can  be  very  time  consuming and these solutions often lack technical  and development support. There is no uniform rule  for  choosing  a  platform.  It  depends  on  what  the  organisation  wants  to  achieve. 
5.6 Legal Aspects 
Organisation  responsible  for  operating  and  maintaining repository need to ensure that all legal  requirements  are  met.  These  requirements  include  appropriate software, content licenses, and intellectual  property  rights. 
5.7 Maintenance 
 Maintenance is the key issue that involves long- term  commitment  by  the  organisation. A  repository  cannot  run  by  itself.  It  needs  constant  attention,  maintenance  of  contents,  backups  etc.  Staff  in  maintenance  needs  to  know  the  consequences  of  changes in hardware, software, and standards and  be  able  to  adjust  accordingly. 
6.    USE  OF  DSPACE   AS  CHOSEN  SOFTWARE  
For DRDO KR DSpace software was identified,  installed  and  tested  because  of  several  reasons3: • DSpace  is  a  Java-based  system  developed  by  
MIT  and hP  labs 
• Uses highly scalable Postgre SQL as the database  
back-end 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
It  offers  a  communities-collections  model  and  has built-in submission workflows and long-term  preservation  function 
Compliance  with  standards  and  protocols  like  DC,  OAI-PMH,  UNICODE,  etc. 
It  uses  Lucene  search  engine  which  offers  decent  search  capability  
Intuitive way of self archiving. Capable of archiving  digital  items  in  various  formats 
Flexible  for  data  migration  
Uses  widely  accepted  metadata  scheme 
Offer customisation facility which did not involve  much  programming 
Majority of the repositories worldwide are created  using  the  DSpace  platform 
6.1 Installation  of  DSpace 
After taking the decision to use DSpace , the first  challenge faced was the installation. DSpace runs on  Postgre SQL and requires server installation. Although  DSpace  runs  on  a  variety  of  operating  systems  it  was decided to purchase Red hat enterprise Linux  after  some  testing  because  it  is  the  recommended  OS for DSpace. During installation some difficulties  were  noticed,  later  on  it  was  rectified  and  DSpace  was  successfully  installed4.  
6.2 Customisation  of  DSpace 
To  get  the  desired  customisation  according  to  need  of  DRDO  KR  necessary  changes  were  made  in  DSpace  by  using  DSpace.Cfg  and  trying  other  facilities  like  Manakin  etc.  Manakin  (XMLUI)  is  a  web-based,  XML  driven  user  interface  to  DSpace  that  introduces  modular  interface  layer,  enabling  an  institution  to  easily  customise  the  interface  according  to  the  specific  needs  of  the  particular  repository5. home-page of DRDO KR was designed  (as shown in Fig. 2). Two communities were created  (as  shown  in  Fig.  3): 
Figure 2. Home page of DRDO Knowledge Repository. 
346 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4,  JULY  2013 
(a) DRDO hQrs 
(b) DRDO  Labs/Estt 
Under  DRDO  HQrs  three  sub  communities  were  created: 
• Defence  Science  Organisation 
• Research  Boards 
• Technical  Directorates 
Figure 3. Communities in DRDO Knowledge Repository. 
6.3 Customisation  of  Input  Data  Fields    
Figure 4. Customisation of metadata input sheet. 
6.4 Standardisation  of  Data  using  Authority  
Files    
Data  inputted  in  metadata  entry  forms  were  standardised wherever it was possible and necessary5.  Rendering  of  data  in  the  fields  like  author,  title,  corporate names, sponsor, etc. were standardised by  using AACR2 code. Authority file for personal names  was maintained. Defense Technical Information Center,  USA  (DTIC)  thesaurus  was  used  as  a  controlled  vocabulary  tool  for  assigning  subject/keywords.  
lab, unique report no., report type, subject, abstract,  security  classification,  etc.  The  customisation  of  metadata  input  form  is  necessary  to  add  some  of  
DSpace  uses  predefined  Dubiln  Core  standard  
Since  most  of  the  technical  terms  in  DRDO  R&D  metadata format. Metadata input form is used while  reports  were  defence  and  military  related,  it  was  submitting an item to the collection. This metadata  decided to use DTIC thesaurus6. Standardisation of  input  form  was  customised  according  to  the  need  data  in  any  repository  ensures  quality,  easy  data  of  DRDO  technical  reports  (Fig.  4).  These  reports  exchange  ,and  interoperability.  
contains  fields  like  author,  title,  year,  performing  
7. 
SCOPE OF WORK IN   DRDO  K NOWLEDGE REPOSITORY 
DRDO  KR  project  involves  four  major  tasks,  
unique  report  no.,  performing  lab,  sponsor,  report  type,  security  classification  etc. 
 In DSpace, metadata entry forms are controlled  by  a  single  XML  file,  input-forms.xml,  in  the  config  subdirectory  under  DSpace  home.  DSpace  comes  with  a  sample  configuration  that  implements  the  traditional metadata-entry forms5. The customisation  options  of  metadata  input  form  can  be: 
•  The  number  of  metadata-entry  pages 
• Which  field  appear  on  each  page,  and  their  
sequence 
• Labels, prompts, and other text associated with  
each  field 
• List  of  available  choices  for  each  menu-driven  
field 
whenever any changes made to the input-forms. xml file, one should always restart Tomcat (or other  servlet  container  used)  to  take  effect. 
the  additional  metadata  to  the  items.  Additional  
metadata  added  to  DRDO  technical  reports  were  
viz.  
(a) Collection  of  reports 
347 
(b) Unique  report  number  assignments  (c) Scanning  and  digitisation,  and  
(d)  Metadata  creation,  and  uploading  in  DSpace. 
7.1 Collection  of  Reports    
Technical  reports  were  collected  from  DRDO  labs situated across India as well as from Technical  Directorates and Research Boards at DRDO hQrs,  New  Delhi. 
7.2 Unique  Report  Number  Assignment    
Reports  collected  from  Labs  were  assigned  unique report number with the help of ‘guidelines for  writing and assigning uniform numbers to technical  reports  in  DRDO’2.  Unique  report  number  consists  of  the  following  elements:  
1. Name  of  the  parent  organisation  (DRDO), 

========5========

SINgh AND ShARMA: DRDO KNOwLEDgE  R EPOSITORy 
2. Name of the laboratory (Maximum four alphabetical  
character), 
3. Name  of  the  project/programme/directorate/ 
division  (Only  three  alphabetical  character), 4. Type  of  report  (Maximum  of  three  character), 5. Report  number  (Continuous  number  given  by  
Lab  in  numeric  character),  and 
6.   y ear of publication (In four numeric character).  
For  example 
7.3 Scanning  and  Digitisation 
Digitisation is the process of converting information  into a digital format. It includes acquiring, converting,  storing  and  retaining  information  in  standardised  and  organised  manner  with  technological  support.  The documents are being scanned in the resolution  of  250  to  400  dpi  (dot  per  inch)  depending  on  the  physical condition of the documents. After scanning,  next process involves editing the scanned images for  any error and makes text files error free. Photoshop  is  used  to  remove  any  noise,  dust,  shadow  and  other  artifacts  from  scanned  pages.  Scan  Tailor  software  is  being  used  to  straighten,  crop  and  reorient  the  cleaned  up  pages.  Scanned  images  are  then  processed  for  OCR  using Acrobat’s  ‘OCR  text  recognition  option’  and  finally  these  are  saved  in  the  computer  in  PDF  A  formats  with  some  file  name.  
7.4 Metadata  Creation  and  Uploading  in  
DSpace 
DSpace  software  serves  as  a  repository  and  stores digital content5. In a system with such a goal,  perhaps  the  most  critical  aspect  of  the  system  is  how that data enters the system. when users log in,  documents  which  have  been  digitised  as  PDF  are  copied  into  the  system  where  DSpace  is  installed  and  then  they  go  through  a  configurable  workflow  where  they  describe  and  upload  their  submissions  to  the  live  repository  in  the  following  way: 
Metadata  is  recorded  in  Dublin  Core  format  where  four  fields  are  treated  as  mandatory  e.g.  Unique  Report  No.,  Title,  Year  and  Performing  Lab along with other available metadata as follows  (Table  1): 
Table 1. Metadata description for DRDO KR 
S.  Submission  No. workfow step 1. Describe 
Description 
2. 
Describe 
3. 
Describe 
4. 
Upload 
5. 
Verify 
6. 
License 
7. 
Complete 
Describe the item if it has more than  one title, more than one fle 
Enter metadata about the document  (s)  for the following felds: author,  title, report date, performing lab,  unique report no., original report no.,  report type, language 
Assign subject/keywords, write  abstract, mention sponsor if any,  security classifcation 
Enter the name of the fle to be  uploaded 
Verify for any correction in the  metadata felds and fle uploaded Read the terms of the license or  agreement. If ok click ‘grant License’ Submission is completed 
Unique  Report  Number 
DC  Element:  
DC  Qualifier:  
Requirement:  
Occurrence:     
Format:              
                      
         
                   
Example:      
relation 
unique  report  number; Mandatory; 
Once  only; 
DRDO-[Performing  lab  name]- [type  of  report/original    report  no.] 
-[yyyy]; 
DRDO-DIPA-PCR-001-1999;  
Author  Name 
DC  Element:  
DC  Qualifier:  
Requirement:  
Occurrence:  
Format:      
                      
                      
Example:      
contributor 
author; 
Optional; 
Max.  Three  names  only; [Last  name,  First  name],  [Last  name,  First  name],  [Last  name,  First  name]; Mathur, A., ganguli,  C.; 
Report  Title  
DC  Element:  title; 
DC  Qualifier:  none; 
Requirement:  Mandatory; 
Occurrence:  Once  only; 
Format:      Text;  
      First  letter  of  the  title  must  be 
        in CAPS, rest in small; Acronym  
        and  abbreviation  should  be 
        captured  as  ALL  CAPS;  First  
        letter  of  nouns  should  be 
        captured  as  CAPS; 
Example:      g uidelines  for  writing  and  
        assigning  uniform  numbers  to 
        technical  reports  in  DRDO;        
348 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4,  JULY  2013 
Other  Title 
DC  Element:  
DC  Qualifier:  
Requirement:  
Occurrence:  
Format:                  
      
      
        
      
      
      
      
Example:      
title; 
alternative; 
Optional; 
Once  onLy; 
Text;  
First  letter  of  the  titlle  must be  in  CAPS,  rest  in  small;        Acronym  and  abbreviation should  be  captured  as ALL  CAPS;  
First  letter  of  nouns  should be  captured  as  CAPS; User  handbook    
Report  Date 
DC  Element:        date; 
DC  Qualifier:        reportdate; 
Requirement:        Mandatory; 
Occurrence:          Once  only; 
Format:                    [yyyy]; 
Example:                1999; 
Performing  Lab/Inst  
DC  Element:        identifier; 
DC  Qualifier:          performinglab; 
Requirement:          Optional; 
Occurrence:            Once  only; 
Format:                    [ACRONyM,  Fixed  Values        
        Only,  LENgTh   NOT  FIXED]; 
Example:                  DIPA;  
Pages 
DC  Element:          identifier; 
DC  Qualifier:          pages; 
Requirement:          Optional; 
Occurrence:            Once  only; 
Format:                  [n/nn/nnn,  LENgTh   NOT      
        FIXED]; 
Example:                  45; 
Original  Report  Number 
DC  Element:        relation; 
DC  Qualifier:          originalreportnumber; 
Requirement:          Optional; 
Occurrence:          Once  only; 
Format:                      [Misc,  LENgTh   NOT  FIXED]; 
Example:                  DRDO-12321; 
Language 
DC  Element:        language; 
DC  Qualifier:          iso; 
Requirement:        Optional; 
Occurrence:          Once  only; 
Format:                    [Fixed  Values  Only,  LENgTh                      NOT  FIXED]; 
Example:              English  (ISO  Code  of  English;  Report  Type  
DC  Element:        type; 
DC  Qualifier:      reporttype; 
349 
Requirement:      Optional; 
Occurrence:        Once  only; 
Format:                Fixed  Values  Only,  LENgTh 
                     NOT FIXED]; 
Example:              Acceptance  Test  Procedure- 
                 ATP; 
Keywords 
DC  Element:     subject; 
DC  Qualifier:   none; 
Requirement:     Optional; 
Occurrence:        Multiple  (Unbound); 
Format:               [Misc]; 
Example:            Armament,  Pinaka 
              weapon,Rockets,Trial  report; Abstract 
Element:             description 
Qualifier:             abstract; 
Requirement:   Optional; 
Occurrence:      Once  onLy; 
Format:               [Misc,  LENThg   NOT  FIXED]; 
Example:           This  paper  examines  the 
                evolution  of  the  U.S.  interest  
              swap  market.  The  authors      
                review  theory  and  past    
                                empirical  studies  on  U.S.  
              swap  spreads  and  estimate 
              an  error-correction  model  for 
                                maturities  of  2,  5,  and  lOycars 
              from  1994  to  2004; 
Sponsorship 
DC  Element:      description; 
DC  Qualifier:      sponsorship; 
Requirement:      Optional; 
Occurrence:        Once  only; 
Format:              [ACRONyM, Fixed Values Only, 
                  LENgTh   NOT  FIXED; 
Example:              ADE; 
Classification 
DC  Element:      subject; 
DC  Qualifier:      classification; 
Requirement:      Optional; 
Occurrence:        Once  onLy; 
Format:                  [Fixed  Values  Only,  
            LENgTh   NOT  FIXED]; 
Example:          Unclassified; 
8. DISSEMINATION 
The  document  submitted  and  archived  into  the  DRDO  Knowledge  Repository  (KR)  can  be  disseminated  and  accessed  by  the  users  through  search  and  browse  (as  shown  in  Fig.  6  &  7).  Repository offers users the capability to search the  data  base  for  items  of  interest  in  both  simple  and  advanced  form.  From  the  DRDO  KR  home-page,  users  can  browse  all  items  by 
• Communities  and  collection 
• Report  date 

========7========

SINgh AND ShARMA: DRDO KNOwLEDgE  R EPOSITORy 
• • • • 
Author 
Title 
Subject 
Unique  report  number 
9.    CONCLUSIONS    
DRDO Knowledge repository (KR) is developed  considering the advantages like no physical boundaries,  round-the-clock availability of DRDO technical reports,  multiple  accesses  to  information  resources,  faster  information  search  and  retrieval,  preservation  and  conservation of exact copy of the original document.  Access  and  retrieval  has  been  increased  in  all  the  DRDO  labs  as  well  as  DRDO hQrs. 
Figure 5. DRDO KR workfow. 
Although  DRDO  Knowledge  Repository(KR)  was  successfully  built  and  implemented  it  was  experienced  that  building  a  successful  knowledge  repository(KR)  was  much  more  beyond  ‘scanning’  and ‘putting document online’. In the process, though  lot  many  challenges  were  faced  like  preparation  of  guidelines,  collection  of  reports  across  India,  digitisation  issues,  constant  updating  of  records,  regular maintenance and backups, DESIDOC was able  to create a knowledge repository for the knowledge  generated  by  the  DRDO  and  could  provide  to  all  DRDO labs through its intranet DRONA from where  scientists/staff  of  various  labs  are  accessing  this  repository  which  at  present  contains  more  than  15760  records.    
350 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4,  JULY  2013 
Figure 6. Advance search in DRDO KR. 
Figure 7. Sample search result in DRDO KR. 
REFERENCES 
1. Ashalatha, et al.  Building institutional repository:  
A overview.OCLC Sys. & Serv., 2007, 23, 278- 
86. 
2.   g uidelines  for  writing  and  assigning  uniform  
numbers to technical reports in DRDO. DESIDOC.  
Metcalfe house,  Delhi. 
3. Thakuria, Juli. Building an institutional repository  
with  DSpace.  6th   Convention  Planner-2008,  
351 
4. 5. 
6. 
Nagaland  University,  Nagaland,  6-7  November  2008. 
DSpace.  http://www.dspace.org/. 
Prasad, A.R.D.  &  Madalli,  Devika  P. Advanced  DSpace. In  DRTC  workshop 2011, 17-18 February  2011,  Documentation  Research  and  Training  Centre,  Bangalore. 
DTIC. http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/stresources/techreports/ dticSearchTools/thesaurus_desc.html/. 

========9========

