DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 323-329  
  2013, DESIDOC 
FRBR and Ranganathan’s Colon Book Numbers: Exploring   
a Symbiotic Relationship  
Shyama Rajaram 
Department of Library & Information Science, The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara-390 002  
E-mail: shyama.rajaram@gmail.com 
ABStRACt 
Library catalogues are signifcant surrogates of the documents in the library collection. This paper  frst  describes  the  conceptual  model  of  FRBR. Then  it  shifts  its  focus  and  goes  on  to  describe  the  Colon Book Numbers of S.R. Ranganathan. Subsequently, it explores a symbiotic relationship between  Functional  Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records  (FRBR) and  Colon  Book  Numbers. The  study  reveals  that  many  of  the  features  of  FRBR  are  already  present  in  Colon  Book  Numbers. The  paper concludes that catalogues adopting FRBR model can go for a full-fedged book numbering system  like  Colon  Book  Numbers,  so  that,  a  simple  call  number  search  can  also  bring  together  all  the  entity- 
relationships in the retrievals. 
Keywords: Functional  requirements  for  bibliographic  records,  FRBR,  cataloguing,  book  number,  
  colon book number, Ranganathan 
1. INtRODUCtION 
Since  the  conceptualisation  of      Functional Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records  (FRBR)  by IFLA in 1997, an enormous number of research  papers  have  been  written  on  FRBR  from  various  dimensions  and  aspects.  It  is  an  undisputable  fact  that  library  catalogues  are  the  mirror  of  the  library  and  are  significant  surrogates  of  the  documents.  Although  cataloguing  is  an  absolutely  important  and  indispensable  function  of  the  library  but  rarely  considered  as  interesting  or  fascinating.  Even  the  best of the cataloguers often get lost in the maze of  the rules and regulations and myriad of punctuation  marks. 
1.1  HIStORY  OF  CAtALOGUING  RULES 
The  rules  for  the  library  cataloguing  began  in  the  19th   century  with  the  91  rules  of  Antonio  Panizzi  in  1841  in  the  British  Museum.  In  1908,  ALA.  Cataloging  Rules  were  published  followed  by  its second edition, ALA. Cataloging Rules for Author  and Title Entries in 1949 which was edited by Clara  Beetle.  The  famous  International  Conference  on  Cataloguing  Principles  was  held  in  Paris  in  1961  by  IFLA  and  the Anglo-American  Cataloging  Rules  (AACR)  was  published  in  1967.  Another  landmark  was the International Meeting of Cataloguing Experts  held in Copenhagen, Denmark in 1969 to establish  international standards for the form and content of 
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 
bibliographic descriptions. This led to the publication  of  International  Standard  Bibliographic  Description  (ISBD)  for  Monographs  in  1971.  Subsequently,  the  second  edition  of  AACR  (AACR2)  followed  in  1978.  AACR2  was  again  revised  significantly  in  1988  and  2002. 
The  last  decade  of  the  20th   century  witnessed  a  sea  change  in  the  information  landscape.  There  was an enormous growth in the number and scope  of  electronic  databases;  there  were  tremendous  developments in the automated library management  systems; there was more to catalogue for individual  libraries than ever before; cataloguing was becoming  expensive and at the same time the user expectations  and needs were raising in the networked environment.  All this led to a series of seminars and deliberations  starting  from  Stockholm  Seminar  on  Bibliographic  Records  held  by  IFLA  in  1990  to  setting  up  of  a  study group to define the functional requirements for  bibliographic records and eventually the presentation  of  the  final  report  of  the  study  group  in  1997  in  the  General  Conference  of  IFLA  that  was  held  in  Copenhagen, Denmark1. The generation of Functional  Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records  (FRBR)  influenced  the  development  of  AACR  in  such  a  way that, it has now metamorphosed into Resource  Description  and  Access  (RDA)  instead  of  being  called as AACR3. It was released in June 2010 and  subsequently  tested  by  several  national  libraries. 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
2. FRBR 
The FRBR evolved after much deliberations and  intensive research by the study group commissioned  after  the  Stockholm  seminar  held  by  IFLA  in  1990.  According  to  the  FRBR  Final  Report  the  terms  of  reference  of  the  study  group  was  “to  delineate  in  clearly defined terms the functions performed by the  bibliographic  record  with  respect  to  various  media,  various applications, and various user needs”1. The  scope of the study was on the full range of functions  performed  by  the  bibliographic  records.  Thus,  the  focus was more on relating the bibliographic elements  and  the  attributes  of  information  bearing  entities  to  the  various  needs  of  the  users  for  which  they  consult  the  bibliographic  records. 
The FRBR is essentially a conceptual model and  not  a  data  model.  It  is  basically  “a  framework  that  
creation  on  the  idea  plane  has  to  be  expressed  in  a  language.  The  ‘Expression’  has  to  manifest  into  a  concrete  form.  In  other  words  when  a  publisher  publishes  a  work  expressed  in  a  language  into  a  physical  carrier  like  a  book  or  any  other  media,  it  would be considered as a ‘Manifestation’. An ‘Item’  is  a  particular  example  of  a  ‘Manifestation’  like  a  single  copy  owned  by  a  library. 
The  second  group  entities  are  ‘Person’  and  ‘Corporate body’ who are responsible for the creation  of the content of group one entities or their production  or  dissemination  or  ownership.  The  group  three  entities are ‘Concept’, ‘Object’, ‘Event’ and ‘Place’.  These  are  additional  entities  that  operate  as  the  subject of ‘Work’. In other words a ‘Work’ could be  on any idea (‘Concept’), a tangible thing (‘Object’),  an  incident  (‘Event’)  or  a  site,  scene  or  setting  
users of bibliographic records, the attributes of each  
identifies and clearly defines the entities of interest to (‘Place’). At the same time the entities in group one and  two  could  also  be  the  subject  of  a  ‘Work’. 
entity,  and  the  types  of  relationships  that  operate  2.2 Attributes 
between  entities”1.  The  term,  ‘users’  is  very  broad  in  scope  for  this  conceptual  model;  all  individuals  
Attributes are the second key concept in FRBR  
who  are  likely  to  search  bibliographic  utilities  like,  
model. All  the  ten  entities  are  essentially  endowed  
with  certain  qualities  or  characteristics.  According  
library users, library staff, publishers, retailers, service  providers  and  other  users  of  various  information  
to  the  Report,  “Each  of  the  entities  defined  in  the  
services  are  considered  as  users.  Such  a  wide  
model has associated with it a set of characteristics  spectrum  of  users  would  use  bibliographic  records  
or  attributes.  The  attributes  of  the  entity  serve  as  for  a  range  of  tasks  like,  browsing,  purchasing,  
the  means  by  which  users  formulate  queries  and  
interpret responses when seeking information about  
borrowing, lending, cataloguing, circulation, inventory  control, archiving, referencing, information retrieval,  
types of materials, media, and formats are covered  
a  particular  entity”1.  For  instance  the  title  or  form  
between  entities;  and  the  relevance  of  attributes  or  relationships  to  user  tasks.  
etc. The model takes into consideration all such use  
of  a  ‘Work’;  the  language  of  an  ‘Expression’;  the  that is expected from bibliographic utilities. Also all  
publisher or edition of a ‘Manifestation’; and the call  
number  or  accession  number  of  an  ‘Item’  are  all  by  this  model.  There  are  four  key  concepts  in  the  
considered as attributes of these entities. Similarly,  FRBR,  viz.,  entities;  their  attributes;  relationships  
the  name  or  birth  date  of  a  ‘Person’;  the  name  
or  place  of  a  ‘Corporate  body’;  are  some  of  the  
2.1  Entities 
The  entities  defined  in  the  model  are  the  key  elements in which users of bibliographic records are  interested. There are ten entities divided into three  groups. According  to  the  FRBR  Final  Report: 
The first group comprises the products of intellectual  or artistic endeavour that are named or described in  bibliographic records: ‘Work’, ‘Expression’, ‘Manifestation’,  and  ‘Item’.  The  second  group  comprises  those  entities  responsible  for  the  intellectual  or  artistic  content, the physical production and dissemination,  or the custodianship of such products: ‘Person’ and  ‘Corporate  body’.  The  third  group  comprises  an  additional set of entities that serve as the subjects  of  intellectual  or  artistic  endeavour:  ‘Concept’,  ‘Object’,  ‘Event’,  and  ‘Place’1. 
Here  ‘Work’  refers  to  a  distinctive  intellectual  or  artistic  creation  which  is  realised  through  an  ‘Expression’. In other words, any artistic or intellectual  
324 
attributes of these entities which users may use for  searching  the  bibliographic  records.In  its  Chapter  4,  the  FRBR  Final  Report  maps  12  attributes  for  ‘Work’,  25  for  ‘Expression’,  38  for  ‘Manifestation’,  9  for  ‘Item’,  4  for  ‘Person’  and  5  for  ‘Corporate  body’. In case of group three entities, i.e., ‘Concept’,  ‘Object’, ‘Event’ and ‘Place’ the alternative words or  phrases  which  may  be  occasionally  used  to  refer  to  them  are  considered  their  attributes.  
2.3  Relationships 
Chapter  4  Pages  56  to  81  of  the  FRBR  Final  Report are devoted to describing a whole range of  relationships that exist between entities. According  to  the  FRBR  model,  “Relationships  serve  as  the  vehicle for depicting the link between one entity and  another, and thus as the means of assisting the user  to  ‘navigate’  the  universe  that  is  represented  in  a  bibliography, catalogue, or bibliographic database”1.  Chapter 3 of the FRBR Final Report presents three  diagrams  to  show  a  logical  relationship  that  exist  between  the  entities  of  all  the  three  groups  at  a 

========2========

RAJARAM: FRBR AND  R ANGANATHAN’S  C OLON  B OOk NuMBERS 
generalised level1. The relationships between group one entities are significant to note. Although a ‘Work’  can  be  realised  through  one  or  more  than  one  
or  ‘Place’  could  be  the  subject  of  more  than  one  work.  Linking  a  ‘Work’  to  its  subject  helps  not  only  in  identifying  the  subject  of  a  ‘Work’  but  also  in  
‘Expression’  but  an  ‘Expression’  is  the  realisation  bringing together all the ‘Works’ on a given subject  of  only  one  ‘Work’.  However,  an  ‘Expression’  can  together. 
have  one  or  several  ‘Manifestations’  and  similarly  a  ‘Manifestation’  can  contain  one  or  more  than  
users generally search a catalogue with the help  
‘Work’  and  ‘Expression’,  an  ‘Expression’  and  a  ‘Manifestation’,  a  ‘Manifestation’  and  an  ‘Item’;  or  
of  an  attribute  of  an  entity  known  to  them.  When  one  ‘Expression’.  Similarly,  a  ‘Manifestation’  can  
the catalogue reflects the relationships between the  be  exemplified  by  one  or  more  than  one  ‘Item’.  
entities  it  helps  the  users  further  in  understanding  However, an ‘Item’ exemplifies only one ‘Manifestation’. the  links  between  the  entities  which  they  need  to  Chapter  4  of  the  Report  discusses  how  the  same  
know  to  satisfy  the  task  for  which  they  approach  relationships can be used at a specific level to show  
the  catalogue. 
the  relationship  that  exists  between  a  particular  
2.4  User  tasks 
users approach a bibliographic utility at a given  
a  ‘Work’  and  two  ‘Expressions’;  or  a  ‘Work’  and  
point  of  time  to  perform  a  particular  task.  The  a  ‘Person’  and  the  like.  In  other  words,  there  can  
four  generic  tasks  for  which  users  use  a  database  be  multiple  ways  of  linking  the  specific  instances  
described  in  the  FRBR  model  are,  ‘to  find’,  ‘to  of  entities  with  the  help  of  their  attributes.  For  
identify’,  ‘to  select’  and  ‘to  acquire  or  obtain’1.  
example: 
W1 –    Toru Dutt’s Le Journal de of Mademoiselle 
        D’Arvers 
e1   The  author’s  original  text  in  French 
e2   An  English  translation  by  N. kamala 
m1  The diary of Mademoiselle D’Arvers published   
  by  Penguin  Books  in  2005 
i1    The  copy  signed  by  the  translator  in  my 
                personal  library 
Entities  in  the  second  group  can  have  many  to  many  relationships,  i.e.,  one  or  more  person  or  one  or  more  corporate  body  could  be  responsible  for one or more ‘Work’, ‘Expression’, ‘Manifestation’  or  ‘Item’  and  vice  a  versa.  Thus,  entities  in  the  second  group,  i.e.  ‘Person’  and  ‘Corporate  body’  are  also  linked  to  the  entities  in  the  first  group.  For  example: 
P1    –    V.  Raghunathan 
w1   Games  Indians  play 
w2    Don’t  sprint  the  marathon 
w3  The  corruption  conundrum  and  other  
          paradoxes  and  dilemmas 
Just  like  the  ‘created  by’  relationship  that  is  demonstrated  above  between  the  ‘Person’  and  his  ‘Work’s, the ‘realised by’, ‘produced by’ and ‘owned  by’ relationships between the ‘Person’ or ‘Corporate  body’ to the ‘Expression’, ‘Manifestation’ and ‘Items’  are  also  linked. 
A ‘Work’ can have a subject relationship to any  of  the  ten  entities  including  the  ‘Work’  entity  itself.  In  other  words  a  ‘Work’  could  have  as  its  subject  
In  other  words,  users  may  search  a  database  to  see  what  it  has  on  a  given  query;  or  to  spot  and  recognise  the  entity  they  are  searching  for;  or  choose  or  reject  an  entity;  or  to  get  hold  of  and  attain  the  entity  through  borrowing  or  buying.  Four  tables  in  Chapter  6  of  the  Report  map  the  attributes and relationships associated with ‘Work’,  ‘Expression’,  ‘Manifestation’,  and  ‘Item’  to  the  four  users’  tasks  that  are  defined1.  Through  the  use  of  three  symbols,  i.e.,  a  dark  square  equals  to  high  value,  a  white  square  equals  to  moderate  value  and  a  white  circle  equals  to  low  value,  show  the  relative  value  of  each  attribute  or  relationship  in  sustaining  a  specific  task  of  the  user.  Thus,  this  ‘entity–attributes–relationship model’ in the 136 page  FRBR Report provides the structure to analyse the  uses  that  users  make  of  bibliographic  data  with  specific reference to the entity of their interest and  their relative (entity–attributes–relationship) relevance  to  the  task  being  performed. 
3. BOOK  NUMBERS 
Call numbers generally consist of class numbers  and book numbers. Libraries where many separate  collections are maintained may include a collection  number  as  well.  The  term  ‘call  number’  perhaps  takes  its  origin  from  the  process  of  requesting  a  book  from  a  closed  access  library.  The  class  number  depicts  the  subject  of  the  book  but  to  individualise the books falling into the same subject  and  to  fix  their  relative  position  in  the  stacks  book  numbers  are  used.  Although  book  numbers  are  very  useful  and  have  a  long  history  but  they  have  
any  ‘Concept’,  thing,  ‘Event’,  ‘Place’,  ‘Person’,  rarely  been  a  subject  of  interest  or  discussion  
‘Corporate body’, ‘Expression’, ‘Manifestation’, ‘Item’  or  another  ‘Work’  itself.  Again  a  ‘Work’  can  have  more than one ‘Concept’, ‘Object’, ‘Event’ or ‘Place’  as its subject. Similarly, a ‘Concept’, ‘Object’, ‘Event’  
in  library  science  discourse.  
A  very  simple  method  of  book  numbering  is  to  use  the  first  three  letters  of  the  author’s  name.  Many  small  libraries  even  in  the  contemporary  
325 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
times  do  so.  Cutter  started  combining  a  letter  and  two  numbers  to  represent  author’s  name;  which Sanborn  expanded  to  three  numbers.  Merrill  Book  Numbers and Jast & Brown Book Numbers also are  a combination of letter and number to represent the  author. Out of all these, the ‘Cutter-Sanborn Three  
translating letters into numbers futile. He observes,  
C  =  A  serial  number  for  copy,  other  than  the 
         first 
EV=  Evaluation  number  for  Pseudo-Classics 
Ranganathan  devised  these  facets  of  book  numbers  on  the  basis  of  his  actual  observation  
of  letters  into  numerals”2.  Such  book  numbering  methods  just  focus  on  author’s  name  and  fail  to  individualise the different copies and editions of the  
of  the  user  behavior  in  the  stack  rooms.  These  Figure Author Table’ is more in use in large libraries book  numbers  are  not  actually  as  elaborate  as  today.  Ranganathan  rightly  finds  this  exercise  of they  appear  in  the  first  glance  but  at  the  same  “This is perhaps due to a blind mania for numerals, time  they  can  all  be  present  in  a  particular  case  if need  be.  In  his  CC  (1960),  Ranganathan  gives  a  even when the alphabet serves the purpose equally. more  detailed  description  of  these  facets  of  Colon  Much ingenuity has been wasted over the translation Book Numbers. The number for the language facet  
which  is  taken  from  the  Language  schedule  of  the  CC  is  not  given  to  books  if  they  happen  to  
represent  the  millennium,  century  and  the  decade  
among  other  short  comings,  this  system  also  fails  to  individualise  the  different  copies  and  editions  of  
same  book  or  the  volumes  of  a  multivolume  book  
be  in  the  favoured  language  of  the  library,  i.e.,  or  books  by  different  authors  on  the  same  subject library  are  written.  It  means  majority  of  the  books  
the  language  in  which  majority  of  the  books  in  a  sharing  the  same  surname.  Biscoe  Book  Numbers  
use  the  year  of  publication  of  the  book  as  the  
in  the  library  may  not  need  a  language  number  book  number  by  using  a  Roman  Capital  letter  to  
at  all.  For  books  belonging  to  the  main  class  
‘Literature’,  the  language  numbers  are  not  given  and  a  numeral  to  represent  the  year.  However,  
in  the  book  number  part,  if  the  book  happens  to  
be  in  the  same  language  in  which  the  literature  of  
the  book  is.  Also  in  case  of  periodicals  language  
the  same  book.  Rider’s Two  Symbol  Book  Number  
numbers  are  not  given.  In  case  of  polyglot  books,  modified the Biscoe Book Number and used the first the text of a classic, the language of the classic is  
like  commentaries  in  two  or  three  languages  for  
digit to represent the decade of publication and the  second digit to represent the name of the author2.  
used  for  the  book  number  part.  In  case  where  the  
Even  this  system  ignores  many  facets  which  one  
classic is less important than the commentary then  
the most popular language among the commentaries  
finds  in  Colon  Book  Numbers. 
3.1  Colon  Book  Numbers 
For  his  CC  which  is  a  faceted  scheme  of  classification,  Ranganathan  created  Colon  Book  Numbers.  Colon  Book  Numbers  are  very  carefully  designed  not  only  to  take  into  consideration  all  possible characteristics of a book, but also facilitate  the user needs. The facet formula that is prescribed  by  Ranganathan  is  presented  as2: 
[L]  [F]  [Y]  [A].[V]-[S];[C]:[EV] 
L  =  Number  of  the  language  of  exposition,  to 
is chosen for the purpose of book numbers. In other  words,  in  case  of  polyglot  books  one  can  go  by  the  logic  of  most  popular  language  in  the  book  to  construct  the  language  number. 
Form  numbers  are  not  given  to  books  if  they  are  in  the  traditional  prose  form.  Similarly,  for  books  falling  in  the  main  class  ‘Literature’,  form  numbers  are  not  needed  as  they  would  be  already  treated in the class number part. Form numbers are  taken  from  a  schedule  especially  devised  for  this  purpose  and  included  as  chapter  2  in  CC  (Ed.6).  
                be  taken  from  the  Language  schedule  of  
The  date  of  publication  of  the  book  serves  as  
the  year  number  and  the  Chronological  schedule  
        CC 
F  =  Number  of  the  form  of  exposition  to  be  
                  taken  from  the  Form  schedule  of  CC 
y   =  Number  for  the  year  of  publication  to  be   
of  CC  is  used  to  construct  the  year  number.  All  the  documents  in  the  library  would  receive  year  numbers;  in  case  of  periodicals  the  year  covered  by  the  volume  serves  as  the  date  of  publication.  
                  taken  from  the  Chronological  schedule  of  
When  the  use  of  the  first  three  facets  give  rise  
         CC 
A =  A serial number to distinguish the different  
              books  having  the  same  language  and 
              form  in  the  same  ultimate  class.  This 
to  the  same  Book  Number  then  a  serial  number  beginning  with  the  numeral  1  can  be  added  to  the  second such book and 2 to the third such book and  so  on.  In  case  of  a  multi-volume  work  the  volume  
              number  begins  with  1  for  the  second  number  is  added  preceded  by  a  dot  in  Indo-Arabic  
                  such  book  in  the  library. 
V  =  Number  for  the  volume  to  be  taken  from 
                  the  book  itself 
S  =  Number  for  supplement  to  be  taken  from 
                  the  book  itself 
326 
numerals  to  the  respective  volumes  as  their  book  numbers. In case a volume also has a supplement  then  the  supplement  volume  is  given  the  same  book  number  as  that  of  its  volume  followed  by  a  dash  and  the  number  of  the  supplement.  Multiple  

========4========

RAJARAM: FRBR AND  R ANGANATHAN’S  C OLON  B OOk NuMBERS 
copies of a book in the library would have the same  Book  Number  as  that  of  the  first  copy;  however  a  copy  number  would  be  added  to  the  second  copy  by  adding  digit  1  preceded  by  a  semi-colon;  digit  2  to  the  third  copy;  digit  3  to  the  fourth  copy  and  so  on.  The  “re-issue  and  renewed  editions  of  the  one and the same Distinctive Editions of a work in  Literature or a Sacred Book in Religion or a Classic  in  any  other  subject”14   should  also  be  treated  as  copies  of  the  same  book.  
To  understand  many  of  the  above  facets,  let  us  take  the  example  of  two  copies  of  a  book  on  Banking in two volumes published in 1998 in Hindi  language in the collection of a library where majority  of  the  books  are  in  English.  In  the  example  the  Colon Book Numbers are shown leaving two spaces  after  the  Colon  Class  Number  X62  for  banks: (Number  for  the  first  volume  of  the  first  copy)  
        X62  152N98.1 
(Number  for  the  first  volume  of  the  second  copy)  
X62  152N98.1;1  
(Number  for  the  second  volume  of  the  first  copy)  
X62  152N98.2  
(Number for the second volume of the second copy)  
X62  152N98.2;1  
The last facet of Colon Book Number is referred  to  as  ‘evaluation’  facet  or  ‘criticism’  facet.  When  a  book  is  not  a  ‘Classic’  as  defined  by  CC,  yet  it  has  other  books  written  on  it;  it  is  called  a  host  book  and  the  other  book  as  the  associated  book.  In  such  a  case  the  book  number  of  the  associated  book  would  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  host  book  with the addition of “:g” to it. This is called criticism  number;  “:g”  is  an  energy  posteriorising  common  isolate for indicating criticism in CC. If there is more  than  one  associated  book  for  a  host  book  then  second,  third  or  fourth  such  book  would  have  the  same  Book  Number  as  that  of  the  first  associated  book  followed  by  the  digits  1  for  the  second  book,  2  for  the  third  book  and  so  on.  
4.  SYMBIOtIC  RELAtIONSHIP  BEtWEEN  
FRBR AND   COLON  BOOK  NUMBERS 
There has always existed a symbiotic relationship  between  the  work  of  a  cataloguer  and  a  classifier.  Classifier  gives  a  class  number  to  books  and  a  cataloguer decides the subject headings on the basis  of  the  class  numbers  and  goes  about  preparing  the  main  and  added  entries;  book  numbers  can  be  added  by  either  of  them,  the  practice  may  differ  from  library  to  library.  Once  the  catalogue  is  ready,  it  is  the  call  number  that  users  use  to  trace  the  location  of  a  book  on  the  shelves  of  a  library.  Call  numbers  are  essentially  composed  of  class  number  plus  book  number  and  in  some  cases  also  a  collection  number.  Therefore,  call  
numbers  are  an  essential  component  of  a  library  catalogue and a symbiotic relationship between the  two  can  never  be  denied. Thus,  this  paper  now  on  will  try  to  explore  how  Ranganathan’s  Colon  Book  Numbers  find  a  resonance  in  the  latest  concept  in  cataloguing,  i.e.,  FRBR  . 
• FRBR  group  one  entity  ‘Work’,  which  refers  
to  a  distinct  intellectual  creation,  is  actually 
represented by a class number. Irrespective of  
the fact what classification scheme is used, the  
class  number  is  essentially  a  translation  into  
notation  the  subject  of  the  intellectual  creation  
under scrutiny. So, the CC Number that comes  
before  a  Colon  Book  Number  can  be  viewed  
as  the  ‘Work’  which  is  an  abstract  entity.  • FRBR  group  one  entity  ‘Expression’  refers  to  
the  realisation  of  the  ‘Work’  in  a  form.  The  
work has to be expressed in a language and a  
form. The first facet of the Colon Book Number  
is  Language  and  the  second  facet  is  Form.  
Thus,  when  the  Colon  Book  Number  depicts  
the  language  of  the  book  and  the  form  of  the  
book, it means it shows the ‘Expression’ of the  
‘Work’.  
• FRBR  group  one  entity  ‘Manifestation’  is  the  
physical  embodiment  of  an  ‘Expression’.  Thus  
when a ‘Work’ expressed in a particular language  
is  published  by  different  publishers;  it  can  be  
viewed  as  ‘Manifestation’.  The  third  facet  of  
Colon Book Number, i.e., the year of publication  
can  be  easily  equated  to  a  ‘Manifestation’  of  
an  ‘Expression’.  
• The  fourth  facet,  i.e.,  the  accession  part  of  
the  Book  Number  can  be  seen  as  the  linking  
of  one  ‘Manifestation’  to  another  related  
‘Manifestation’.  
• The  Volume  and  Supplement  facets  of  Colon  
Book Numbers depict the part-whole relationships  
within a ‘Manifestation’ which is also discussed  
in  the  FRBR  model. 
• FRBR group one entity ‘Item’ is a concrete entity  
that  exemplifies  a  manifestation.  The  seventh  
facet of Colon Book Number is the copy number  
which again is an exemplar of a particular item.  
Each  individual  copy  would  have  a  distinct  
copy  number.  So  if  a  library  has  20  copies  of  
the  same  book,  the  first  copy  would  not  have  
a  copy  number  and  the  subsequent  19  copies  
would have a copy number serially form 1 to 19.  
Thus each copy gets linked to its manifestation  
and  yet  possesses  a  distinct  book  number. • The ‘Work–to-work’ relationships conceptualised  
in the FRBR Report are akin to the ‘Evaluation’  
facet  of  the  Colon  Book  Numbers.  A  ‘Work’  
can  be  a  subject  of  another  ‘Works’  and  that  
is  what  the  Evaluation/Criticism  facet  attempts  
327 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JuLy  2013 
• 
• 
to  show.  Through  this  facet  the  associated  book  finds  a  place  next  to  its  host  book  on  the  stacks  where  it  would  be  most  helpful. An  adjunct  to  this  facet,  which  happens  to  be  the  last  facet  of  the  Colon  Book  Number,  is  the  ‘Accession  Part  of  the  Criticism  Number’;  this  helps  in  bringing  together  on  the  shelves  all  the  associated  books  of  a  host  book  yet  each  one  would  have  a  distinct  number.  
In Colon Book Numbering, the year of publication  of the different editions of an ordinary book can  also  be  used  to  construct  the  copy  number  so  that  they  can  all  be  brought  together  on  the  shelves  next  to  each  other.  Such  a  facility  in  FRBR model is shown as ‘Manifestation-to- Item’  relationship. 
One  of  the  rules  given  by  Ranganathan  for  constructing the Language Facet of Colon Book  Numbers is that “In the case of a book belonging  
(b)  Heading  section,  
(c)  Title  section,  
(d)  Note  section,  
(e)  Accession  number,  and  
(f)  Tracings.  
He  presents  a  choice  of  Notes  for  the  Notes  Section like Series note, Multiple series note, Extract  note,  Change  of  title  note,  and  Associated  book  note.  These notes present the relationships between  entities that FRBR model in Chapter 5 of the Final  Report  depicts  as  ‘Work-to-work’,  ‘Expression-to- expression’, ‘Expression–to-work’, Manifestation-to- manifestation,  ‘Manifestation-to-item’  and  ‘Item-to- item’.  The  Cross  Reference  added  entry  of  CCC  takes  care  of  the  part-whole  relationships  between  the  ‘Items’.  So  most  of  the  concepts  contained  in  the  FRBR  model  are  actually  already  present  in  Ranganathan’s  Colon  Book  Numbers.  
to a Main Class other than ‘Literature’, if it is in  
5. 
the  Favoured  Language  or  if  the  Language  to  be  used  to  construct  the  Language  Number  is  
not  be  written”3.  There  is  yet  another  rule  for  
CONCLUSIONS 
In  the  contemporary  world,  the  computerised  
in the traditional prose form then form numbers  need  not  be  given3.  Owing  to  these  rules,  not  
the  favoured  one,  the  Language  Number  need  
catalogues  have  replaced  the  card  catalogues  that  
dominated the 20th  century. The popular classification  the  Form  Facet  that  if  the  book  happens  to  be  
schemes today are: universal Decimal Classification,  
one  place  on  the  shelves  of  a  library;  but  they  
Dewey  Decimal  Classification,  or  LC  Classification  
schemes. Cutter-Sanborn Three Figure Author Table  only  all  the  ‘Expressions’  of  a  given  ‘Work’  in  
or  LC  Cutter  Tables  are  popular  Book  Numbering  the  favoured  language  would  come  together  in  
methods today. It is AACR-2 which forms the basis for  
bibliographic description along with MARC-21 tags in  will  also  have  precedence  over  ‘Expression’s  
most of the automated library management systems.  of  the  same  ‘Work’  in  other  languages.  The  
Now,  RDA  which  has  evolved  from AACR-2  and  is  
reason  being  Roman  Capital  letters  are  given  precedence  over  all  other  digits  used  in  Colon  
a  structure-based  on  FRBR  and  FRAD  (Functional  
Roman  smalls  are  used. 
Besides  the  Colon  Book  Numbers,  the  Classic  
Book  Numbers;  and  the  Book  Number  of  a  
Requirements for Authority Data) can include in its  book  which  does  not  have  a  Language  Facet  
flexible framework rules for book numbers. Whatever  and  a  Form  Facet  would  start  with  the  third  
be the classification numbers used, a bibliographic  facet, namely, the year of publication, for which  
utility  can  construct  book  numbers  having  all  the  a  Roman  Capital  letter  is  used.  For  Language  
facets suggested by Ranganathan. In fact, an author  Facet  numerals  are  used  and  for  Form  Facet  
facet  can  also  be  added  to  it  which  is  not  present  
in Colon Book Numbers, but are an obsession with  
other  Book  Numbering  methods.  New  schedule  for  form numbers can be devised to accommodate the  
Device that Ranganathan uses to construct the class  newer  media  that  has  emerged  today.  Similarly,  numbers  for  a  ‘Classic’  is  an  ingenious  method  new  schedules  can  be  designed  for  Language  of  bringing  together  on  the  shelves  of  a  library  a  Facet and a Chronological schedule for the year of  
classical  work  and  the  various  editions  of  different  
publication  facet.  Thus,  catalogues  that  are  trying  
commentaries on it and sub-commentaries on different  to  implement  the  FRBR  model  can  go  for  a  full- 
commentaries  on  it.  According  to  Ranganathan,  ‘Classic’  is  a  work  which  has  a  permanent  value,  which is very powerful and cuts a new ground. For  such a work he feels it is important to present it with  its associated literature as a ‘continuous spectrum’  with  nothing  unrelated  intervening 
3. 
Further, even in his Classified Catalogue Code (CCC)  to construct the Main Entry of a Classified Catalogue,  Ranganathan  provides  five  sections,  viz.  (a)  Leading  section,  
328 
fledged  book  numbering  system  like  Colon  Books  Numbers, so that, a simple call number search can  also  bring  together  all  the  entity-relationships  in  the  retrievals.  This  would  help  users  in  their  four  primary  tasks,  ‘to  find’,  ‘to  identify’,  ‘to  select’  and  ‘to  obtain’.  This  would  also  help  in  housekeeping  activities  of  a  library  and  arranging  the  books  on  the  shelves  in  a  much  better  way.  While  marching  ahead with the new technology and the humongous  variety  and  volume  of  information  resources;  we  

========6========

RAJARAM: FRBR AND  R ANGANATHAN’S  C OLON  B OOk NuMBERS 
should try to take the gems and nuggets imbedded  in  old  concepts  and  practices  rather  than  leaving  them  behind.  
About  the Author 
REFERENCES 
1. International Federation of Library Associations  
and Institutions Study Group on the Functional  
Requirements for Bibliographic Records. Functional  
Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records:  Final  
Report.  k.G.  Saur,  Munich,  Germany,  1998.  
http://www.ifla.org/files/cataloguing/frbr/frbr_2008. 
pdf/  (accessed  on  28  July  2011) 
2. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Prolegomena  to  library  
classification, vol. 1. Ed. 3. Sarada Ranganathan  
Endowment  for  Library  Science,  Bangalore,  
1967. 
3. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Colon  classification.  Ed.  
6.  SaradaRanganathan  Endowment  for  Library  
Science,  Bangalore,  1960. 
4. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Classified  catalogue  code  
with  additional  rules  for  dictionary  catalogue  
code.  Ed.  5.  Sarada  Ranganathan  Endowment  
for  Library  Science,  Bangalore,  1964,  376p. 
Dr Shyama Rajaram  is Associate Professor & In-charge  Head of Department of Library and Information Science  and  Chairperson,  Board  of  Studies  in  Library  and  Information  Science  in  M.S.  university  of  Baroda,  Vadodara.  She  received  Dr.  C.D.  Sharma  award  for  the  best  written  and  presented  paper  in  1996  in  the  41st   All  India  Library  Conference  of  Indian  Library  Association.  
329 

========7========

