DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 4, July 2013, pp. 314-322  
  2013, DESIDOC 
Journey of Catalogue from Panizzi’s Principles to   
Resource Description and Access  
A.S. Chandel* and Rai Vijay Prasad**  
*Department of Library & Information Science, North Eastern Hill University, Shillong-793 022  
E-mail: nehushgmzu07@gmail.com 
**Central University of Jharkahand, Brambe, Ranchi-835 205  
E-mail: rvprasad49@gmail.com 
AbstRACt 
This paper discusses that cataloguing continues to be basic tool of knowledge organisation which  has taken over even the function of classifcation bringing together similar ideas accessible on multiple  points. It traces the history of cataloguing and individual contributions made by Panizzi, Lubetzky, Cutter,  and  Ranganathan  who  laid  the  foundation  for  modern  cataloguing.  It  discusses  the  background  of  Resource Description and Access (RDA) code as development over AACR-2. The conceptual model of  Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) along with its new terminology and basic  principle of entity-relationship have been explained. While discussing new features of RDA, it has also  been compared with AACR-2 to show the main difference between the two. It concludes that RDA is a  descriptive  catalogue  code  with  metadata  structure  with  added  scope  and  advantages  over AACR-2R  
but with mixed professional reaction on its adoption. 
Keywords: Resource description and access, functional requirements for bibliographic records, FRBR,   
 Ranganathan, Panizzi, Charles Ammi Cutter, Lubetzky, cataloguing, knowledge organisation,   
 entity-relationship, AACR, catalogue codes, classifed catalogue code 
1. INtRODUCtION 
Knowledge organisation is the core of librarianship  and many of the professional activities revolve around  it.  It  is  one  of  the  major  professional  challenges  to  organise  the  resources  effectively  to  provide  easy  and  timely  access  on  multiple  access  points  irrespective  of  their  location  and  ownership  using  appropriate technology and methods. Library has no  excuse  to  show  its  inability  to  provide  information  available under the pretext that source of information  is  not  in  its  holding.  The  knowledge  organisation  is  becoming  more  and  more  complex  due  to  rapid  growth  of  resources  coming  in  varied  formats. The  advent  of  Internet  and  its  technology  has  direct  implication  on  knowledge  organisation.  Till  1980’s  libraries  were  limited  to  organise  their  respective  collections.  But  the  scope  now  is  much  wider  when  libraries  are  expected  to  provide  access  to  all  resources  available  globally  which  was  out  of  imagination  before  the  advent  of  computer  age.    
User behaviour in the present new environment  of    present    digital  age  is  ever  changing  where  they  expect  every  information  easily  available  on  easiest  platform  like  web.  Convenience  in  use  of  
Received 20 May 2013, online published 22 July 2013 
resources  is  a  dominant  factor  with  least  reliance  on  authority  and  standard  of  information.  Today’s  users are highly impatient, expecting all information  on  their  desktop,  preferably  on  mobile  phones  and  iPods.  Therefore,  organisation,  repackaging  and  integrating  of  web  and  other  traditional  resources  together  is  becoming  increasingly  important.  In  such  circumstances,  organisation  of  all  existing  knowledge  resources  irrespective  of  their  location,  availability  and  forms  fall  under  the  mandate  of  today’s  librarianship.  This  complex  situation  has  been  described  by  Elaine  Svenonius1   as: 
“The essential and defining objective of a system  for organising information, then, is to bring essentially  like information together and to differentiate what is  not exactly alike. Designing a system to achieve this  purpose is subject to various constrain: It should be  economical,  it  should  maintain  continuity  with  the  past  (given  the  existence  of  more  than  40  million  documents  already  organised),  and  it  should  take  full  advantage  of  current  technologies”. 
 Cataloguing and classification have been basic  tools for arrangement and retrieval of knowledge and  information which deal with analysis of information 

========1========

ChANDEL AND PRASAD: JOURNEy OF  C ATALOgUE FROM  P ANIzzI’S  P RINCIPLES TO  R ESOURCE  D ESCRIPTION AND  A CCESS 
resources into classification numbers/codes/tags and  other methods of contents analysis. There has been  thinking that role of classification and catalogue may  not  continue  to  be  as  important    as  used  to  be  in  the  past.  But  till  shelf  arrangement  continues,  the  role  of  classification  cannot  be  undermined.  Even  its  role  in  organisation  of  web  resources  is  being  realised  and  applied.  Arranging  resources  under  categories, groups, and communities which is being  done by many search engines and directories is also  a  form  of  classification  which  provides  systematic  and  integrated  approach  to  resources.  Therefore,  role  of  classification  in  systematic  and  relational  arrangement  cannot  be  undermined.  Classification  and  cataloguing  which  is  also  called  twin  process  would  continue  to  be  basic  and  essential  tools  of  resource  management  and  discovery  for  all  times  to come. Newly emerging subjects have implication  on  classification  schedules  to  accommodate  them  at their right place and sequence according to their  degree  of  relationship  among  them.  As  such,  new  editions of classification schemes are being brought  out regularly to accommodate newly emerged subjects  and  their  subdivisions.  In  comparison  between  the  classification  and  the  cataloguing,  cataloguing  has  undergone  many  changes  in  the  recent  past  and  its  rules  continue  to  evolve  which  are  being  incorporated in the revised cataloguing rules. In the  present age of information and information explosion,  there  is  no  dearth  of  generation  and  availability  of  new knowledge and information. But searching and  retrieval  of  information  is  becoming  more  complex  and efforts are on to make searching comprehensive  as  well  as  precise  and  pinpointed.  Today’s  users  expect that they should not get only documents on  their  interest  area  but  also  be  exposed  to  all  other  related resources, which may interest them more than  their  primary  search.  Therefore,  diverse  resources  from  different  locations  need  to  be  integrated  to  provide  services  from  a  single  window.  
2. HIstORICAL bACKGROUND 
historically,  systematic  cataloguing  started  only    with  91  rules  written  by  Panizzi,  followed  by   Charles Ammi Cutter which also went under various  revision  in  1889,  1891,  and  1904.  Panizzi‘s  ‘Rules  for  the  Compilation  of  the  Catalogue’  published  in  1941  by  British  Museum  laid  the  foundation  for  future  codes  which  covered  rules  for  author  and  title  entries,  anonymous  works,  etc. his   successor   Seymour  Lubetzky  acknowledged  that  Panizzi  has  laid  cornerstone  for  modern  cataloguing.  Panizzi,  according to Lubetzky, was not merely the conceiver  of the Rules but had other qualities also. In Chapter  3  of  the  Cataloging  Rules  and  Principles,  titled  ‘Design  for  a  Code’,  Lubetzky  displays  his  close  scrutiny  of  Panizzi’s  rules2. 
The contribution of Seymour Lubetzky has been  
important whose contribution to Paris Principles and  ALA Rules was highly acknowledged. Lubetzky wrote  ‘Manual of Descriptive Cataloguing’; Preliminary Draft   published in 19433  and ‘Code of Cataloguing Rules  Author and Title Entries, 1960’4. his work was key to  1949 Rules for Descriptive Cataloguing in the Library of  Congress also adopted by American Library Association5.                                                                                                                                     
          Lubetzky  stated  that  “complete  reconstruction  of  rules  is  necessary  based  upon  the  objectives  which  should  be  implicit  in  our  rules  for  entry. he  divided  the  objectives  into  two.  The  first  objective  is  to  enable  the  user  of  the  catalog  to  determine  readily  whether  or  not  the  library  has  the  book  he  wants.  The  catalogue  is  constantly  searched  by  many  readers  and  members  of  the  staff  and  the  quicker  this  information  can  be  found  better  the  catalogue.  The  second  objective  is  to  reveal  to  the  user  of  the  catalogue,  under  one  form  of  the  author’s  name,  what  works  the  library  has  by  a  given  author  and  what  editions  or  translations  of  a  given  work6. he  meant  that  catalogue  should  bring  all  the  works  (along  with  their  expression  and  manifestation)  of  the  author  at  one  place  for  the  convenience  of  the  users.  he  was  the  first  who  gave  the  idea  of  descriptive  catalogue  which  is  now  being  emphasised  in  modern  cataloguing  codes. he had  listed  the  following  functions  of  the  descriptive  catalogue: 
(i) Describe  the  title  of  the  book 
(ii) Describe  the  particular  edition  to  which  the  
book  belong 
(iii) Describe  physical makeup  of  the  book (iv) Describe  bibliographical  relation  of  the  book,  
and  in  special  case 
(v) Describe special features of the particular copy  
in  hand7. 
his   concept  of  descriptive  catalogue  was  a  vision for the future cataloguing. he had anticipated  the  importance  of  bibliographical  relation  which  is  a  key  concern  in  modern  cataloguing  when  today  Functional Requirements  for  Bibliographic     Records  (FRBR),  Resource  Description  and  Access  (RDA)  and  semantic  web  are  hot  topics  for  consideration  and  implementation.  
The  Charles  Ammi  Cutter  (1937-1903),  who  was  an  important  figure  in  librarianship,  not  only  developed  ‘Rules  for  Dictionary  Catalogue’  (RDC)  but  also  designed  ‘Expansive  Classification’,  and  ‘Three  Figure  Author  Table’  (Cutter  Number).  his  ‘Rules for a Dictionary Catalogue’ was first published  in  1876  which  appeared  in  the  same  report  that  unveiled Dewey’s Classification scheme2. Last edition  of    Cutter’s  ‘Rules  for  a  Dictionary  Catalogue’  was  published in 19048. Cutter considered catalogue as  an  important  searching  tool  which  can  show  as  to  what  resources  the  library  has  to  satisfy  user’s  
315 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
approach  by  author,  title,  subject.  his  objectives  of  a  library  catalogue  is  highly  cited  by  all  authors  writing  on  cataloguing.  SR  Ranganathan  had  all  admiration  for  Cutter’s  Rdc.  he  states  that  Rdc  was the first code to reach beyond those limitations  (which were in earlier codes). he only pointed out its  limitation in the linguistic context. he acknowledged  his  contribution  stating  that  the  “library  profession  has  been  fortunate  in  the  author  of  this  code.  he  was  a  genius.  This  is  seen  in  the  ring  of  certitude  and  the  profoundness  of  penetration  found  in  the  rules  and  commentaries  of  Rdc.  Rdc  is  indeed  a  classic”9.  Ranganathan’s  comment  on  Rdc  has  a  special  significance  who  was  a  believer  of  logical  system  and  approach. 
After Cutter, it was SR Ranganathan, who  published  
Classified Catalogue Code with Additional Rules  
for  Dictionary  Catalogue  (CCC)  in  1934  as  a  
revolt to the existing catalogue rules and codes  
deserves special mention in the context of recent  
development  in  the  field  of  cataloguing10.  he  
was  not  satisfied  with  the  existing  catalogue  
codes,  despite  his  admiration  to  Rdc.  he  was  
quite  critical  of  AACR  which  was  first  time  
published  in  1908  based  upon  Panizzi-Cutter  
mould11   and  commented  that  each  rule  of  the  
Anglo-American  Code  was  taken  by  itself  to  
be put into rote-memory as it were. There was  
no attempt to present the rules as a system10.  
Ranganathan10   conceived  catalogue  as  a  tool  
to  comply  with  the  message  of  his  famous  
Five Laws of Library Science12   and  stated  that  
catalogue  should  be  designed  to: 
(i) Disclose  to  every  reader  his  or  her  document (ii) Secure  for  every  document  its  reader (iii) Save  of  the  time  of  the  reader;  and  for  this  
purpose 
(iv) Save  the  time  of  the  staff. 
Applying  Cutter’s  line  of  approach  he  restated  the  purpose  in  a  more  specific  way: 
(1) Enable a person to find a book of which either  
the 
(a)    Author,  or 
(b)    Title,  or 
(c)    Subject  is  known; 
(2) Show  what  the  library  has 
(d)  By  a  given  author, 
(e)  By  a  given  subject,  and 
(f)  In  a  given  kind  of  literature;  and 
(3) Assist  in  the  choice  of  a  book  as  to  its: 
(g)  Edition,  and 
(h)  Character. 
The  CCC  was  based  upon  logical  approach  of  the users to the resources. his canons and principles  
316 
have  relevance  even  today  when  RDA,  FRBR,  FRAD, and metadata standards are being discussed.  his  ‘Canon  of  Ascertainability’  which  states  that  source of information for cataloguing should not be  confined to title page only but cataloguer may refer  to the overflowing pages  and other sources for the  purpose,  in  the  absence  of  adequate  information  available  on  the  title  page.  Assessment  of  users’  approach  to  catalogue  is  of  paramount  importance  and all access points given in the catalogue should  meet  their  requirements.  Keywords  and  subject  descriptors  must  be  assigned  keeping  in  view  the  user  group  being  served.  This  is  what  ‘Canon  of  Sought  heading’  prescribes  and  gives  direction  to  the cataloguer. The canon prescribes that cataloguer  should  ask  himself  ‘Is  reader  (user)  or  library  staff  likely  to  look  for  a  book  (any  resource)  under  the  particular  type  or  choice  or  rendering  of  heading  or in a particular added entry?’10  Cataloguer should  ask  himself  before  assigning  keyword  or  subject  heading that these headings or access points being  identified  and  described  in  the  catalogue  have  probability  of  being  searched.  his  other  canons;  ‘Canon  of  Permanence’,  ‘Canon  of  Currency’,  and  ‘Canon  of  Consistency’  are  still  guiding  principles  for  cataloguing  including  in  creation  of  metadata.  Both Lubetzky and Ranganathan believed in making  catalogue  as  simple  as  possible  but  meeting  the  requirements of both users and library staff. Ranganathan  perception  was  that  catalogue  should  satisfy  all  possible  approaches  of  users  and  it  should  be  as  simple  as  possible,  saving  the  time  and  efforts  of  both  the  cataloguer  and  user.  he  could  visualise  that  physical  description  like  collation  and  imprint  except  in  special  documents  is  not  important  from  users’  point  of  view.  AACR-2,  team  also  realised  this and  deleted rule 1.4.D4,  stating that shortest  possible  form  in  the  publication,  distribution,  etc.,  area should be given, as the elaborated information  does not play any role in searching and retrieval13.  he  had  also  realised  as  a  teacher  of  cataloguing  that  bibliographical  details  about  format,  collation  and imprint were over emphasised in practical class.  how many users search a book which should have X  number of pages, published by a particular publisher,  having  illustration?  Nevertheless,  such  information  at  times  may  be  required  by  the  library  staff.  his  concept of individualisation of persons or corporate  body  owning  the  responsibility  for  the  creation  of  thought  which  he  does  by  giving  year  of  the  birth  of  author  and  if  ascertainable  year  of  death  and  other  individualising  elements,  which  now  RDA  principles are also accepting and adopting under the  ‘principles  of  differentiation’  where  data  describing  a  resource  should  differentiate  that  resource  from  other  resources.  his  ‘Canon  of  individualisation’  states  that  heading  of  a  catalogue  entry  should  be  made  to  denote  one  and  only  one  entity,  by  

========3========

ChANDEL AND PRASAD: JOURNEy OF  C ATALOgUE FROM  P ANIzzI’S  P RINCIPLES TO  R ESOURCE  D ESCRIPTION AND  A CCESS 
adding  to  it  the  necessary  and  sufficient  number  of  individualisation  elements10.  he  had  evolved  special device for individualisation of authors having  produced the same work through his Book Numbers  given  in  his  colon  classification14. 
The  main  problem  today  in  cataloguing  is  assigning appropriate subject headings or keywords.  Present users depend more on keyword search, and  assigning  befitting  subject  descriptors  or  keywords  matching with the users approach. Cataloguer has a  challenging task of subject analysis which requires  subject  knowledge  of  various  discipline  in  addition  to having cataloguing skill. In one of the surveys of  directors,  the  professionals  felt  that  MARC,  LCSh,  and  AACR  are  irrelevant  in  context  of  keyword  searching  and  thesaurus.  They  suggested  that  indexing and metadata should be more emphasised  than traditional cataloguing15. Ranganathan was very  much aware of this problem of indexing, that is why  he devised chain procedure indexing method which  derives class index entries from class number, in a  more  or  less  mechanical  way.  Chain  procedure  is  used  to  derive  class  index  entries  in  a  classified  catalogue  and  specific  subject  entries,  subject  analytical,  and  ‘see’  and  ‘see  also’  subject  entries  in dictionary catalogue10. he  was  in  the  opinion  of  having  economy  in  cataloguing  in  terms  of  time  and  efforts.  Under  ‘Law  of  Parsimony’,  he  states  that overall economy of manpower, material, money,  and  time  should  be  saved.  In  view  of  this  he  had  devised chain procedure9  for deriving subject headings  providing  multiple  access  points  in  an  automatic  way  also  revealing  relationship  among  them.  
What  RDA  and  modern  cataloguing  is  striving  today  is  to  establish  relationship  of  coordinated  subjects and provide integrated approach to as many  resources as possible. This is what classified part of  catalogue has been able to achieve. The FRBR and  RDA  talk  about  collocating  resources,  establishing  bibliographical  and  whole  part  relationship  which  Ranganathan was able to establish through classified  part  of  the  catalogue  where  entries  are  arranged  strictly according to the relationship among entities.  Finally,  the  era  of  individual  contributors  came  to  an  end,  and  revision  of  rules  and  principles  was  taken  over  by  professional  bodies. 
In  1967,  Anglo-American  Cataloguing  Rules  (AACR)  was  published  in  British  and  American  edition  which  was  revised  as  AACR-2  in  1978.  There  were  several  revision  and  amendments  and  updating  of  rules  over  the  years  till  200516.  Joint  Committee  for  Revision  of  AACR  was  constituted  which  has  been  actively  engaged  in  bringing  out  changes  in  the  rules  from  time  to  time  to  mee  the  challenging  needs  of  users  in  a  new  environment  of  electronic  age. 
3. FRbR  MODEL 
This is a  conceptual schema of database based  upon entity-relationship to provide greater flexibility  in manipulating bibliographic data and offering better  information to users as they navigate … catalog24.  This  was  developed  by  IFLA  Study  group  which  worked  from  1992-1995  to  develop  this  model  indented  to  be  independent  of  code.  Basically,  this  is  an  analytical  technique  that  can  be  used  to  identify  and  describe  the  entities.  Relationship  represents  the  association  or  connections  among  entitites17.  The  FRBR  are  defined  in  relation  to  the  following  generic  tasks  that  are  performed  by  users  when  searching  and  making  use  of  national  bibliographies  and  library  catalogues:  
• Using the data to find materials that correspond  
to  the  user’s  stated  search  criteria  (e.g.,  in  
the  context  of  a  search  for  all  documents  on  
a  given  subject,  or  a  search  for  a  recording  
issued  under  a  particular  title);  
• Using  the  data  retrieved  to  identify  an  entity  
(e.g., to confirm that the document described in  
a  record  corresponds  to  the  document  sought  
by the user, or to distinguish between two texts  
or  recordings  that  have  the  same  title);  • Using  the  data  to  select  an  entity  that  is  
appropriate to the user’s needs (e.g., to select  
a  text  in  a  language  the  user  understands,  or  
to choose a version of a computer program that  
is  compatible  with  the  hardware  and  operating  
system  available  to  the  user;  
• Using  the  data  to  acquire  or  obtain  access  to  
the  entity  described  (e.g.,  to  place  a  purchase  
order  for  a  publication,  to  submit  a  request  
for  the  loan  of  a  copy  of  a  book  in  a  library’s  
collection,  or  to  access  online  an  electronic  
document  stored  on  a  remote  computer18. 
The  model  uses  terminology  like  entity,  work,  expression,  manifestation,  and  item  to  show  the  relationship among them. The relationship is shown  among three groups as given in fig. 1-3 taken from  Final  Report  of  IFLA  Study group  on  the  FRBR. 
Figure 1. Group 1–Entities and ‘Primary’ relationship. 
317 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
Figure  2.  Group  2–Entities  and  ‘Responsibility’  
   relationship. 
Figure 3. Group 3–Entities and ‘subject’ relationship. 
The  relationship  among  three  groups  is:  
group  1-  Entities  and  primary  relationship, 
group  2-   Entities and responsibility relationship, 
                            and  
group  3-  Entities  and  subject  relationship  
In  the  first  group,  entity  is  defined  as  work  as  intellectual  or  artistic  endeavor  or  creation  and  intellectual  or  artistic,  realisation  of  work  is  an  ‘Expression’  of  a  work,  physical  embodiment  of  an  
expression  is  ‘Manifestation’  of  work.  There  can  be  more  than  one  manifestation  of  a  work  in  the  form  of  printed  version,  e-version,  video  tape,  etc.  If new version is based upon the original work, but  its adaptation is with intellectual contribution brining  newness in the work, in that case it becomes ‘New  manifestation’.  Item  is  defined  as  single  physical  object  which  may  be  produced  in  a  more  than  one  form like a book in the form of printed version as well  as  in  compact  disk,  paperback  or  any  other  form. 
The  objective  of  FRBR  is  to  establish  entity- relationship,  linking  or  collating  expressions,  manifestations  with  the  work  to  provide  integrated  approach to related resources created by a person or  corporate body. The work which is being described  should  reveal  its  relationship  with  other  related  resources.  This  analysis  and  capturing  data  to  achieve  aforesaid  objective  is  difficult  job  for  the  cataloguer/metadata  creator. 
‘Entities’  in  the  second  group  represent  those  who  are  responsible  for  intellectual  and  artistic  content, the physical production and dissemination,  presentation,  narration,  etc.,  these  are  person  and  corporate body. One person or corporate body may  produce  more  than  one  work;  similarly  a  work  can  be  created  by  more  than  one  person  or  corporate  body.  Work  so  created  may  have  more  than  one  expression and manifestation. An item may be owned  by one or more than one person or corporate body,  and  a  person  or  corporate  body  may  have  more  than one item. This relationship among entities could  be  one  to  one,  one  to  many,  or  many  to  many  as  in  database  system  design19. 
In the group third, entities represent ‘Concepts’,  ‘Objects’,  ‘Event  Places’  to  be  treated  as  subjects  of  work.  This  is  almost  similar  to  five  fundamental  categories  of  a  subject  and  facet  analysis  used  by  Ranganathan  in  his  Colon  Classification14.  Work  (subject)  may  have  more  than  one  concept,  object  and/or  place,  more  than  one  manifestation,  item,  person and/or corporate body. Ranganathan combines  these  multiple  concepts  through  round  and  levels.  The book/work has many attributes within it; like its  physical description, ISBN, form like compact disc,  paperback,  etc.,  called  ‘Manifestation’.  The  work  may  be  translated  into  other  languages,  adapted,  abridged which also can be brought out in different  forms  like  editions,  adaptation  and  abridgement,  etc.,  which  are  termed  as  ‘Expression’  in  FRBR  terminology. 
In the present electronic environment, traditional  cataloguing  is  no  more  in  use.  The  concept  of  main  and  added  entry,  use  of  punctuation  marks,  dividing  catalogue  into  indentions  don’t  play  any  role. Neither the specific structure nor the display of  the  catalogue  is  required  any  more.  In  the  present  context, some of the practices of AACR were found  irrelevant  so  were  dropped  in  RDA. 
318 

========5========

ChANDEL AND PRASAD: JOURNEy OF  C ATALOgUE FROM  P ANIzzI’S  P RINCIPLES TO  R ESOURCE  D ESCRIPTION AND  A CCESS 
4. RDA AND  COMPARIsION  WItH AACR-2 
The RDA is a new code developed for detailed  description of various information resources (old and  newly  emerged  works)  with  emphasis  on  entities’  relationship with their attributes as laid down in the  conceptual model of FRBR.  Instead of naming the  revision  as  AACR-3,  it  has  been  named  as  RDA,  giving emphasis on description of various elements  of  the  records.  The  AACR  has  been  undergoing  various  revisions  and  amendments  from  time  to  time  mainly  due  to  emergence  of  new  medium  of  information  and  changing  information  seeking  behaviour  of  users.  Cataloguing  Section  of  IFLA  has  been  continuously  working  on  cataloguing  standards  and  rules  which  finally  developed  the  model  for  description  of  resources.  The  RDA  is  a  resource  discovery  tool  based  upon  metadata  creation, aiming at collating related resources which  Cutter  and  Ranganathan  had  much  earlier  thought  of. It can be considered as a database management  system,  based  upon  certain  principles  of  recording  description  of  resources  and  make  them  access.  Some  of  the  practices  of  AACR  such  as  main,  entry, added entries, indentions, display format, etc.,  have  no  relevancy  in  the  present  computer  age  in  which  every  descriptive  element  of  a  catalogue  is  searchable.  The  prospectus  of  RDA  states  that  ‘it  [RDA]  is  being  developed  to  provide  better  fit  with  
table 1. Comparison of AACR-2 and RDA21,22 
Features 
AACR-2 
emerging technologies… ‘and ‘the aim is to provide  a  set  of  instructions  for  recording  data  that  can  be  applied independently of any particular structure or  syntax  for  data  storage  and  display’18.  The  data  created  using  RDA  to  describe    a  resource  are  designed  to  assist  users  performing  the  following  tasks20:    
Find:        to  find  resources  that  correspond  to  the   
            user’s  stated  search  criteria; 
Identify:    to  confirm  that  the  resources  described 
            corresponds  to  the  resources  sought,  or   
        to  distinguish  between  two  or  more 
            resources  with  similar  characteristics; Select:      to  select  a  resource  that  is  appropriate 
            to  the  user’s  needs;  and 
Obtain:  to  acquire  or  access  the  resource 
            described.  
With this view, RDA was conceived not only to  assist  the  users  in  finding,  identifying,  ‘Selection’  but they need to be helped in acquiring  resources  described which is possible by consulting catalogues  of other libraries as selection tool. It seems that the  task of RDA is much beyond the scope of traditional  cataloguing.  It  would  be  relevant  here  to  know  the  main difference between RDA and AACR-2 and note  the important additions and deletions made in RDA.  The  difference  is  shown  in  Table  1. 
RDA 
Source of information for cataloging Title page was recommended as main source May go beyond title page to capture information for  
More than three Authors Rule 
recording 
When  more  than  3  authors  have  the  same This  rule  has  been  dropped  where  more  than  three  function, give only the frst name followed by “… 
[et al.]”  
authors also can be entered. Option of continuing with  three author rule is also given. In place of et al. 
[and 3 other]    
Inaccuracy 
Could  be  corrected,  e.g.,  Will[i]am  which  was To  be  inscribed  as  such. however,  correction  if  any  
wrongly spelled as Willam. 
Correction made was being shown as [sic]. 
could be shown in variant title. 
general Material Designations (gMD) In  traditional  cataloguing  where  computerised Terminology used in AACR have been changed with  
cataloguing is being done, gMD does not play addition  of  new  types  of  material  divide  into  three  
much  role  and  AACR-2  was  more  inclined new types; content type, media type and carrier type  
towards  manual  cataloguing  without  any which are being explained  under RDA elements later  
provision of creating metadata. 
paragraph. 
Copyright data and physical description Copyright  data  was  shown  by  small  c.,  e.g., Abbreviations  were  dropped  and  full  form  was  
c1989, many abbreviations like p. iii. v. pkb were preferred,  like  pages,  volumes,  illustrations,  
in use ,  
Individualising element  
publication if not known 
paperback, etc. 
Included  date  of  birth  of  person,  titles,  occupational  titles  as  compliance  to  Principle  of  differentiation  which  Ranganathan  had  covered  in  his  canon  of  individualisation.  
Recording  of  publisher  and  place  of Abbreviations  of  [s.l.)   and  [ s.n]   used  to  be  Replaced with: [Place of publication not identifed] and  
the  practice  to  show  the  absence  of    place  of [Publisher not identifed]. 
publication and publisher respectively.  
Level of description 
There were two levels of description with limited Number  of  more  descriptive  elements  were  added,  
number of descriptive elements. 
some of them for entity-relationship. 
319 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
In addition to the differences mentioned in Table  1, some minor differences can be noted which have  least  effect  on  cataloguing  practice.  It  should  also  be pointed out here that regular users of catalogue  had  become  familiar  with  the  old  practices  and  did  not  have  much  difficulty  in  resource  finding  and  understanding  abbreviations  being  used  in  AACR,  though  full-form  of  abbreviations  are  better  understood  which  has  been  adopted  in  RDA  but  violation  of  economy  principle. 
Addition  of  more  descriptive  elements,  and  making RDA compatible with international practices  like ISBD and MARC and establishing links among  related resources by application of entity-relationship  may  prove  useful.  The  RDA  has  added  more  core  element  for  metadata  creation  like  ‘Production  statement’,  ‘distribution  statement’,  ‘manufacturing  statement’,  ‘carrier  type’,  ‘extent’  and  many  type  of  description  like  comprehensive,  analytical  and  hierarchical.  Some  of  the  RDA  elements23   are  mentioned  in  Table  2. 
table 2. RDA elements for audio recording book 
RDA REF 2.13 2.15 3.2 3.3 3.4 6.9 7.3 
RDA element 
Mode of issuance 
Identifcation for manifestation Media type 
Carrier type 
Extent 
Content type 
Performer, narrator, presenter  
17.8 18.5 25.1 26.1 27.1 
Work manifested Relationship designator Related work Related expression Related manifestation 
It  is  evident  from  Table  2  that  RDA  has  added  descriptive  elements  some  of  them  are  not  even  available  in  MARC-21.  The  above  example  shows  as  to  how  RDA  establishes  entity-relationship  by  creating  new  fields  in  the  data  structure. 
5. CONCLUsIONs 
Journey  of  cataloguing  had  started  with  the  British  Museum  Catalogue  since  1841.  however,  systematic cataloguing based upon rules and principles  began  with  Panizzi,  continued  by  Lubetzky,  Cutter,  and  Ranganathan  before  it  was  taken  over  by  professional associations and bodies like American  Library  Association,  British  Library  Association,  Canadian  Library  Association,  and  IFLA.  Journey  began  with  the  card  catalogue  and  finally  reached  virtual  world  of  online  catalogue.  In  the  beginning,  emphasis  was  on  simplified  catalogue  with  brief  description  as  per  requirement  of  users  of  that  time.  Cataloguing  scenario  had  a  drastic  change  
320 
due  to  the  advent  of  computer  and  emergence  of  new  information  resources  in  different  types  and  formats.  Different  study  groups  particularly  IFLA  Study  group  and  associations  started  working  on  revision of code to cope with the changing scenario.  Library software also started developing cataloguing  modules  compatible  with  international  standard  like  MARC  format  and z39.50. As  a  consequence,  the  long  era  of  physical  form  of  catalogue  came  to  an  end  which  was  taken  over  by  computerised  catalogue. AACR has been more in use since 1967  internationally  which  underwent  various  revisions  and  amendments,  finally  incorporated  in  AACR-2  (Ed.  2).  It  was  further  realised  that  AACR-2  also  needs  revision  which  was  brought  out  as  RDA.  The  main  difference  of  RDA  from  AACR  is  that  latter is based upon creation of metadata structure  identifying such fields that are capable of establishing  entity-relationship  as  elaborated  earlier.  It  is  the  description  part  of  cataloguing  which  is  important.  Access points are automatically generated from the  
Data recorded 
Multiple part of monograph ISBN NO. 
Audio disc or CD 
Audio disc 
3 audio discs 
Spoken words, performed music 
Munro, Alice (1931) - Lives of girls and women Author, abridger, translator, adaptor   Information technology 
Abridgement of …, translation of… 
Originally broadcast on AIR 
descriptive  elements  which  should  correspond  to  the  users’  approach.  The  RDA  has  identified  new  fields  which  can  accommodate  more  attributes  of  entities and relate them with other related resources  termed  as  ‘Manifestations  and  Expressions’.    
The RDA has its foundation on the principles of  its  predecessor AACR,  of  course  with  some  added  features  ‘with  an  effort  to  attain  an  effective  level  of  alignment  between  RDA  and  metadata  standard  used  in  those  communities21   (archives,  museum,  publishers,  etc.)  and  is  not  radical  to  break  the  past24.  Barara  Tillett25   considers  RDA  as  bridge  that  strives  to  connect  our  past  with  our  future.  Michael  gorman  has  observed  that  the  sad  thing  is  that  (it  is)  betraying  the  former  (AACR)  has  not  managed  to  appease  the  latter  (RDA)26.    
how  far  libraries  would  be  able  to  adopt  RDA  over the well established practices of  AACR which  has  been  in  use  over  more  than  five  decades  is  doubtful, however, important libraries like LC, NAL,  

========7========

ChANDEL AND PRASAD: JOURNEy OF  C ATALOgUE FROM  P ANIzzI’S  P RINCIPLES TO  R ESOURCE  D ESCRIPTION AND  A CCESS 
NLM have already announced its adoption. Everything  will  depend  upon  the  professional  reactions  after  its  release  on  31-03-2013  as  announced.  Almost  all  modern  libraries  are  using  library  software  like  VTLS,  Liberty,  etc.,  having  excellent  modules  of  cataloguing  which  are  already  having  some  of  the  features of RDA with flexibility and compatibility with  international  standard.  Will  such  libraries  prefer  to  switch over to RDA from their system in use? Only  future  will  tell.  What  is  important  in  the  present  environment  is  analysis  of  attributes  of  entities  and  describe  and  record  them  in  such  a  way  that  relationship  among  them  could  be  established  and  linked.  Description  dominates  the  access  points,  as  many  access  points  are  implicit  in  description  part  only.  Everything  depends  upon  creation  of  metadata,  database  design  and  the  capability  of  the  cataloguer.  Establishing  relationship  among  works and coordinating them with their manifestation  and  expression  is  of  course  going  to  be  a  useful  feature. Now the question is whether the objectives  laid  down  in  RDA  are  not  achievable  without  its  adoption or such features can be introduced in the  existing practices by doing some customisation and  modifying  of  present  data  structure  in  use.  Now,  wait  is  not  long,  and  let’s  see  what  RDA  toolkit  brings  to  the  profession.  
REFERENCEs 
1. Svenonius,  E.  The  intellectual  foundation  of  
information  organisation.  C  The  MIT  Press,  
ambridge  MA,  London,  2000,  11-12. 
2.   g aleffi,  Agnese.  Biographical  and  cataloguing  
common ground: Panizzi and Lubetzky, kindered  
spirits separated by a century. Lib. Inf. History,  
2009, 25(4),  227-46.  
3. Lubetzky,  Seymour.  Manual  of  descriptive  
cataloging.  preliminary  draft—for  official  use  
only,  1943. 
4. Lubetzky,  Seymour.  Code  of  cataloging  rules:  
Author  and  title  entry.  An  unfinished  draft  for  
a  new  edition  of  cataloging  rules  prepared  for  
the  Catalog  Code  Revision  Committee.  With  
an  explanatory  commentary  by  Paul  Dunkin. 
American  Library  Association,  Chicago,  1960.  5. Denton, William. FRBR and history of cataloguing.  
Understanding  FRBR.  What it is and how it will  
affect  our  retrieval,  edited  by Arlene g. Taylor.  
Libraries  Unlimited,  Westport,  2007,  27. 6. Lubetzky,  Seymour.  Cataloguing  rules  and  
principles. In  Denton, William. FRBR and history  
of  cataloguing.  Understanding    FRBR.  What  it  
is and how it will affect our retrieval, edited by  
Arlene g. Taylor. Libraries Unlimited, Westport,  
2007,  27. 
7. Lubetzky,  Seymour.  Functions  of  descriptive  
cataloging. 1943, 3. In    galeffi, Agnese. Biographical  
and  cataloguing  common  ground:  Panizzi  and  
Lubetzky, kindered spirits separated by a century.  
Lib.  Inf.  History,  2009,  25(4),  227-46. 8. Cutter,  Charles  Ammi.  Rules  for  a  dictionary  
catalog.  Ed.  4.  Washington  DC. 
9. Ranganathan,  S.R.  headings  and  canons:  
Comparative  study  of  five  catalogue  codes.  S  
Viswanathan,  Madras,  1955,  15. 
10. Ranganathan,  S.R.  Classified  catalogue  code  
with  additional  rules  for  dictionary  catalogue  
code.  Ed.  5.  Sarada  Ranganathan  Endowment  
for  Library  Science,  Bangalore,1965.  11. Blake,  Vigil  L.P.  Forging  the  Anglo-American  
cataloguing alliance: Descriptive cataloguing 1830- 
1908.  Cata.  &  Classif.  Quart.,  2002,  35(1&2),  
3-22. 
12. Ranganathan, S.R. The Five laws of library science.  
Ed.  2. Asia  Publishing,  Bombay,  1963. 13. Anglo-American Catalogue Rules/prepared under  
the direction of the Joint Committee for Revision  
of AACR, a committee of the ALA... [et al.].  Ed.  
2.  2002  revision.  Chicago: ALA,  2002,  xvii. 14. Ranganathan, S.R. Colon Classification. Ed. 6.  
Sarada  Ranganathan  Endowment,  Bangalore,  
1960. 
15. Warren,  Jenny.  Directors’  views  of  the  future  
of  cataloguing  in  Australia  and  New  zealand.  
Austra. Acad.  Res.  Lib.,  2007,  38(4). 16. Joint  Steering  Committee  for  Development  
of  RDA,  Early  English  Language  Cataloguing  
Codes. In RDA simplified. edited by  Joy, Stewart  
and A. Richard. Cata. & Classif. Quart.,  2012,  
50(33),  34. 
17. Tillett,  Barbara.  What  is  FRBR?  A  conceptual  
model  for  the  bibliographic  universe.  Library  
of  Congress  Cataloguing  Distribution  Service.  
http://www.loc.gov.cds/downloads/FRBR.PDF/  
(accessed  on  17  February  2013). 
18. IFLA Study group on the Functional Requirements  
for Bibliographical  Records. Functional Requirements  
for Bibliographical Records. Final Report. K.g.,  
1998,  82p. 
19. Kashyap, M.M. Integrated library system design  
and  development  approaches.  In  Knowledge  
management in digital era, edited by A.S. Chandel.  
Westville,  New  Delhi,  2011,  97p. 
20. Coyle,  Karen  and  hillmann,  Diane.  Resource  
Description and Access: Cataloguing rules for the  
20th   century.  D-Lib-Magazine,  Jan/Feb.  2007. 21. RDA Toolkit. Resource Description and Access.  
Introduction. http://access.rdatoolkit.org/ (accessed  
on  5  February  2013). 
22. UIUC  Library.  RDA  and AACR2R  Monographic  
Cataloging:  Major  Differences.  Compiled  by  
Marek  Stroda.  16  May  2012. 
23. Anhalt, Joy & Stewart, Richard A. RDA simplified.  
Cata.  &  Classif.  Quart.,  2012,  50,  33-42. 
321 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  4, JULy  2013 
24. Joint  Steering  Committee  for  the  Revision  of  
Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules. RDA: Resource  
Description and Access: Prospectus. http://www. 
collectionscanada.ca/jsc/rdaprospectus.html/.  
(accessed  on  26  February  2013). 
25. Barbara,  Tillett.  RDA  changes  from  AACR-2  
for  text.   In   Resource  description  and  access:  
From  AACR  to  RDA,  edited  by  F.  Tim  Knight  
http://yorkspace.library.yorku.ca/xmlui/bitstream/ 
handle/10315/6717/RDA_CALLarticle_final2.pdf10/  
(accessed  on  26  February  2013).    
26.   g orman, Michael. The coming cataloguing debacle.  
http://www.slc.ca/rda1007.pdf/ (accessed on 26  
February  2013).  
About  the  Authors       
                                        Prof  A.s.  Chandel   is  working  as  U gC  Emeritus  Fellow  at  Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science,  North  Eastern  hill  University  (NEhU),  Shillong.  he  has  served  the  profession  in  various  
322 
capacities. he was Consultant and Advisor (Library  automation  and  Digitisation)  Central  University  of  Jharkhand  Ranchi  in  addition  to  his  UgC  project  of digitisation at NEhU. he was head, Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science,  NEhU;  Deputy  Director (Information), SAARC Agricultural Information  Centre, Dhaka (Bangladesh); OSD (Library) Mizoram  University; and Consultant and Advisor (Library) to  various Universities and Institutes. he has serveral  books  and  periodical  articles  to  his  credit.    
                                                                                                                           sh Rai Vijay Prasad   has  a  more  then  39  years  of  experience of practicing librarianship and is presently  working as University Librarian in Central University  of  Jharkhand,  Ranchi.  Earlier,  he  had  served  as  a  Assistant general  Manager  and head,  Information  and Documentation Centre, Steel Authority of India  Ltd.  (R&D).  he  has  also  served  as  a  Librarian  in  Forest  Research  Institute  &  Colleges,  Dehradun. 

========9========

