DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 5, September 2013, pp. 361-366  
  2013, DESIDOC 
Application of Mobile Technologies to Libraries 
Malathy S. and Kantha P.  
Library & Documentation Division, ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bangalore-560 017  
  E-mail: malathy@isac.gov.in, pkantha@isac.gov.in  
AbsTrAcT 
 Libraries have always set an example in experimenting with new technology developments, whether  it is automation or adopting other information and communication technologies to improve their services.  This paper presents an outline of the application and use of developments in mobile telecommunication  systems,  web  technologies  (internet/intranet)  and  geographic  systems  like  GPS/GPRS  to  provide  ubiquitous, user-friendly, personalised and dynamic up to date information services to library users. This  new technology will be of great help to libraries towards strengthening their relationship and providing  enhanced  user  experience  to  existing  users.  Libraries  may  well  reach  out  to  the  new/remote  users  who were considered unlikely to connect because of absence of a medium. This should be adopted in  compliance with the information security policies and standards of the parent organisation. 
Keywords: Library  services,  mobile  devices,  information  services,  instant  messaging,  SMS  alerts 
  e-learning, e-resources 
1. INTrODUcTION  
Both library and technology are growing organisms.  Dynamic  nature  of  technology  has  significant  impact  on  every  aspect  of  modern  life.  Particularly  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT)  has  provided  faster  access  to  information  and  it  is  also challenging the libraries to rethink and remodel  their  services  adopting  the  technological  changes.  In  the  past  few  decades,  libraries  have  adopted  ICT and passed through developmental stages like  automated  house-keeping  operations,  providing  faster  access  to  its  collection,  and  digitisation  to  provide  multiple  accesses  at  users  desktop.  In  the  modern  world,  libraries  are  not  lone  information  providers,  Web  provides  wide  range  of  information  although  the  content  may  not  always  be  free  and/ or  with  value  addition.  To  benchmark  its  place  as  an  information  provider,  libraries  must  not  hesitate  to  adopt  all  possible  new  technologies  like  ICT,  Wi-fi,  mobile  communications,  and  Library  2.0  and  3.0  to  redesign,  and  transform  its  services  so  as  to  deliver  information  and  its  services  to  the  more  demanding users whenever, wherever and however  they  prefer. 
The focus of this paper is on hand-held mobile  devices like PDAs and smart mobile phones, although  the phrase ‘mobile devices’ is used in general. Use  of  mobile  devices  depends  greatly  on  constantly  changing  mobile  technology,  device  design,  data  transmission rate, battery life, cost, standardisation,  etc.  
2. APPLIcATIONs   OF  MO bILE  PHONEs 
The  wireless  technology  and  mobile  phones  are  becoming  an  integral  part  of  everyday  life  and  are  changing  the  way  one  connects  and  interacts  with  the  world.  Mobile  phones  have  wide  variety  of applications. Already mobile devices have made  significant impact on banking, tourism (Web GIS), and  health services. An innovative application of mobile  phones in agriculture is made where Indian farmers  are using low-cost water pump activation system called  ‘Nano  Ganesh’  developed  by  Tata  Teleservices.  A  cell phone application with modem allows farmers to  remotely access their irrigation pumps and to check  availability  of  power  to  their  irrigation  systems  and  turn on/off the pumps. Doctors are also using mobiles  to  access  electronic  medical  record,  view  medical  images,  access  drug  information,  and  take  notes.  Latest is mobile real-time remote patient monitoring  and an iPhone application, iStethoscope to monitor  heart  rates  of  patients  on  the  go.  Already  mobile  phones are no longer a luxury, but a necessity not  only  for  simple  voice  or  text  communication,  but  also  for  accessing  the  internet.  Such  connectivity  seems  to  be  the  wave  of  the  future.    
As per International Telecommunication Union1  (ITU) ICT facts and figures, 2011, there are about 6  billion mobile-cellular subscribers. Mobile-broadband  subscriptions  have  grown  45%  annually  over  the  last  four  years  and  today  there  are  twice  as  many  mobile-broadband as fixed broadband subscriptions  (Fig.1).     
Received 20 September 2012, revised 1 May 2013, online published 17 September 2013  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2013 
(*estimate)  
Figure 1. ITU world telecommunication/IcT indicators database1. 
•	 Total 159 economies worldwide have launched 3G  
services commercially and the number of active  
mobile-broadband  subscriptions  has  increased  
to  almost  1.2  billion. 
•	 While 	 people 	 in 	 developed 	 countries 	 usually 	 
speeds.  Availability  of  automatic  configuration  of  GPRS-enabled  mobile  phones,  which  help  the  subscribers  to  be  online  with  few  clicks.    
Emerging  technologies  like  speech  technology  in  mobile  phones  has  enabled  disabled  persons  to  
people  in  developing  countries. 
•	 Percentage 	 of 	 the 	 population 	 covered 	 by 	 a 	 
use  mobile-broadband  networks  in  addition  to  
use mobiles effectively. Dr Ponani Gopalakrishnan,  a fixedbroadband connection, mobile-broadband  
VP, India Software Labs of IBM in an interview with  is  often  the  only  access  method  available  to  
magazine  ‘Digit ,  Jan  2010’  talks  about  the  spoken  
web  and  they  are  working  on  technology  that  will  
translate  the  experience  of  the  web  to  the  mobile  phone platform where people can speak and interact  
population  coverage  reached  45  %  in  2011. 
This  passion  for  mobiles  by  common  man  has  thrown  ample  opportunities  for  libraries  to  create  mobile-friendly  library  and  information  services,  which may lessen the risk of exclusion. The libraries  need to switch over from ‘physical places’ to ‘virtual  places’ to embrace and serve ‘netgens’ and ‘digital  natives’2  who prefer their libraries to be where they  are  and  prefer  to  access  and  share  information  from  anywhere  at  anytime.  
2G  mobile-cellular  network  is  twice  as  high  as  
with  web  information  through  voice.  
the  population  covered  by  a  3G  network.  3G  
These smart phones are becoming increasingly  
ubiquitous to make the dream of ‘pervasive library’  
3. PrEsENT  scENArIO  OF  MObILE  
cOMMUNIcATION  
There are wide range of mobile computing platforms  in the market from smart phones to multimedia phones  with different types, styles, models, and with many  inbuilt features and capabilities like cameras, touch  screens, bar code scanning, Wi-Fi, bluetooth, instant  messaging,  GIS/GPS,  RFID,  operating  systems,  varying additional storage space, etc. Revolutionary  iPhones  and  smart  phones  (3G  and  4G  phones)  can  be  used  to  run  many  software  applications  including  internet  access  with  faster  connection 
362 
a reality. The mobile phones with operating systems,  capability  to  scan  barcodes,  text  recognition  may  help  libraries  to  interface  with  other  applications  to  introduce  users  to  online  library  transactions,  database  querying,  relevant  full-text  information  download  and  interactive  sessions.  
4. 
ADVANTAGEs   OF  LI brArY  INFOrMATION  THrOUGH  MObILE  
4.1 User-friendly Aid 
Familiarity with their own devices and technology  helps the users in accessing information quickly and  does  not  require  orientation  and  training.  Mobile  users  are  using  the  facilities  on  mobile  phones  like SMS, instant messaging, web browsing, e-mail  effortlessly  to  communicate.  Most  of  the  features  are  pre-installed  on  mobile  devices  or  option  for  data  plan  packages.  
4.2 Personalised service  
Personalised  service  helps  users  to  interact  with  library  staff  to  seek  specific  information  or  reference  away  from  library. 

========2========

MALAThy AND  K ANThA: APPLICATION OF  M OBILE  T EChNOLOGIES TO  L IBRARIES 
4.3 Ability  to Access  Information 
Information  access  from  anywhere  at  anytime  will  be  of  great  help  for  users  who  cannot  visit  library  in  person  and  provides  a  constant  link  to  required  information  resources.  
4.4  Time saving  
Users need not record information about resources  while  browsing  and  searching  library  resources  or  wait at library transaction counter to renew/reserve  books  and  hence  the  time  of  the  user  is  saved. 
4.5 User  Participation  
5.2  Formal  Education,  Distance  Learning  and  
E-learning 
Students  are  very  versatile  in  using  their  mobile  phones  and  various  mobile  applications.  Academic  libraries  can  harness  the  advantage  to  lead  implementation  of  library  services  through  mobile devices to support distance learning, formal  education,  and  research  activities  in  e-learning  environment  by  making  the  information  resources  ubiquitous. Libraries should redesign their services  keeping  social  networking  sites  in  mind,  which  are  heavily used by younger generation for interaction,  communication,  and  information  sharing.  Library  
Libraries  can  enrich  OPAC  by  allowing  users  services should also blend with teaching and research  to  incorporate  user  created  content  like  notes  or  practice of colleges/universities, scientific community  
images  uploaded  by  users.  
4.6 Location Awareness 
Mobile communication enables libraries to offer  location-based services/content through global positioning  system  (GPS)  capabilities.  Libraries  can  guide  the  users to the location of specific document or service  through  maps  and  navigational  tools. 
4.7 Limitless Access 
All online resources accessible on their desktop  also  become  accessible  through  mobiles. 
4.8 Access  to  Print-disabled  Users 
Mobiles communications help providing services  orally to vision-disabled and physically-handicapped  users. 
5. LIbrArY  &  INFOrMATION  sErVIcEs   ON  
sMALL scrEEN  DEVIcEs 
In view of the capabilities and developments in  mobile technologies and their advantages enumerated  above, libraries can design and provide the following  specific services on mobile devices, compliance with  the  information  security  policies  and  standards  of  the  parent  organisation.    
5.1 sMs/Texting  (Alert services) 
Existing  e-mail  alert  services  like  bringing  new  books to the notice of users for suggestion, intimation  of arrival of indented documents by users, informing  availability  of  reserved  documents  for  collection,  appraising  about  which/when  books  are  overdue,  library  circulars,  e-journals  subscribed,  change  in  timings,  information  about  important  events,  etc.,  can  be  upgraded  by  sending  through  SMS/text- alert  services3   to  meet  the  information  needs  of  ‘netgens’. Such alert notifications can be generated  automatically  using  integrated  library  management  system/software.  SMS  messages  can  be  sent  to  group  of  users  simultaneously  through  many  free  applications,  and  intermediary  websites/clients.  
or  other  patrons  whom  they  serve.  
5.3  Instant  Messaging  for reference services 
The reference and referral services have already  become  virtual  with  ICT  applications  and  internet.  The mobile devices can further appreciate the service  with instant answers like definitions, meanings and  other  information  from  digital  libraries  and  web.  If  the  organisation  has  its  own  secure  and  private  enterprise  IM  network,  libraries  may  as  well  make  use of these as they are more reliable and secure; or  else use web-based free instant messaging services  from  Google,  America  Online,  Way2SMS,  etc.,  as  an  intermediary  to  have  interactive  sessions  with  users  to  answer  ‘reference  queries’. As  these  free  messaging services can be withdrawn anytime by the  providers, libraries’ may subscribe to fee-based tools  like Text a Librarian, Libraryh3lp, MyInfoquest, and  Shoutbomb. These tools offer mobile customers all  of the benefits of virtual reference services without  being  tied  to  a  website.  Librarians  can  provide  instant  answers,  and  links  to  articles/references  in  real  time.  
5.4  E-resources  with  Mobile  Interfaces 
Some publishers are already delivering e-books  (both text and audio) that are accessible via mobile  phones. Using free Plucker e-book viewer, one can  access  about  20,000  free  e-books  from  Project  Gutenberg.  Mobipocket  of  Amazon  is  one  of  the  stanadard e-book reader applications and the website  has  over  40,000  titles  (about  11,000  free). A  large  collection of audio books both free-and subscription- based  services  are  available  for  download  and  also  transferable  to  mobile  devices.  LibroVox  is  a  collection  of  free  audio  books  from  the  public  domain.  OCLC’s  NetLibrary  collection  is  providing  e-book and audio book titles on library subscription.  Libraries  can  make  use  of  multimedia  messaging  service  (MMS)  on  mobile  devices  to  share  photos,  videos,  and  audio.  Most  of  the  e-book  publishers  provide 24x7 access to the library subscriptions from  any internet terminal within the campus, as well on  
363 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2013 
mobile  devices,  such  as  iPads,  Android  devices,  and  Kindle.  Just  like  any  other  library  databases,  users  are  prompted  to  log  in  using  user-ID  and  password,  when  they  are  off-campus  to  access  e-books  on  their  mobile  devices. 
One  can  get  todays’  news  on  their  mobiles  either  by  accessing  the  web  portals  or  SMS  text  messaging  on  their  mobile  phones.  Newspapers  like  Wall  Street  Journal,  Washington  Post   and  Chicago  Tribune   offer  news  for  small  screen.  In  India,  Newshunt,  a  mobile  application  by  Eterno  Infotech  Pvt.  Ltd.  is  designed  to  read  newspapers  on  GPRS-enabled  mobile  phones. 
The  greater  challenge  is  to  provide  access  to  e-journals through mobile phones as the libraries and  publishers prefer authentication limited to campus wide  IP  address.  Libraries must  convince the publishers  to provide user id and password mode in addition to  IP address based authentication to access e-journals  on mobiles. Publishers like IEEE Xplore, Elsevier’s  Science Direct, PubMed, EBSCOhost, Encyclopaedia  Britannica, American Institute of Physics iResearch  iPhone  application,  etc.,  are  already  offering  their  databases for mobile devices. The nature.com app  from  Nature  Publishing  Group  is  providing  access  to  read  full-text  articles,  view  full-size  figures  and  save  references. 
Libraries  can  offer  their  digital  collections  (institutional  repositories  and  in-house  databases)  on mobiles phones that can be accessed remotely.  Greenstone3  digital library software runs on mobile  handsets  and  allow  access  just  like  accessing  any  other Greenstone server with searching and browsing  multimedia  collections.  
5.5  Mobile  Optimised  Library  Webpages 
With the increased use of Internet through mobile,  libraries are required to redesign their web pages as  mobile optimised interactive and participative library  web pages to provide dynamic information services  to users on a 24X7 basis via mobile devices. While  redesigning  library  must  take  into  consideration  the  basic  models  of  mobile  phones  to  the  smart  phones  with  greater  capabilities  and  functionalities  as  some  of  the  iPhones  and  smart  phones  are  compatible  to  access  the  web  pages  designed  for  larger screens. But the time taken to access is more  and  downloading  is  very  slow  and  expensive.  To  overcome these difficulties, it is necessary to make  mobile-friendly  websites  by  using  (cascading  style  sheets)  CSS  or  auto-detect  and  reformat  (ADR)  software,  which  allows  a  website  to  rearrange  its  content and navigation to suit the size of the screen  it is being viewed on. Libraries should be aware of  mobile  web  browsers,  screen  resolutions  and  size,  etc.,  while  creating  webpages.  The  website  must  be  redesigned  to  have  less  graphics,  so  that  the  page loads much faster and with minimal keyboard  
364 
operations, to ease the mobile user. In this context,  text-only websites are easier and faster to navigate  and  fabricate  into  new  applications.  
5.6  Library  Instructions  and  Virtual  Tours 
Library  tours,  instruction/induction/orientation  programs  have  been  quite  significant  in  bringing  the nonusers to libraries and also help the remotely  located  or  users  located  in  different  geographical  locations.  Library  users,  who  don’t  have  time  or  inclination  to  attend  an  on-site  workshop,  can  get  access to library tours on their mobile devices.  Audio/ virtual  library  tours  can  be  produced  fairly  quickly,  inexpensively, and could reduce the amount of staff  time  spent  helping  new  users  to  orient  themselves  in the library and explaining the facilities available.   It  can  easily  be  provided  both  as  downloads  from  the  library  website  and  on  mobile  devices.    5.7  Online  Library catalogs  on  Mobile  Phones  
Libraries are required to interact with the software  vendors to create mobile compatible WebOPACs4. For  example, AirPac add-on product will auto detect the  type of device you are using and format accordingly  the  catalogs  without  graphics  for  better  viewing.  libSirsi-Dynix,  Innovative  and  LibraryAnywhere  developed  by  Library  Thing  have  similar  options.  OCLC’s  WorldCat  Mobile  application  pilot  allows  users  to  search  for  and  find  books  and  other  materials  available  in  their  local  libraries  through  a  web  application  they  can  access  from  a  PDA  or  a  smart  phone5. 
To  provide  location-based  services,  libraries  have  to  use  mobile  telecommunication  system,  the  internet/web-based OPAC on intranet and geographic  system  like  GPS.  Many  phones  have  built-in  GPS,  which  allow  users  to  navigate  to  locations  and,  if  activated, allow others to find them. OCLC’s Worldcat  mobile  application  for  iphones  makes  use  of  this  feature when identifying local libraries. Libraries with  multiple branches like public libraries can capitalise  on  the  GPS  function  to  create  custom  maps  and  navigational  tools  to  branch  locations.    
5.8  Qr codes  on  Mobiles 
QR  code6   stands  for  ‘quick  response’,  and  basically  a  two-dimensional  bar  codes  that  can  contain  any  alphanumeric  text  and  often  used  to  store urls, text, etc., known as ‘mobile tagging’.  QR  codes  are  used  in  commercial  tracking,  logistics,  inventory  control,  and  advertising.  Data  can  be  translated  into  a  QR  code  by  any  QR  generator,  many  of  which  are  available  as  free  download.  Users  simply  enter  the  data  to  be  translated,  and  the  generator  produces  the  code,  which  can  then  be  displayed  electronically  or  in  printed  format.  Decoding  the  information  can  be  done  with  any  mobile camera phone that has a QR reader, which  is  freely  available  online  for  most  devices. 

========4========

MALAThy AND  K ANThA: APPLICATION OF  M OBILE  T EChNOLOGIES TO  L IBRARIES 
Libraries  can  use  QR  codes  to  label  books,  journals,  audio/visual,  offprints,  add  QR  codes  in  WebOPAC and other places. Users with phones that  have a camera and free barcode decoder software  can take a picture of the barcode, then the software  decodes  the  picture,  and  translates  the  data  into  title,  barcode,  and  location  information  that  can  be  displayed  on  the  phone.    
The  QR  code  can  be  scanned,  and  saved  for  further  use  on  mobile.  QR  codes  not  only  link  to  websites,  but  also  can  be  used  to  send  prewritten  SMS  to  phones,  transfer  phone  numbers,  and  provide  further  text.  They  are  designed  to  cope  with  a  high-level  of  error,  hence  are  suitable  for  outdoor  use. 
5.9  Mobile-based  Library  Lending  service  
As in banking and financial sectors, libraries can  
•	 Knowledge 	 of 	 hardware 	 and 	 software 	 of 	 mobile 	 
devices 
•	 Create/tailor 	 mobile-optimised 	 content 	 including 	 
interactive and participative library homepages,  
OPAC,  virtual  tours,  and  databases 
•	 Familiarity 	 with 	 internet/intranet 	 services 	 like 	 
using  e-mail,  SMS  and  spam  preventing,  etc. •	 Develop 	 expertise 	 in 	 protecting 	 privacy 	 and 	 
security levels as more personalised information is  
involved  in  using  mobiles  for  library  services •	 Skills 	 related 	 to 	 searching 	 and 	 navigating 	 through 	 
mobile  devices,  mobile  web  applications  like  
push  e-mail,  etc. 
•	 Skills 	 for 	 interacting 	 with 	 users 	 via 	 smart 	 phone 	 
applications, mobile-friendly webpages, and third  
party  intermediary  clients 
formulate regulations for using mobiles for circulation  
•	 Skills 	 relating 	 to 	 training 	 and 	 user 	 orientation 	 
of reading materials and maintenance of users account.  The SirsiDynix company has developed a handheld  
to  market  these  services  to  users 
circulation  tool  called  ‘PocketCirc’,  which  enables  
8. 
libraries to access the unicorn library management  system  on  a  PDA  device.  This  wireless  solution  
APPLIcATION  OF  MObILE  TEcHNOLOGIEs IN  IsAc   LI brArY 
In lieu of sensitive nature of information generated  
walking  around  the  library. 
Mobile  phones  make  ILL/document  delivery  services faster and cut-down the time to request/visit  different libraries and complement the geographically  remote  users.  
enables staff to assist patrons in the stacks, checkout  
materials  while  off  site,  such  as  at  community  or  
as  well  as  used  and  dealt  with  from  security  point  campus  events,  and  update  inventory  items  while  
of  view,  ISRO  employees  are  not  permitted  to  use  
their  mobile  phones  inside  ISRO  Satellite  Centre  
6. PrErEQUIsITEs   FO r   IMPLEMENTING  
MObILE-bAsED  LIbrArY sErVIcEs •	 It 	 is 	 necessary 	 to 	 have 	 a 	 carefully 	 planned 	 
requirement study to know the practical situation  
like, the kind of services to be provided on mobile  
devices  and  type  of  devices  to  be  used. •	 Library 	 need 	 to 	 acquire 	 the 	 required 	 hardware 	 
and  software  after  market  survey. 
•	 Library 	 must 	 provide 	 physical 	 and 	 virtual 	 environment 	 
for  using  mobile  devices  and  accessories.  •	 One 	 needs 	 to 	 ensure 	 that 	 the 	 customers 	 having 	 
(ISAC) campus except for the employees who have  been officially provided with mobile phones to meet  exigencies. hence, the ISAC mobile library services  can  be  introduced  in  the  first  phase  to  only  senior  scientists/engineers who are allowed to use mobiles in  the campus, employees on tour, scientists/engineers  sponsored for higher studies/research (study leave),  those  enrolled  for  distance  learning  through  open  universities,  and  faculty  and  students  of  Indian  Institute  of  Space  Technology  (IIST).  
All information services hosted on ISAC library  homepage accessible through intranet and spacenet can  be straight away optimised to mobile-based services.  Initially  library’s  alert  services  like  information  on  new books for suggestion, books on display, arrival  of indented document, reserved documents ready for  collection, books overdue, library circulars, information  
mobile  phones  of  different  network  operators  
about  important  events,  etc.,  can  be  provided.  
are  in  a  position  to  avail  the  services. •	 It 	 is 	 a 	 prerequisite 	 to 	 optimise 	 library 	 OPAC, 	 
The  mobile  enterprise  devices  that  run  on  intranet  are  used  in  some  of  the  hot  segments  
introduce  new  services  wherever  possible. •	 Security 	 and 	 authentication 	 is 	 a 	 matter 	 of 	 concern 	 
website, and databases for mobile devices and  
like  organised  retail,  logistics,  transportation  and  
the  government  sectors  like  the  Indian  Railways,  
the  Department  of  Posts,  and  Police  Departments.  
Similarly,  in  future  the  above  library  services  and  in mobile services particularly due to availability  
of  web  contents  on  a  24x7  basis  to  prevent  
other new mobile-based services like mobile OPAC,  
circulation,  etc.,  can  be  introduced  with  controlled  
damage  or  loss  to  the  data. 
7.   s KILLs rEQUIrED 
Librarians should acquire and apply the following skills  if  they  wish  to  provide  mobile-based  services:  
security  risk  by  adopting  mobile  intranet-based  applications or mobile enterprise application (MEA)  in  ISAC. 
WebOPAC  of  ISAC  library  can  be  enriched  with  user  participation,  i.e.,  by  allowing  users  to  
365 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2013 
comment  on  the  items  in  catalog  and  letting  users  to  comment  directly  from  their  PDAs  and  mobile  phones to library databases. For example, they can  upload some of their memorable experiences, photos  or pictures related to that particular project in case  of  internal  technical  reports/papers  published  as  value-addition  and  they  become  far  more  valuable  to  ISRO  community  as  such. 
QR  codes  can  be  introduced  in  ISAC  library  WebOPAC,  webpages  and  virtual  materials  to  help  users to capture, store, and retrieve the information  about  library  services  and  resources  that  saves  the  time  of  the  users.  In  future,  QR  Codes  could  possibly be linked to RFID tags, so that users could  do  self-checkouts. 
9.    cONcLUsIONs 
Library policies and services should be flexible  and  open  so  that  new  information  needs  of  users  in  pursuit  of  organisational  needs  are  met  with  new technologies. The task of libraries is to exploit  new technology in a more effective way to promote  and integrate them into the design of future library  services  in  a  cost  efficient  manner.    
however  one  cannot  neglect  the  policies  and  standards of information security of the organisation.  Since,  the  feature  like  ‘always  on’  and  continuous  connectivity makes new devices more vulnerable to  security  threats,  the  same  need  to  be  addressed  cautiously before setting up the library services for  mobile  devices.  While  the  financial  institutions  like  banks are making use of such technologies without  exposing  the  customer  to  much  risk,  it  may  not  be  an impossible task for the libraries to overcome such  security threats in providing library and information  services  on  mobile  devices.  It  is  very  essential  for  libraries to be dynamic and change their outlook to  adopt  new  technologies  and  to  develop  new  kind  of  relationships  with  users.  
rEFErENcEs 
1. International  Telecommunication  Union.  http:// 
www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ 
366 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 6. 
ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf/ (accessed on 29 May  2012). 
Information services and Web 2.0: New challenges  and opportunities. In  Electronic Library:  International  Scientific  Conference,  25-28  September,  2008,  Belgrade,  2008,  pp.  1-8. 
What mobile services does your library offer? Library  Connect, 2009, 7(4), 8. http://libraryconnectarchive. elsevier.com/lcn/0704/lcn070407.html/ (accessed  on  29  May  2012). 
Lippincott , Joan K. Mobile technologies, mobile  users: Implications for academic libraries. Association  of  Research  Libraries  (ARL)  Bimonthly  Report,  2008,  261,  1-4.  http://www.arl.org/bm~doc/arl- br-261.pdf/  (accessed  on  29  May  2012). Worldcat.  http://www.worldcat.org/mobile/. 7  things  you  should  know  about  QR  codes.  http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI7085. pdf/  (accessed  on  29  May  2012). 
About  the Authors 
Ms  Malathy  s.   obtained  her  MLIS  from  University  of  Mysore.  Presently,  she  is  working  as  Scientist/ Engineer  ‘SE’,  Library  &  Documentation  Division,  ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bengaluru. her areas  of  work  include:  Library  automation,  serials  and  e-journals,  e-resources  management,  digitisation,  and  design  and  development  of  digital  library  of  ISAC. her areas of interests include: User studies,  user orientation, internet-based services, application  of  ICT  in  libraries,  etc. 
Ms Kantha P.  obtained her MLIS from University of  Bangalore.  Presently,  she  is  working  as  Scientist/ Engineer  ‘SD’,  Library  &  Documentation  Division,  ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bengaluru. her areas  of  work  include:  Library  automation,  digitisation,  design and development of library databases, library  homepage,  and  maintenance  of  library  software  and hardware. her areas of interests include: User  studies,  user  orientation,  internet-based  services,   application  of  ICT  in  libraries,  etc. 

========6========

