DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 5, September 2013, pp. 367-377  
  2013, DESIDOC 
Training Needs of School Librarians in India 
Chennupati K. Ramaiah* and K. Nallaperumal Pillai** 
*Dept. of LIS, School of Media & Communication, Pondicherry University, Puducherry-605 014  
  E-mail: ckramaiah@gmail.com 
**UNESCO Madanjeet Singh Institute for South Asian Regional Co-operation  
Pondicherry University, Puducherry-605 014  
AbSTrAcT 
  In  Indi a  the  situation  of  schools,  school  libraries,  and  school  librarians  is  in  a  poor  condition  as  compared to the advanced countries in the world. Most of the schools do not have libraries, and wherever  libraries are available, the properly trained manpower is not available to manage those libraries. There are  many reasons for this problem including budget, space, resources, manpower, lack of national policies,  and standards. One of the problems is lack of proper training to school librarians in Indian library school.  The  paper  reviews  the  need  for  school  library,  UNESCO  manifestation  of  school  library,  national  and  international scenarios, school library standards & guidelines, roles, and responsibility of school librarians,  and impact of school libraries on students, and teachers. The school library plays an important role on  the  overall  development  of  the  students  to  transform  them  into  knowledgeable  persons. Their  reading  skills,  information  seeking  skills,  and  the  knowledge  about  the  library  resources  can  be  improved  due  to the school library and the school librarian. So, the need for professionally trained manpower to man  
these libraries is also discussed. 
Keywords: School  libraries,  school  librarians,  training  needs,  Indian  school  libraries,  impact  of  school 
  libraries on education 
1.  INTrODUcTION 
“…the  library  media  center  should  become  a  magnet  for  teacher  and  student  alike.” 
-- Alliance  for  Excellence 
The  21st   century  workforce  requires  skills  in  problem-solving, communication, and technology to  be  creative  and  innovative,  and  habits  to  connect  experiences and information from a variety of sources  and constantly develop their own knowledge1,2. The  same skills, and habits are vital in a democracy that  are required by citizens to understand the complex  problems  of  change,  make  reasoned  arguments,  and understand different viewpoints. The partnership  for 21st  century skills is a collaboration of business  and educational organisation, declared a propound  gap  between  what  students  learn  in  school  and  the  knowledge  and  skills  they  need  for  the  21st  century communities3. The world of ‘school libraries’ has  changed  substantially  due  to  technological  advancements  in  various  fields  including  printing  technology, IT, networks, digital storage, etc. Automation,  collaborative working, print-to-digital shift, changing  educational  needs,  and  multimedia  products  led  
Received 21  September 2012, online published 17 September 2013 
to  many  changes  in  today’s  school  librarianship.  School librarians recognise the importance of being  instructionally savvy, educational partners who can  collaborate with teachers in co-plan, co-teach, and  co-evaluate student’s work. According to UNESCO,  the  following  aims  of  the  school  library4   are  to:  (i) Acquire books  and  other  materials  in  line  with  
the  demands  of  the  curriculum  and  the  needs  
of  students  to  organise  these  materials  for  
effective  use; 
(ii) Guide pupils in their choice of books and other  
materials  of  learning  desired  both  for  personal  
and  curricular  purposes; 
(iii) Develop  in  pupils  skill  and  resourcefulness  in  
their  use  of  books,  and  libraries  to  encourage  
the  habit  of  personal  investigation; 
(iv) Help pupils, establish a wide range of significant  
interests; 
(v) Provide  aesthetic  experience  and  develop  
appreciation  of  the  arts; 
(vi) Encourage  lifelong  education  throughout  the  
use  of  library  resources; 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMbER   2013 
(vii)  Encourage social attitudes, and provide experience  
in  social  and  democratic  living;  and 
(viii) Work cooperatively and constructively with teaching  
and  administrative  staff  of  the  school. 
However,  due  to  technological  developments  in  libraries,  lots  of  changes  took  place  in  their  collections,  services,  and  functions.  Accordingly,  the manpower to manage them also got to change,  therefore this study is most essential for effectively  running  today  and  tomorrows’  school  libraries.  In  this context, many countries, like, US, UK, Canada,  Australia,  etc.,  framed  school  library  guidelines  intended  to  help  in  establishing,  maintaining,  and  developing  primary,  secondary,  and  high  school  libraries. The guidelines addresses the library needs  of  school  students;  embedding  the  school  library  in  the  teaching,  and  learning  culture  of  the  whole  school. The  guidelines  also  recognise  that  the  use  of  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICTs) as an integral part to every aspect of school  library.  
2.  NEED  FOr   S cHOOL  LIbrArY    
During the 6 
th 
 Indian Education Survey 
5 
  it  was  found  that  96  %  of  children  in  the  age  group  6  to  14  in  rural  India  were  enrolled  in  schools.  73  %  of  these  children  were  enrolled  in  government  schools, and the remaining (21.8 %) were enrolled  in private schools. It is surprising that around 40 %  of all rural children in 5th  standard in India were at  least  three  grades  (classes)  behind  based  on  their  level  of  learning.  During  2007-2009,  for  children  in  government schools in 5th  standard, the ability to do  division  problems  has  actually  declined  from  41  %  to 36 %. The average attendance rate in rural India  is  around  75  %  however,  it  is  90  %  or  more  for  states  like  Kerala,  Karnataka,  Himachal  Pradesh,  Maharashtra,  Goa,  Tamil  Nadu,  and  Nagaland.  In  government  schools,  17.1  %  students  take  private  tuitions, and this percentage rose to 30.8 % by the  time  they  reached  to  8th   standard.      
In  today’s  IT  era,  school  library  takes  a  key  place in the school education. School librarian deals  with  all  subject  areas,  but  more  closely  related  to  teaching  and  learning,  media  resources  use  and  management, IT and net skills, reading, information  seeking  skills,  information  literacy  skills,  etc.  The  school  librarian  should  be  well  versed  with  the  following:  
2.1  Incorporation  of  IT  in  School  Library 
IT has become an integral part in today’s school  education so it has to be accommodated in the school  library. Information processing tools, communication  tools, information searching tools, net-surfing, etc.,  may  be  taught  to  all  the  students  to  do  their  day- 
368 
to-day  work  and  project  works  in  a  much  better  way.  School  librarian  need  to  prepare  students  for  the  information  and  technology-rich  work-place  of  the  future.  An  active,  dynamic  information  and  technology  team  is  an  integral  part  of  the  school.  As  educators,  it  is  our  responsibility  to  equip  our  students with the required IT skills so that they will  comfortably work in e-networked or virtual learning  environments.  Incorporation  of  IT  component  in  school  libraries  is  essential  for  the  students  to  utilise  the  entire  resources  of  the  library. 
Helping  teachers  should  make  the  best  use  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  new  technologies  to  their students. E-mail, cell phones, and blogging are  some of the ways students nowadays communicate  to  each  other,  so  the  school  librarian  should  help  them in effectively use of these technologies. Today  knowing how to identify, locate, access, and utilise  information  is  the  key  to  our  achievement.  
2.2  Getting Acquainted  with  E-media 
Due to the advancement of technology so many  developments took place in information acquisition,  organisation, and dissemination. Hence, the school  librarians  are  also  expected  to  master  in  handling  of  the  electronic  media  because  the  majority  of  their  resources  are  either  media-  or  IT-based,  so  familiarity/expertise  in  these  areas  is  one  of  the  prerequisites  to  properly  run  the  school  library. 2.3 Familiarity  with  Other  Subject Areas 
The fundamental aspect of school librarianship is  information literacy: the ability to access, evaluate,  and use information from a variety of sources and in  a  variety  of  formats.  Library  &  Information  Science  deals  with  many  subjects  including  management,  information technology, education, archival science,  preservation & conservation, ethics, copyright, computer  science,  documentation  &  records  management,  printing  &  publishing,  sociology,  psychology,  and  many  more.  
3.  ScHOOL  LIbrArIES    
3.1  International  Scenario  
The school library equips the students with life- long learning skills and develops imagination among them to live as responsible citizens. The mission of  the  school  library  is  to  offer  instructional  services,  books  and  instructional  resources  that  enable  the  students  to  become  critical  thinkers  and  effective  users  of  information  in  all  formats  or  media.  The  school libraries link to the wider library and information  network  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  UNESCO’s  Public  Library  Manifesto7.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  when  librarians  and  teachers  work  together,  students  will  achieve  higher  level  of literacy, reading, learning, problem-solving skills  and  ICT  skills.  School  library  is  an  integral  part  of  

========2========

RAMAIAH AND  P ILLAI: TRAINING  N EEDS Of SCHOOL  L IbRARIANS IN  I NDIA 
present education system and supports educational  goals. It develops and sustains the habit of reading  and learning in children and organises activities that  encourage  cultural  and  social  awareness.  It  works  with students, teachers, administrators and parents  to  achieve  the  mission  of  the  school. 
Similar to Public Library Manifesto, the UNESCO  also brought out School Library Manifesto in 1998.  The  purpose  of  this  Manifesto  is  to  define  and  advance  the  role  of  school  libraries  and  resource  centres in enabling students to acquire the learning  tools  and  learning  content  that  will  allow  them  to  survive; to develop their full capacities; to continue  to learn throughout their lives; and to make informed  decisions7. 
School  libraries  offer  material  relevant  to  the  needs of students and teachers, including traditional  materials such as books, magazines and newspapers,  and  material  available  in  electronic  form  through  modem technologies. The materials should complement  and enrich the school curricula’s textbooks, teaching  materials  and  methodologies.  When  teachers  and  librarians  work  together,  students  improves  their  reading,  learning,  problem  solving,  and  develop  computer  and  information  literacy. 
3.2  Titles  Used  
‘school  library’,  while  the  terms  ‘teacher-librarian’,  ‘school library media specialist’, ‘teacher documentalist’,  ‘information technologist’, and ‘information specialist’  are  meant  by  the  term  ‘school  librarian’.    3.2.5  School  Library  Media  Specialists 
    The  school  librarian  in  the  USA  is  called  ‘School  Library  Media  Specialists  (SLMS)’,  and  their  library  is  called  ‘School  Library  Media  Center  (SLMC)’. The school librarians are called with different  titles  in  different  parts  of  Europe,  however  their  roles and responsibilities are almost similar. In this  case, the librarian is expected to be an information  specialist,  curriculum  consultant,  teacher  librarian,  and having elaborate knowledge about the handling  of  electronic  information  sources. both  in Australia  and New Zealand school librarians are called ‘teacher  librarian’,  who  is  holding  recognised  qualifications  both in teaching and librarianship, and also holding  an Associate  membership  of  the Australian  Library  and Information Association. Within the broad fields  of  education  and  librarianship,  teacher  librarians  are  uniquely  qualified. 
    The  school  library  is  a  vital  teaching  and  learning  environment  in  the  school  community.  The  school  library  and  its  staff  are  integral  part  empowering  the  students  to  become  independent  
The following are the basic titles that are used in  
lifelong  learners.  Student  learning  outcomes  are  different  countries  but  their  function  is  the  same:  
enhanced through the teacher librarian’s acquisition  
3.2.1  Library  Resources  
and  organisation  of  information  resources,  the  
models,  posters,  charts,  slides  and  CD-ROMs.  Several equipment including and computer hardware  and  software  that  enable  teachers  and  learners  to  access  digital  information.  
3.2.2  School  Library 
    This term is used in its generic form to incorporate all  types  and  models  of  collection  development  and  delivery  that  provides  materials  relevant  to  a  resource-based teaching and learning, approach to  learners  and  teachers  in  schools. 
3.2.3  Teacher-librarian 
   A generic term for the various names used in  schools for teachers who manage the resource collection,  for  example,  librarians,  media  teachers,  resource  centre  teachers,  and  information  specialists.  3.2.4  School  Librarian 
   The terms ‘school library’ and ‘school librarian’  are used in this text to encompass a range of terms employed  by  different  countries  to  designate  the  policies, programmes, services, and staff of the library  within a school. Such terms as ‘information center’,  ‘documentation  center’,  ‘resource  center’,  ‘media  center’, and ‘learning center’ are included in the term  
   Include all media, such as books, periodicals,  
dissemination  and  circulation  of  learning  materials  newspapers, videos, audiotapes, three-dimensional  
and  collaboratively  planned  programs  to  integrate  
information  and  digital  literacy8.  
   The international research shows that the quality  of  student’s  learning  outcome  greatly  enhanced  by  effective school libraries9. All  learners  of  European  countries are entitled to quality SLMCs and services.  In order to achieve this in each country, the European  Union adopted and implemented the principles of the  IfLA/UNESCO school library manifesto. The schools  with  well  stocked,  well-equipped  school  libraries,  managed  by  qualified  and  motivated  professional  teacher-librarians  working  with  support  staff  will  create high-quality learning experiences. Standardised  scores  of  the  students  tend  to  be  10-20  %  higher  than  in  schools  without  this  investment  on  school  libraries10. The school library is one of the few factors  whose  contribution  to  academic  achievement  has  been  documented  empirically,  and  its  contribution  cannot  be  explained.  
 The technological developments in the information  and knowledge dissemination compel the changes in  the roles and responsibilities of the school librarians.  School library professionals in the developed countries  are  now  engaged  in  some  exciting  activities  so  as  to  remain  effective  in  the  midest  of  fast-moving  technological  changes.  They  are  providing  smart  researching methodologies and information literacy  
369 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMbER   2013 
skills  to  their  students.  They  are  using  Web  2.0  technologies  including  blogs  to  give  updates  on  resources as well as to interact with users and host  collaborative  discussions,  connecting  their  readers  on  social  networking  sites  such  as  MySpace  or  Orkut.  The  RSS  tools  are  used  to  subscribe  new  information  services  by  the  staff  and  students  involved in creating online library-related resources,  podcasts  and  videocasts  for  the  audio  tours  of  the  library. As  a  result,  school  libraries  are  now  called  ‘Learning Resource Centers’ and the school librarians  as  the  ‘Learning  Resource  Centre  Managers’.  The  American  Association  of  School  Librarians  (AASL)  and  Association  for  Educational  Communications  and  Technology  (AECT)11   identified  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  school  librarian  as  school  library media specialist, as teacher, as instructional  partner, as information specialist, and as programme  administrator.  
Around  the  world,  instructors  are  reinventing  themselves  as  21st   century  digital  teachers  in  this  new  technology-based  classroom  environment.  Nowadays  mobile  digital  devices  are  more  and  convenient  because  digital  curricular  materials  are  more comprehensive in scope and content, and the  classroom  is  now  connected  with  the  world.  As  a  result,  classrooms  are  becoming  more  interactive  and  students  are  increasingly  engaged.  Teachers  and  instructors  can  use  the  opportunity  to  present  these  new  technologies  and  take  their  profession  to the next level of performance and sophistication.  Now  it  is  the  time  for  education  leaders  to  make  the investment in professional development to help  the  workforce  seize  the  future.  According  to  Carl  Harvey12  a teacher expects a School Library Media  Specialist  as  a:  teacher,  collaborator,  resource  locator, technology literate, staff developer, innovator,  manager, and is flexible. Also he/she loves literature  and  loves  to  learn,  and  also  lends  helping  hand.  but  most  of  the  time,  the  Library  Media  Specialist  does  not  work  alone.  To  run  the  school  library  programme successfully everyone – the library media  specialist,  teachers,  administration,  and  the  library  media  staff  would  work  together  for  the  benefit  of  the  students.  
3.3  National  Scenario  
Due to lack of professional training programmes  (both degree and diploma level), most of the libraries  are  looked  after  by  the  regular  teachers  as  an  additional  duty  so  they  cannot  do  any  professional  work.  because  of  that  their  regular  teaching  also  hampers  so  there  is  an  urgent  need  in  India  to start  professional  training  programme  to  train  the  school  librarians  that  suits  to  the  requirements  of  the  current  needs  of  schools.  To  study  the  existing situation and needs of all types of schools  no  research  work  was  done  in  India  except  the  
370 
School  Libraries  Committee  of  the  Indian  Library  Association  surveyed  all  school  libraries  in  Delhi  during  1998  but  the  report  is  not  available  for  this  review.  besides  that,  the  following  seminars  were  conducted in India but most of them did not publish  their  proceedings: 
(a) Role  of  school  libraries  in  quality  education,  
organised  by  NCERT,  New  Delhi  during  10-11  
february,  2009. 
(b) School  libraries  and  reading,  an  international  
conference, organised by Vidya bhawan Society,  
Udaipur, Rajastan held during 3-5 October 2008,  
and 
(c)  Manpower  in  school  libraries  in  India:  Present  
position and prospective requirements. National  
seminar on school libraries and education system,  
organised by KLA, Trivandrum, 19-20 November  
1998.  
Out of the 28 states of the Union of India, only  17 states have passed the legislation for the Public  Library  Act.  In  India,  school  libraries  are  facing  lot  of  problems  ranging  from  inadequate  space  for  keeping  books,  reading  space  for  students,  lack  of  professionally  trained  staff  to  manage  them  properly13.  Non-availability  of  regular  funds  for  acquiring  reading  materials  is  a  major  problem  faced by most of the school libraries in government  and semi-government sectors. These schools have  only  limited  amalgamated  funds  such  as  parent- teacher association fund which is used to purchase  a small number of approved textbooks. The ad-hoc  system  existing  among  school  libraries  is  running  throughout  the  country  due  to  absence  of  specific  guidelines and standards for their sustained growth.  Rural  schools  are  lagging  much  behind  to  urban  schools,  in  terms  of  professionally  trained  library  staff and other resources. Therefore, India in need  of  school  librarians  training  programme  to  produce  professional  school  librarians,  and  at  the  same  time proper guidelines and mechanisms have to be  developed  to  standardise  the  school  libraries  both  at  state  and  central  governments  level. 
After setting up of UGC’s INfLIbNET, the college  and university libraries have developed to a greater  extent but the school libraries are totally neglected  in  India.  According  to  the  7th   All  India  Education  Survey,  77.24  %  secondary  schools  and  89.59  %  higher secondary schools are having library facility  whereas in 6th  Survey out of total 65,564 secondary  schools, the percentages for secondary and higher  secondary schools having library facility was 80.65 %  and  90.21  %  respectively.  However,   there  are  no  trained librarians working in most of Indian schools,  although the central government has made libraries  as centres to raise the literacy rate in the country14.  Their resources in terms of staff and funds are scarce,  as these have received the least priority. The school  

========4========

RAMAIAH AND  P ILLAI: TRAINING  N EEDS Of SCHOOL  L IbRARIANS IN  I NDIA 
libraries  neither  have  good  collection  nor  sufficient  space  because  of  the  financial  constraints.  As  a  result,  the  school  libraries  are  unable  to  inculcate  the  reading  habits  among  the  children  and  help  in  achieving  information  literacy.  In  1998,  the  School  Library Committee of the Indian Library Association  surveyed all school libraries in Delhi and found that  most  of  the  government  primary  schools  had  no  library at all and the libraries in secondary schools  are  substandard.  The  committee  stressed  for  the  need  for  school  library  and  it  may  be  made  as  the  hub  of  the  school.  for  them  it  is  one  of  the  best  marking  tools  to  attract  large  number  of  students  to  their  school.  After  privatisation  of  education  in  the country, the majority the public (private) schools  were able to set-up some what better library facilities  including staff, collections and services as compared  to  the  government  schools.  
The  national  seminar  on  the  ‘Role  of  School  Libraries in quality education’ 10-11 february 2009,  New Delhi, NCERT has submitted a report with the  15  recommendations,  out  of  which  following  points  related  to  the  training  needs  of  school  librarians  are: 
(i) The  post  of  a  professionally  trained  librarian  
may  be  including  in  the  skeleton  staff  of  the  
secondary schools not with standing the strength  
of  students. 
(ii) The school library budget should be of at least  
5  %  of  the  school’s  budget. 
(iii)  National  census  of  school  libraries  in  India  is  
strongly  recommended. 
(iv) LIS courses to add school librarianship modules  
in  universities  and  vocational  stream. (v) Standards  for  libraries  and  services  should  be  
developed  by  the  apex  bodies  in  the  form  of  
handbooks/manuals. 
Though  India  is  one  of  the  top  producers  of  technically trained manpower in the world, the school  education  system  is  not  at  all  comparable  to  other  developed countries. Many countries like USA, UK,  Canada,  Australia,  etc.  already  formulated  school  libraries  guidelines  long  back  at  national  level  and  providing quality services to their school community  but  in  India  neither  standards  nor  guidelines  are  established  for  setting-up  of  school  libraries  and  also  for  appointment  of  school  librarians.  3.4 roles  of  School  Libraries  in  India 
In  India,  the  library  was  considered  as  an  important  part  of  school  since  it  is  a  store  house  of  knowledge  and  the  activities  were  confined  to issue and return of books only. Nowadays the school  library  is  expected  to  serve  the  students  and  the  teaching community in a most professional manner,  thus the roles are multifaceted and manifolds.  The  services  render  by  some  of  the  school  libraries  in  
India  including:  
(a)  Reference  service; 
(b)  Information  dissemination;  and  
(c) book  issue  and  return,  etc. 
Dr  S.R.  Ranganathan  stated  that  the  school  libraries  should  act  as  laboratories  for  students  and  the  librarians  should  function  as  guides  to  help  them  in  learning  and  using  the  books  for  improvement  of  knowledge  and  scholarship.  The  school  libraries  are  managed  by  trained  librarians  in  case  of  public/private  and  a  few  government  schools, and providing services like issuing of books  and  story  telling  hours.  Whereas,  the  situation  in  rural areas is quite opposite, the book almirahs are  mostly  locked  and  the  libraries  are  in  bad  shape.   besides  to  these  services,  once  in  a  while  school  libraries also arrange book exhibitions to the readers  for  selecting  the  books. 
The role of school library is to act as a gateway  to knowledge and play an important role in inculcating  the  love  for  reading  among  the  students.  The  school  library  is  an  integral  part  of  the  educational  process. Encouraging at the right age, the children  are sure to develop love towards books. The school  library should provide information and ideas that are  fundamental  to  functioning  successfully  in  today’s  information  and  knowledge  based  society.  The  school library equips students with life-long learning  skills  and  develops  the  imagination,  enabling  them  to  live  as  responsible  citizens.  The  mission  of  the  school library is to nurture the educational process15.  According  to  UNESCO  the  following  are  essential  to the development of information literacy, teaching,  learning  and  culture,  and  are  core  school  library  services: supporting and enhancing educational goals  as outlined in the school’s mission and curriculum;  developing  and  sustaining  the  lifelong  habit  and  enjoyment  of  reading  and  learning  in  children;  offering  opportunities  for  experiences  in  creating  and using information for knowledge, understanding,  imagination and enjoyment; supporting all students  in  learning  and  practicing  skills  for  developing  and  using  information,  regardless  of  form,  format  or  medium,  and  including  sensitivity  to  the  oral  tradition; providing a school information center that  gives access to local, national and global resources  and  opportunities  that  expose  learners  to  diverse  ideas, experiences and opinions; organising activities  that  encourage  cultural  and  social  awareness  and  sensitivity; having staff trained in information services  and  education  who  is  recognised  members  of  the  school  community,  work  with  students,  teachers,  administrators and parents to achieve the mission of  the school; proclaiming the concept that intellectual  freedom and unrestricted access to information are  essential  to  effective  and  responsible  citizenship  and  participation  in  a  democracy. 
371 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMbER   2013 
Therefore,  the  school  library  should  fulfill  all  these  functions  by  developing  relevant  policies  and  programmes  based  on  guidelines  provided  and  standards  established  by  professional  bodies;  selecting and acquiring resources; providing physical  and  intellectual  access  to  appropriate  sources  of  information;  providing  instructional  facilities;  and  employing  trained  staff. 
4.  ScHOOL  LIbrArY  STANDArDS  &  
GUIDELINES  
or  international  agencies.  Library  standards  are  
5.1 Influence  on  Tests  Scores 
Many studies found that students score an average  of  10-20  %  higher  on  reading  and  achievement  tests  when  their  school  has  a  strong  library  media  program16-18. This effect remains the same, regardless  of  other  school  conditions  such  as  student-teacher  ratio, overall per-pupil spending, student demographics  and community socio-economic conditions. In addition  to  the  above  results,  qualitative  research  shows  that  the  relationship  is  causal:  however,  effective  
It was found that successful library media program  
The  school  library  is  essential  for  literacy,  
library media programs directly contribute to higher  education  and  information  provision  as  well  as  for  
student  achievement19,20  . 
economic, social and cultural development of a nation.  
Hence,  the  school  libraries  must  have  adequate  
is  made  up  of  numerous  important  elements,  and  and  sustained  funding  for  trained  staff,  materials,  
researchers  have  identified  a  number  of  specific  technologies and facilities. It is the responsibility of These  individual  factors  can  be  categorised  into  
factors that correlate with higher student achievement.  local,  regional  and  national  authorities  that  school  
libraries meeting the standards established by national (i)  
the  following  four  main  categories: 
Research has shown that student achievement  used to measure and evaluate the condition of the  
libraries as well as the degree of their development.  
Standards  can  have  an  international,  national  and  
regional  scope.  Internationally,  standards  are  not  
only  developed  by  the  library  organisations,  such  
as  International  Association  of  School  Libraries  (IASL),  IfLA,  UNESCO,and  ISO.  However,  the  
School Library Manifesto15,1998 version issued by  
UNESCO  became  the  standard  for  all  the  school  
is higher ‘when Library media centers are having  more staff and opened for long working hours’21-24.  A  professionally  trained  librarian  can  optimise  each of the other impact factors such as quality  of information resources, level of patron usage,  and  level  of  instructional  collaboration,  and  maximising  their  program’s  impacts  on  student  achievement.  Longer  opening  hours  result  in  greater  optimisation  of  these  impacts18.  
librarians  in  the  world.  In  India  so  far  national  (ii)  When ‘Library media centers have larger collections  standards and guidelines for libraries, library services  
and  staffing  are  not  formulated  so  the  condition  
of better quality information resources, periodicals,  etc.’23-24   also,  achievement  is  higher  in  schools  where the library media center provides access  to  online  information23-25.  
of  school  libraries  is  not  in  good  shape.  This  is  
directly  showing  impact  on  the  quality  of  teaching  
and  learning  and  total  education  being  provided  to  
(iii) When ‘Library media centers and resources are  
the  school  children.  
5.  IMPAcT  OF  ScHOOL  LIbrArY  MEDIA  
cENTEr   ON  STUDENTS 
SLMC being a knowledge centre will surely have  impact  on  the  students.  The  school  library  plays  a  very  important  role  on  the  overall  development  of  the students to transform them into knowledgeable  persons.  Their  reading  skills,  information  seeking  skills and the knowledge about the library resources  will  be  improved  due  to  the  SLMC  and  the  SLMS.  Research  studies  continue  to  show  that  an  active  school  library  programme  run  by  a  trained  teacher  librarian  or  resource  teacher  makes  a  significant  difference on the student’s learning outcome. Numerous  international  studies  have  demonstrated  a  link  between  student  achievement  and  the  presence  of  professionally staffed and accessible school libraries  and  some  of  them  are  discussed  in  the  following  sections.  Studies  have  also  shown  that  reading  enjoyment is a significant factor in improving student  performance not only in literacy, but in science and  mathematics  as  well. 
372 
used more frequently by students and staff’18,21-22,25 the  level  of  usage  is  partially  a  function  of  the  accessibility  of  the  facility  and  its  resources,  and this level of accessibility is also associated  with higher student achievement18. Test  scores  are  also  higher  in  schools  where  the  library  operates  on  a  flexible  schedule  instead  of  a  fixed  rotation26-27.  
(iv)  When  ‘Library  media  specialistss  spend  more  
time  collaborating  with  classroom  teachers  to  
teach information literacy curriculum standards’,  
more often students receive information literacy  
instruction which leads to higher test scores21.  
Student achievement is higher when information  
literacy instruction is integrated with the subject- 
area curriculum22-25.  Student achievement is also  
higher when librarian collaborates with classroom  
teachers  to  teach  information  literacy21-22,25-27. 
5.2 Influence  on character built-up 
School library media programmes are aimed to  give the students a balanced and rational thinking,  

========6========

RAMAIAH AND  P ILLAI: TRAINING  N EEDS Of SCHOOL  L IbRARIANS IN  I NDIA 
to  realise  their  responsibility  in  the  society  and  to  have  a  good  character  built-up.  Interpersonal  and  self-directional skills have four main skills, of which  the  fourth  one  is  social  responsibility:  acting  as  responsible citizens with the interests of the larger  community in mind; demonstrating ethical behavior  in  personal,  workplace,  and  community  contacts28.  SLMS teaches the students about ethics, social issue,  copyright issues, collaborate work, equal respect to  others  work,  etc.,  that  leads  to  good  character.  5.3 Impact  on  Social  Environment 
The  society  in  which  children  live  has  lot  of  impact on them. It is quite natural that the influence  of  the  social  environment  on  the  children  may  be  positive or negative. The children are taught to live  in  the  society.  This  means  that  they  are  educated  to live in the community and adjust with the society.   Social skills are part of the curriculum of the school  education. The responsibility of teaching social skills  to children lies on School Library Media Specialist.  They promote social skills whenever they introduce  activities  that  encourages  teens  to  make  friends  and  work  together29. 
6.  IMPAcT  OF  ScHOOL  LIbrArY  ON  
TEAcHErS AND  TEAcHING 
Teachers are the pillars of the school education.  They have good knowledge in their subject area and  processing excellent teaching skills to conduct class  teaching.  The  Library  is  a  great  treasure  for  them.  In fact their knowledge of library resources and the  skills of utilising the electronic media tools enhance  their  efficiency  in  teaching  and  understanding  the  student’s  requirements.  The  library  resources  add  new  knowledge  to  teachers  and  make  them  feel  refreshed  in  their  subject  field.  Thus,  the  impact  of  school  library  on  teachers  and  teaching  is  in  many  folds.  
partners,  collection  development  activities,  and  the  SLMS  will  have  positive  impact  on  students’  achievement31. 
6.2   c ombined  Effort  of  Teachers  and  SLMS 
Though  they  do  different  type  of  works,  all  the  school staff work towards achieving the goal or the  motto  of  the  school.  Classroom  teachers  work  on  the  syllabus,  reading  specialists  transforming  each  student as an expert in reading, and the SLMS trains  them  as  effective  users  of  library  collections  and  other resources. Ultimately all these factors will help  the  students  to  achieve  best  results.  The  practice  in  several  developed  countries  shows  that  SLMS  collaborate  with  classroom  teachers  in  designing,  delivering and assessing authentic learning activities,  providing students with opportunities to practice and  refine  life-long  skills  of  research.  
With a deep knowledge of wide variety of authentic  reading materials available in the SLMC and beyond,  the  SLMS  has  a  key  role  in  supporting  print  and  online reading comprehension strategy instruction in  collaboration  with  classroom  teachers  and  reading  specialists.  SLMS  co-design,  co-implement,  and  co-evaluate  interdisciplinary  lessons  and  units  of  instruction that result in increased student learning10.  SLMS  has  teaching  role  to  act  as  co-teacher  of  information literacy to students and in-service trainer  of  teachers.    
6.3 Improvement  of  Teachers’  IT  Skills 
Teachers are supposed to know the information  resources that are available in the library and also  use of electronic materials to greater extent so that  they  will  deliver  quality  teaching  to  students.  This  knowledge  can  be  well  acquired  by  the  regular visit  to  the  library  and  in  collaboration  with  the  librarian.  School  librarians  should  teach  students  and  teachers  how  to  search  for,  evaluate,  and  use  
Media  Specialists 
It  is  proved  beyond  doubt  that  a  school  needs  library and librarian.  Earlier research in this direction  has shown that the impact of library on the students’  achievements  such  as  reading,  comprehension  and  so  on.  It  is  also  essential  to  see  the  impact  of  school  library  on  teachers  and  teaching  which  ultimately  effect  on  the  results  of  the  school.  In  a  study it was found that due to good relationship and  cooperation between school librarian and teachers,  one can create conducive educational environment  and strengthen the bond and mutual respect between  these groups. The teacher participants describe the  roles  of  the  SLMS  to  be  more  important  that  what  is actually being practiced in their school settings30.  It was found that the interaction between the school  administration,  teachers  as  collaborative  planning  
6.1 Teachers  Perceptions  about  School  Library  
the information efficiently and effectively. The SLMS  
is an expert and well versed with the operations of  
the electronic equipments so it teaches the students  and teachers about the operations of the electronic  instruments which they are supposed to use during  the  teaching  and  learning.  In  a  study  it  was  found  that the participants had varied perceptions, beliefs  and  expectations  on  the  subject.  However,  all  the  participants agreed that SLMS should teach computer  skills  to  both  students  and  teachers  and  assist  students  and  teachers  in  locating  resources32.  
7.  TrAINING  NEEDS  OF  ScHOOL  
LIbrArIANS 
Training is given to personnel for getting required  knowledge about the work and the working condition.  SLMS  is  trained  professional  like  a  teacher  to  handle  the  school  children  and  also  teaches  about  the  maintenance  of  the  school  library.  The  SLMS  
373 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMbER   2013 
is  trained  in  such  a  way  that  he/she  may  be  able  to  handle  the  electronic  media  equipments,  the  students  in  the  classroom  or  in  the  library,  and  also  the  library  activities. 
7.1 Qualifications  of  School  Library  Media  
Specialists  in  Developed countries 
The school librarian should have the qualities of  both the librarian and the teacher. He must be able  to  think  in  terms  of  the  needs  and  interests  of  the  school students. The school librarian should have a  wide knowledge of books, ability to organise library  materials for the efficient service, and considerable  experience  in  reference  work.  Even  though  an  individual  may  desire  to  have  an  MLIS  degree,  a  school  library  media  specialist  programme  may  be  more suitable based on their strengths, weaknesses  and  overall  career  goals33. 
A  School  Library  Media  Specialists  bachelor's  degree programmes can be completed in four years  in several universities in USA, UK, Canada, Australia  and  their  list  is  available  at  http://www.sldirectory. com/libsf/resf/jobs.html. However, master's program  in  this  field  takes  two  years  after  completion  of  undergraduate  programme  in  many  western  and  European universities. The job description describes  the roles and responsibilities of a particular position.  It  may  vary  from  general  to  specific  depending  on  the  particular  school.      
7.2 Skills  of  School  Library  Media  Specialists 
The efficient use of School Library Media Center  depends  on  the  skills  of  the  SLMS.  The  SLMS  is  supposed to be a ‘teacher librarian’ who is capable  of teaching reading practice, story telling, handling  the  electronic  media  equipments  to  students  and  teaching them about their functions and operations.  The  functions  and  skills  of  school  librarians,  being  an efficient communicator, keeping abreast with the  current  new  technologies,  and  being  able  to  make  sure their students have open access to information.  They must also be ready to change, learn and grow  so  that  their  programmes  and  activities  respond  to  the  best  resources  for  teachers  to  teach  and  students  to  learn.  
SLMS  have  crucial  roles  to  play  in  student’s  learning  as  curriculum  developer,  instructional  design  consultants,  information  specialists,  ICT  skills  teachers,  staff  developers,  collaborators28.  School librarians are still recognised as specialists  in  the  two  main  roles  of  the  school  library  is  the  provision  and  organisation  of  information  for  the  purpose of increasing the knowledge of each student  and  the  integration  of  information  handling  skills  into  the  curriculum.  They  also  need  to  possess  sufficient  management  skills  to  operate  the  school  library smoothly and successfully for the fulfillment  of  these  roles. 
374 
7.3 Library  Training  in  India 
All most all the Indian school librarians are not  specialised  in  school  librarianship  because  such  training  is  not  available  in  the  country  and  also  there  is  no  prerequisite  for  their  jobs  selection.  It  is  the  general  opinion  of  the  educationists  all  over  the  world  that  the  job  of  the  school  librarian  is  entirely different from that of a college or university  librarian.  The  research  on  this  subject  also  proves  the same. The school librarian is supposed to deal  with the elementary school students to the teenage  students.  The  activities  such  as  reading  practice,  comprehension,  story  telling  needs  special  skills  and  psychological  understanding  of  the  students.  Hence, the school librarian of India may have some  specialised  training  in  order  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  the  school  students. 
Only small percentage (9.38 %) of librarians in  secondary and higher secondary schools are having  professionally  trained  librarians.  The  professional  qualifications of these librarians vary from certificate  course or a Diploma or a bachelors degree in Library  and Information Science. because of that the school  libraries in India are facing a lot of problems ranging  from  inadequate  space  for  keeping  books,  reading  space, unsuitable school building and untrained staff.  Most  of  the  schools  do  not  provide  required  basic  services to their users because of the appointment  of  non-qualified  staff  in  their  libraries.  
7.4 Teaching  Skills  as  Part  of  Training 
The  role  of  school  librarian  includes  teacher  librarian which stresses the librarian to be a teacher  in the classroom hence, first of all the school librarian  has  to  be  a  trained  teacher  also.Teaching  skills  are  based  on  with  sociological  and  psychological  principles. Getting acquainted with the teaching skills  will make the job easier for the school librarian while  dealing  the  students  in  the  class  or  in  the  library.  As  teacher,  they  also  hold  classes  a  few  times  a  week  or  month  on  proper  library  use,  research  techniques,  on  use  of  DVDs  and  A-V  equipments  and  on  the  operations  of  projectors33. 
7.5   c hild  Psychology-based  Training 
The presence of SLMC and SLMS in the school  is  a  psychological  booster  to  the  school.  With  the  help of the school library and librarian, the teachers  can make their teaching more effective. The librarian  can  also  help  a  teacher  to  develop  professionally.  The collaboration between a teacher and the school  librarian  makes  a  difference  in  student’s  learning  and progress. Sometimes a teacher needs a friend;  one  of  the  advantages  of  working  with  the  SLMS  is  companionship.  

========8========

RAMAIAH AND  P ILLAI: TRAINING  N EEDS Of SCHOOL  L IbRARIANS IN  I NDIA 
8.    cON cLUSIONS 
The  information  explosion  has  changed  the  knowledge and skills required for productive living in  the 21st  century. Students must become efficient and  effective users of information. UNESCO’s Manifesto15 affirms that ‘the school library is integral part of the  educational  process’,  therefore  the  school  library  services  should  foster  and  enhance  the  school’s  mission  and  curriculum,  and  should,  consequently,  provide  the  school  community  with  a  stimulating  environment  for  all  learners.  The  several  goals  outlined in the IfLA-UNESCO Manifesto are so far  met  partly  only,  due  to  lack  of  collections,  space,  equipment and staff. Skills of working collaboratively  with  teachers,  administrators,  and  parents,  should  be  taught  to  school  librarians.  Staff  development  programs to school librarians are rarely provided in  India.The  university  departments  offering  courses  in librarianship and information management should  introduce  new  programmes  or  courses  in  school  libraries, so that newly trained professionals would  be  able  to  meet  the  needs  of  all  levels  of  schools.  At  the  same  time,  professional  associations  and  academic  departments  should  also  run  short  term  courses including school librarians training in Library  automation,  e-resources,ICT  tools,  school  library  standards,  and  quality  services.  
Research findings demonstrated that if the library  staff  are  professionally  trained  and  qualified,  they  make a difference in the school library services. This  situation in this field varies very much from country  to country and sometimes within the same country.  School  libraries  can  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  student’s  achievement  by  providing  instructional  materials aligned to the curriculum; by collaborating  with  teachers,  administrators  and  parents  and  by  extending  their  hours  of  operation  beyond  the  school day. The school librarians spends more time  in  collaborating  with  classroom  teachers  to  teach  information literacy curriculum standards. Collaborative  planning  also  plays  a  key  role  in  how  the  media  center  impact  on  the  student’s  achievements.  The  media specialists and teachers must work together  in  order  to  best  use  of  the  media  centres  by  the  students. 
Helping  teachers  should  make  the  best  use  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  new  technologies  to  their students. Knowing how to identify, locate, access  and  utilise  information  is  the  key  to  achievement.  Out  of  four  roles  of  school  librarians,  working  effectively  with  teachers,  administrators  and  other  staff  to  provide  them  with  specific  opportunities  to  develop  sophisticated  skills  in  information  literacy  including the use of IT6. Effective teacher librarians  are educators to both teachers and students. They  share in the teaching and learning activities of their  
students  and  fellow  teachers.  They  manage  their  library to support staff and volunteers to guide and  evolve  the  library  media  program.  They  participate  in  all  the  meetings  with  administration  to  align  the  library  with  the  instructional  goals  of  school.  
 Education for school librarianship is not offered  anywhere  in  India  except  a  few,  which  offers  as  certificate  or  diploma  level  courses  which  are  not  so  popular  in  the  country.  Many  countries  including  USA,  UK, Australia,  Canada,  etc  offering  as special programme or specialisation in a general  LIS programme. More often, in-service training and  post-graduate courses offered to a teacher wanting  to  enter  in  the  field  of  school  librarianship,  the  possibility  to  become  educated  and  trained  in  the  school  librarianship  and  to  acquire  some  relevant  competencies  (i.e.  in  school  library  organisation  and  management,  or  curriculum  related  activities).  It is high time that Indian LIS schools should open  their eyes and make their contribution to education  by  providing  quality  manpower  who  are  able  to  deliver  quality  school  education  in  the  country  sooner  than  later.  
rEFErENcES 
1. 21st   century  workplace,  2005. 
2. 21st   century  skills  for  21 
st 
  century  jobs,  1999. 3. 21st   century  communities,  2002. 
4.   f argo,  Lucille  f.  The  library  in  the  school.   
American Library Association, Chicago, Illinois.  
1947,  p.22. 
5. NCERT.  National  seminar  on  role  of  school  
libraries  in  quality  education,  10-11  february  
2009,  New  Delhi. 
6. Stanley,  Deborah.  A  practical  guide  to  what  
library media teachers actually do! CSLA Journal,  
2006, 30(1),  8-11. 
7. UNESCO.  UNESCO’s  public  library  manifesto.  
UNESCO,  Paris,  1998. 
8. American Association of School Libraries  (AASL).  
The  library  media  specialist’s  role  in  reading  
position  statement.  Amer.  Asso.  School  Lib.,  
2009, 26(2),  2. 
9. School Library Association, Republic of Ireland  
(SLARI). The  school  library  in  the  21st   century  
an  agenda  for  change,  2004.  http://www.slari. 
ie/Policy/SLARIpolicy.pdf/ (accessed on 30 May  
2012). 
10. Lance,  K.C.  &  Loertscher,  D.V.  Powering  
achievement:  School  library  media  programs  
make  a  difference:  The  evidence.  Ed.  2.  Hi  
Willow  Research  &  Publishing,  Salt  Lake  City,  
UT,  2003. 
11. American Association  of  School  Librarians  and  
Association  for  Educational  Communications  
and  Technology.  Information  power:  building  
partnerships  for  learning.  American  Library  
Association,  Chicago,  1998. 
375 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  5, SEPTEMbER   2013 
12. Harvey, C. What should a teacher expect a school  
library specialist to be? Lib. Media Connection,  
2005, 23(5),  23. 
13. Singh, Jagtar.  Status of school library development  
in  India.  Sri  Lanka J.  Lib.  Inf.  Manag.,  2005,  
1(1),  7-10. 
14. NCERT Sixth all india school education survey.  
NCERT,  New  Delhi,  1993. 
15. IfLA/UNESCO  school  library  manifesto. 16. Lance,  K.C.  &  Loertscher,  D.V.  Powering  
achievement:  School  library  media  programs  
make  a  difference:  the  evidence  mounts.  Ed.  
3.  Hi  Willow  Research  &  Publishing,  Salt  Lake  
City,  2005. 
17. Scholastic.  School  libraries  work!  Scholastic  
Library Publishing, 2008. http://librarypublishing. 
scholastic.com/content/stores/LibraryStore/pages/ 
images/SLW3_2008.pdf/  (accessed  on  30  May  
2012). 
18. Quantitative resources, LLC.  Show me connection:  
How school library media center services affect  
student  achievement.  Missouri  Department  of  
Elementary  and  Secondary  Education,  2003.  
http://www.dese.mo.gov/divimprove/curriculum/ 
librarystudy/plainenglish.pdf/. 
19. Todd,  R.J.  &  Kuhlthau,  C.C.  Student  learning  
through  Ohio  school  libraries:  background,  
methodology  and  report  of  findings.  Ohio  
Educational  Library  Media  Association,  Ohio,  
2004.  http://www.oelma.org/StudentLearning/ 
documents/OELMAReportoffindings.pdf/ (accessed  
on  30  May  2012). 
20. Todd,  R.J.  Report  of  Phase  Two  of  Delaware  
School Library Survey: Student Learning through  
Delaware School Libraries. Governor’s Task force  
on School Libraries, 2005. http://www2.lib.udel. 
edu/taskforce/study/phasetwo.pdf/ (accessed on  
30  May  2012). 
21. Lance,  K.C.,  et  al.  Information  empowered:  
The  school  librarian  as  an  agent  of  academic  
achievement  in  Alaska  schools.  Alaska  State  
Library,  1999.  http://www.library.state.ak.us/ 
pdf/anc/infoemxs.pdf/  (accessed  on  30  May  
2012). 
22. Lance,  K.C.;  Hamilton-Pennell,  C.  &  Rodney,  
M.J.  How  school  librarians  help  kids  achieve  
standards: The second Colorado study. Library  
Research  Service,  2000.  http://www.lrs.org/ 
documents/lmcstudies/CO/execsumm.pdf/ (accessed  
on  30  May  2012). 
23. Lance, K.C. The impact of school library media  
centers on academic achievement. School  Lib.  
Media  Quart.,  1994,   22 (3),  161-65. 
24.   b aumbach, D. Making the grade: The status of  
school library media centers in the Sunshine state  
and how they contribute to student achievement,  
2002. http://www.sunlink.ucf.edu/makingthegrade/ 
summary.pdf/  (accessed  on  30  May  2012). 
376 
25. Lance, K.C.; Rodney, M.J. & Hamilton-Pennell,  
C.  Measuring  up  to  standards:  The  impact  of  
school  library  programs  &  information  literacy  
in Pennsylvania schools. Pennsylvania Citizens  
for better Libraries, 2000. http://www.statelibrary. 
state.pa.us/libraries/lib/libraries/measuringup.pdf/  
(accessed  on  30  May  2012). 
26. Lance, K.C.; Rodney, M.J. & Hamilton-Pennell,  
C.  Powerful  libraries  make  powerful  learners:  
The  Illinois  study.  Illinois  School  Library  Media  
Association,  2005.  http://www.islma.org/pdf/ 
ILStudy2.pdf/  (accessed  on  30  May  2012). 27. Lance,  K.C.;  Rodney,  M.J.  &  Russell,  b.  How  
students,  teachers,  and  principals  benefit  from  
strong school libraries: The Indiana study. Indiana  
Library  federation,  2007.  http://www.ilfonline. 
org/AIME/indata.htm/  (accessed  on  30  May  
2012). 
28. Schroeder,  Eileen  E.  &  Zarinna  E.A.  Student  
learning:  Documenting  the  impact  of  school  
library media programme. Educational Media and  
Technology  Yearbook,  2007,  Vol.  32.  98-127. 29. Jones,  Jami  L.  I  build  resiliency:  The  role  of  
the school media specialist. School  Lib.  World  
Wide,  2003, 9(2),  90-93. 
30. Ragle,  Kelli  Steverson.  The  perception  of  high  
school teachers on the roles and responsibilities  
of  library  media  specialists.  Walden  University,   
2009.  EdD  Thesis.    
31. Pruitt-Annisette, brenda. Highly qualified school  
library media specialist:  Perception of teacher’s  
preparation training requirements and the impact  
on  P-12  students’  achievement.  Clark  Atlanta  
University,  2008.  EdD  Thesis.  
32. Hayden, J. Perceptions, beliefs, and expectations  
of  pre-service  and  experienced  middle  school  
teachers  regarding  the  roles  of  school  library  
media specialists. Georgia State University, Atlanta,  
2000.  Unpublished  Doctoral  Dissertation, 33. Swartz, Jonathan. School library media specialist  
programs. 2006. http://www.liscareer.com/swartz_ 
school.htm/  (accessed  on  30  May  2012). 
About  the Authors 
Dr chennupati K. ramaiah  is Professor and Head,  Department  of  Library  &  Information  Science  at  Pondicherry University, Puducherry. Prior to that he  worked as Professor & Head, Department of Library  &  Information  Science,  and  University  Librarian  at  Dravidian University, Kuppam. before that he worked  as Professor & Librarian at Muffakham Jah College  of  Engineering  &  Technology,  Hyderabad.  He  also  worked  as  the  Director,  Centre  for  Information  Science,  Mahatma  Gandhi  National  Institute  of  Research  and  Social  Action,  Hyderabad  for  two  years.  He  worked  as  an  Assistant  Professor  for  

========10========

RAMAIAH AND  P ILLAI: TRAINING  N EEDS Of SCHOOL  L IbRARIANS IN  I NDIA 
6  years  with  Nanyang  Technological  University,  Singapore  during  1999-2005.  Prior  to  that  he  was  Deputy  Director  at  DESIDOC,  DRDO,  Delhi  and  worked  for  14  years  as  Scientist.  
He  was  a  Commonwealth  Scholar  for  doing  PhD  in  UK  in  the  field  of  Information  Science  during  1989-1993.  His  formal  education  includes  Masters  degrees  in  Chemistry  and  Library  and  Information  Science.  He  is  fellow  of  Society  of  Information  Science. He has published about 100 papers and four  books. His research interests include: Multimedia &  hypertext technologies, human-computer interaction,  
user  interfaces,  designing  e-books,  e-publishing,  e-learning,  archival  informatics,  and  bibliometrics. 
Mr  K.  Nallaperumal  Pillai   is  working  as   Assistant  Librarian  at  UNESCO  Madanjeet  Singh  Institute  for  South  Asian  Regional  Co-operation,    Pondicherry  University,  Puducherry.  Prior  to  that  he worked as School Librarian at Dalhousie Public  School,  Dalhousie  and  Professional  Assistant  at  Pondicherry  University,  Puducherry.  He  has  more  than 30 years experience which includes 7 years in  school  library  and  24  years  in  university  library. 
377 

========11========

