DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 6, November 2013, pp. 433-441 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Developing a Standardised Tool for Impact Assessment of InflIbneT 
S. Ramesh* and T. Yuvaraj** *Manonmaniam Sundaranar, University, Tirunelveli–627 012 
E-mail: ramesh_msul@yahoo.co.in 
**Department of Psychology, Manonmaniam, Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli–627 012 
E-mail: yuvarajpsychologist@gmail.com 
AbSTrAcT 
This  paper  aims  to  develop  a  standardised  tool  to  measure  the  impact  of  INFLIBNET  services.The methodology  involves  validation  of  the  impact  assessment  scale  by  establishing  reliability  and  validity.    Construct validity was established initially, based on previous research fndings on impact assessment.   This  was  followed  by  content  validity  by  asking  opinion  from  three  experts,  who  rated  the  scale  to  be  highly valid, along with certain modifcations. Later, Test Retest reliability was established using data from  21 respondents with an interval 75 days. ‘r’ value ranges from 0.46 – 0.49 for different subscales. Alpha  co-effciency was also calculated c value range between 0.54 and 0.80, Thus, the scale was found to be  stable and valid and ready for identifying impact of INFLIBNET services. The paper involves application of  Psychometry in the feld of Library Science, emphasizing the importance of standardisation in assessment  
of any new resources/ service. 
Keywords: INFLIBNET, impact, impact assessment, standardisation, validity, reliability, RAINI scale      
1. InTrODUcTIOn 
1.1  InflIbneT 
University  Grants  Commission  (UGC)  has  created  an  autonomous  body  for  digitalisation  of  library  resources  of  all  academic  and  research  institutes, which is now called Information and Library  Network (INFLIBNET). INFLIBNET is an autonomous  Inter-University  Centre  (IUC)  of  University  Grants  Commission  (UGC).  It  is  involved  in  creating  the  infrastructure for the sharing of library and information  resources and services among academic and research  institutions  in  India.  INFLIBNET  works  jointly  with  Indian  University  Libraries  to  shape  the  future  of  academic  libraries  in  the  formation  of  information  environment1.  It  is  a  multiple  service  network  that  offers catalogue-based services, database services,  document supply services, collection and development  and  communications  based  services2.  INFLIBNET  has  a  website  of  its  own  where  it  offers  all  these  services  under  separate  classification  categories3.  
Researchers in the field of library and information  services have explored the impact created by INFLIBNET  among  the  research  community  in  India.  However,  most  of  them  have  attempted  only  on  looking  at  very  specific  services  of  INLIFBNET,  especially  on  e-journals.  A  major  reason  is  that  most  of  the  end  users  of  INFLIBNET  are  found  to  be  using  
Received 30 November 2012, Online published 13 November 2013   
e-journals alone for their research purpose and not  many of them are aware of other valuable services  of  INFLIBNET. 
To  understand  the  impact  of  INFLIBNET,  it  is  essential  to  take  into  consideration,  all  of  the  services  rendered  by  INFLIBNET.  But  it  has  so  far  been carried out by very few researchers in the field  of library science. But, to do this, a well-structured  form of assessment is required. Hence, a necessity  for developing a standard tool to assess the impact  of  INFLIBNET  is  initially  felt. 
2.  cOnSTrUcT   v AlIDITy 
To understand the impact of a service, the users  must continuously use the service and it must have  crossed a limited period of time. If the investigators  have to calculate the impact of a particular service,  then  the  service  must  be  accessed  by  a  number  of  users.  Through  these  regular  users,  the  real  impact  can  be  found.    
The impact of any service must be compulsorily  analysed by its provider. Only then, an investigator  can understand why the user uses this service and  whether this service fulfills the needs of the users.   It also confirms whether the needs of the users are  satisfied  or  if  there  are  any  other  services  which  are  more  useful  to  the  users.  If  the  needs  of  the  users are not fulfilled, the investigator must find out  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2013 
the reasons. If the investigator has understood the  nature of this impact, then the value of the services  can be understood easily. Hence, to understand the  impact  of  a  service,  impact  assessment  shows  the  real  value  of  that  service4. 
Devi & murthy5   had  done  a  study  on  issues  in  UGC-INFONET  e-journal  consortium  where,  they   concluded  that  the  impact  analysis  could  be  done  after  INFLIBNET  programme  has  achieved  a  level  of  stability.  The  inception  of  INFLIBNET  has  now  crossed over 10 years. many research scholars and  faculty  members  have  used  this  service  to  their  entire  satisfaction  in  gathering  information  in  their  respective disciplines. Therefore, it was decided to  conduct  this  study  to  explore  the  overall  impact  of  INFLIBNET, through development of a standardised  scale  of  impact  assessment. 
The  construct  variable  in  this  research  paper  is  ‘impact’  Theories  that  state  the  parameters  of  impact  tend  to  look  it  from  a  physical  science  perspective,  where  impact  simply  means  collision  of  two  particles.  Whereas,  the  term  impact  does  not  seem  to  have  conceptual  background  from  the  perspective of library science. In spite of this, there  are studies that have focused on impact assessment  of  library  resources. 
Articles  were  reviewed  in  search  of  a  strong  theory that supports the impact of library resources  in  general  and  INFLIBNET  and  e-resources  in  particular.  However, the definition of impact relates  predominantly  to  physical  or  a  chemical  sciences  where,  impact  is  considered  as  the  collision  of  particles  and  no  theory  refers  to  the  impact  as  viewed  by  the  authors  in  the  present  study.  
In one of the reviews, Hess & Klekotka6 defined  impact as “the extent to which the program makes a  difference compared to either having no program or  having an alternative program”. This was considered  for  the  present  study  as  conceptually  strong  and  having appropriateness for the present study. Thus,  keeping  this  as  conceptual  definition,  the  authors  started  searching  for  various  constructs  underlying  the  variable  ‘impact’  from  previous  literature  on  digital libraries and e-resources. This is elaborated  as  follows: 
3.    lIT erATUre  SUrvey 
Bradley5   presented  various  studies  about  the  impact  of  International  Federation  of  Library  Associations and Institutions (IFLA) upon setting up  of educational activities for librarians, from cataloging  to  internet  access  and  has  quoted  a  definition  of  impact  assessment  by  markless  &  Streatfield7   in  which  they  state  that  “impact  assessment  is,  a  process  that  aims  to  identify  the  consequences  of  an  action.  Action  can  take  many  forms”.     
Ramaiah  &  moorthy8,  studied  the  impact  of  Continuing Education Programmes (CEP) on Library  
434 
and  Information  Science  (LIS)  professionals  where  they viewed impact to be something that fills up the  gaps in university learning and keeps up-to-date with  the  technology  and  helps  in  getting  promotions. 
Banks & Dellavalle9  explained the impact factor  of the scholarly communication system. There were  five  categories  of  alternatives  to  the  impact  factor:  measures that build upon the same data that informed  the impact factor; measures that refine impact factor  data  with  ‘page  rank’  indicating  weight  electronic  resources  or  web  sites  through  the  number  of  resources  that  link  to  them;  measures  of  article  downloads  and  other  usage  factors;  recommended  systems, in which individual scholars rate the value  of articles and a group’s evaluations pooled together  collectively;  and  ambitious  measures  that  attempt  to encompass the interactions and influences of all  inputs  in  the  scholarly  communications  system.  
Bonorino  & molteni10   describe  the  impact  that  the  emergence  of  e-journals  had  exerted  on  the  different services and areas making up information  units  in  Argentine  private  universities.  Regarding  impact  assessment  in  the  library  cooperation  and  publishing area, the following topics were addressed:  the degree of cooperation in relation to inter-library  loan; libraries publishing electronic journals; and the  role of librarians in publishing the approved articles  and  also  in  posting  the  articles  in  the  web. 
Elam11  conducted a survey to find out the impact  of  e-resources  and  digital  image  databases  on  the  research methodologies of Art History field. In this,  she contacted, to Pratt Art History Professor, Dr. mary  Edwards, who praised the convenience of electronic  databases,  explaining,  “I  use  JSTOR  to  print  out  articles  to  save  time  and  prevent  harm  to  journals  caused by Xeroxing,” while other art historians were  still unsure about electronic resources. Dr. Coolleen  Sheehy,  Curator  and  Director  of  Education  at  the  Weisman  museum  of  Art,  used  online  databases  to  obtain  citations. mary  Ellyn  Johnson  of  the  San  Francisco Art  Institute,  said,  “I  like  the  simplicity  –  keyword  searches  and  advanced  searches”.  
Yi & Herlihy12  measured the impact of deploying  an open-URL link resolver, on students and faculty  for the use of electronic scholarly resources. For this,  the  California  State  University,  San marcos master  Level  Institution  was  chosen.  They  measured  two  open-URL links: (1) EbscoHost and JSTOR access  number and (2) SFX access number.  EbscoHost and  JSTOR access data were analysed by the amounts  and type of access. SFX data was analysed by the  number of sessions fulfilled in both EbscoHost and  JSTOR.  Two  levels  of  impact  were  studied.  Direct  impact was defined as any usage that can be directly  attributed  to  SFX.  Indirect  impact  was  defined  as  usage  changes  that  coincide  with  implementation  of  SFX.  A  two-tier  timeline  was  conducted  so  as  

========2========

RAmESH  & Y UVARAJ: DEVELOPING A  S TANDARDISED  T OOL FOR  Im PACT  A SSESSmENT OF  I NFLIBNET 
to  study  both  short  and  long  term  influence  of  an  Open-URL link resolver. The number of services, or  in  other  words,  the  usage  of  EbscoHost  &  JSTOR  service  have  increased.  Open  URL-link  serves  as  a short-term direct impact, after the implementation  of  SFX  at  California  State  University,  San  marcos  in  2002.  SFX  has  a  positive  short-term  impact  on  the usage of these services. On a long-term indirect  impact,  the  implementation  of  SFX  has  provided  easy  access  to  scholarly  resources.  
  Oduwole  &  Sowole 
13 
  studied  the  effect  of  a  database called ‘The Essential Electronic Agricultural  Database (TEEAL) upon library services in a Nigerian  University of Agriculture. The impact of TEEAL was  reported  as  very  easy  to  use  and  the  library  users  were  very  satisfied  with  TEEAL  because  they  can  review  information  very  fast.  It  concluded  that  the  CD-ROm   database  technology  has  enabled  users,  especially researchers, to locate relevant information  at a fast rate, with less effort and at less cost when  compared  to  hard  copy  journals.      
The  researchers  have  inferred  simultaneously  from  many  authors  who  had  studied  about  impact  assessment. They are as follows:  Libraries have to  acquire  a  large  number  and  variety  of  database  in  CD-ROm  format. For example easy-to-use workstations  with appropriate search software, which would give  users help in finding and loading the appropriate CD- ROm  discs and in using the search software 
14. User’s  accessibility to electronic databases has increased  the  awareness  of  the  value  of  information  and  has  assisted  the  nation  in  scientific  and  technological  advancement15.  Quick  information  provision,  cost  effectiveness  and  saving  of  space  are  the  benefits  of  CD-ROm16.  Users  can  access  CD-ROm   quickly  and easily. This has even positively affected library  users,  staff  service  policies  and  budgets17. 
Borgman18, et al.  have pointed out that scientific  digital libraries can support both research and teaching  applications. They provide an existing opportunity to  assess  the  usefulness  of  personal  digital  libraries  in instruction and learning. madle19, et al. proposed  a  methodology  for  evaluating  the  impact  of  the  National Electronic Library for Communicable Disease  (NeLCD) on users’ knowledge, attitude and behaviour.  Nicholas20,  et  al. 
   
noted  that  while  evaluating  the  users’  knowledge,  attitude  and  behaviour,  a  small  number  of  users  always  give  a  clear  picture  about  the individual user’s behaviour. Sumner & marlino21 proposed three approaches–cognitive tools, component  repositories,  and  knowledge  networks  with  specific  examples  drawn  from  the  Digital  Library  for  Earth  System  Education  (DLESE)  and  the  NSDL  for  educational  digital  libraries.      
Appleton22  reported upon the design, implementation  and  findings  of  a  research  study  investigating  the  perceptions  of  electronic  library  resources  within  the  UK’s  further  education  sector.     
Appleton  had  stated  the  views  of  various  authors  regarding  impact  assessment.    They  are:  Academics  working  within  the  Higher  Education  (HE) sector regarding Electronic Library Resources  (ELR)  as  having  more  use  and  impact  upon  their  teaching  and  learning,  than  their  further  education  contemporaries  do23.    
Payne24  explained how there was an increasing  interest in looking at the impact of value of libraries,  and that this must go beyond just looking at the use  of  and  satisfaction  with  library  services,  but  must  assess  what  contribution  a  library  and  information  service  makes  to  its  host  organisation. 
In case of academic libraries, this relates to how  much impact the library service has on the learning,  teaching  and  research  activities  of  the  institutions.  Select higher education libraries strategically measured  their  performance  in  a  particular  area  of  provision,  in  order  to  standardise  good  practice  in  academic  library  performance  measurement.  
One  of  the  strands  of  this  project  was  the  impact  of  investment  in  electronic  resources.  The  objectives  of  the  research  were  to  measure  the  impact  of  Electronic  Library  Resources  (ELR)  on  learning,  teaching  and  research,  to  evaluate  the  ‘usefulness’  of  ELR,  and  to  increase  the  perceived  value  of  ELR  within  the  user  community.  This  was  achieved  through  measuring  ELR  usage  statistics,  user attendance at ELR workshops, library expenditure  on  ELR,  citations  of  ELR  in  bibliographies  and  reading  lists  and  the  library  survey25.  It  would  be  more difficult to obtain real qualitative evidence that  the  use  of  ELR  in  these  contexts  have  a  positive  or  beneficial  impact  in  the  actual  teaching  and  learning  activity  of  the  institution.  
Jay  &  Webber26   examined  the  Use  of  Internet  in English Public Libraries. The study revealed that  users  were  satisfied  with  their  search  results.  It  was  pointed  out  that  difficulty,  time-consumption,  competitiveness, cost effectiveness, efficiency and the  effectiveness of reference works and accessibility of  resources were the components of impact on internet  based resources. The authors have quoted Jane’s27 definition  of  impact  as  “a  profession  in  rapid  and  profound  transition,  struggling  to  understand  what  best to do as the information environment continues  to  change”. They  have  also  given  views  on  impact  assessment gathered from many authors. They are  as  follows:  Berube28   had  found  in  his  research  on  the  impact  of  Library  Systems  and  Services  and  Virtual Reference Toolkit, Used in the British Library,  that  majority  of  users  had  reacted  positively  to  the  service.  It  also  had  an  impact  on  the  users’  satisfaction and the issue of web accessibility. Tenopir  &  Ennis29   reported  that  the  electronic  resources  have  increased  job  satisfaction.    
435 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2013 
Janes27   stated  that  public  librarians  are  more  likely to be more positive than academic librarians,  and  in  particular,  that  the  public  librarians  are  more  likely  to  agree  that  internet  resources  have  made  reference  work  more  effective.  Janes  had  also  commented  that  the  survey  carried  out  was  aimed  at  reference  librarians  for  whom  the  impact  of  digital  reference  is  likely  to  be  positive  and  optimistic. Spacey30 et al.  found that the majority of  the UK public staff surveyed, had positive attitudes  towards  the  internet,  particularly  highlighting  the  increased  availability  of  information  to  help  them  answer  enquiries. 
4.  InferenceS   fr O m  lITerATUre 
From reviewing innumerous literatures, the authors  opine,  from  the  directions  of  various  researchers,  that  while  measuring  the  impact  of  a  particular  service,  certain  factors  mentioned  below  must  be  taken  into  account.    
• Access to user based information must be made  
easy.    
•  Guidelines regarding this service must be easy  
to  understand.    
•  To  create  an  infrastructure  and  to  fulfill  the  
user’s  need  in  gathering  information      
must  be  the  librarian’s  first  task.    
•  Users  must  know  how  to  access  these  
services.  
•  If  this  is  the  case,  then  time  and  energy  can  
be  saved.  
The  authors  are  also  of  the  opinion  that,  if  all  these  services  were  brought  under  a  single  domain,  the  impact  would  be  very  good.  After  all  these  reviews,  the  authors  thus  come  out  with  the  operational  definition  of  ‘impact  assessment’  of  a  particular  digital  resource,  which  will  include  the  following: saving time, number of citations presented,  availability  of  advanced  searches,  availability  of   print  resources,  provision  of  training  programmes,   availability  of  new  and  latest  services,  availability  of a variety of databases, easy-to-use workstations,  awareness  of  value  of  information,  scientific  and  technological  advancements,  quick  information  provision,  cost  effectiveness,  saving  of  space,  easy  and  rapid  access,  less  effort,  easy  to  search  database, competitiveness, efficiency and effectiveness  of  reference  works,  accessibility  of  e-resources,  Virtual  Reference  Toolkit,  users’  satisfaction,  web  accessibility, positive attitudes, increased availability  of  information,  presence  of  a  mode  of  answering  enquiries,  number  of  times  an  article  has  been  downloaded,  positive  or  beneficial  to  teaching  and  learning, new technology,  less storage costs, better   cooperation  in  relation  to  inter-library  loan  and  
436 
keeping  up-to-date  with  the  technology  related  to  library  science.    
Based  upon  these  qualities,  the  authors  thus,  developed  a  scale,  which  included  42  statements.   This  42  item  instrument  was  then  divided  into  5  subscales, such as, Attitude on INFLIBNET, Impact  of  JCCC,  Impact  of  e-journals,  Impact  of  Union  Catalogue  and  the  Overall  Impact  of  INFLIBNET.  
For  every  statement  a  5-point  Likert  scale  of  response was provided. The 5 points were Strongly  Agree,  Agree,  Uncertain,  Disagree,  and  Strongly  Disagree. These responses were ranked accordingly.  5  marks  were  awarded  for  Strongly  Agree  and  1  mark  for  Strongly  Disagree.  The  authors  framed  32  statements  as  positive  and  10  statements  as  negative  statements.  Negative  statements  were  included  to  reduce  the  bias  in  response 
5.    cO nTenT vAlIDITy 
The  scale  was  given  to  three  experts.  Among  these three experts, the first expert was an Associate  Professor  from  the  Department  of  Sociology.  This  Associate Professor frequently used INFLIBNET and  was  hence  selected  by  the  authors  as  one  of  the  experts. The second expert was a Research Scientist  in  Psychology.  As  the  tool  development  involved  Psychometric  application,  the  authors  decided  to  make use of her expertise in the rating of this scale.  Thirdly,  the  authors  selected  a  college  librarian  for  his  expertise  in  research  in  Library  Science.  As  the  thrust  areas  of  this  research  were  centered  on  library  service,  this  librarian  was  selected  as  the  third  expert.  The  42  item  scale  was  rated  for  its  clarity,  relevance  and  usefulness  by  the  experts. 
5.1  clarity 
The  experts  suggested  certain  changes  based  on  clarity.  These  changes  were  made  accordingly,  which  are  elaborated  in  Table  1. 
5.2  relevance 
The importance of relevance were analysed and  the  authors  were  asked  to  include  only  relevant  statements and to exclude the irrelevant statements.   The  authors  removed  the  irrelevant  statements  according  to  the  suggestion  of  the  experts  and  then  asked  the  experts  to  place  all  the  statements  in  appropriate  order  (Table  2). 
Following  this,  certain  changes  were  made  in  the  addition  of  relevant  statements  and  the  scale  was  altered  accordingly  (Table  3).      
5.3 rearrangement 
The  statements  mentioned  below  were  also  rearranged according to INFLIBNET related programmes  (Item  no.17.1  to  17.14)  (Table  4).  

========4========

RAmESH  & Y UVARAJ: DEVELOPING A  S TANDARDISED  T OOL FOR  Im PACT  A SSESSmENT OF  I NFLIBNET 
Table 1. revised statement 
Item no. 
Original statements   
Impact of Jccc  subscale 
14.2 
 It takes a lot of steps to get JCCC 
revised statements    
It takes a lot of mental energy to get into JCCC 
14.7 
I am able to select journals of my my Journal   m y Journal option allows me to interest from select journal   
option 
Impact of e-journals subscale 
15.1 
With the help of e-journals I am  able to access research articles from anywhere in the world 
15.2 
I quote these research articles as citation in my  paper presentation 
Impact of union catalogue subscale 
16.1 
I can access books available in  Union Catalogue 
even through State-wise search 
Overall impact of InflIbneT subscale 
17.4 
INFLIBNET helps to identify Experts related to my area of Research also with their profle 
Table 2. Irrelevant statements 
S. no.     Sub-scale   
Statement 
of my own interest 
I am able to access research articles world wide 
I have quoted e-consortium journal  in citation for my paper presentation 
I can access books even through state-wise search       
I am able to identify experts related to my area of research along with their profle 
1.     JCCC 
   
Through JCCC, I am able to select topics of my research area and access articles  
specifcally 
2. 
Union Catalogue    
With the help of union catalogue, I am able to gather information related to my feld  
of interest. 
3. 
Union Catalogue    
   
With the help of bibliographic details I am able to gather information about      Universities/ Institutions where the  research materials are available so that I can go  there and gather the research material. 
Table 3. Addition of relevant statements 
S. no. 
Sub-scale   
Statement 
16.5 
Union Catalogue 
It is easier for me to know the location of bibliographic data in union catalogue 
17.13 
   
Overall Impact of INFLIBNET I use Really Simple Syndication (RSS) program in INFLIBNET to access current  
issues in my research area 
17.4 
Overall Impact of INFLIBNET RSS provides multiple options for accessing program current issues.  
5.4  Usefulness  rating  
The following statements were removed as they were  not considered useful by any of the 3 experts (Table 5).  Overall,  the  experts  rated  the  scale  to  be  of  high  relevance and almost all of the statements are clear  and  specific  to  the  purpose  of  the  present  study.   Thus, the revised 42 item scale was then distributed  to  a  group  of  scholars  and  faculty  members  for  further  standardisation. 
6.  eSTAbl IShIng  relIAbIlITy 
After  the  Content  Validity  was  established,  the  authors  distributed  the  questionnaire  to  research  scholars  and  faculty  members  ast  manonmaniam  Sundaranar  University,  Tirunelveli.  78  scales  were  distributed among those scholars and faculty, who have  been using INFLIBNET. Among these, 75 scales were  returned duly filled. Three scales were only partially  filled and hence rejected by the investigator. Thus,  using these 75 scales, further tests of standardisation  were  carried  out  by  the  authors. 
437 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2013 
Table 4. rearrangement of the sub-scale: Overall impact of InflIbneT programme 
S. no. 
Statements    
Original  location  
After  rearrangement 
1. 
I update my knowledge on INFLIBNET by reading latest reports available in the  
Institutional Repository 
17.1 
17.1 
2. 
I am able to access information about research from Universities anywhere in India. 17.2 
17.2 
3. 
I make use of utilities (anti-virus, messaging, audio-video,  software etc) available in  17.3 
INFLIBNET, which I can download free of cost 
17.5 
4. 
I am able to identify experts related to my area of research along with their profle 
17.4 
17.4 
5. 
I am able to identify previous research works done in my feld of interest 
17.5 
17.3 
6. 
Using INFLIBNET program is cost effective than any other traditional method 
of collecting reviews 
7.  
I chat online regarding my doubts in accessing INFLIBNET 
8. 
My request for searching research material is satisfed  
9. 
I send queries and receive feedback related to my research  
17.6 
17.12 
17.7 
17.6 
17.8 
17.7    
17.9        
17.10 
10 . 
I do not have to move to places in search of research material hereafter 
11.    m y knowledge in accessing INFLIBNET is less 
12. 
Time to search for research material is saved  
17.10 
17.8  
17.11 
17.9 
17.12 
17.11 
13. 
I use RSS (Really Simple Syndication) in INFLIBNET to access current 
issues in my research area 
14 .        
RSS provides multiple options for accessing current issues    
Table 5. removing the statements 
S. no. Statement 
1.     You  receive  requested  articles  in  JCCC  service  by  
post 
2.     You  get  duplicate  records  in  Union  Catalogue  
Database 
3.     Abstracts are not available in Theses Database 
6.1 Test-retest method 
The reliability of the 42 statements was analysed  using the Test-Retest method. The scale was given  to  21  respondents  of  manonmaniam  Sundaranar  
17.13          
17.13 
     
17.14 
17.14 
University,  Tirunelveli,  initially  they  include  mPhil  scholars,  PhD  scholars  and  Faculty members  who  are  using  INFLIBNET.  After  a  gap  of  75  days  the  scale  was  distributed  again  to  the  same  group  of  persons and they were asked to fill them. Their two  sets  of  data  were  then  compared  using  Pearson’s  Product  moment  Correlation.  The  results  were  tabulated  (Table  6). 
The  ‘r’  values  of  Attitude  on  INFLIBNET  sub  scale  was  (0.46)  the  Impact  of  e-journals  (0.46)  and  the  Overall  Impact  of  INFLIBNET  (0.49)  was  significant  at  0.05  levels.  Thus,  the  3  subscales  are  found  to  be  consistent.  Although,  the  r  value  
Table 6. ‘r’ value showing test-retest reliability for the sub-scales of the impact of InflIbneT scale 
Sub Scales Attitude on INFLIBNET 
value Test Value 
Re-Test Value 
Impact of e-journals 
Test Value 
Re-Test Value 
Overall Impact of INFLIBNET 
Test Value 
Re-Test Value 
* Correlation is signifcant at 0.05 level (2-tailed) 
438 
n 21 
mean 25.48 
Std. Dev. 2.38 
r 
21 
36.40 
4.59 
0.46* 
20 
32.71 
4.90 
20 
36.40 
4.59 
0.46* 
21 
46.57 
5.47 
19 
51.10 
7.39 
0.46* 

========6========

RAmESH  & Y UVARAJ: DEVELOPING A  S TANDARDISED  T OOL FOR  Im PACT  A SSESSmENT OF  I NFLIBNET 
shows  a  moderate  relationship  on  all  these  3  subscales,  it  can  be  stability  appreciable  value  since  the  time  interval  between  the  two  phases  of  measurement is relatively large (75 days).  The test- retest reliability for the subscales measuring JCCC  and  Union  Catalogue  services  could  not  be  found,  because  most  of  the  users  did  not  respond  to  the  questions  related  to  JCCC  and  Union  Catalogue.   The respondents reported that they were not aware  of  the  above  services  and  hence,  not  used  them  frequently. 
7.  InTernAl  cOnSISTency  relIAbIlITy 
Internal  stability  of  the  scale  was  assessed  using  Internal  Consistency  Reliability.  Cronboch  Alpha  coefficient  was  used  to  establish  internal  consistency. 
7.1 Attitude  on  I nflIbneT  Statement  Sub- 
scale 
The authors had framed 7 statements for measuring  Attitude on INFLIBNET. The Alpha value was found  to be 0.35 for this subscale. This value is too low to  prove Internal Consistency. The Corrected Item-Total  Correlation’s (CITC) lowest value was shown through  every  statement  which  was  removed  step  by  step  so as to increase the Alpha value. In the CITC test,  the  lowest  value  that  is  shown  is  as  follows: 
by  INFLIBNET.  The  original  scale  consisted  of  8  items.  This  had  an  Alpha  Value  of  0.63.  3  items  were  removed  which  resulted  in  an Alpha  Value  of  0.80  for  the  remaining  5  items  (Table  8).  
7.3 Impact  of e-journals  Sub-scale 
In  this  sub-scale  8  statements  were  prepared.   The Alpha value of these 8 statements showed 0.53.   One  statement  which  had  a  low  CITC  value  was  removed.  The  statement  is  shown  (Table  9). 
This statement was excluded and the remaining  7 statements were analysed again and the resultant  Alpha  value  was  0.54.  On  further  purification,  the  Alpha tends to decrease. Hence, further purification  was stopped and thereby retaining the 7 statements  under  impact  of  e-journal  subscale.  
7.4  Impact  of  Union catalogue  Sub-scale 
The Alpha value for impact of Union Catalogue  subscale with 5 items is 0.80. This is highly consistence.   Hence  all  of  the  items  were  retained  (Table  10). 7.5  Overall  Impact  of  InflIbneT  Sub-scale 
In this sub-scale, 14 statements were framed by  the  authors  and  the  Alpha  value  was  found  to  be  0.72.  No statement was deleted from this sub-scale.   All  the  statements  were  internally  consistent. 
Table 7. Alpha value of impact of e-journals’ sub-scale 
Item no.     Statement 
   
cITc  value 
Alpha if item Deleted 
11.2 
INFLIBNET is simply another medium in searching for reviews 
0.01 
0.41 
11.7 
Using other web resources (such as Google, Yahoo, etc.) is easy to access articles  
than  using INFLIBNET     
11.4 
0.06 
0.47 
Traditional methods (such as going to libraries  and Universities) for searching  research reviews are easier than INFLIBNET search. 
Table 8. Alpha value of Jccc  sub-scale 
Item no     Statement 
   
0.11     0.61 
cITc  value 
Alpha if item deleted 
14.5 
I am not able to know the status of my ILL (Inter-Library Loan on request for a  
research article 
14.2 
It takes a lot of mental energy to get into JCCC  
14.4 
ILL service takes time to send the Requested  Article   
These  3  statements  were  removed  one  by  one  and  every  time  the Alpha  was  checked.  Thus,  through  the  remaining  4  statements,  the  Alpha  value  was  found  to  be  0.61.  These  4  statements  were  found  to  be  Internally  Consistent  and  hence  retained  under  this  sub-scale  (Table  7). 
7.2   Impact  of  J ccc   Sub-scale 
JCCC  subscale  was  developed  to  know  users  awareness and usage of the JCCC service provided  
0.11 
0.65 
0.03     0.71 
0.00 
0.80 
Table 9. Alpha value of impact of e-journals’ sub-scale 
Item no. 
Statement 
15.4 
Some of the important  research articles in the  e-consortium are not  available in full-text 
cITc value 0.01 
Alpha If item  deleted  0.41 
8. DIScUSSIOnS 
The  present  study  was  aimed  at  developing  a  standard tool for impact assessment of INFLIBNET  
439 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2013 
Table 10. Alpha value of all the sub-scales of impact of  
InflIbneT 
Sub-scale	 Alpha 	 co-effcient 
Attitude on INFLIBNET 
0.61 
Impact of JCCC 
0.80 
Impact of e-journals 
0.54 
Impact of Union Catalogue 
0.80 
Overall Impact of INFLIBNET 
0.72 
measurement, Vol. 2, edited by Kempf-Leonard,  
Kimberly Elsevier Academic Press, Oxford, 2005,  
271-76.  
7.   m arkless,  S.  &  Streadfield,  D.  Supported  self- 
evaluation in assessing the impact of HE libraries.  
Performance  Measurement  &  Metrics,  2008,  
9(1),  38-47. 
8. Ramaiah,  C.K.  &  Lakshman  moorthy,  A.  The  
impact of continuing education programmes on  
library  and  information  science  professionals.  
Library  Review,   2009,  51(1),  24-31. 
Banks, m.A., & Dellavalle, R. Emerging alternatives  
to the impact factor. OCLC Sys. & Serv.: Intern.  
Digi.  lib.  perspe.,  2006, 21(3)  167-73. 
9. 
tool.  The items were pooled from various researchers  
done earlier on impact assessment of digital libraries  
and  e-resources  across  the  world.  These  items  
were  then  arranged  in  5  categories.  They  are  
10. Bonorino, A.G. & molteni, V.E. Electronic journals  
‘Attitude on INFLIBNET’, ‘impact of JCCC’, ‘impact  
collections in Argentine Private academic libraries,  The  Electronic  Library,  2007,  25(1),  65-79.    
of  e-journals,  ‘impact  of  Union  Catalogue’,  and  the  
‘Overall  Impact’  of  INFLIBNET’.  The  scale  was  
11. Elam, B. Readiness or avoidance: E-resources  
validated  with  the  help  of  experts  and  then  set  for  
and the art historian. Collection Building, 2007,  26(1),  4-6.    
reliability. Test-Reset  method  was  carried  out,  with  
an  interval  or  75  days  from  which,  the  scale  found  
12. Yi, H. & Herlihy, C.S. Assessment of the impact  to be stable. Internal stability was also established  
using  Alpha  co-efficiency.  
of  on  Open-URL  link  resolver,  New  Library  world,  2007, 108(7/8),  317-31.  
The present scale satisfies the authors in carrying  
13. Oduwole,  A.A.,  &  Sowole,  A.O.  Utilisation  and  out their further exploration of analysing the impact  
of  INFLIBNET  upon  the  research  scholars  and  faculty  members. 
9.    cO nclUSIOnS 
Thus  the  tool  developed  for  the  purpose  of  defining  the  impact  of  INFLIBNET  is  highly  valid  and  reliable.  This  standardised  scale  was  named  by  the  authors  as  RAINI  scale  and  with  this  the  authors  decided  to  go  about  evaluating  the  impact  of  INFLIBNET  services  in  their  future  research. 
referenceS 
1.  INFLIBNET  Information  and  Library  Network,  
2010.  http://www.infibnet.ac.in  (accessed  25  
July  2012).  
2. Subba  Rao,  Siriginidi.  Networking  scenario  in  
India.  New  Library  World,  1999,  100(1149),  
160-64. 
3. Arora, Jagdish & Trivedi, Kruti. UGC-INFONET  
digital library consortium: Present services and  
future endeavours. DESIDOC J. Lib. Inf. Tech.,  
2010, 30(2),  15-25. 
4. Bradley,  F.  IFLA,  sustainability  and  impact  
assessment.  Performance  Measurement  and  
Metrics,  2009, 10(3),  167-171.  
5. Devi, Thiyam Satyabati & murthy, T.A.V.  Issues  
in  UGC-INFONET  e-journals  consortium.  In 
PLANNER-05. Paper presented at Third Convention,  
10-11 November,  Silchar, Information and Library  
Network Centre, (INFLIBNET), Ahmedabad,  pp.  
347-54.    
6. Hess, Frederick m., & Klekotka, Amy L. Impact/ 
out come evaluation. In  Encyclopedia of Social  
440 
impact  of  the  essential  electronic  agricultural  
database  (TEEAL)  on  library  services  in  a  
Nigerian  University  of  agriculture.   Program  
Electronic  Library  and  Information  Systems,  
2006, 40(2),  157-67. 
14. Bolin,  R.l.  The  challenge  of  CD-ROms  for  
libraries.  Reference  Librarian,  1994, 43,  117- 
30.  
15. Oduwole, A.A., & Akpati, C.B. Accessibility and  
retrieval of electronic information at the University  
of Agriculture Library Abeokuta.  Library Review,  
2003, 52(5),  228-33. 
16. Singh, P. & mehla, R.D. Agricultural databases  
on  CD-ROms:  their  relevance  for  libraries  in  
developing countries. Quart. Bull. Intern. Asso.  
Agri.  Inf.  Speci.,  1995, 40(4),  114-20.    17. Ye, C.F.  Using Chinese biomedical disc produced  
by  the  institute  of  medical  information  of  the  
Chinese  academy  of  medical  science.  Online  
Kensaku,  1995, 16(3),  11-5.    
18. Borgman, C.L et al. How Geography professors  
select materials for classroom lecturers: Implications  
for the design of digital libraries. Paper presented  
at  the  Fourth  ACm/IEEE-CS  Joint  conference  
on  Digital  Libraries,  2004  tucson,  Arizona,  pp.  
179-85.  
19.   m adle,  G.  Kostkova,  P.,  mani-Saads,  J.  &  
Weinberg, J. Development of a methodology to  
evaluate  the  impact  of  a  medical  digital  library  
on  user  knowledge,  attitude  and  behaviour.  
2003.  available  at:  www.hon.ch/mednet2003/ 
absrtracts/491753869.html/  (accessed  on  25  
July  2012). 

========8========

RAmESH  & Y UVARAJ: DEVELOPING A  S TANDARDISED  T OOL FOR  Im PACT  A SSESSmENT OF  I NFLIBNET 
20. Nicholas,  D.,  Huntington,  P.  &  Williams,  P.  
micro-mining  log  files:  A  method  for  enriching  
the  data  yield  from  internet  log  files. Journals  
of  Information  Science,  2003, 29,  391-404. 21. Sumner,  T.  &  marlino,  m.  Digital  libraries  and  
educational  Practice:  A  case  for  new  models.   
Proceedings  of  JCDL’04,  TUCSON,  Arizona,  
2004,    June  7-11,  170-8.    
22. Appleton,  L.  Perceptions  of  electronic  library  
resources  in  further  education. The  Electronic  
Library,  2006, 24(5),  619-634. 
23. Hewitson, A.  Use  and  awareness  of  electronic  
information services by academic staff at Leeds  
metropolitan University–a qualitative study. Journals  
of Librarianship and Information Science, 2002,  
34(1),  43-52. 
24. Payne, P. Guest editorial.  Library and Information  
Research,  2005,  29(91).      
25. Peters,  L.  &  Fiander,  W.  University  College  
Chester: the impact of investment in electronic  
resources.  Library  and  Information  Research,  
2005, 29(91),  27-9. 
26.  Jay,  m.  &  Webber,  S.  Impact  of  the  internet  
on  delivery  of  reference  services  in  English  
public libraries. Program: electronic library and  
information  systems,  2005, 39(1),  25-38.  27. Janes, J. Digital reference: Reference librarians’  
experiences and attitudes. Journal of the American  
Society for Information Science and Technology,  
2002, 53(7),  549-66.    
28. Berube,  L.  Ask  Live!  UK  Public  Libraries  and  
Virtual  Collaboration.  Library  and  nformation  
Research,  2003, l27(86),  43-50. 
29. Tenopir,  C.  &  Ennis,  L.  The  impact  of  digital  
reference on librarians and library users. Online,  
1998, 22(6),  84-86,  88. 
30. Spacey, R., murray, I. & Goulding, A. Staff with  
attitude.  Public  Library  Journal,  2004,  19(2),  
5-7.    
About the Authors 
Dr S. ramesh  is working as Library Assistant (SG)  at manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli,  TamilNadu,  India,  since  1997.  He  has  completed  mA in Sociology and mLIS, at Annamalai University.  In  2011  he  has  completed  his  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  His  area  of  research  includes e-resources and its impact on researcher.  He has 15 years of experience in classification and  cataloguing.    
T. yuvaraj  is working as Assistant Professor & Head  i/c,  Department  of  Psychology  at  manonmaniam  Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli, TamilNadu, India.  He  has  completed  mSc,  and  mPhil  in  Psychology  at  University  of  madras,  Chennai,  India.    His  area  of  specialisation  includes  Human  Relations  and  Youth  empowerment.  He  teaches  counseling,  Behaviour  modification  and  Psychometry.  He  is  a  lifetime  member  of  Indian  Association  of  Applied  Psychology and South Asian Society for Criminology  and  Victimology.  He  is  involved  with  the  research  works  of  Dr  S.Ramesh,  where  he  contributed  on  the  Psychological Assessment  of  INFLIBNET. 
441 

========9========

