DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 6, November 2013, pp. 474-479 
  2013, DESIDOC 
Steps for Developing Digital Repository using DSpace: An Experience of  
Kuvempu University, India 
B.S. Biradar and Koteppa Banateppanavar Department of PG Studies and Research in Library and Information Science  
Kuvempu University, Jnana Sahyadri Shankaraghatta-577 451 
E-mail: bsbiradar53@rediffmail.com, koteshlibrarian@gmail.com 
AbStRAct 
The main purpose of this paper is to provide practical guidelines of setting up an institutional repository  through DSpace open source software. In the electronic publishing age, the demand for information has  been growing steadily in all spheres of work. At the same time the concept of access to information at  the free of cost in electronic format is gaining momentum. In this direction present paper discussed step  by step procedures in building an institutional repository using DSpace including collections. This paper  helps in planning to build an IR. It also helps the beginners in understanding the steps to be followed for  uploading different fle formats to build digital repository to maintain collection with uniformity. 
Keywords: Institutional repository, design, procedures and guidelines, DSpace 
1. IntRoDUctIon 
In  this  digital  age,  everyone  wants  to  have  contents  and  be  successful  information  service  providers. Institutional repositories (IRs) have become  a  hot  topic  over  the  last  few  years,  and  many  institutions around the world are actively considering  or  working  towards  implementing  them.  The  IR  is  a  very  powerful  tool  that  can  serve  as  an  engine  of  information  transfer.  It  has  been  recognised  as  an  essential  infrastructure  of  scholarly  information  dissemination.  
The  IR  provides  a  method  for  capturing  and  maintaining today’s electronic detritus so that tomorrow’s  scholars  can  understand  the  thinking  behind  the  published  record.  For  the  standard  IRs,  each  and  every  institution  should  have  to  equip  its  library  professionals so that they are able to cope up with  the  ever-growing  changes  in  this  part.  In  view  of  the  above  Kuvempu  University  has  undertaken  to  create  an  IR  and  the  project  is  under  progress.  
2. AboUt  InStItUtIonAl  REpoSItoRy 
The IRs are all part of the open access movement  to  make  scholarly  information  more  accessible  via  the  web.  Once  an  IR  is  operating  efficiently,  it  can  increase the visibility of an institution’s scholarship  while paving the way for greater collaboration among  researchers  outside  the  institution1.  The  creation  of  IRs  can  be  achieved  by  a  number  of  available  content  management  software,  such  as  DSpace  which  is  the  focus  of  this  article.  Sharma2,  et  al.  
Received 01 February 2013, online published 13 November 2013 
have  discussed  the  IRs  and  the  skill  requirements  in  their  paper. 
A  university-based  IR  is  a  set  of  services  that  a  university  offers  to  the  faculty  members  of  its  community  for  the  management  and  dissemination  of  digital  materials  created  by  the  institution  and  its  community  members.  It  is  most  essentially  an  organisational commitment to the stewardship of these  digital  materials,  including  long-term  preservation,  where  appropriate,  as  well  as  organisation  and  access  or  distribution.  In  other  words,  an  IR  is  a  mechanism  for  centrally  storing,  presenting  and  storing  digital  material  created  by  an  institution.  By  depositing  content  into  an  IR  staff  and  their  departments  are  able  to  manage  and  preserve  the  content  in  a  cost  efficient  manner3. 
The  IRs  can  contain  a  variety  of  content  types  and  formats,  for  example,  research  outputs  such  as scholarly articles and preprints, reports, theses,  audio,  video,  images,  and  other  material. 
3. DSpAcE 
One  of  the  main  drivers  for  creating  digital  repositories  has  been  the  open  access  movement.  Material kept in open access repositories is available  online,  free  of  charge.  The  author  retains  the  rights  to  the  material  but  gives  its  users  the  right  to  search,  read,  download,  copy,  distribute,  print  or  link  to  full-text  without  requiring  any  economic  compensation.  The  key  philosophy  being  that  any  publicly  funded  research  would  be  made  publicly  available4. 

========1========

BIRADAR  & B ANATEppANAVAR: STEpS FOR  D EVELOpINg DIgITAL  R EpOSITORy USINg DSpACE 
DSpace was jointly developed by Massachusetts  Institute of Technology and Hewlett-packard in 2002,  is  an  open  source  software  which  can  be  freely  downloaded.  DSpace  is  the  software  of  choice  for  academic, non-profit, and commercial organisations  building  open  digital  repositories.  It  is  free  and  easy  to  install  ‘out  of  the  box’  and  completely  customisable  to  fit  the  needs  of  any  organisation.  DSpace  preserves  and  enables  easy  and  open  access  to  all  types  of  digital  content.  Including  text, images, moving images, mpegs and datasets.   With  an  ever-growing  community  of  developers,  committed to continuously expanding and improving  the  software,  each  DSpace  installation  benefits  from  the  next5. 
and click on My DSpace icon. Then login screen  
will  appear  (Fig.  1). 
(b)  Log-in  name–One  has  to  create  a  dedicated  
e-mail  account,  e.g.  gmail,  hotmail  or  yahoo,  
solely  for  uploading  publications. 
4.   c opyRIght  
While creating IR one should think of copyright  because  most  of  the  authors  have  signed  over  copyright  to  the  publisher.  So  one  must  check  the  list  of  publisher  open  access  policies  just  to  see  whether  the  publisher  allows  their  articles  to  be  deposited  and  if  yes  what  conditions  must  be  met.  If the publisher did not mention the copy right then  one has to e-mail them for permission to deposit the  article  to  DSpace.  One  should  keep  the  responses  on  file  for  future  reference. 
figure 1. login screan of digital repository. (c) Creating a Top-level Community–After login  
as an administrator on the top of the right there  
is  an  option  to  ‘Create  Top-Level  Community’  
by using the feature community/collection listing  
page  (Fig.  2).  This  option  helps  to  create  new  
top  level  community  and  take  one  to  the  ‘Edit  
Community’  page.  Enter  the  name  of  top  level  
community then click on create. Figure 3 shows  
an example for creating the top-level community.  
Here,  School  of  Social  Science  is  created  as  
a  top  level  community. 
5.   hARD wARE AnD   Softw ARE 
REqUIREmEnt 
The  following  hardwares  and  software  have  been  used  to  set  up  a  Kuvempu  University  digital  repository.  
Item 
Confguration 
Server,  two  processor,  AMD  Opteron quad core 
Dell desktop computer, DELL Optiplex 780 
AMD  Opteron-2376  quad  core,2.3gHz  quad  core  64bit  processor  or  better,  2 gB  6667  MHz DDR 2 RAM 
Confguration: Intel Core 2 Duo,  Operating 
System: Microsoft Windows 7 
Dell  desktop  computer,  DELL  Optiplex  980 
Confguration: Intel Core 2 Duo,  Operating 
System: Microsoft Windows 7 
figure 2. building of communities. 
ADOBE 
Hp  Laser  printer LJp  1007 
Adobe  Acrobat  Standard  with  Media 
Mono 600x600, speed 14 ppM,  1 USB port 
Hp  SJ Scanner 5590 
Dspace:1.7.2 
Resolution  600x600,  speed  8PPM, ADF capacity 30, fat bed  size A4 
Supporting Software’s 
Operating system 
Fedora 14 
6.   S tEpS   fo R cREAtIng  DIgItAl  
REpoSItoRy 
(a)  The  following  steps  were  taken  to  crate  the  
kuvempu University. go to local DSpace homepage  
figure 3. Example of creating a community. 
475 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
(d) Creating a Sub-community–After creation of top- 
level community to create a sub-community, go to  
the community home page of the community that  
is  to  be  the  parent  of  the  new  sub-community.  
Then, click on the ‘Create sub-community’ in the  
‘Admin  Tools’  box  at  the  top  right-hand  corner  
of  the  page  (Fig.  4).  Insert  the  sub-community  
name  then  click  on  ‘create’.  e.g.,  Top-level  
Community  ‘School  of  Social  Science’  under  
this  sub-community  ‘History’  (Fig.  5). 
figure 6. creating a collection. 
figure 7. collection description. 
figure 4. Example of creating a sub-community. 
figure 5. Example of creating a sub-community. 
figure 8. Edit collection window. 
(e)  Creating a Collection– After creating sub -community,  
one  has  to  start  to  create  collection  under  
the  sub  community,  various  main  headings  
whichever relevant. For example, Journal articles,  
Conference  articles,  Book  chapters,  etc.  Here  
as  an  example  in  sub-community  of  History,  
journal  articles  are  given  (Fig.  6). 
(f)  Describe  the  Collection  (Checkboxes)–Choose  
the  relevant  options  as  shown  in  Fig.  7  to  
describe  the  collection  then  click  on  ‘next’. 
Write collection name, example Journal articles,  conference articles, Book chapters, etc. After entering  the collection name then click on ‘update’ (Fig. 8). By  clicking  update  Fig.  9  page  will  appear. 
figure 9. Uploading of articles. 
476 

========3========

BIRADAR  & B ANATEppANAVAR: STEpS FOR  D EVELOpINg DIgITAL  R EpOSITORy USINg DSpACE 
(g)  Start uploading documents to DSpace collection–  
On clicking the name of collection it will take to  
uploading a document in to DSpace collection.  
Here,  Collection  in  Journal  articles  has  been  
created  (Fig  9). 
(h)  Click  on  submit  to  this  collection–Once  logged  
in  DSpace  for  submitting  the  documents,  the  
submission steps will cover seven steps to upload  
documents into DSpace. Such as (1) Describe,  
(2) Describe, (3) Describe, (4) Upload, (5) Verify,  
(6)  License,  and  (7)  Complete  (Fig  10). 
figure 10. Submission of artcle. Step  I.  Describe  this  Item  
more  ‘findable’  the  submission  will  be  fill  your  metadata in second step and follow the instructions  (Fig.  11(a&b)). 
(a) 
(b) 
figure 11(a&b). Item description. 
In  this  step,  one  has  to  describe  output.  The  second  field  is  the  equivalent  of  an  abstract.  It  gives browser an outline of the paper’s contents and  findings,  and  is  usually  100–400  words  long. Also,  if it is a conference paper, which was presented in  more than one conference, please add the comment:  “another version of this paper was presented in”, and  
that  apply  to  this  submission  
• In  the  first  deposit  page  three  options  will  be  
Check the relevant boxes next to the statements  
mention  the  name  of  the  other  conference(s). 
ISSN—for  journal  articles 
in  the  ‘yes’  box. 
For  depositing  an  item  previously  published  
ISBN—for books, book chapters and other published  given.  Sometimes  an  item  has  more  than  one  
reports.  Also  enter  the  ISBN  no.,  a  10-digit  and  title,  perhaps  an  abbreviation,  acronym,  or  a  
newer  13-digit  codes  at  the  end  of  description.  title  in  another  language.  If  this  is  the  case,  
and  you  want  this  information  captured,  click  
Authors’ names—Just the names and one initial only,  
otherwise the authors are listed several times within  
• 
DSpace.  e.g.,  Koteppa  B  with  DSpace  formatting  
items  that  have  not  been  previously  published  
changes  this  to  Koteppa  B.          
elsewhere,  click  in  the  ‘yes’  box.  Later  in  the  
process the option to include citation information  
Title—Enter  the  full  and  proper  name  by  which  will be received for the original publishing. New  
this  item  should  be  known. All  DSpace  items  must  
have  a  title! 
or  distributed  will  be  assigned  an  issue  date  Date  of  Issue—(note-this  input  box  appears  only  
• 
by  the  system. 
An  item  can  consist  of  more  than  one  file  in  
if  one  indicate  on  the  first  page  that  the  item  has  been previously published or distributed. If DSpace  
DSpace, for example an HTML file, may contain  
is  the  first  means  of  distribution  of  this  item,  a  references  to  image  files  (such  as  jpg  or  gif  
date will be assigned by the system when the item  files).  Another  example  is  an  article  that  is  
becomes  a  part  of  the  repository).  If  the  item  was  supplemented  with  a  video  and  a  data  file.  If  
previously published or made public, enter the date  you  are  submitting  more  than  one  file  for  this  
of that event here. If month is not known, leave the  item,  click  in  the  ‘yes’  box.  If  none  of  these  
default  ‘no  month’;  otherwise  select  a  month  from  
the  drop-down  box.  If  the  exact  day  is  not  known,  
questions  apply,  click  the  ‘Next’  button. 
Step  II.  Describe  this  Item  
leave  that  box  empty. 
Volume, Issue and Page numbers—Use the format,  
This  descriptive  information  enables  users  to  2(13):24-37  with  no  spaces  between  characters.  retrieve  item  using  search  engines.  By  filling  out  
DSpace  formats  this  to:  2(13),  pp.  24-37.  If  there  these  fields  in  the  form,  a  metadata  record  for  
is no issue number, i.e., just volume and page nos.  item  is  created.  The  more  thorough  one  is,  the  
enter:  2:24-37  formats  to  2  pp.  24-37. 
477 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
Step  III.  Describe  this  Item  
After  completing  second  step,  then  click  on  ‘next’,  it  takes  to  the  third  step  keywords  and  abstract.  Use  one  input  box  for  each  subject  word  or phrase. For more input boxes, click on the ‘Add  More’  button.  Choose  at  least  10  keywords,  and  more  if  it  is  a  particularly  significant  publication  
such  as  a  refereed  journal  or  book.  The  keywords  are critical for the dissemination of research. Some  of  the  aspects  that  might  help  browsers  to  find  the  publications,  apart  from  the  theme,  are  the  contextual level, the research approach (where the  methodological issues are described), the educational  sector  and  subjects,  and  the  educational  issues,  among  others. Abstract  can  either,  cut  and  pasted  or  can  be  typed.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  length  of  the  abstract  (Fig.12(a&b)).  
Step  IV.  Upload  a  File 
To  upload  file(s),  just  click  on  browse  button  to  select  file(s)  for  submission.  choose  the  format  (for  example  pdf  or  Word  document),  and  verify  the  uploading  (Fig.  13(a-d)). 
(a) 
(b) 
figure 12 (a&b). Information about the submission. 
(a) 
(c) 
(b) (d) 
Figure 13 (a-d). (a) Browsing, (b) selection, (c) uploading, and (d) verifcation of uploaded fle. 
478 

========5========

BIRADAR  & B ANATEppANAVAR: STEpS FOR  D EVELOpINg DIgITAL  R EpOSITORy USINg DSpACE 
Step  V.  Verify  Item  DSpace, Communities and Collection, and Submit to  
In  the  fifth  step  check  metadata  for  verifying  
this Collection’, this options helps to direct selecting  the  submissions.  This  page  navigate  to  review  the  
and  also  the  status  of  submission  can  be  checked  information entered to describe the item. To correct  
by  going  to  the  My  DSpace  page  (Fig.  16). or  edit  information,  click  on  the  corresponding  
button  on  the  right,  or  use  the  oval  buttons  in  
the  progress  bar  at  the  top  of  the  page  to  move  
around  the  submission  pages.  Click  on  the  “Next”  
button  to  continue.  
Click  on  the  “Cancel/Save”  button  to  stop  and  
save    data.  This  is  a  final  check  where  one  can  
go  back  and  amend  as  required,  before  submitting  
(Fig.  14). 
figure 16. Submission complition. 
8.   c onclUSIonS 
Benefits of building IR for the traditional libraries  
are  limited  by  storage  space;  but  digital  libraries/ 
repositories have the potential to store much more  
scholarly  information  and  require  very  little  space  
to  contain  it.  As  such,  the  cost  of  maintaining  an  
institutional  digital  library  is  much  lower  than  that  
of  a  traditional  library. 
Considering  the  advantages  like  no  physical  
boundaries, round-the-clock availability of information,  
multiple  accesses  to  information  resources,  faster  
information  search  and  retrieval,  preservation  and  
conservation of exact copy of the original document  
and cost, the Kuvempu University have plan set up  
Figure 14. Item verifction. 
an  IR  using  the  open-source  software  DSpace.  Step  VI.  Grant  License  
REfEREncES 
Once  verification  is  finished,  click  on  next  to   
1. Winter, Marsha & Bowen-Chang, portia. Dealing  go  to  sixth  step.  In  this  step  click  on  I  grant  the  
with DSpace: the experience at the University of  permission to complete submission. DSpace requires  
the West Indies, St Augustine, New Library World,  agreement to this non-exclusive distribution license  
2010,11(7/8), 320–32.  http://www.emeraldinsight. before  an  item  can  appear  on  DSpace  (Fig.  15).  
com/journals.htm?articleid=1875479/. (accessed  
on  10  December  2012). 
2. Sharma,  Ajay  Kumar;  Meichieo,  Kevinino  &  
Saha, Nimai Chand. Institutional repositories and  
skills  requirements,  a  new  horizon  to  preserve  
the  intellectual  output:  An  Indian  perspective.  
PLANNER,  2008,  pp.  336-53.  http://ir.inflibnet. 
ac.in/dxml/bitstream/handle/1944/1145/30. 
pdf?sequence=1/.s/. 
3. Lynch,  Clifford  A.  Institutional  repositories:  
essential  infrastructure  for  scholarship  in  the  
digital age ARL, Bio Monthly Report,  2003,  226,  
1-11. http://www.arl.org/resources/pubs/br/br226/ 
br226ir.shtml/  (accessed  on  20 April  2012). 
4. About  Institutional  Repositories.  http://www.lib. 
cam.ac.uk/repository/about/about_institutional_ 
repositories.html/.  
figure 15. grant of licence. 5. DSpace: ‘About Dspace’. http://www.dspace.org/  Step  VII.  Submission  Complete  
(accessed  on  10  January  2012). 
6. Step  by  Step  guide:  http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk/ 
Seventh step shows that submission is complete  repository/deposit_guide/step_by_step_guide. and  also  give  three  options  such  as go  to  my  html/  (accessed  on  02  May2012). 
479 

========6========

