DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 33, No. 6, November 2013, pp. 498-508  
  2013, DESIDOC 
Comparative Study Between Words in Titles and Keywords of Some  
Articles on Knowledge Organisation 
Dines Ch. Maiti* and Bidyarthi Dutta** Central Library, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur-821 302 
E-mail: dines.mati@gmail.com  
Department of Library & Information Science, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore-721 102 
E-mail: bidyarthi.bhaswati@gmail.com 
ABSTrACT 
 This  paper  has  presented  research  trends  in  the  area  of  knowledge  organisation  since  2002  to  2011. In all, the bibliographic details of 285 research articles on some thrust research areas of knowledge  organisation  as  represented  by  three  keywords,  viz.,  classifcation  and  indexing,  faceted  classifcation  and folksonomy, have been collected from Emerald E-journal Consortia hosted by UGC-INFONET and  analysed to study the research trend. The growth of literature in this area shows a logistic pattern over  the said span. The distribution of articles over journals has been studied and Journal of Documentation ranked top followed by Aslib Proceedings, The Electronic Library  and  Library Hi Tech  for three specifc  subject  areas  consecutively.  The  frequencies  of  assigned  keywords  have  been  analysed  and  core  keywords  have  been  identifed. The  words  in  titles  of  285  articles  have  been  analysed  and  compared  with  the  words  in  assigned  keywords.  Two  indicators  have  been  defned,  viz.,  Matching  Coeffcient  (MC) and Title-to-Keyword Ratio (TKR) to study the state of matching between these two types of word  clusters after comparative study. There are so many MC as found for different articles ranging from 0 to  0.5. The MCs have been graded in a scale set according to their numerical values. In all, seven grades  have  been  set  to  study  the  state  of  matching  between  two  types  of  words.  In  general,  percentage  of  bad matching outnumbers the good matching. As titles are assumed as a most concise abstract of an  article, it is customary to assume words in title as true refector of central theme of the same. If words  in assigned keywords poorly match the same in titles, then it may be logically inferred that keywords are  
incorrectly assigned for majority articles. 
Keywords: Knowledge organisation, subject classifcation, subject indexing, faceted classifcation,        
 folksonomy, ontology, title analysis, keyword analysis, information retrieval  
1. InTrOduCTIOn 
The term knowledge organisation (KO) indicates a  field of study chiefly related to Library and Information  Science  (LIS).  The  scope  of  KO  covers  various  functional  activities  such  as  content  description  of  document,  indexing  and  abstracting,  document  classification, cataloguing of information resources,  database management, etc. These activities are done  by  librarians,  archivists,  subject  specialists  as  well  as  by  computer  algorithms.  The  KO,  as  a  field  of  study  is  concerned  with  the  nature  and  quality  of  such knowledge organising processes (KOP) as well  as  the  knowledge  organising  systems  (KOS)  used  to  organise  documents,  document  representations,  and  concepts. 
There  exist  different  historical  and  theoretical  
service  professionals  have  often  concentrated  on  applying new technology and standards in this area  of  knowledge.  Traditional  human-based  activities  are  increasingly  challenged  by  computer-based  retrieval techniques. Hjørland1  provided an overview  of  different  approaches  to  KO  as:  
(a)  Traditional Approach  
The  approaches  provided  by  Melvil  Dewey  (1851-1931) and Henry Bliss (1870-1955) are mainly  classed under this category. Dewey’s approach found  an  efficient  way  to  manage  library  collections.  An  important  characteristic  in  Henry  Bliss’  (and  many  contemporary thinkers of KO) was that the sciences  tend  to  reflect  the  order  of  nature  and  that  library  classification should reflect the order of knowledge  
approaches for organising knowledge, which are related  
as  uncovered  by  science: 
to different views of knowledge, cognition, language,  
Natural  order  -->  Scientific  classification  -->  
and  social  organisation.  Library  and  information  
Library  classification  (KO).  
Received 30 May 2013, online published 13 November 2013 

========1========

MAITI  & D UTTA: COMPARATIVE STUDy BETwEEN  w ORDS IN TITLES AND  w ORDS IN KEywORDS 
The  principles,  which  may  be  attributed  to  the  traditional  approach  to  KO  are: 
• Principle  of  controlled  vocabulary  
• Cutter’s  rule  about  specificity  
• Hulme’s  principle  of  literary  warrant 
• Principle  of  organising  from  the  general  to  the  
specific  
folksonomy  has  come  as  an  amalgamation  of  two  words  folk  and  taxonomy.  Concept  of  folksonomy  embraces user-assigned of clientele-assigned keywords  for  the  purpose  of  tagging.  It  is  social  tagging  but  not  standardised  tagging  according  to  some  pre-supposed  subject  access  tool.  The  concept  of  keywords is more important here rather the concept  
After  more  than  100  years  of  research  and  of  subject  headings  or  subject  descriptors.  The  
development  in  LIS,  the  ‘traditional’  approach  still  has  a  strong  position  in  KO  and  in  many  ways  its  principles  still  dominate. 
(b)  Facet Analytic Approach 
This approach was initiated with the publication  of S.R. Ranganathan’s Colon Classification in 1933,  which has been further developed by, in particular, the  British Classification Research Group. Its analytico- synthetic  methodology.  The  meaning  of  the  term  ‘analysis’  is:  Breaking  down  each  subject  into  its  basic concepts. The meaning of the term ‘synthesis’  is:  Combining  the  relevant  units  and  concepts  to  describe  the  subject  matter  of  the  information  package  in  hand. 
(c)  Information  retrieval Approach  (I r) 
This  approach  was  incepted  with  the  Cranfield  experiments, which were founded in the 1950s, and  the TREC experiments (Text Retrieval Conferences)  started  in  1992.  It  was  the  Cranfield  experiments,  which introduced the famous measures “recall” and  “precision” as evaluation criteria for systems efficiency.  The Cranfield experiments found that classification  systems  like  UDC  and  facet-analytic  systems  were  less efficient compared to free-text searches or low  level indexing systems (‘UNITERM’). The Cranfield  I  test  found  the  following  results: 
• UNITERM  82  %  recall  
• Alphabetical  subject  headings  81.5  %  recall  • UDC  75.6  %  recall  
• Facet  classification  scheme  73.8  %  recall  
subject  heading  is  a  standardised  list  while  the  keywords  are  personalised  to  some  extent.  There  is  no  standard  criterion  for  keyword  selection  in  any  subject.  The  subject-specific  keywords  may  be  classified  on  some  chosen  parameters2.  The  keywords  selected  from  any  specific  subject  area  show  special  characteristics  as  was  observed  in  case of the subject domain Fermi liquid3  under the  broad  area  of  physics.  The  content  management  of  any  subject  depends  on  categories  of  selected  keywords as observed in case of physics4. Another  notable feature in this approach of KO is recognising  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  under  which  a  word  may  be  regarded  as  keyword.  Actually,  it  is  true  that  all  keywords  are  words  but  all  words  are  not  necessarily  keywords.  But  the  question  is  that  under  which  circumstances  a  word  may  be  recognised  as  a  keyword.  Is  there  any  objective  criteria  that  may  chalk  out  the  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  word  for  becoming a keyword? Also, a keyword may contain  either one or several single words. The association  between  several  single  words  generally  creates  keywords  that  was  studied  for  the  specific  subject  domain  low  temperature  physics5.    
(e) Bibliometric Approaches 
These approaches are primarily based on using  bibliographical  references  to  organise  networks  of  papers, mainly by bibliographic coupling or co-citation  analysis.  In  recent  years  it  has  become  a  popular  activity to construe bibliometric maps as structures  of  research  fields.  The  bibliographic  scattering  is  
Although these results have been criticised and  
an  important  phenomenon  in  this  approach,  which  questioned,  the  IR-tradition  became  much  more  
was investigated from the viewpoint of generalised  influential  while  library  classification  research  lost  
source approach by Sen6. The scattering phenomenon  influence.  The  dominant  trend  has  been  to  regard  
was  also  observed  from  the  viewpoint  of  Bose- 
Einstein  Statistics  by  Dutta  &  Sen7.  The  physicist  
only  statistical  averages.  
(d)   u ser-oriented  and  Cognitive Approach 
User studies demonstrated very early that users  prefer verbal search systems as opposed to systems  based on classification notations. This is one example  of  a  principle  derived  from  empirical  studies  of  users.  Adherents  of  classification  notations  may,  of  course,  still  have  an  argument:  That  notations  are well-defined and that users may miss important  information by not considering them. Folksonomy is  a recent kind of KO based on users’ rather than on  librarians’ or subject specialists’ indexing. The term  
and  information  scientist,  Derek  De  Solla  Price  unified  all  informetric  and  scientometric  laws  in  a  logical  way8.  This  approach  however  centrally  speaks  about  networking  of  scholarly  literature  on  various  streams.  
(f)   d omain Analytic Approach 
The indexing of a given document should reflect  the  needs  of  a  given  group  of  users  or  a  given  ideal  purpose.  In  other  words,  any  description  or  representation of a given document is more or less  suited  to  the  fulfillment  of  certain  tasks.  It  is  the  
499 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
only approach to KO which has seriously examined  epistemological issues in the field, i.e., comparing the  assumptions made in different approaches to KO and  examining  the  questions  regarding  subjectivity  and  objectivity in KO. Hjørland described this approach as  a new horizon in information science9,10. Subjectivity  concerns  about  individual  differences.  A  kind  of  subjectivity about many users is related to philosophical  positions. In any field of knowledge different views  are  always  at  play.  In  arts,  for  example,  different  views  of  art  are  always  present.  
The different approaches of KO prevailing since  long  back  and  even  today  it  is  an  interesting  topic  of  active  research.  It  is  a  crux  area  in  library  and  information science. The subject basically deals with  processing and organisation of information so that it  can be promptly retrievable by information clientele.  LIS  is  an  interdisciplinary  and  multidisciplinary  subject.  Therefore  this  subject  embraces  so  many  other  subject  domains.  In  fact,  multidisciplinary  or  interdisciplinary study of LIS or KO is another vast  area  of  study.  Understanding  of  subject  is  a  core  problem  of  LIS  and  KO  as  well,  and  attempts  are  continuously  being  taken  since  last  hundred  fifty  years  so  that  an  objective  or  exact  answer  might  be  sought.  But  still  it  is  perhaps  an  unsolved  problem in the area of LIS. Hjørland11   described  in  detail  the  history  and  evolution  of  the  concept  of  subject  in  information  science  during  last  hundred  years.  Also,  the  paradigm  shift  of  the  concept  of  library  classification  in  the  internet  era  is  nicely  described  by  Hjørland12.  Some  important  areas  of  KO are, as also clear from Hjorland’s description of  different approaches as above, classification, indexing,  folksonomy,  ontology,  etc.  For  this  study  three  keywords have thus been chosen, i.e. classification  and indexing, faceted classification and folksonomy, as  they may be regarded as appropriate representative  of  the  core  area  of  knowledge  organisation.  The  foremost  keyword  classification  and  indexing  is  highly contextual to first four approaches. Actually it  a very general keyword of the subject KO. Actually  here  two  separate  keywords,  classification  and  indexing are connected. These two keywords closely  resemble  trains  of  interlinked  functions.  Therefore  these  two  keywords  are  jointly  chosen  here.  The  keywords  faceted  classification  and  folksonomy  are  contextual  to  second  and  fourth  approaches  mainly.  The  subject  domains  represented  by  these  three  keywords  also  indicate  thrust  areas  of  active  research  in  KO.  
2. OBjeCTIveS 
The  objectives  of  this  study  are  to: 
(a) Study  research  trend  of  some  selective  areas  
of knowledge organisation since the year 2002  
to  2011 
500 
(b) Observe  growth  of  literature  since  the  year  
2002  to  2011 
(c) Find  out  core  keywords  reflecting  the  central  
theme  of  the  said  subject 
(d) Identify  core  journals  in  the  said  subject  area (e) Draw  a  comparative  study  between  the  words  
in  title  and  words  in  assigned  keywords  for  
collected  285  research  articles,  and 
(f) Measure the appropriateness of chosen keywords  
through  analysis  of  a  pre-defined  parameter,  
viz.,  matching  coefficient. 
3. SCOpe And  meThOdOlOgy 
This study has been carried out over a sample  of  bibliographic  details  of  285  research  articles  distributed  over  36  journals  collected  from  the  bibliographic database of Emerald accessed through  e-journal consortium INFONET hosted by INFLIBNET  at Vidyasagar University. In Emerald database research  articles  are  spread  over  a  time  span  of  ten  years  ranging  from  the  year  2002  to  2011.  In  all,  three  keywords  have  been  selected  as  representative  of  thrust areas of knowledge organisation for this study.  The  keywords  classification  and  indexing  are  crux  areas  of  knowledge  organisation  in  the  context  of  LIS.  The  keyword  faceted  classification  indicates  a  modern  approach  to  classification  incepted  by  Ranganathan  in  the  third  decade  of  last  century  in  contrast  to  traditional  enumerative  approach  introduced  by  Melvil  Dewey  in  the  seventh  decade  of  nineteenth  century.  
The  keyword  Folksonomy  is  a  comparatively  new  term.  This  term  was  coined  by  Thomas  Van  Der  waals  in  200413.  This  term  specifically  refers  to subject indexing systems created within internet  communities.  A  folksonomy  may  be  viewed  as  a  system of classification derived from the practice and  method of collaboratively creating and managing tags  to  annotate  and  categorise  content.  The  practices  involved in folksonomy are also known as collaborative  tagging,  social  classification,  social  indexing  and  social  tagging.  
In Emerald database the information is available  from  the  following  types  of  sources,  i.e.,  journals,  books,  bibliographic  database,  case  studies,  and  site  pages.  Only  the  journal  has  been  considered  for  the  present  study  as  source  of  information.  Since this study involves analysis of research trend,  therefore  journal  articles  have  been  taken  under  consideration.  Three  sources  also  feebly  contain  original  research  articles.  It  is  to  be  noted  that,  journals  also  contain  different  types  of  writings  other  than  research  articles,  for  instance,  short  communication,  news  item,  letters  to  editor,  book  review,  editorial  comment,  etc.,  All  those  types  of  writings  were  not  considered  for  this  study  except  only  the  research  articles.  

========3========

MAITI  & D UTTA: COMPARATIVE STUDy BETwEEN  w ORDS IN TITLES AND  w ORDS IN KEywORDS 
Table  1.  Keywords-wise  classification  of  research  
 papers 
Keywords no. of  no. of  no. of  no. of  
research  journals  authors  assigned  
articles  covered involved keywords 
retrieved 
Classifcation  
and indexing 
107 16 168 203 Faceted  
classifcation 
125 34 222 280 Folksonomy 53 14 117 129 Total no. of  
research  285 
articles 
The  numbers  of  research  papers  retrieved  against  each  keyword  along  with  total  numbers  of  journals, authors and assigned keywords are given  in  Table  1. 
Each bibliographic detail of papers downloaded  contains  fourteen  metadata,  which  are  listed  in  abbreviated form at the left side of the record. The  abbreviations  used  for  each  metadata  have  been  explained  as: 
Ty  - Type  
T1 - Title  of  the  article 
AU - Author  of  the  article 
Kw - Assigned  keyword 
JO - Name  of  the  journal  where  the  concerned  
article  was  published 
Py -   y ear  of  publication 
PB - Name  of  the  publisher 
VL - Volume  no. 
IS - Issue  no. 
SP - Starting page no. of the article in the concerned  
journal 
EP - Ending  page  no.  of  the  article  in  the  same  
journal 
SN - ISSN  of  the  concerned  journal 
M3 - Digital  Object  Identification  no. 
UR - URL  of  the  article 
N2 - Abstract  of  the  paper 
A sample of one downloaded articles bibliographic  details  is  : 
Ty  -  JOUR 
T1 -  Google  Scholar  as  a  tool  for  discovering  
    journal  articles  in  library  and  information  
    science 
AU -  Dirk  Lewandowski 
Kw  - Information  science 
Kw - Libraries 
Kw  - Search  engines 
JO - Online  Information  Review 
Py  - 2010 
PB - Emerald  Group  Publishing  Limited VL - 34 
IS - 2 
SP - 250 
EP - 262 
SN - 1468-4527 
M3 - DOI:  10.1108/14684521011036972 UR - http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/1468452101103   
    6972/ 
N2    -  Purpose  –  The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  
measure  the  coverage  of  Google  Scholar  for  
Library  and  Information  Science  (LIS)  journal  
literature  uavailability. 
Out of fourteen only five metadata have been used  for this study, i.e., T1 – Title of the article, AU – Author  of the article, Kw  – Assigned keyword, JO – Name  of  the  journal  and  Py   –  year  of  publication.  
The  authorship  pattern  has  been  studied  from  the list of authors. The year of publication was used  to  study  the  year-wise  distribution  of  articles.  The  journal-name was studied to trace the core journals  in  the  field.  The  assigned  keywords  were  studied  from  the  metadata  tagged  as  Kw.  The  title  was  analysed  to  study  the  words  in  title.  The  assigned  keywords  were  also  analysed  to  study  the  words  in  keywords.  After  that,  the  words  in  title  were  compared  with  the  words  in  assigned  keywords.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  only  single  words  have  been  taken  both  from  titles  and  assigned  keywords. The  phrases containing more than one word were split up  in single words. For instance, the phrase ‘electronic  journal’,  has  been  split  up  in  two  different  words,  ‘electronic’  and  ‘journal’. 
It  this  study  two  parameters  are  definet  to  carry  out  comparative  study  between  words  in  titles and assigned keywords. Suppose, in a record  the  title  consists  of  ‘M’  no.  of  single  words  and  all  assigned  keywords  consist  of  ‘N’  no.  of  single  words.  Of  these  say,  ‘w’  no.  of  single  words  from  title  exactly  alike  to  same  no.  of  single  words  from  assigned  keywords.  The  quantity  may  thus  be denoted as number of matching words between  title  and  assigned  keywords.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  during selection of single words from titles, only the  full words have been taken, but the form words like  article,  proposition,  conjunction,  interjection,  etc.,  have been excluded. The full words indicate words  whose meaning could be found in dictionaries, that  is to say the full words carry some lexical meaning.  while  the  form  words  belong  to  the  grammar  and  carry only grammatical implications. Also in case of  words  with  identical  roots  but  different  stems,  the  
501 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
roots  are  taken  under  consideration.  For  instance,  the  two  words  childhood  and  children  have  been  considered  as  matched  words,  because  these  two  words contain identical root, i.e. child, but different  stems, i.e. hood and ren. The two words library and  libraries  have  also  been  considered  as  matched  word  on  the  same  logical  ground. 
Let  us  represent  the  ratio  of  words  in  title  to  words  in  assigned  keyword  bedefined  as  TKR  or  Title-Keyword-Ratio,  so  
TKR  =  M/N (1) 
Secondly,  let  the  ratio  of  matching  words  to  the  total  number  of  single  words  appearing  in  title  and  assigned  keywords  be  defined  as  Matching  Coefficient  (MC)  so: 
MC  = w   /  (M  +  N) (2) where,  M  =  No.  of  single  words  in  title  N  =  No.  of  single  words  in  assigned  keywords;  and  w   =  No.  of  matching  words  
Now  the  following  cases  may  occur  for  TKR, 
Case  1:  If  M  >  N,  then  TKR  >  1,  
Case  2:  If  M  <  N,  then  TKR  <  1,  
Case  3:  If  M  =  N,  then  TKR  =  1,  
The  following  cases  may  occur  for  MC, 
Case  1:  If  all  single  words  in  title  become  exactly  alike  with  all  words  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.  no.  of  words  in  title  is  equal  to  no.  of  words  in  assigned keywords, then a special phenomena will  happen  that  may  be  termed  as  perfect  matching.  In  case  of  perfect  matching,  we  have, 
M  =  N  = w,  as w   =  No.  of  matched  words 
(3) 
Substituting  Eqn  (3)  in  Eqn  (2),  we  get, 
MC  =  0.5 (4) 
As  this  is  the  case  of  best  matching,  therefore  the value of MC in Eqn (4) is the maximum probable  value  of  the  same.  Thus  it  may  be  written  as, 
(MC)max   =  0.5 (5) 
Case 2: If no word in title matches with that in  assigned keyword, then w  = 0, which is the case of  worst matching or no matching. Thus MC = 0, which  is  the  minimum  possible  value  of  the  same. 
Hence,  (MC)min   =  0 (6) 
Thus  the  range  of  values  of  MC  is  as  follows: 
0  ≤  MC  ≤  0.5 (7) 
In  this  study,  the  parameter  MC  has  been  segmentised in seven zones depending on different  ranges  of  their  values  as  listed  in  Table  2.  
The  method  of  comparison  between  words  in  
Table 2. Scale fxing of matching coeffcient 
Type of  matching Range of  values of MC 
no matching 
very low  matching 0.01 - 0.1 
low matching 
0 
0.11 - 0.2 
502 
title  and  assigned  keywords  has  been  presented  below  for  the  bibliographic  record  given  above: 
Here  the  title  is:  Google  Scholar  as  a  tool  for  discovering journal articles in library and information  science. 
The  single  full  words  in  this  title  are:  Google,  Scholar,  tool,  discovering,  journal,  articles,  library,  information,  science 
Form  words  in  this  title  are:  as,  a,  for,  in,  and 
Assigned keywords in this title are: Information  science,  Libraries,  Search  engines 
Single full words in the assigned keywords are:  Information,  science,  Libraries,  Search,  engines 
Now,  in  this  record,  M  =  9,  N  =  5  and w   =  3,  as  no.  of  matched  words  are  three. 
Thus  TKR  =  9/5  =  1.8  and  MC  =  3  /  (9  +  5)  =  3  /  14  =  0.214;  this  value  of  MC  belongs  to  moderate  matching  zone  at  per  Table  2. 
4.   r eSulTS And  AnAlySIS 
4.1   g rowth  of  literature 
The  year-wise  distribution  of  research  papers  has  been  presented  in Table  3. The  steady  growth  of literature has been observed since the year 2002  to  2011.  The  no.  of  articles  in  the  year  2002  was  17,  while  the  same  in  the  year  2011  was  44,  i.e.,  almost  2.5  times  more  than  2002.  The  maximum  no.  of  articles  was  observed  in  2010,  which  was  45.  The  graphical  presentation  of  the  growth  of  literature has been shown in Fig. 1. The graph has  been plotted using the open-source graphic software  Findgraph.  It  has  been  found  out  that  the  logistic  pattern  was  followed  by  growth  of  literature  during  the  said  time  interval,  i.e.  from  2002  to  2011.  The  exact equation followed by the growth pattern may  be  written  as: 
Figure 1. growth of literature since 2002 to 2011. 
moderate  matching 0.21 - 0.3 
high matching 
0.31 - 0.4 
very high  matching 0.41 - 0.49 
perfect  matching 0.5 

========5========

MAITI  & D UTTA: COMPARATIVE STUDy BETwEEN  w ORDS IN TITLES AND  w ORDS IN KEywORDS 
(8) 
in terms of research activities. The subject faceted  
y  =  12  +  28/  (1  +  exp(3.7  -  0.8*x)) where, x 
the  no.  of  research  articles.  
 represents time variable, and y represents  classification, though newer compared to classification  
and indexing, but still it was incepted by Ranganathan  
Eqn (1) thus portrays the exact growth pattern of  in  second  decade  of  last  century.  The  first  edition  
research  articles  in  the  concerned  subject  field. 
The growth pattern presented by Fig. 1. shows  the consolidated picture from three subject domains  
of  Colon  Classification  was  published  in  1933.  Therefore  this  area  also  attained  stability  to  some  extent.  But  the  folksonomy  is  a  new  area  having  
indicated by the keywords classification and indexing,  full  of  unsolved  problems  that  accelerates  its  high  
faceted  classification  &  folksonomy.  
Table  3  reflects  three  distinct  growth  patterns  for three different subject domains. For the subject  
tune  with  research  activities. 
4.2  distribution  of Articles  over  journals 
The total number of article contributed in the  
domain,  classification  and  indexing,  no  steady  
pattern has been observed. The growth of literature  
subject  Classification  and  Indexing  is  107.  The  
in  this  area  followed  a  fluctuating  pattern  with  the  highest  no.  of  publications  in  2008  and  lowest  no.  of  publications  in  2003.  In  the  subject  domain,  faceted  classification  a  steady  growth  pattern  has  been  observed.  The  lowest  no.  of  publications  came  in  2004,  while  highest  no.  of  publications  emerged  in  2011.  On  the  other  hand,  the  growth  process  for  the  subject  area  folksonomy,  started  from  the  year  2006.  Actually,  the  term  folksonomy  was coined in the year 2004, and therefore the first  research activity initiated only after a year, i.e. since  
articles  are  published  in  16  journals.  The  top  five  journals  along  with  percentage  of  articles  contained  therein  are  presented  in  Table  4.  It  has  been  observed  from  Figure  2,  that  the  core  journal  is Journal  of  Documentation   followed  by  The  Electronic  Library,  Library  Review,  Online  Information  Review  and   Library  Management .  These  five  journals  contained  67  %  of  total  contributions, i.e., nearly two-third of total number  of articles. Therefore, these five journals may be  regarded  as  top  journals  in  this  area. 
year 
Table 3. distribution of research papers over the years since 2002 to 2011 
   no. of articles for the keywords 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
Subject (keyword)-wise  total no. of articles 
Classifcation and indexing 12 
6 
15 
9  
15 
7 
17 
9 
9 
8 
107 
2006.  But  just  after  inception,  very  rapid  growth  of  research literature has been observed. The highest  no.  of  output  occurred  in  two  consecutive  years,  i.e.,  2009  and  2010.  The  steep  rise  pattern  within  a  very  short  time  is  observed  here  unlike  other  two  subject  areas.  This  implies  that  the  subject  folksonomy  is  a  budding  area  of  active  research.  This is a promising area of knowledge organisation,  where possibility of creation of new research scope  is  very  high.  
The  other  two  subject  domains  are  traditional  areas;  particularly  the  domain  of  classification  and  indexing is a subject having a rich historical tradition  since Melvil Dewey’s epoch around 1876, when the  first edition of Decimal Classification was published.  This area, therefore becomes more or less stabilised  
Faceted classifcation 5 
8 
4 
5 
9 
15 
16 
18 
20 
25 
125 
Folksonomy 0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
3 
6 
16 16 11 
53 
year-wise total  no. of articles 
17 14 19 14 25 25 39 43 45 44 285 
Table  4.  Top  five  journals  for  the  subject  domain  
 classifcation and indexing 
S. no. 
name of journal 
Frequency (%) 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 
10. 11. 
Journal of Documentation Electronic Library 
Library Review 
Online Information Review Library Management Aslib Proceedings 
New Library World 
Library Hi Tech 
Bottom Line: Managing Library  Finances 
Collection Building 
Others 
19 (17.8 %) 14 (13.1 %) 14 (13.1 %) 14 (13.1 %) 9 (8.4 %) 8 (7.5 %) 7 (6.5 %) 5 (4.7 %) 4 (3.7 %) 
4 (3.7 %) 9 (8.4 %) 
503 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
The total number of articles in the area of faceted  classification  is  125.The  articles  are  published  in  34  journals.  The  name  of  top  five  journals  have  been given in Table 5 along with number of articles  contained therein. It has been observed that the top  most  journal  is Journal  of  Documentation  followed  by  Aslib  Proceedings,  Online  Information  Review,  Library Hi-tech, The Electronic Library and   Library  Review.  This  top  six  journals  (ranked  one  to  five)  contain  63  %,  i.e.,  nearly  two-third  of  total  number  of  articles. 
The total number of articles in the subject area  folksonomy  is  53.  The  articles  are  published  in  15  journals.  The  Table  6  shows  journals  depicts  the  consolidated  distribution  of  articles  over  journals.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  top  most  journals  is  Journal  of  Documentation   followed  by  Library  Hi  Tech,  Online  Information  Review,  OCLC  Systems  and  Services  and   Program:  electronic  library  and  information  systems.  These  five  journals  consist  of  66  %,  i.e.,  almost  two-third  of  total  number  of  articles.  
Table  5.  Top  five  journals  for  the  subject  domain  
 faceted classifcation 
name of journal Total Journal of Documentation 22.4 % 
Aslib Proceedings 
9.6 % 
Online Information Review 
8.8 % 
Library Hi Tech 
8 % 
Electronic Library 
7.2 % 
Library Review 
7.2 % 
Reference Services Review 
5.6 % 
New Library World 
3.2 % 
Program: electronic library and information system3.2 % 
OCLS Systems & Services 
2.4 % 
Others 
22.4 % 
Table  6.  Top  five  journals  for  the  subject  domain     
folksonomy 
name of journal Total Journal of Documentation 18.9 % Library Hi Tech 17 % Online Information Review 15.1 % OCLC Systems & Services 7.6 % Program: Electronic library and information systems7.6 % Aslib Proceedings 5.66 % New Library World 5.66 % VINE 5.66 % Electronic Library 3.77 % Library Management 3.77 % Others 9.43 % 
504 
4.3 Assigned  Keyword pattern 
Total number of assigned keywords is 203 with  total  frequency  of  occurrence  438.  The  top  fifteen  keywords along with their frequencies are presented  in  Table  7.  The  total  frequency  of  occurrence  of  top  fifteen  keywords  is  143,  almost  one-third  of  the  total  frequency  of  203  keywords.  These  top  fifteen  keywords  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  core  keywords  in  this  subject  domain.  It  is  clear  that  the  more  researches  are  done  in  this  area  than  the  other  fields  of  knowledge.  It  is  thus  clear  from  Table  7  that  the  thrust  research  interest  in  this  subject  centre  around  the  terms  like  libraries,  information retrieval, academic libraries, information  management and information services. It is clear from  Table 7, that the words like electronic, information,  research  and  library  occurred  maximum  times,  because  these  words  seldom  occurred  alone  but  with  other  associated  words. 
Table  7.  Top  keywords  in  the  subject  domain      
  classifcation and indexing  
list of keywords Libraries 
Frequency 17 
Information retrieval 
15 
Academic libraries 
12 
Information management 
11 
Information services 
11 
Digital libraries 
10 
Research 
10 
Databases 
8 
Electronic journals 
8 
Librarians 
8 
Internet 
7 
University libraries 
7 
worldwide web 
7 
Electronic publishing 6 
India 6 
Total number of assigned keywords in this subject  domain  is  279  with  total  frequency  of  occurrence  528.  The  top  eighteen  core  keywords  along  with  their  frequencies  are  shown  in  Table  8.  The  total  frequency of top eighteen core keywords is 174, i.e.,  nearly one-third of total frequency of occurrence of  all  280  keywords.  It  is  evident  from  Table  8  above  that  the  principal  research  interest  in  this  area  centre around the keywords like Information retrieval,  classification,  digital  libraries,  academic  libraries,  internet, online catalogue, semantics, classification  schemes, controlled language construction, user interface  etc. (Table 9). Some very broad umbrella terms also  occurred here like internet, knowledge organisation,  information  science,  information  management,  etc.  The  keywords  like  library,  information,  electronic,  

========7========

MAITI  & D UTTA: COMPARATIVE STUDy BETwEEN  w ORDS IN TITLES AND  w ORDS IN KEywORDS 
Table  8.  Top  keywords  in  the  subject  domain  faceted  
classifcation 
list of keywords Total 
Information retrieval 
22 
Classifcation 
17 
Digital libraries 
15 
Knowledge management 
12 
Academic libraries 
11 
Internet 
11 
worldwide web 
10 
Libraries 
9 
Online catalogues 
8 
Semantics 
8 
Classifcation schemes 
7 
Controlled language construction 
7 
Information systems 
7 
User interfaces 
7 
Information management 
6 
Information science 
6 
United Kingdom 
6 
Communication technologies 
5 
Table  9.  Top  keywords  in  the  subject  domain 
  folksonomy 
list of keywords Total 
 Internet 
 Tagging 
world wide web 
 Academic libraries  Information retrieval  Knowledge management  Learning 
 Social networks 
 Digital libraries 
 Communication technologies  Indexing 
11 11 9 6 6 6 6 6 5 4 4 
knowledge,  research,  online,  organisational,  etc.,  hardly  occurred  alone,  but  with  other  words. 
4.4 Words  in  Titles  and Assigned  Keywords: A  
Comparative  Study    
A comparative study between words in titles and  words  in  assigned  keywords  for  classification  and  indexing is shown in Table. The values of Matching  Coefficients have been graded into seven ranges in  order of quality of matching. The value of matching  co-efficient  varies  from  0  to  0.5.  The  zero  value  indicates no matching, while the highest value of 0.5  indicates  perfect  matching.  The  intermediate  steps  from no matching to perfect matching are: very low  matching,  low  matching,  moderate  matching,  high  matching and very high matching. It is evident that  43  %  of  total  no.  of  articles  showed  low  matching.  For 13.1 % of articles there was no matching between  words  in  title  and  assigned  keywords,  while  for  15.9  %  of  total  no.  of  articles  the  matching  profile  was very low. Only 21.5 % articles showed moderate  matching  (Table  10).  Article  was  found  with  very  high  and  perfect  matching  profile.  From  the  above  categorisation it is clear that the words in titles and  assigned keywords do not match in most cases. As  title  is  the  most  concrete  and  compact  abstract  of  an article, therefore it may be safely assumed that  the  title  is  always  assigned  in  right  way.  The  title  reflects  the  central  theme  of  an  article  in  briefest  way. The assigned keywords are generally supplied  by  the  authors  and/or  by  editors  sometimes.  Now,  there  should  be  tally  between  words  in  title  and  assigned keywords, so that the keywords may help  in information retrieval properly. As in this case very  poor tally or matching is observed, therefore it may  be assumed that in most cases the keywords are not  assigned  in  the  right  way.  The  assigned  keywords  thus  rarely  reflect  the  central  theme  or  core  area  of  research  from  an  article  as  observed  here.  In  about  73  %  articles,  i.e.,  cases  of  no  matching,  very low matching and low matching, the keywords  may  be  presumed  as  wrongly  assigned,  while  in  remaining  27  %  articles,  i.e.  cases  of  moderate  matching  and  high  matching,  the  keywords  are  more  or  less  correctly  assigned.  
Also, it is clear from Table 11, that for 36 % of  total  articles,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  smaller  than  no. of words in assigned keywords (i.e., TKR < 1),  
Table 10. Distribution of articles over different scales of matching for classifcation and indexing 
Matching profle 
no  matching 
very low  matching 
low matching 
moderate  matching 
high matching 
very high  matching 
perfect  matching 
Value range 
0 
0.01 - 0.1 
0.11 - 0.2 
0.21 - 0.3 
0.31 - 0.4 
0.41 - 0.49 
0.5 
No. of research articles  with different matching  profles 
14 
17 
46 
23 
7 
0 
0 
Percentage of research  articles with different  matching profles 
13.1 % 
15.9 % 
43.0 % 
21.5 % 
6.5 % 
0 
0 
505 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
Table  11.  Title  keyword  ratio  for  classification  and 
  indexing 
relative size of m  &  n no. of articles (%) TKr=m/n M<N 39 (36 %) < 1 
M=N 7 (7 %) = 1 
M>N 61 (57 %) > 1 
while  for  57  %  of  articles  the  case  is  reverse  (i.e.,  TKR  >  1).  For  only  7  %  of  total  articles  no.  of  words  in  title  exactly  equals  to  the  no.  of  words  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.,  TKR  =  1.  In  majority  cases  thus,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  greater  than  so  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.,  title  is  generally  longer than all assigned keywords. Very few articles  contained  exactly  equal  no.  of  words  in  both  titles  and  assigned  keywords. 
A  comparative  study  between  words  in  titles  and  assigned  keywords  is  shown  in  Table  12  for  ‘faceted  classification’.  It  is  evident  that  40  %  of  total  no.  of  articles  showed  low  matching.  For  13  %  of  articles  there  was  no  matching  between  words  in  title  and  assigned  keywords,  while  for  18  %  of  total  no.  of  articles  the  matching  profile  was  very  low.  No  article  was  found  with  very  high  and  perfect  matching  profile.  From  the  above  classification  it  is  clear  that  the  words  in  titles  and  assigned keywords do not match in most cases for  faceted  ‘classification’  also.  In  this  case  also  very  poor  matching  is  observed;  therefore  it  may  be  assumed  that  in  most  cases  the  keywords  are  not  assigned  in  the  right  way.  The  assigned  keywords  thus rarely reflect the central theme or core area of  research from an article as observed in this subject  area  too.  In  about  71  %  articles,  i.e.,  cases  of  no  matching  (NM),  very  low  matching  (VLM)  and  low  matching (LM), the keywords may be presumed as  
wrongly assigned, while in remaining 29 % articles,  i.e.,  cases  of  moderate  matching  (MM)  and  high  matching  (HM),  the  keywords  are  more  or  less  correctly  assigned.  
Also,  it  is  clear  from Table  13  that  for  30  %  of  total  articles,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  smaller  than  no. of words in assigned keywords (i.e., TKR < 1),  while  for  55  %  of  articles  the  case  is  reverse  (i.e.,  TKR  >  1).  For  only  15%  of  total  articles  no.  of  words  in  title  exactly  equals  to  the  no.  of  words  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.,  TKR  =  1.  In  majority  cases  thus,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  greater  than  so  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.  title  is  generally  longer than all assigned keywords. Very few articles  contained  exactly  equal  no.  of  words  in  both  titles  and  assigned  keywords  as  usual.  Though  in  this  case,  the  no.  of  articles  with  TKR  =  1,  is  double  than  that  of  previous  one. 
A comparative study between words in titles and  assigned  keywords  is  shown  in  Table  14  36  %  of  total  no.  of  articles  showed  low  matching.  For  9  %  of articles there was no matching between words in  title  and  assigned  keywords,  while  for  9%  of  total  no. of articles the matching profile was very low. No  article was found with very high and perfect matching  profile. From the above classification it is clear that  the  words  in  titles  and  assigned  keywords  do  not  match  in  most  cases.  In  this  case  also  very  poor  matching  profile  is  observed;  therefore  it  may  be  assumed  that  in  most  cases  the  keywords  are  not  assigned  in  the  right  way.  The  assigned  keywords  thus rarely reflect the central theme or core area of  research from an article as observed in this subject  area  too.  In  about  55  %  articles,  i.e.,  cases  of  no  matching  (NM),  very  low  matching  (VLM)  and  low  matching (LM), the keywords may be presumed as  
no matching 
Table 12. Distribution of articles over different scales of matching for faceted classifcation 
moderate matching 
very low matching 
low matching 
0 
0.01 - 0.1 
0.11 - 0.2 
0.21 - 0.3 
16 
22 
50 
27 
13 % 
18 % 
40 % 
22 % 
Table 13. Title keyword ratio for faceted classifcation 
relative size of m  &  n 
no. of articles (%) 
TKr=m/n 
M<N 
37 (30 %) 
< 1 
M=N 
19 (15 %) 
= 1 
M>N 
69 (55 %) 
> 1 
high matching 
very high matching 
perfect matching 
0.31 - 0.4 
0.41 - 0.49 
0.5 
10 
0 
0 
8 % 
0 % 
0 %  
wrongly assigned, while in remaining 45 % articles,  i.e.,  cases  of  moderate  matching  (MM)  and  high  matching  (HM),  the  keywords  are  more  or  less  correctly assigned. In case of folksonomy, however  the  percentage  of  good  matching  (cases  of  MM  &  HM)  is  relatively  higher  compared  to  other  two  subject areas, i.e., 45 %, while the same was 29 %  
no matching 
very low matching 
Table 14. distribution of articles over different scales of matching for folksonomy 
moderate matching 
low matching 
0 
0.01 - 0.1 
0.11 - 0.2 
0.21 - 0.3 
5 
5 
19 
17 
9 % 
9 % 
36 % 
32 % 
506 
high matching 
very high matching 
perfect matching 
0.31 - 0.4 
0.41 - 0.49 
0.5 
7 
0 
0 
13 % 
0 % 
0 % 

========9========

MAITI  & D UTTA: COMPARATIVE STUDy BETwEEN  w ORDS IN TITLES AND  w ORDS IN KEywORDS 
and  30  %  respectively  for  other  two  subject  areas.  It has thus been observed that there is an increase  in  good  matching  and  consecutively  decrease  in  bad  matching  in  case  of  ‘folksonomy’.    
Also,  it  is  clear  from Table  15  that  for  40  %  of  total  articles,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  smaller  than  no. of words in assigned keywords (i.e., TKR < 1),  while  for  45  %  of  articles  the  case  is  reverse  (i.e.,  TKR  >  1).  For  only  15%  of  total  articles  no.  of  words  in  title  exactly  equals  to  the  no.  of  words  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.  TKR  =  1.  In  majority  cases  thus,  no.  of  words  in  title  is  greater  than  so  in  assigned  keywords,  i.e.  title  is  generally  longer than all assigned keywords. Very few articles  contained  exactly  equal  no.  of  words  in  both  titles  and  assigned  keywords.  Though  in  this  case,  the  no.  of  articles  with  TKR  =  1,  is  double  than  the  subject  of  ‘classification  and  indexing’. 
Table 15. Title keyword ratio for folksonomy 
relative size of m  &  n 
no. of articles (%) 
TKr=m/n 
M<N 
21 (40 %) 
< 1 
M=N 
8 (15 %) 
= 1 
M>N 
24 (45 %) 
> 1 
5. COnCluSIOnS 
This study has been carried over the bibliographic  details of 285 research papers in all, collected from  Emerald  database.  The  findings  that  have  been  observed  after  thorough  inspection  of  all  research  articles  are  listed  below: 
(a) The  growth  pattern  for  three  different  subject  
domains  have  been  studied  in  a  consolidated  
way that has been presented in Table 3. It has  
been noticed that the consolidated growth pattern  
follows a mathematically systematic pattern that  
can  be  represented  through  a  logistic  function  
as follows: library, internet, information retrieval,  
academic library, electronic library, classification,  
etc. Some keywords like, information, research,  
electronic, knowledge, online etc hardly occurred  
once, but with other terms. It is therefore clear  
that  these  areas  indicate  potential  topics  for  
research. 
(d) From  the  comparative  study  of  words  in  title  
and  assigned  keywords  it  is  clear  that  40%  of  
total  no.  of  articles  showed  low  matching.  No  
article  was  found  with  very  high  and  perfect  
matching profile. From the above classification  
it is clear that the words in titles and assigned  
keywords  do  not  match  in  most  cases. As  title  
is the most concrete and compact abstract of an  
article, therefore it may be safely assumed that  
the  words  in  title  are  always  assigned  in  right  
way.  The  title  reflects  the  central  theme  of  an  
article  in  briefest  way.  The  assigned  keywords  
are generally supplied by the authors and/or by  
editors  sometimes.  Now,  there  should  be  tally  
between words in title and assigned keywords.  
As  in  this  case  very  poor  tally  or  matching  is  
observed,  therefore  it  may  be  assumed  that  
in  most  cases  the  keywords  are  not  assigned  
in  the  right  way.  The  assigned  keywords  here  
rarely reflect the central theme or core area of  
research  from  an  article. 
In the traditional subject domains, like ‘classification  
& indexing’ and ‘faceted classification’, the good  
matching  and  bad  matching  percentages  were  
about 30 % and 70 % respectively, while in the  
newly budding subject domain like ‘folksonomy’,  
the good matching and bad matching percentages  
were 45 % and 55 % respectively. It means, the  
keywords  were  wrongly  assigned  in  traditional  
subject  domains,  while  more  or  less  rightly  
assigned  in  new  subject  domain. 
as  expressed  by  Eqn  7.  But  when  the  growth  
patterns  for  three  subject  domains  are  studied  
(e) It is also clear that the value of TKR for majority  
separately,  then  three  distinct  patterns  were  
followed. The subject domain classification and  
indexing shows no regular growth pattern, but a  
zig-zag one fluctuating over different years. The  
subject domain ‘faceted classification’ shows a  
steady growth pattern over the entire time span  
of  ten  years. The  subject  domain  ‘folksonomy’  
shows  a  steep  growth  pattern. As  this  concept  
was incepted in the year 2004, research about  
this  topic  was  started  in  2006.  But  since  after  
beginning  the  growth  occurred  very  quickly.  (b) From  the  study  of  journal  pattern  it  has  been  
observed that Journal of Documentation, Library  
Hitech,  Aslib  Proceedings  and   The  Electronic  
Library   are  core  journals  in  this  area. 
(c) From  the  analysis  of  assigned  keyword  profile  
the core keywords, which have been found are  
of articles is greater than one. For few number  
of  articles  it  is  equal  to  one,  and  for  little  fare  
no.  of  articles  the  same  is  less  than  one.  (f) Differences  have  been  observed  in  research  
trends between traditional and emerging subject  
domains. 
reFerenCeS 
1. Hjørland,  B.  what  is  knowledge  organisation  
(KO)? Knowledge Organisation,  2008,  35(2/3),  
86-101. 
2. Dutta, B.; Majumder, K.P. & Sen, B.K. Classification  
of  keywords  extracted  from  research  articles  
published  in  science  journals. Annals  Lib.  Inf.  
Studies,  2008, 55(4),  317-33. 
3. Dutta, B.; Majumder, K.P. & Sen, B.K. An analytical  
model  for  investigation  of  some  characteristics  
507 

========10========

DJLIT,  VOL.  33,  NO.  6,  NOVEMBER   2013 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
of  the  keywords  of  the  subject  Fermi  liquid:  A  case  study.  Annals  Lib.  Inf.  Studies,  2009,  56(4),  273-90. 
Dutta,  B.;  Majumder,  K.P.  &  Sen,  B.K.  Content  management by keywords: An analytical study.  SRELS  J.  Inf.  Manag.,  2010,  47(6),  599-620. Dutta,  C.  &  Dutta,  B.  Mechanism  of  keyword  formation  in  research  articles  on  physics:  An  empirical  study.  SRELS  J.  Inf.  Manag.,  2013,  50(1),  3-22. 
Sen, S.K. Bibliographic scattering: A generalised  source  approach,  Scientometrics,  1989,  17,  197-204. 
Dutta, B. & Sen, B.K. The scattering of articles  over  a  journal  system  as  observed  from  the  viewpoint  of  Bose-Einstein  statistics.  Annals  Lib.  Inf.  Studies,  2005, 52(2),  51-55. 
508 
8. Price, D.D.S. Bradford’s law and related statistical  
patterns. Current  Contents,  1980, 19,  5-12  9. Hjørland,  B.  &  Albrechtsen,  H.  Toward  a  new  
horizon in information science: Domain-analysis.  
JASIS,  1995,  46(6),  400-25. 
10. Hjørland,  B.  Domain  analysis  in  information  
science: Eleven approaches–traditional as well  
as innovative. Journal of Documentation, 2002, 
58   (4),  422-62. 
11. Hjørland, B. The concept of ‘subject’ in Information  
Science. Journal of Documentation,  1992, 48(2),  
172-200. 
12. Hjørland,  B.  Is  classification  necessary  after  
google.  Journal  of  Documentation,  2012,  68 
(3),  299-317. 
13. http://www.wikipedia.org/. 

========11========

