DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 4, July 2014, pp. 304-308 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.34.5841 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Building Knowledge Management-based Systems: Initiatives at Research  
Centre Imarat 
N. Venkatesh and S. Kalpavalli Research Centre Imarat, DRDO, Hyderabad–500 069 
E-mail: venkatesh.n@rcilab.in 
ABStRACt  
Information technology (IT) and knowledge society are two important driving forces of 21st  century.  Internet and web-based technologies have led to a new era of knowledge creation, storage, retrieval and  dissemination of information. During the last decade, knowledge management (KM) has been identifed as  the major management initiative that will help organisations, institutions, libraries and information centres  to utilise fruits of IT in fulflling the objectives of the organisation. Knowledge creation and sharing are  widely  recognised  as  important  assets  of  any  organisation.  In  today’s  context,  IT-based  services  have  changed the entire process of information cycle. All library professionals must redesign and reshape the  traditional  library  management  tools  and  apply  KM  concepts  and  practices  for  providing  better  library  services. Since knowledge is a critical asset of any organisation, KM practices will lead to provide right  information  to  right  person  at  right  time  into  a  reality. This  paper  covers  KM  concepts,  changing  role  of  library  professionals  and  current  trends  in  KM  practices  and  information  services  in  DRDO  and  in  
Research Centre Imarat (RCI) in particular. 
Keywords: Knowledge management, open source software, digital library 
1. INtRODUCtION 
In Defence Research and Development Organisation  (DRDO),  project  management  plays  a  key  role  in  design,  development  and  production  of  weapons  for  Defence  services.  Documentation  practices  play  a  vital  role  for  success  of  various  activities  in  project  management.  The  success  of  any  project  is crucially dependent on the documents produced,  stored and retrieved as per user needs. DRDO with  a chain of over 50 laboratories and establishments  spread  across  the  country  are  deeply  engaged  in  developing  defence  technologies1.  From  last  few  years DRDO has given importance to KM concepts  and  processes.  KM  has  been  recognised  as  good  management  tool  providing  basis  for  sharing  of  information assets and achieving organisational goals.  In present environment, the key factors for success  begin with top management support and commitment,  knowledge  assets  of  DRDO  and  proper  planning  and  control  of  all  KM-related  activities.  This  paper  gives details of present KM practices and information  services, contribution of DRDO Head Quarters, DRDO  libraries  to  make  KM  as  a  management  tool  for  fulfilling  organisational  objectives.  The  RCI  Library  has  initiated  software  development  for  building KM-based system namely, Knowledge Initiative Tracking  System (KITS). It is aimed  to realise intranet-based  system that supports organisational objectives and develop  culture  of  sharing  of  knowledge  within  RCI. 
This paper also covers various RCI initiatives in  building KM-based systems for providing platform for  easy exchange of information and better utilisation  of  talents  of  staff  for  overall  development  of  RCI. 
2. KNOWLEDGE  MANAGEMENt   CONCEP tS 
Knowledge management is a cross disciplinary  domain.  Knowledge  management  was  defined  by  Devenport as the processes of capturing, distributing  and efficiently using knowledge2. The second definition,  more  comprehensive,  is  given  by  Gartner  Group3,  which  states  that  “knowledge  Management  is  a  discipline  that  promotes  an  integrated  approach  to  identify,  capture,  evaluate,  retrieve,  and  share  all  of  an  enterprise’s  information  assets”.  These  assets may include databases, documents, policies,  procedures,  and  previously  uncaptured  expertise,  experience  of  individual  workers  and  also  tacit  knowledge that which is known but not captured in  any formal or explicit fashion. Devenport & Prusak4 have  given  another  pragmatic  description  of  KM  which  says,  ‘A  fluid  mix  of  contextual  information,  framed  experience,  values  and  expert  insight  that  provides framework for evaluating and incorporating  new  experiences  and  information’. 
It is clear that KM involves the identification and  analysis  of  available  and  required  knowledge  and  the  subsequent  planning  and  control  of  actions  to  develop knowledge assets so as to fulfill organisational  
Received 5 January 2014, revised 15 April 2014, Online published 9 July 2014 

========1========

VENKATESH  &  KALPAVALLI: BUILDING KNOwLEDGE  M ANAGEMENT-BASED SYSTEMS 
objectives. Thus KM practices can be broadly defined  as,  “The  acquiring,  sharing  and  use  of  knowledge  within  organisation,  including  learning  processes  and  management  information  systems”5. 
2.1   t YPES  OF  KNOWLEDGE  
The  KM  can  be  broadly  defined  as  knowledge  which  is  of  two  types-explicit  and  implicit.  Explicit  knowledge  is  available  in  the  documented  form.  It  can  be  preserved  systematically  and  can  be  retrieved, communicated, and used as and when it  is  required.  It  is  the  traditional  form  of  knowledge  and  is  available  in  the  formal,  and  documented  form.  It  can  be  easily  shared  amongst  its  users.  Since  very  long  time  librarians  and  information  professionals  have  been  working  with  the  task  of  collection,  organisation  and  dissemination  of  it.  Implicit  knowledge,  also  known  as  tacit  knowledge  is  unformulated,  related  to  intuitions,  feelings,  and  emotions.  It  resides  in  human  minds.  It  is  very  difficult  to  document  tacit  knowledge.  It  should  be  understood  gathering  of  tacit  knowledge  is  a  continuous process since expert advice, contextual  experience, problem solving capabilities and intuition  of  an  individual  cannot  be  documented. 
The main characteristics of KM are human resource  management,  information  technology  knowledge  sharing,  and  information  management.  The  details  of  KM  cycle  are  shown  in  Fig.  1. 
Figure 1. knowledge management cycle. 
3. KM AND  LIBRARIES 
The  objective  of  KM  in  libraries  is  to  promote  knowledge  innovation.  It  refers  to  the  production,  diffusion and transfer of knowledge as well as of the  network systems constructed by related institutions  and organisations. It includes three aspects, namely,  theoretical  innovation  management  of  knowledge,  technical innovation management, and organisational  innovation  management6. 
3.1 Applications  of  KM  
In a library and information centre, understanding  of  KM  and  to  assess  what  library  and  information  professional’s  role  should  be  to  play  a  part  in  KM  environment  is  vital.  They  are  to  :  
• Gain  an  understanding  of  KM  and  the  roles,  
skills  and  competencies  needed  in  these  
environments 
• Assess  the  implications  for  the  library  and  
information  profession  if  its  members  are  to  
play  a  full  part  in  KM 
• Assess  the  routes  available  to  people  wishing  
to  develop  KM  skills 
• Examine  the  need  for  information  literacy  
throughout  KM  environment 
• Have  continuing  professional  and  technical  
education  and  training  
• Understand  the  information  management  
principles 
• Understand  the  publishing  processes 
• Understand  the  technological  opportunities. 
In  KM  environment,  the  role  of  information  management includes not only managing traditional  library  management  tasks  but  also  effective  use  of  information  and  knowledge  stored  in  primary,  secondary  and  tertiary  resources  both  in  print  as  well  as  electronic  format.  Information  management  includes capabilities as well as value addition aspect  and  opportunities  as  well  as  challenges.  Thus  information management brings together and makes  available  hardware,  software,  control  mechanisms  and  online  learning  resources  but  KM  adds  human  expertise  through  human  resource  development  and  human  resource  management  and  the  KM  is  almost  a  step  ahead  of  information  management7. Libraries  have  to  decide  what  type  of  knowledge  can  be  institutionalised  and  shared  and  what  is  useful  information  and  raw  data8.  The  core  areas  of  KM-related  to  libraries  are  shown  in  Fig.  2. 
Figure 2. It  relevant to KM in libraries. 
3.2 Role  of  DRDO  Libraries 
DRDO  consists  of  more  than  50  laboratories  working areas of Missile Engineering, Aircraft, Optics,  Tanks,  Naval  Systems,  Electronics,  Life  Sciences,  R&D  Management,  etc.  All  DRDO  labs  have  well  developed  libraries.  All  the  libraries  have  made  significant  progress  in  following  areas: 
305 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  4, JULY   2014 
(a)  Library  automation 
(b) Pull  and  push-based  services 
(c) E-journals 
(d) Technical  reports 
(e) CD-Rom  services  
(f) Document  delivery  services 
(g) Development  of  digital  library 
(h) Intranet  &  internet-based  services 
(i) Conference  papers,  standards 
Besides  the  above  library  service,  all  libraries  have  started contribution to KM at lab-level. Defence  Scientific  Information  and  Documentation  Centre  (DESIDOC)  have  taken  large  number  of  steps  for  promotion  of  KM  culture  in  all  DRDO  laboratories.  DESIDOC  was  established  with  the  aim  to  be  a  center  of  excellence  in  collection,  processing,  and  disseminating  scientific  and  technical  information  on  cutting  edge  technologies  for  Defence  research  and development9. It’s website can be accessed on  DRONA. Since it is the central information system in  DRDO, it provides access to number of databases,  periodicals, in-house publications, current awareness  services,  DRDO  blog,  etc.  DESIDOC  is  the  nodal  centre  for  providing  e-journals  services  to  all  labs  under  consortium  programme.  . 
DESIDOC  has  laid  good  foundation  for  KM  initiatives  in  all  areas  of  Defence  R&D.  DRDL,  Hyderabad has started KM activities on their intranet,  namely, D-net. It provides scope for discussion forums,  blog,  knowledge  shares  of  the  month,  knowledge  bank,  knowledge  bites,  E-learning,  etc.  In  some  labs  besides  libraries,  KM  cells  are  established  to  take  forward  KM  activities. 
4. KM  INIt IAtIVES  IN  DRDO 
The broad objectives of KM Initiatives in DRDO  include how to meet the growing demands of project  management,  through  performance  improvement  and  breakthrough  innovation,  by  leveraging  on  the  collective  knowledge  of  various  organisational  entities.  DRDO  has  carried  out  project,  namely,  ‘Advanced  Techniques  for  Scientific  Performance  Measurement’.  The  important  findings  are: • Project management, design and development of  
• 
• 
and  for  growth  of  leadership  qualities  among  scientists. 
The recommended action plan provides major role  for senior scientists in the area of KM in terms  of effective sharing and utilisation of knowledge  assets  at  various  levels.  Advanced  training  in  R&D,  HR,  and  knowledge  management  are  essential  for  career  development  of  all  senior  scientists. 
DRDO policy in the area of KM aims to achieve  higher quality, productivity and better collaboration  through  the  synergy  of  knowledge,  resources,  facilities,  and  employees. 
4.1 KM AWARENESS 
To  improve  awareness  of  KM  among  DRDO  scientists and staff, various seminars, training courses,  and conferences are held. Some of the key results  are  as  follows. 
(a) DRONA (DRDO Rapid Online Network Access),  
an  intranet  linking  all  labs  in  DRDO  was  
established. 
(b) All scientists and officers have to fill information  
under  personnel  information  system  (PIS)  on  
DRONA.  The  mandatory  fields  of  PIS  include:  
General Details, Official Details, Family & Education,  
Job Experience, Promotions, Posting & Transfer,  
etc.  This  system  provides  basis  for  collection  
of  tacit  knowledge  of  scientists  and  officers. (c) DRONA  mail,  lab-wise  information  have  led  to  
access to all facilities, assets, and developments  
in  DRDO. 
d) Human  resource  management  has  been  given  
highest  importance  in  DRDO. 
(e) Scientists and staff carrying out R&D work leading  
to patents, copy right, etc., are encouraged for  
growth  of  knowledge  assets. 
5.  RCI  INI tIAtIVES 
The RCI is a premier R&D lab in the country with  an objective of developing the frontier technologies  for  guided  missile  systems  for Armed  Forces.  RCI  is  considered  as  avionics  hub  of  DRDO  and  has  developed  critical  indigenous  technologies  over  
the  main  job  functions  of  Senior  Scientists. Successful completion of projects, R&D management,  
components, research and development, institutional  
last  25  years. 
management and technology management form  
The  RCI  Library  has  taken  steps  for  growth  of  
digital library concepts. These include: RCI intranet,  
• 
namely,  RC  Net;  development  of  digital  library  of  
and  knowledge  generation  have  been  marked  
missiles and digitisation of project documents. RCI  as the most important aspects for performance  
has  started  digitisation  activities  from  2004  in  all  
areas of missile electronics10. It has developed Digital  
• 
assessment  of  scientists. 
Knowledge management was recognised as the  
Assets  Management  software  to  provide  access  to  
first  step  for  enhancing  managerial  potential  
born-digital  and  made-digital  objects  on  intranet  
306 

========3========

VENKATESH  &  KALPAVALLI: BUILDING KNOwLEDGE  M ANAGEMENT-BASED SYSTEMS 
suitable  for  library  and  lab-level  applications11.    Recently,  it  has  developed  in-house  software  for  project  information  centre  in  DRDO  as  per  DRDO  guidelines for project documents12. RCI Library also  has initiated following steps to make  KM Practices  as  part  and  parcel    of  lab  activities.  Some  of  the  key  features  are: 
(a) Development of institutional repositories covering  
papers  published  by  scientists  in  journals/ 
conferences/seminars/workshops  over  last  25  
years 
(b) Database  of  all  CEP  course/training  course  
materials 
(c) Database  of  workshops  proceedings  held  in  
RCI 
(d) Development  ofimage  database  covering  all  
RCI  activities 
(e) TIRC  has  collected  details  of  user  profile  of  
all  Scientists  for  better  understanding  of  their   
experience,  skill  sets  and  problem  solving  
capabilities  
(f) Technical  discussions  with  KM  consultants (g) Study of various open source software features in  
the area of KM  was carried out and Freeplane,  
Fusion KM, Mediawiki, Moodle, and Opendocman  
were considered for purpose of study. The study  
brought  out  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  
OSS. 
The  net  result  of  all  these  initiatives  lead  to  the  need  for  development  of  in-house    software  for  KM  as  per  lab  requirements.  RCI  Library  has  initiated  in-house  software  development,  namely,  knowledge  initiatives  tracking  system  (KITS)  using  SQL  server  and  .net. A  broad  frame  work  of  KITS  
Figure 3. Conceptual model of KM. 
designed  as  per  RCI  requirements  is  shown  in Fig.  3.  The  framework  is  based  on  a  conceptual  model  where  various  Knowledge  sources  at  the content-level interact to realise an integrated knowledge  structure. 
Some  of  the  key  advantages  of  KM  initiatives  at  RCI  are: 
(a) Development of intranet-based system supporting  
culture  of  sharing  of  Knowledge 
(b) Encourage  knowledge  creation  and  growth  of  
integrated  information  system 
(c) Provide  a  platform  for  all  HR  activities (d) Development  of  blog  for  easy  exchange  of  
ideas 
(e) Better  control  of  all  the  knowledge  assets. 
6.  PROBLEM AREAS 
The  KM  is  highly  useful  in  ongoing  renewal  of  organisational  processes.  There  is  need  for  better  co-ordination  between  libraries,  computer  centre,  human  resource  division  and  top  management  to  achieve better results. HRD activities should support  the  change  in  management  role  and  promote  an  understanding  of  organisational  culture.  Network  facilities, better skill sets for library staff and manpower  training  in  KM  for  all  scientists  and  staff  is  the  need  of  the  hour. 
7.  CONCLUSIONS 
The significance of KM is felt in all organisations.  The KM concepts and activities have brought information  management  and  network  issues  into  focus.  The  key KM resources are not only technology but also  people,  contents,  and  economics.  Thus  KM  is  a  key  tool  for  building  the  era  of  web-native  science  and technology developments in DRDO. Information  professionals have to take full advantage in present  IT  scenario  by  understanding  the  potential  of  KM  and  laboratory  objectives.    
AKOWLEDGEMENtS 
The authors are thankful to Shri G. Satheesh Reddy, OS &  Director,  RCI  for  permitting  to  present  the  paper. 
REFERENCES 
1. Moorthy, A.L. DRDO e-journals consortium. DESIDOC  
J.  Lib.  &  Inf.  Technol.,   2009,  29(5),18-23. 2. Devenport,  T.H.  Real  success  knowledge  
management projects. Sloan Manag. Rev.,1998,  
39(1),  43-57. 
3. Duhon,  B.  It’s  all  out  heads.   Inform,  1998,  
12(8),  9-13. 
4. Devenport, T.H. & Prusak, L. working knowledge:  
How  organisation  manages.  Harvard  Business  
School,  Boston.  1998. 
307 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  4, JULY   2014 
5. Natarajan, M. KM in Hybrid Libraries. In NACLIN- 
2000: Library and Information Networking, edited  
by H.K. Kaul & Harish Chandra. Paper presented  
at  the  3rd   National  Convention  on  Library  and  
Information Networking, 24-25 December 2000,  
Chennai.  DELNET,  New  Delhi,  2000.  pp.1-8. 6. Shanhong,  Tang.  Knowledge  management  in  
libraries in the 21st  century.  In  66 
th 
 IFLA Council  
and  General  Conference,  13-18  August  2000,  
Jerusalem,  Israel.  pp.  13-18. 
7. Ravichandra Rao, I.K. Information Management: An  
overview. In  CALIBER-98: Information Management  
in Academic and Research Libraries, edited by  
M. Mahapatra & D.B. Ramesh. Paper presented  
at the 5th  National Convention for Automation of  
Libraries in Education and Research, 4-5 March  
1998,  Bhubaneswar.  Information  and  Library  
Network Centre (INFLIBNET), Ahmedabad, 1998. 
pp.  1-8. 
8. Dabas, K.C. & Gill, N.S. Knowledge management:  
An  overview,  exploration  and  implementation  
in university libraries. In  NACLIN-2000: Library  
and Information Networking, edited by H.K. Kaul  
&  Harish  Chandra.  Paper  presented  at  the  3rd 
National Convention on Library and Information  
Networking,  24-25  December  2000,  Chennai.  
DELNET,  New  Delhi,  2000.  pp.18-31. 9. Moorthy, A.L. Souvenir on National Conference  
on  Digitisation  &  Digital  Preservation,11-12,  
December  2008,  DESIDOC,  New  Delhi,  pp.  
1-6. 
10. Venkatesh, N.; Ramana Rao, G.V. & Kalpavalli,  
S.  Digitisation  issues  in  DRDO-prospects  and  
problems.  In   NCDDP-2008,  edited  by  Shashi  
Tyagi  &  B.  Nityanand.  Paper  presented  at  the  
308 
National Conference on Digitisation and Digital  
Preservation, 11-12 December 2008, New Delhi.  
DESIDOC,  New  Delhi,  2008,  pp.3-7. 
11. Venkatesh, N.; Nageswara Rao, K. & Kalpavalli.  
S.  Development  of  digital  assets  management  
software for Research Centre Imarat. DESIDOC  
J.  Lib.  &  Inf.  Technol.,   2012,  32(5),  447-51. 12. Venkatesh,  N.  &  Kalpavalli  S.  Development  of  
software for project information centres (SPIC)  
in  DRDO. PM  World  J.,  2013, 2(6),  1-9. 
About  the Authors 
Mr  N.  Venkatesh   is  working  as  Scientist  ‘F’,  Head,  Technical  Information  Resource  Centre (TIRC),  Directorate  of  HRDG,  RCI,  Hyderabad.  He  has  obtained  MSc  (Physics)  in  1981  and  BLIS  in  1982 from Osmania University, Hyderabad. He has  attended  one  year  training  course  on  Information  Science in National Centre for Science Information,  Indian  Institute  of  Science,  Bangalore  in  1984.  He  joined DRDO as Scientist at the Institute of Armament  Technology, Pune in 1985. He has published research  papers  in  various  conferences  and  journals.  His  areas  of  interest  include:  Library  management,  digital  libraries  &  information  management,  project  documentation,  and  knowledge  management. 
Ms S. Kalpavalliis is working as Contract Engineer in  TIRC, RCI, Hyderabad. She holds MCA from Osmania  University,  Hyderabad.  Her  current  areas  of  work  are:  Library  automation,  software  development  for  digital library applications, knowledge management,  etc.  She  has  published  four  articles. 

========5========

