DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 1, January 2014, pp. 11-15 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Application of Digital Rights Management in Library 
Ashis Kumar Pal 
Indian Statistical Institute Library, 203 BT Road, Kolkata-700 108 
E-mail: ashispal@isical.ac.in 
AbstRAct 
  Digital  rights  management  (DRM)  is  emerging  as  a  formidable  new  challenges  and  focuces  on  security like encryption and watermarking. It is a type of access control technology that is used by hardware  manufacturers, publishers, copyright holders and individuals with the intent to limit the use of digital content.   Libraries may license resources, such as images and videos, which may require a DRM system to protect  the fles from copying or misuse. The DRM technology is used to limit copying, printing and sharing of  e-books. A properly managed DRM system could assist libraries in managing these services.  
Keywords: Digital  rights  management,  digital  libraries,  digitisation,  copyright,  encryption,  watermarks, 
  DRM techniques, digital certifcate, digital signature 
1. IntRoDuctIon 
Information  and  communication  technologies,  internet,  and  particularly  the  world  wide  web  have  revolutionised  the  information  explosion.  Now  the  e-publishing  agencies  and  digital  libraries  face  the  challenge  to  protect  the  authority  rights  and  fair  use  of  the  digitised  reading  material. 
Digital rights management (DRM)1  is a technique  that  attributes  certain  conditions  on  some  digital  products  to  be  used  and  shared  in  libraries  and  information centres. The DRM is set up as a system  for  the  protection  of  digital  works,  and  created  or  designed to protect the unauthorised duplication and  illegal distribution of copyrighted digital products. As  the  internet  is  becoming  widely  used,  it  is  easy  to  copy  and  illegally  sell  a  variety  of  marketed  digital  information  and  products.  Therefore,  this  type  of  technique  prevents  users  from  adopting  any  illegal  and  unauthorised  attempts.  
The DRM technology works by allowing distributors  of  electronic  information  to  control  viewing/access  to  content.  Some  form  of  encryption  is  needed  to  control  access  to  content.  Rights  management  solutions  are  based  on  a  wrapper  or  container  placed  around  a  data  file  which  protects  and  sets  the data life-cycle and defines usage rules, payment  and  redistribution  constraints.  A  license  must  be  acquired  to  unlock  the  wrapper  and  get  access  to  the content. Individual ‘keys’ for viewing or listening  to  the  content  are  provided  to  the  end-user  who  has  purchased  the  rights  which  generally  include  limitations  on  copying,  printing  and  redistribution. 
Received 5 February 2013, Online published 17 January 2014 
The  DRM  systems  are  designed  to  ensure  the  harmony  of  the  object  so  that  the  object  is  not  intercepted before delivery and to ensure the security  of  the  whole  distribution  chain,  so  that  objects  are  transferred only to authorised consumers and devices.  The DRM system makes use of the technology and  tools  to  create  an  end-to-end  secured  packaging  and distribution system for protected contents. The  system  generally  includes  the  following  steps: • Watermarks and identifiers are used to identify  
the content uniquely. This identification can also  
be  used  for  downstream  tracing  of  the  content  
to  ensure  an  authorised  use  of  the  content.  • To ensure that only consumers with appropriate  
keys  can  access  the  content  and  to  ensure  
that  the  content  is  unchanged  throughout  the  
process.  
• To  manage  the  encryption  and  decryption  of  
the content by authorised entities in the content  
value  chain  
• It contains usage rules to decide what conditions  
must be met for access and how the consumer  
can  use  the  resource.  
The  DRM  systems  have  also  reached  to  a  stage  of  maturity  and  flexibility  where  libraries  can  actually consider their adoption to provide integrated  access  to  all  digital  information.  The  success  of  information society depends on digital content being  accessible. Libraries must not be prevented by DRM  from availing themselves of their lawful rights under  national  copyright  law  and  must  be  able  to  extend  their  services  to  the  digital  environment. 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  1, JANuARy  2014 
2. IMpLeMentAtIon  of  DRM technoLogy 
For  maximum  utilisation  of  the  resources,  the  important  part  is  its  implementation  in  the  ground  level. Various techniques are used to protect the right  of the author. The DRM technologies2  have enabled  publishers  to  enforce  access  policies  that  not  only  disallow  copyright  infringements,  but  also  prevent  unlawful  use  of  copyrighted  works.  The  DRM  is  a  copy  protection  tool  generally  used  by  the  e-book  publishers  to  restrict  the  user  of  converting  their  e-book  formats  from  one  to  another  and  limit  them  to  copying,  printing,  and  sharing  of  e-books. 
The fundamental security requirement for a DRM  system  is  that  the  hardware  and/or  software  used  to  access  the  protected  data  be  guaranteed  by  its  manufacturer to behave in accordance with licences.  A  terminal  is  an  abstract  single-user  player,  editor,  or  similar  that  may  be  implemented  as  a  hardware  device, a software application  or combination of the  two. Figure 1 shows, one reference model of a DRM  system.  Information  is  created  by  a  provider  and  transmitted in a  protected (for example, encrypted)  form  to  a  user  via  some  distribution  channel.  To  access  the protected data, user must obtain a licence  from    the  licence  issuer.  Licences  are    written  in  a  machine-readable    rights  expression    language  that  sets  out  the  terms  of  use  of  the  data  and  the  information  required  to  access  the  protected  content. 
figure 1. Reference model for DRM systems. 
3.   t ooLs AnD   co Mponents  of  DRM 
The  DRM  systems  usually  comprise  of  several  technologies  that  enable  a  transaction  of  digital  documents  to  the  authorised  user.  Many  core  technologies  involve  in  DRM  that  include: 3.1 Watermarking 
Watermarking 
3 
  inserts  information  into  content  that  can  be  used  for  many  purposes,  such  as  
12 
provenance  (creation  and  ownership),  copyright,   and the conditions of use. Watermarks are inserted  into  contents  of  a  digital  file  that  donot  affect  the  original  content.  Digital  information  embedded  within  any  digital  media  can  later  be  detected  and  extracted  with  the  watermark  recognition  software.   Watermarks  can  be  measured  in  terms  of  capacity  and  original  signal  fidelity. 
Watermark  capacity  refers  to  the  amount  of  information that can be embedded in a watermark. A  Signal fidelity measure function measures the distortion  between the unmarked file and the watermarked file.  Watermarking is often used in data hiding, in which  secret  information  is  embedded  in  a  digital  file.  Watermarks serve the purpose of identification and  content use management that generally is a part of DRM  system  or  strategy  for  safeguarding  documents. 3.1.1 Application  of  Watermarking 
3 
    A number of possible applications of watermarking  technologies  are  there  in  the  field  of  library  and  information  science  which  are: 
• In  the  field  of  data  security,  watermarks  may  
be  used  for  certification,  authentication,  and  
conditional access. Certification is an important  
issue  for  official  documents,  such  as  identity  
cards  or  passports 
• Another  application  of  watermarking  is  on  the  
protected identity card or library card. The identity  
number is written in clear text on the card and  
hidden  as  a  digital  watermark  in  the  identity  
photo. Therefore, switching or manipulating the  
photo,  identity  will  be  detected 
• Digital watermarks can also be adapted to mark  
white  paper  with  the  goal  of  authenticating  
the  originator,  verify  the  authenticity  of  the  
document  content,  or  to  date  the  document.  
Such  applications  are  especially  of  interest  for  
official  documents,  such  as  contracts.  In  the  
event of a dispute, the digital watermark is then  
read allowing authentication of key information  
in  the  contract. 
3.2   e ncryption 
Encryption4  is based on cryptography. Information  security  is  provided  on  computers  and  over  the  internet  by  a  variety  of  methods.  But  the  most  popular  forms  of  security  rely  on  encryption,  the  process  of  encoding  information  in  such  a  way  that  only  the  person  (or  computer)  with  the  key  can  decode  it.  Encryption  is  a  standard  method  to  protect  digital  content  from  unauthorised  use  by  scrambling  the  content,  until  a  key  is  used  to  decrypt  the  content  and  make  it  usable  by  the  key  holder.  The  key  (code)  is  the  most  important  component  in  an  encryption  system.  Encryption  systems  generally  are  of  two  categories: 

========2========

PAL: APPLICATION OF  D IgITAL  R IghTS  M ANAgEMENT IN  L IBRARy 
(a) Symmetric/Private-key  encryption;  and (b) Public-key encryption (also known as asymmetric- 
key  encryption). 
In symmetric-key encryption, each party (computer)  has  a  secret  key  (code)  that  it  can  use  to  encrypt  a  packet  of  information  before  it  is  sent  over  the  network to another computer. Symmetric-key encryption  is essentially the same as a secret code that each  of  the  two  computers  must  know  to  decode  the  information. 
Public-key  encryption  uses  two  different  keys  at  once,  i.e.,  combination  of  a  private-key  and  a  public  key.  The  private-key  is  known  only  to  one’s  computer,  while  the  public  key  may  be  widely  distributed, even to unknown users. The public Key  and  the  private-key  are  related  computationally,  but  the  private-key  should  not  derivable  from  the  public key. A message may be encrypted by anyone  processing the public key but can only be decrypted  by  the  private-key. 
3.2.1 Application  of  Encryption 
        A  popular  implementation  of  public-key  encryption is the secure sockets layer (SSL) developed  by  Netscape.  It  is  an  Internet  security  protocol  used  by  Internet  browsers  and  Web  servers  to  transmit  sensitive  information4.  The  SSL  allows  authenticating  both  the  client  and  the  server,  and  also establishing a secure connection between client  and  server.  It  is  primarily  designed  to  ensure  the  security of electronic transactions over the internet.  This  SSL  has  become  part  of  an  overall  security  protocol  known  as  transport  layer  security  (TLS).  Figure  2(a)  shows  that  ‘s’  is  given  after  ‘http’  in  the  address  whenever  someone  is  about  to  enter  sensitive information, such as a credit-card number.  Figure  2(b)  also  introduces  padlock  system  by  the  use  of  encryption  system. 
(a)  
4. DRM  techno Logy  In  LIbRARy  
The DRM5  products are developed in response  to the rapid increase in online piracy of commercially  marketed  material  which  proliferates  through  the  widespread use of file exchange programs. Typically,  DRM  is  implemented  by  embedding  code  that  prevents  copying,  specifies  a  time  period  in  which  the  content  can  be  accessed  or  limits  the  number  of devices the media can be installed on. Although  digital  content  is  protected  by  copyright  laws  but  policing the Web and catching law-breakers is very  difficult.  The  DRM  technology  focuses  on  making  it  impossible  to  steal  content.  however,  serious  breaches  of  copyright  law  is  there  because  of  the  ease  with  which  digital  files  can  be  copied  and  transmitted. 
Recently, electronic document delivery services/ system6  libraries have adopted to deliver the documents  in the softcopy rather than the physical copy of the  same  to  its  user.  On  this  system  of  delivery,  users  receive  a  copy  of  a  required  article  which  is  being  requested  by  him  from  the  source,  but  this  system  is  objectionable  by  the  publisher  of  the  document  because  when  a  user  receives  a  document  he  is  free  to  share  it  with  others  without  any  limitation.  To  avoid  these  types  of  misuses,  libraries  should  have  to  follow  the  DRM  technologies  with  the  following  techniques: 
• Many commercially licensed resources are bundled  
with  digital  rights  licenses  or  watermarks  that  
may  be  imperceptible  to  the  libraries  as  well  
as  to  the  end  users. 
• Libraries may license resources, such as images  
and  videos,  which  may  require  a  DRM  system  
to  protect  the  files  from  copying  or  misuse. • Digital signature or the hand-written signatures are  
used to regulate the access to digital content, and • E-books  in  the  library  use  DRM  technology  to  
limit  copying,  printing,  and  sharing  of  e-books.  
E-books are usually limited to a certain number  
(b) 
figure 2. (a) ‘s’ for sensative information and (b) padlock system used for encryption. 
13 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  1, JANuARy  2014 
of reading devices and some e-publishers prevent  any  copying  or  printing.  Some  commentators  believe  that  DRM  makes  e-book  publishing  complex. 
5.   f utuRe  of  DRM 
The  DRM  is  emerging  as  a  formidable  new  challenge4.  It  is  essential  for  DRM  systems  to  provide  interoperable  services.  Solutions  to  DRM  challenges will enable untold amounts of new content  to  be  made  available  in  safe,  open,  and  trusted  environments. The technology can be expected to be  heavily  used  in  the  future  to  support  digital  library  collections, software development, distance education,  and  networking  of  digital  items.  Libraries  must  not  be  prevented  by  DRM  from  availing  themselves  of  their  lawful  rights  under  national  copyright  law  and  must  be  able  to  extend  their  services  to  the  digital  environment. 
Evaluation of the DRM implementation with respect  to issues such as copyright support, fair use or fair  dealing  protection,  renewability,  and  degradation  of  transmission  and  playback  performance  should  become a standard part of the resource evaluation  process. Another issue of concern to libraries is that  DRM  system  may  unfairly  disadvantage  disabled  users. Most countries provide exemptions from anti  circumvention  provisions  in  law  to  support  access  to  information  for  disabled  user.  Libraries  should  ensure  that  DRM  bundles  with  licensed  content  either  includes  special  provisions  for  the  disabled  or  can  be  made  accessible  to  disabled  patrons  in  some  manner,  perhaps  through  special  certificates  or  at  designated  library  workstations. 
Libraries that routinely purchase DRM-protected  content may want to investigate the use of modular  hardware components to avoid collisions with operating  systems  and  other  application  whenever  a  DRM  component  is  automatically  renewed.  The  best  current strategy for dealing with embedded DRM is  awareness – studying the system configuration and  DRM  specification  that  vendors  provide.  The  DRM  components  of  any  given  product  are  marketed  to  the  content  rights  holder,  not  to  the  user. 
6. DRM AnD copyRIght  (AMenDMent)  Act,  
2012 In  the  DIgItAL   e RA 
‘Indian Copyright (Amendment) Bill,  2012’ enacted  in the Parliament7   in  May  2012,  was  largely  based  on  two  treaties,  i.e.,  World  Intellectual  Property  Organisation (WIPO) Copyright Treaty, 1996 and the  WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT),  1996.  It  addresses  the  challenges  posed  by  digital  technology to the protection of copyright and related  rights, particularly with regard to the dissemination  of protected material over digital networks such as  the  internet  and  deals  with  copyright  protection  for  the  authors  of  literary  and  artistic  works  such  as  
14 
writings,  computer  programs,  original  databases,  musical  works,  audio-visual  works,  works  of  fine  art,  and  photographs. 
This  Indian  copyright  Act  includes  two  new  Sections  65A  and  65B  to  punish  persons  found  guilty  of  piracy  by  using  technology  to  take  away  somebody’s  copyright  and  then  use  that  material  to  make  profits. 
‘Section-65A7 –  Any  person  who  circumvents  an  effective  technological  measure  applied  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  any  of  the  rights  conferred  by  this  Act,  with  the  intention  of  infringing  such  rights, shall be punishable with imprisonment which  may  extend  to  two  years  and  shall  also  be  liable  to  fine.’ 
‘Section-65B7  – Any person, who knowingly: (a) removes  or alters any rights management information without  authority, or (b) distributes, imports for distribution,  broadcasts  or  communicates  to  the  public,  without  authority, copies of any work, or performance knowing  that  electronic  rights  management  information  has  been removed or altered without authority, shall be  punishable with imprisonment which may extend to  two  years  and  shall  also  be  liable  to  fine’ 
So,  the  Copyright  (Amendment)  Act,  2012,  makes substantial progress in filling the gaps in the  parent Act (1957) so as to benefit all stakeholders.  The  act  provides  a  clear  picture  on  the  rights  of  authors  for  his/her  creative  works. 
7. LIbRARIAns AgAInst  DRM 
The DRM provides media and technology companies  the ultimate control over every aspect of what people  can  do  with  their  media.  This  essentially  moves  control  of  the  library's  digital  collection  into  the  hands of the publishers and intermediary companies  which will immediately be implementing DRM. That  is  why,  in  2008,  the  DRM  Elimination  Crew  stood  on  the  steps  of  the  Boston  Public  Library  (BPL)  and  demanded  that  they  Kick  DRM  Out8. 
Back then librarians were somewhat disgruntled  with  this  setup,  but,  unfortunately,  few  librarians  were  willing  to  take  action  to  get  DRM  out  of  their  libraries. however,  a  recent  move  by  the  publisher  harperCollins  may  have  just  pushed  many  such  librarians over the edge by demanding a 26-checkout  limit  on  many  of  their  titles  (i.e.,  a  title  can  only  be  checked  out  26  times  to  patrons  before  it  is  removed  from  the  library's  digital  collection  and  it  needs  to  be  re-purchased). 
So, the Readers Bill of Rights9  currently makes  the  following  demands  for  readers: 
• Ability  to  create  a  paper  copy  of  the  item  in  
its  entirety 
• Ability to retain, archive and transfer purchased  
materials 

========4========

PAL: APPLICATION OF  D IgITAL  R IghTS  M ANAgEMENT IN  L IBRARy 
• Digital Books should be in an open format (i.e.,  
one  can  read  on  a  computer,  not  just  a  book  
reader  device) 
• Reader  information  will  remain  private  (what,  
when  and  how  one  reads  will  not  be  stored  or  
marketed) 
Readers, librarians, and authors need to make  their  voices  against  DRM,  because  it  makes  them  helpless  and  divided.  If  one  does  not  ban  DRM  from libraries then it will be expected that in future  librarians  and  readers  may  not  be  able  to  retain  rights  into  the  library. 
8.   c oncL usIons 
Digital  rights  management  system  is  a  means  of  delivering  content.  however,  DRM  is  frequently  seen  only  as  a  technical  protection  measure,  i.e.,  technical means of enabling right holders to deliver  digital content in a controlled way, preventing users  from  having  access  to  the  content  unless  they  meet  the  requirements  of  the  right  holder,  be  it  financial  or  otherwise,  and  preventing  users  from  using the accessed content in ways other than the  right holder has given permission for. Libraries are  already involved in the clearance and management  of  rights. A  property  managed  introduction  of  DRM  systems  in  its  widest  sense,  could  assist  libraries  in  managing  their  services.  
RefeRences 
1. May,    Christopher.    Digital  rights  management:  
Problem of expanding ownership rights. Chandos  
Publishing,  Oxford, 2007.  
2. Karen Coyle. The technology of rights: Digital rights  
management. Talk originally given at the Library 
of  Congress  on  19  November  2003,  2003. 
3.   h artung,  Frank    &  Ramme,  Friedhelm.  Digital  
rights management and watermarking of multimedia  
content. IEEE  Communications,  2000,  78-84. 4. Kramer,    Elsa  F.  Digital  rights  management:  
Pitfalls and possibilities for people with disabilities.   
J.  Electr.  Pub.,  2007,  1(10). 
5. Agnew,  garce.  Digital  rights  management:   
Librarian’s  guide  to  technology  and  practice.   
Chandos  Publishing,  Oxford,  2008.  
6. Pal,  Ashis  Kumar.  Design  and  development  of  
Prof. Prasanta Chandra Mohalanobis   archives.  
IASLIB  Bulletin,  2011,  3(56),  154-60. 
7. The  Copyright  (Amendment)  Bill  2012,  passed  
by  Rajya  Sabha  on  17th  May  2012. 
8. http://www.defectivebydesign.org/Librarians-Against- 
DRM.  (accessed  on  22  October  2012). 
9. Eschenfelder,  Kristin R.  Every library’s nightmare?  
Digital rights management, use restrictions, and  
licensed  scholarly  digital  resources.  College   
Res.  Lib.,  2008, 3(69). 
About  the Author 
Mr  Ashis  Kumar  pal,   MA  (Econ.)  and  MLISc  is  currently working as Associate Scientist ‘A’ at Library,  Documentation  &  Information  Science  Division,  Indian  Statistical  Institute,  Kolkata.  Besides  this,  he  is  working  as guest  Faculty,  Dept  of  Library  &  Information Science, Rabindra Bharati university and  Counselor of Indira gandhi National Open university.  he  has  served  the  profession  for  more  than  18  years.  his  research  interests  include:  Institutional  repository,  digital  rights  managements,  encryption,  watermarking,  library  consortia,  library  automation,  etc. he has published many papers in the national  and  international  journals. 
15 

========5========

