DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 1, January 2014, pp. 23-27 
  2014, DESIDOC 
An Exploratory Analysis of Messages on a Prominent LIS  
Electronic Discussion List from India 
S.M. Pujar*, G. Mahesh** and Francis Jayakanth***  *Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Goregaon (East), Mumbai-400 065 
E-mail: pujar@igidr.ac.in 
**National Institute of Science Communication and Information Resources (NISCAIR) New Delhi-110 067 
E-mail: gmahesh7@gmail.com 
***J.R.D. Tata Memorial Library, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560 012 
E-mail: franc@library.iisc.ernet.in 
AbStrAct 
 The study analyses some of the aspects of e-mail postings such as number of posts, contributors  and the topics of discussion on India’s leading e-mail discussion list, LIS-Forum between 2006 and 2011.  It  has  been  found  from  the  study  that  during  the  period  of  study  on  an  average;  about  1600  postings  per  year,  are  being  circulated  on  the  LIS-Forum,  out  of  which  ‘announcements’  are  forming  the  major  posting. It shows, even in an era of several powerful social media and Web 2.0 tools, the e-mail based  discussion list which is the earliest kind of social medium, continues to retain its relevance and popularity  and it is evident from its usage by professionals in India to form their virtual network.  
Keywords: LIS-Forum, e-mail, discussion list 
1. IntroDuctIon 
Library and information science (LIS) education  in India, which began in 1912, has already completed  100  years.    India's  major  contribution  to  library  science, the five laws of library science, postulated  by  Dr  SR  Ranganathan,  remains  relevant  and  continues  to  be  widely  discussed  and  debated.  Dr  Ranganathan  was  also  instrumental  in  setting  up  several  library  schools  in  India,  thus  laying  a  strong  foundation  for  LIS  education  in  the  country.  The impact of ICT especially the internet, on library  and  information  services  is  well  known.  As  per  Telephone  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  (TRAI)  report,  as  on  March  2011,  there  are  19.67  million  internet  subscribers  and  381.40  million  people  access  internet  through  their  mobile  phones1.  The  newly  established  National  Knowledge  Network  (NKN)  is  laying  the  foundations  for  high  speed  internet  connectivity  across  educational,  scientific  and  research  institutions  in  the  country.  It  will  facilitate  better  internet  connectivity  especially  for  the  teaching,  learning  and  research  communities  in  the  country.    
E-mail has been known to be a killer application  of  the  internet.  Listserv,  an  e-mail-based  software  
Received 16 April 2013, Online published 17 January 2014 
tool,  facilitates  in  the  automatic  redistribution  of  e-mails  to  all  the  subscribers  of  a  mailing  list.   This  helps  in  geographically  separated  users  to  share  information  and  to  engage  in  discussions  and  debates  amongst  themselves.  Thus,  Listservs  are  not  only  an  effective  communication  tool,  but  they  also  enable  healthy  discussions  on  issues  of  interest  to  a  community.  For  the  last  many  years,  listservs are also being used for sharing information  amongst  a  group  of  users. 
Listserv  first  appeared  on  Bitnet,  an  academic  network-based on IBM computers. The early versions  of Listserv became operational in the mid 1980s, and  its early archives show how network users learned  to use the software and, perhaps more importantly,  how  to  manage  network-based  organisations2.  In  India, the LIS-Forum, administered by Indian Institute  of  Science,  Bangalore  has  come  to  be  recognised  as a prominent Listserv in the LIS discipline, which  was  set  up  in  November  1994  by  the  erstwhile  National Centre for Science Information (NCSI) with  support  from  NISSAT,  DSIR,  Govt.  of  India3   with  more  than  7500  members  with  the  large  majority  of  them  being  from  India.    It  is  observed  that  the  forum  is  quite  active  with  regular  postings  by  the  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  1, JANuARy  2014 
members. The postings include announcements of  events such as conferences, workshops, seminars,   job  openings,  news  of  interest  to  the  community  members,  topics  for  discussions,  request  to  take  part  in  surveys,  request  for  articles,  and  so  on.   Being  a  moderated  list,  one  rarely  finds  irrelevant  postings.  Therefore,  it  is  felt  that  an  analysis  of  the  messages  on  the  LIS-Forum  will  give  some  understanding  of  what  is  being  discussed  amongst  the  LIS  professionals  from  India 
2. LItErAturE rEvIEw 
Many studies have been undertaken on the content  analysis  of  discussion  forum  messages.  Deryakulu  & Olkun4  have used content analysis technique and  examined the types of job-related problems that the  Turkish  computer  teachers  experienced  and  types  of social support provided by reciprocal discussions  in  an  online  forum.  Azevedo5,  et  al.,  proposed  a  qualitative  analysis  of  discussion  forums  using  a  text mining technique which used a graph formalism  to  represent  relevant  terms  found  in  a  text,  as  well  as  their  relationships.  The  study  found  that  text  mining  approach  is  useful  to  assist  teachers  in  identifying  situations  that  needs  intervention.  Mailing lists are chiefly used for information sharing  and  dissemination.  Pujar6,  et  al.,  had  identified  eight  such  mailing  lists  from  India  for  library  and  information  science  professionals  in  the  country.  Content analysis of the mailing list, Iphealth, a health  sector  information  dissemination  and  news  alert  mailing list revealed the diversity in the documents  that  were  forwarded7.  
Bibliometric  and  content  analyses  of  20,000  postings on KuTuP-L, a discussion list for librarians  in Turkey revealed that the distribution of messages  followed Price and Pareto Laws but not Lotka’s Law8.  Wildemuth9, et al.,  studied postings on 14 different  electronic  lists  or  newsgroups  for  approximately  one  month  during  the  year  1994.  It  was  found  that  the  topics  most  frequently  discussed  in  each  group  were  reasonably  consistent  with  the  group’s  stated purpose.  In addition, technology topics were  frequently  discussed,  as  well  as  topics  related  to  library’s  clientele.  Rajshekar  &  Gulla6   have  dwelt  about the setting up of the LIS-Forum and presented  the  statistics  of  the  forum  three  years  after  it  was  established. 
3.   o bjEctI vES   of  th E StuDy 
●	 To 	 study 	 the 	 year-wise 	 distribution 	 of 	 messages 	 
on  LIS-Forum; 
●	 To 	 study 	 types 	 of 	 messages 	 being 	 posted 	 on 	 
the  Forum;  and 
●	 To 	 identify 	 prominent 	 contributors. 
24 
4. MEtho DoLogy  
The  LIS-Forum  started  its  operation  in  1994  using the ListProc software10. In 2001, it was moved  to  the  Mailman  software11,  which  archives  all  the  messages  that  are  approved  for  circulation.  The  archived  messages  are  available  and  accessible  from  April  2003  onwards  in  text  and  compressed  formats12.  
For  analysis,  messages  posted  to  the  mailing  list  during  the  six-year  period  (2006-2011)  have  been  studied.  The  content  of  each  message  was  manually  examined.  The  messages  were  broadly  grouped  into  the  following  seven  categories: 4.1  Queries 
The messages in this category dealt with queries,  questions  or  clarifications  sought  by  the  members  on various issues and topics. Such queries could be  related to the application of emerging technologies for  providing information services or seeking advice for  the implementation of software for library automation,  institutional repository, software for detecting plagiarism,  etc. Queries were also raised pertaining to government  circulars,  vendor  addresses,  pay  scales,  the  need  for  the  LIS  associations  to  take  up  the  issues  pertaining  to  the  profession  and  professionals  with  the  State  and  Federal  Governments.  
4.2 responses 
Messages  in  this  category  pertains  to  replies  or  responses  provided  by  the  fellow  members  to  queries  posted  by  the  members  or  views  aired  by  members on posts in general. It has been observed  that  members  who  have  opted  to  receive  forum  messages in the 'digest' mode, while responding to  a  particular  message,  do  not  take  care  to  ensure  that  only  pertinent  part  of  the  'digest'  is  included  in the response and to follow the top-posting style.  This  makes  the  responses  clumsy  and  may  result  such replies/responses being discarded by the fellow  members, if at all such messages are approved for  circulation.  The  moderation  process  ensures  that  such  replies  are  not  circulated,  but  occasionally,  such  replies  do  appear  on  the  Forum. 
4.3  Discussion  on  Issues 
The  discussion  topics  and  issues  raised  by  members  range  from  application  of  information  and  communication  technologies  for  providing  information  services,  various  aspects  pertaining  to  digital  library,  pay  scales,  pay  parity,  open  access,  library automation, library related software, continuing/ higher education, working conditions,  etc. Budding  professionals  and  students  pursuing  masters  and  other  degree  programmes,  raise  topics  that  are  directly  relevant  to  them.    

========2========

PuJAR, et al.: AN  Ex PLORATORy ANALySIS OF  M ESSAGES ON A  P ROMINENT  L IS ELECTRONIC  D ISCuSSION 
4.4 Announcements 
Messages pertains to announcements of conferences,  workshops,  seminars,  lectures,  panel  discussions,  admissions, short-term courses, jobs, etc., constitute  a  good  percentage  of  the  overall  postings. 4.5 request  for resources 
Request for articles from journals and sometimes  papers  from  conference  proceedings.  It  has  been  observed  that  such  requests  are  entertained  only  from the academic and Government-funded research  institutions. 
4.6  Information  Dissemination 
On issues related to open access, search engines,  technological developments, release of new versions  of open source software, articles/books of interest,  bibliographies on specific topics, reports of interest,  digital libraries, databases, etc.  Many a time messages  from  other  lists  are  also  forwarded.  Messages  in  this  category  also  constitute  a  good  percentage  of  overall  messages  posted  on  the  list. 
4.7 others 
Messages in this category includes achievements,  promotions, wishes, award of degrees, congratulatory  messages,  condolences,  obituaries,  etc. 
5. AnALySIS 
9734 messages have been posted on the mailing  list for the period 2006-2011, with an average of 1622  messages per year. The year-wise breakup of messages  for the period 2006-2011 is given in Table 1. These  
table 1. Messages per year 
year 2006 
no. of messages (%) 1834 (18.84 %) 
cumulative total 1834 
2007 
1425 (14.64 %) 
3259 
2008 
1982 (20.36 %) 
5241 
2009 
1569 (16.12 %) 
6810 
2010 
1436 (14.75 %) 
8246 
2011 
1488 (15.29 %) 
9734 
postings  broadly  belonged  to  the  categories  listed  in the preceding section. It has been observed that  2008 had the highest number of postings (20.36 %)  while  2007  had  the  least  (14.64  %).  
Based  on  the  categorisation  of  the  messages,  it  has  been  observed  that  announcements  were  the  most  dominant  type  of  messages  posted  on  the  forum.  They  constituted  41.46  %  of  the  total  number  messages.  This  was  followed  by  postings  related  to  information  dissemination  (23.26  %).  Queries, responses, discussions, requests and other  types of messages constituted the remaining 35 %  of messages in more or less the same proportions.  Table 2 shows the break-up of the messages as per  the  different  categories  identified  for  the  study.  
Table 3, shows members who have posted 100  or  more  messages  during  the  study  period.  The  analysis  of  the  messages  has  revealed  that  the  nine members listed in the table have posted 100 or  more number messages each, that have contributed  about  17  %  of  the  total  numbers  of  messages  analysed.  To  identify  the  leading  contributors  to  the  forum,  all  the  messages  were  copied  onto  a  text  file.  From  the  text  file,  the  e-mail  addresses  alongwith  the  names  of  the  members  who  have  posted  messages  were  extracted  and  ported  to  a  spreadsheet  software  tool.                    
table 3. top nine contributors list 
names of members 
no. of messages posted (%) 
Subbiah Arunachalam 
367 (3.77 %) 
Sukhdev Singh 
301 (3.1 %) 
Anup Kumar Das 
224 (2.3 %) 
Vimal Kumar 
147 (1.51 %) 
Dinesh Siddaiah 
143 (1.47 %) 
Mukesh Anand 
142 (1.46 %) 
J.K. Vijayakumar 
118 (1.21 %) 
N. Laxman Rao 
113 (1.16 %) 
Padmanabha Vyasamoorthy100 (1.02 %) 
table 2. year-wise distribution of messages pertaining to different categories 
year 
Queries 
response 
Discussion  on issues 
Announcements 
2006 
170 
116 
188 
560 
2007 
127 
90 
123 
515 
2008 
148 
150 
256 
737 
2009 
118 
64 
129 
712 
2010 
149 
67 
69 
715 
2011 
155 
101 
78 
797 
total 
867 
588 
843 
4036 
request for  resources 
Information  dissemination 
others (wishes,  condolence) 
50 
632 
118 
37 
488 
45 
73 
490 
128 
108 
316 
122 
108 
244 
84 
159 
95 
103 
535 
2265 
600 
25 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  1, JANuARy  2014 
6. DIScuSSIonS 
Rajashekar & Gulla 
6 
 had grouped the messages  posted  on  the  Forum  in  its  early  days  into  the  following  categories: 
●	 Information 	 dissemination 	 (current 	 awareness) 	 
information dissemination tool; (b) there is very little  discussion on current issues; (c) very little sharing of  problems and experiences; and (d) small percentage  of  the  subscribers  contributed  to  the  Forum. 
The situation has not changed much in the last  
from  ISI,  electronic  journals  on  internet) ●	 S u r v e y s 	 ( e . g . , 	 C D - R O M 	 d a t a b a s e 							 
subscriptions) 
●	 Discussion 	 (e.g. 	 patent 	 information 	 services, 	 
CD-ROM usage, organising a software package  
library,  handling  Indian  scripts  on  CDS/ISIS) ●	 Enquiries 	 (e.g. 	 availability 	 of 	 journals, 	 hardware, 	 
related to new products, services, publications,  
18 years of the Forum’s existence. Even today, the  information sources and general news (e.g. new  
LIS-Forum is predominantly being used for information  journal  devoted  to  CDIS/ISIS,  new  products  
dissemination  rather  than  for  discussions  related  
to  current  professional  issues,  best  practices,  and  
sharing experiences.  The other shortcomings have  been  noticed  in  this  study  include: 
•	 Though 	 the 	 file 	 attachments 	 are 	 not 	 allowed 	 
in the postings, several postings, especially, in  
the  announcement  category  of  messages  are  
received  with  attachments.  
•	 Postings 	 are 	 supposed 	 to 	 be 	 made 	 in 	 textual 	 converting  downloaded  bibliographic  records),   
format  only,  but  most  of  them  are  in  HTML  or  
and  
●	 Announcements 	 for 	 forthcoming 	 meetings, 	 seminars 	 
and  workshops  (e.g.  marketing  of  information,  
information  industry-user  meet). 
These groups, except for surveys, are valid even  today.  Probably  in  its  early  days,  the  Forum  was  used more frequently for conducting surveys.  In the  present study, it has been identified by Rajashekar  &  Gulla6,  responses,  requests  for  resources  and  information dissemination have been added. Writing  about the LIS-Forum in November 1997, three years  after  it  became  operational,  they  had  mentioned  that  the  objectives  of  the  forum  were  to: (1) Act  as  an  electronic  forum  (or  conference)  for  
LIS  professionals,  managers,  educators  and  
users  of  library  and  information  systems  and  
services 
(2) Discuss  issues  related  (but  not  exclusive)  to  
library  and  information  practices  and  use  of  
information  technologies  for  providing  library  
and  information  services,  and 
(3) Act as an electronic medium for quick exchanges  
of  information  and  experiences  related  to  new  
initiatives,  plans,  projects,  information  sources  
and services, forthcoming events and international  
developments.  
From  141  subscribers  (Indian  126  and  Foreign  15) and 296 messages distributed during first twenty  months  of  its  existence,  the  LIS-Forum  as  can  be  seen from the present study has grown by leaps and  bounds.  It  is  found  that  the  Forum  is  facilitating  in  the creation of a virtual network of LIS professionals  and students in the country.  It is serving as a focal  point  to  learn  and  share  things  related  to  the  LIS  profession not only from within the country but from  across the world as well. The Forum, therefore, has  been  fulfilling  its  stated  objectives. 
The  shortcomings  of  the  Forum  by  Rajashekar  &  Gulla6   were:  (a)  Forum  is  largely  used  as  an  
26 
composed  using  GuI-based  tools.  This  makes  
the postings unnecessarily bulky and members  
should  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  network  
bandwidth  is  not  infinite.  Also,  not  everybody  
on  the  list  uses  GuI-based  mail  clients. 
•	 Many 	 a 	 times, 	 messages 	 are 	 composed 	 using 	 a 	 
word processing software and such messages are  
copied and directly pasted on to the LIS-Forum  
mail, that induce lots of non-ASCII characters and  
make the messages garbled. This is especially  
true for people who use simple text-based mail  
clients. To copy content from a word processing  
utility  and  paste  it  onto  the  Forum  mail,  such  
content should first be pasted onto a text editor  
like  notepad.  In  the  next  step,  text  should  be  
copied  from  the  text  editor  and  pasted  on  to  
the  LIS-Forum  mail. 
•	 Announcements 	 about 	 a 	 particular 	 event 	 like 	 
conference, for example, will invariably include  
complete  details  of  the  event.  This,  in  spite  
of  the  fact  that  the  website  for  the  event  has  
all  the  details.  Such  postings  should  provide  
minimal  information  about  the  event  and  a  link  
should  be  provided  to  the  event  website.  This  
is  true  for  the  forwarded  messages  too. 
•	 Top-posting 	 style 	 is 	 not 	 being 	 followed 	 at 	 all. 	 
Sometimes, the original message itself is missing  
in the replies or the subject line of the message  
is altered. This will make it difficult for members  
who  are  following  a  particular  discussion. •	 Clubbing 	 LIS-Forum 	 mail 	 with 	 other 	 e-mail 	 
addresses  amounts  to  spamming  and  should  
be strictly avoided. If the same message needs  
to  be  sent  to  different  mailing  lists,  members  
should  do  so  by  sending  it  individually. 
•	 In 	 some 	 postings, 	 the 	 'subject' 	 of 	 the 	 post 	 is 	 not 	 
provided or irrelevant 'subject' line like 'Please  
post  this  message’  is  provided. 

========4========

PuJAR, et al.: AN  Ex PLORATORy ANALySIS OF  M ESSAGES ON A  P ROMINENT  L IS ELECTRONIC  D ISCuSSION 
•	 It 	 has 	 been 	 observed 	 that 	 at 	 times 	 the 	 Forum 	 is 	 
being used as the first option to seek information  
or  to  get  clarification  for  a  doubt.  A  member  
intending to post a query on the Forum should  
first  try  to  exhaust  all  the  possible  sources  
including searching the Forum's archived content  
to  seek  an  answer  for  one's  query.  In  short,  
a  Forum  should  be  used  as  the  last  resort  to  
pose  a  query,  and  
•	 To 	 avoid 	 duplication 	 of 	 queries, 	 the 	 Forum's 	 
archived  content  should  first  be  searched. 
7.   c oncL uSIonS 
The  Forum  can  be  used  very  effectively  to  discuss  various  issues  related  to  the  profession  and  also  to  disseminate  useful  information  to  all  the  members.  Students  and  budding  professionals  can  greatly  benefit  by  being  members  of  such  lists.  Members  of  the  Forum  on  their  part  should  strictly follow the discussion list etiquettes. This will  avoid  unnecessary  network  traffic  and  make  the  list  more  effective  in  realising  its  objectives.  Also,  the  moderation  process  becomes  simpler  and  less  time  consuming.    Moderation  on  many  of  the  lists  including the LIS-Forum are done on voluntary basis  and  members  should  not  take  it  for  granted.  
LIS-Forum has been serving as a platform for the  LIS  professionals  and  students  in  India  in  creating  a virtual network of its members. Several members  have  vouched  the  usefulness  of  the  Forum.  This  fact  became  evident  when  a  posting  was  made  by  the  moderator  of  the  list  about  the  likelihood  of  change  of  guard  in  the  continuation  of  the  list.  The recent announcement regarding the closure of  the  NCSI,  which  has  been  administering  the  LIS- Forum,  caused  anxiety  among  its  users.  However,  it  is  being  continued  from  the  Indian  Institute  of  Science  and  hopefully,  will  continue  to  serve  the  LIS  community  in  India  and  elsewhere. 
rEfErEncES 
1. TRAI. Annual Report 2010-2011. 2011. http://www. 
trai.gov.in/WriteReadData/userFiles/Documents/ 
AnuualReports/ar_10_11.pdf/  (accessed  on  15  
September  2012). 
2. Grier,  D.A.  &  Campbell,  M.  A  social  history  of  
Bitnet and Listserv, 1985-1991. IEEE Annals of  
the  History  of  Comp.,  2000, 22,  32-41. 3. Rajashekar, T. B. & Gulla, M. LISFORuM: E-mail  
discussion forum for library and information services.  
Inf.  Today  Tomorrow,  1997,  16(3),  9-13.  4. Deryakulu, D. & Olkun, S. Analysis of computer  
teachers’  online  discussion  forum  messages  
about  their  occupational  problems. Edu.  Tech.   
Society,  2007, 10(4),  131-42. 
5. Azevedo, B.F.T.; Behar, P.A. & Reategui, B. Qualitative  
analysis of discussion forums. Inter. J. Com. Inf.  
Sys.  Indus.  Manag. Appli.,  2011, 3,  671-78. 
6. Pujar, S.M.; Manjunath, G.K. & Juttiyavar, M.N.  
Information  sharing  and  dissemination  by  use  
of  mailing  lists.  DESIDOC  Bull.  Inf.  Technol.,  
2003, 23(6),  3-8. 
7. Riba,  M.  Mailing  lists  as  discourse  networks:  
The  case  of  Iphealth.  2003.  http://www.uoc. 
edu/in3/dt/20084/index.html/  (accessed  on  15  
September  2012). 
8. Tonta,  y.  &  Karabulut,  D.  The  anatomy  of  an  
electronic discussion list for librarians, KuTuP-L:  
Bibliometric  and  content  analyses  of  postings.  
In  Electronic Publishing proceedings of the 14th  
International Conference in Helsinki, Finland, Hanken  
School  of  Economics,  Helsinki,  2010,  234-44. 9. Wildemuth, B.M.,  et al.  What’s everybody talking about?  
J.  Edu.  Lib.  Inf.  Sci.,  1997,  38(2),  137-56. 10.  ListProc  software.  http://listproc.sourceforge. 
net/index.html/. 
11. Mailman software. http://www.gnu.org/software/ 
mailman/index.html/. 
12. LIS-Forum. http://ncsi.iisc.ernet.in/mailman/listinfo/ 
lis-forum/. 
About  the Authors 
Dr  Shamprasad  M.  Pujar   is  Deputy  Librarian  at  Indira  Gandhi  Institute  of  Development  Research,  Mumbai.  He  has  PhD  (LIS)  and  has  contributed  more  than  30  papers  in  national  and  international  journals and conferences. He is also the recipient of   Commonwealth  Professional  Fellowship,  2008.  His  areas of interest include: ICT applications for libraries,  web  2.0,  OERs,  open  access  journals,  etc. 
Dr g. Mahesh  is Principal Scientist at National Institute  of Science Communication and Information Resources  (NISCAIR), New Delhi. He is currently Head of the  E-resources  and  Informetrics  Division.  He  is  also  the Coordinator of the National Knowledge Resource  Consortium,  a  project  that  facilitates  online  access  to information resources to all CSIR and DST labs.  He  obtained  PhD  (LIS)  from  Vardhaman  Mahaveer  Open university. He has about 20 papers published  in international and national journals. He is also the  Editor of Annals of Library and Information Studies.  Currently, he is also the National Focal Coordinator  of  the  SAARC  Documentation  Centre.  
Dr francis jayakanth  is Scientific Assistant at JRD  Tata  Memorial  Library,  Indian  Institute  of  Science,  Bangalore.  He  has  MLISc  and  PhD  in  Library  and  Information  Science.  His  areas  of  interest  include:  Discovery services, interoperability of legacy information  systems,  and  digital  preservation.    
27 

========5========

