DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 5, September 2014, pp. 384-392 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.34.6254 
  2014, DESIDOC 
Metadata Description Framework for Integration of Bioinformatics  
Information Resources: A Case of iBIRA 
Shri Ram and N. Laxman Rao  Jaypee University of Information Technology, Solan-173 234 
E-mail: shriram2576@gmail.com  
Department of Library and Information Science, Osmania University, Hyderabad-500 007 
E-mail: naglaxman@gmail.com 
ABstRACt 
Bioinformatics emerged as a new discipline dedicated to the answer the queries about life science  using computational approaches. The basic aim of bioinformatics is to create databases, analyse data  sets and managing data generated through large-scale projects such as Human Genome project (HGP).  It covers a wide variety of traditional computer science domains, such as data modeling, data retrieval,  data mining, data integration, data managing, data warehousing, and simulation of biological information  generated through laboratory and feld experiments. Due to varied form, nature, and activities in the feld  of bioinformatics, presenting the information in cohesive fashion is major challenge. The bioinformatics  information resources are heterogeneous in nature. Integration and interoperability of information is one  of  the  biggest  challenges  in  this  feld.  Bioinformatics,  as  an  emerging  feld,  needs  attention  towards  metadata application for resource discovery. This paper discusses the metadata element set description  framework for integration of various information resources related to the feld of bioinformatics available  over internet. A web-based tool iBIRA: Integrated Bioinformatics Information Resources Access has been  designed  and  developed  for  integration  of  bioinformatics  information  resources.  Dublin  Core  metadata  element set has been used for description of information resources and XML schema has been used for  interoperability of information resources with others. A database has been designed using structure query  language (SQL)–database management system and hypertext preprocessor (PHP)–as web programming  languages for integration of bioinformatics resources. The database is designated to categorise various  resources into biological database, institutions, journals, patents, software tools, web-servers, etc., and  the search result is presented in the form of ‘tree view’. Each of these categories of the resources has  been analysed for their metadata element set as per the DCMI terms.   
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Dublin core, information resource integration, metadata description 
1. IntRoDuCtIon 
Internet  has  now  become  universal  media  for  information exchange. Due to heterogeneous nature  of information and activities; fragmented information  creation and storage, integration and interoperability  among  various  sources  of  information  has  become  difficult1-2. There is significant attention received towards  it,  since  early  days  of  computer  and  information  processing.  Much  of  the  work  in  the  context  of  semantic integration, federated searching, metadata  creation, integration of schemas by defining a global  schema and mappings with local schema has been  done in different fields. Federated database searching3,  metadata generation for molecular biology databases4,  computer-based patient records5-6   are  some  of  the  initiatives  reflecting  the  integration  of  information  resources.  During  these  processes  various  issues  aroused pertaining to the standardisation of metadata  
elements  describing  information  resources7-8.  The  biggest  leap  in  this  area  was  the  launch  of  Dublin  Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI), a project of Online  Computer Library Center, Inc. (OCLC) and National  Center  for  Super  Computing  Applications  (NCSA).  This project was started in a workshop of OCLC and  NSCA  in  1995  with  the  objective  to  define  a  set  of  elements that could be used by authors to describe  their  own  web-resources.  Due  to  proliferation  of  web-based information resources and advancement  of internet technologies; the libraries face challenge  to catalogue all the information resources available  over  internet.  The  focused  aim  was  to  define  and  standardise some of the key terminology to describe  the  resources  in  standard  format.  The  goal  of  the  OCLC-NCSA  was  to  set  metadata  standard  (The  term  proposed  to  define  a  structured  information  that  describe,  explains,  locate,  or  otherwise  helps  in  retrieving,  using,  or  managing  a  resource),  with  
Received 14 February 2014, Revised 4 August 2014, Online published 4 September 2014 

========1========

RAM  & R AO: METADATA  D ESCRIPTION  F RAMEwORk FOR  I NTEGRATION OF  B IOINFORMATICS  I NFORMATION  R ESOuRCES 
initially thirteen core elements were later increased  to  fifteen9   (Table  1). 
The basic purpose of the Dublin Core Metadata  Element set was to describe web-based resources.  However, the concept continued to develop and find  its  application  in  many  ‘non-traditional’  formats10.  Initially,  it  was  used  to  describe  digital  information  but  later,  the  term  has  broadened  to  include  any  kind  of  standardised  descriptive  information  about  resources,  including  non-digital  formats11.  The  application  of  metadata  description  mostly  applied  to library catalogues, indexing tools, abstracting tools  and archival activities. But, with the proliferation of  internet  resources,  available  in  digital  formats,  it  has  been  extended  to  be  used  for  describing  and  embedding interoperability of information resources  in  other  subjects  (such  as  bioinformatics)  too12.   with  this  initial  background,  the  purpose  of  this  paper is to describe the metadata elements for the  bioinformatics information resources available over  internet, in design and development of an integrated  tool,  known  as iBIRA13.  
2. BIoInFoRMAtICs AnD InFoRMAtIon  
ResouRCe IntegRAtIon 
Bioinformatics  term  was  first  used  for  ‘the  study  of  informatics  in  biotic  system14.  It  has  now  emerging  as  a  major  element  in  contemporary  biology  and  biomedical  research15.  Bioinformatics  is  a  discipline  where  biology,  computer  science  and  information  technology  have  merged  to  form  single  discipline.  The  purpose  of  bioinformatics  is  to  enable  the  discovery  of  new  biological  insights  with the help computers and involves the processing  of  data  (collection,  analysis,  mining,  management,  
integration, simulation, and visualisation) originated  from laboratory experiments. It involves and support  computer-based massive data analysis produced by  new  computational  technology  application  during  experimentation in molecular biology and large-scale  project such as Human Genome Sequencing projects.  These experimentation processes includes the large- scale DNA sequence analysis, use of software tools  for  sequence  analysis  and  sequence  annotation.  Later  developments  in  proteomic  techniques  made  this  subject  transition  to  ever  expanding  subject  arena.  The  expansion  of  the  subject  can  be  seen  in  development  in  various  kinds  of  databases,  web-servers,  software  development,  production  of  literatures,  technologies  in  sequence  analysis  and  comparison,  etc.  Furthermore,  bioinformatics  finds  its  application  in  medicine,  targeted  drug  discovery,  proposing  new  hypothesis  and  through  these  hypothesis  designing  new  experiments  for  future  research.  Due  to  polymorphism  nature  of  bioinformatics  subject,  it  has  made  information  a  multidisciplinary  in  nature,  covering  the  area  of  mathematics, statistics, and information and computer  technology  amalgamation.  Bioinformatics  is  one  of  the  subjects,  which  is  ever  expanding  in  nature.  This  expansion  has  been  witnessed  in  the  form  of  new  form  of  data  about  nucleotide  sequences  and  structures.  The  information  and  knowledge  is  being generated, communicated and used for every  day  task  in  creation  of  databases,  development  of  software  tools,  sequence  annotations,  patents,  web-servers,  and  published  as  literatures,  etc.  The  fusion  of  information  science  and  biology  is  expected  to  continue  and  expand  for  foreseeable  future.  Due  to  heterogeneity  of  the  information  in 
table 1. set of 15 DCMI terms proposed by national Information standard organisation (nIso) 
s. no. 1. 2. 
DC terms Contributor Coverage 
Defnition 
An entity responsible for making contributions to the resource 
The spatial or temporal topic of the resource, the spatial applicability of the resource, or  the jurisdiction under which the resource is relevant 
An entity primarily responsible for making the resource 
A point or period of time associated with an event in the lifecycle of the resource 
An account of the resource 
The fle format, physical medium, or dimensions of the resource An unambiguous reference to the resource within a given context 
A language of the resource 
An entity responsible for making the resource available 
A related resource 
3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 
Creator Date Description Format Identifer Language Publisher Relation Rights Source Subject Title Type 
Information about rights held in and over the resource A related resource from which the described resource is derived 
The topic of the resource A name given to the resource 
The nature or genre of the resource 
385 

========2========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
this  field  the  various  information  scientists  as  well  as  bioinformatics  people  started  thinking  about  the  interoperability  of  resources  for  the  purpose  of  integration  in  turns  facilitate  information  storage  and  retrieval. 
2.1 Information  Resource  Integration 
Bioinformatics  subjects  deal  with  multiple  data  types and formats. Interoperability and compatibility  of information resources remains one of the biggest  challenges  for  bioinformatics16.  The  initial  purpose  of bioinformatics was to manage the biological data  with computers; but, after the completion of Human  Genome  Project  in  2003,  bioinformatics  now  aims  to manipulate and ultimately discover new biological  knowledge  through  several  levels  of  increasing  complexity  and  format  of  information  resources  such  as  genomics,  proteomics,  trascriptomics,  metabolomics, etc. Integration of information resources  can  improve  the  functional  annotations  and  help  in  the  development  of  new  biological  hypothesis17.  Such type of information integration requires suitable  information  repositories  that  store  and  integrate  bioinformatics information from different data sources  such a molecular biology databases, software tools,  journals, institutions imparting bioinformatics education  and patents. Effective integration and interoperability  of bioinformatics information resources is not a new  issue  but  one  that  comes  up  with  the  information  scientists  who  are  working  in  the  organisation  with  bioinformatics activity facing challenges to provide and  manage information successfully. Information scientists  with  the  help  of  Information  and  Communication  Technologies are trying to cope up with this problem;  however  working  with  bioinformatics  information  stills  remains  a  challenge.  iBIRA13   is  an  effort  to  integrate different kinds of bioinformatics information  resources. 
3. MetADAtA   App RoAChes  FoR 
InFoRMAtIon  ResouRCe  DesCRIptIon  
AnD   Integ RAtIon 
It is estimated that at present, the size of internet  is  more  than  8.11  billion  pages.  This  estimation  is  based  on  the  minimal  size  of  the  indexed  world  wide  webpages  by  popular  search  engines  like  Google, Yahoo, Bing, etc.18   In  this  scenario  finding  specific  information  seems  very  difficult.  However,  thousands  of  indexes  and  directories  exists  that  attempt  to  categorise  the  content  of  internet  by  various  means.  Information  storage  and  retrieval  (ISAR) in the present internet era is one of the major  challenges in front of the user–to retrieve user-centered  information. Formulation of search strategies, ISAR  system analysis and design, search monitoring are  some  of  the  objectives  of  ISAR  that  are  useful  in  successful recall of the targeted search queries. The  user  does  not  care  whether  a  relevant  document  
386 
was  missed  through  faulty  acquisition  or  through  faulty retrieval or mismatched metadata input in the  system.  The  users  are  interested  in  completeness  of information, complacency of relevant documents  available anywhere and how many are contained in  the  answer  provided  by  the  ISAR  system? 
This scenario in bioinformatics is more prominent  and  pertinent.  These  are  due  to  the  nature  of  bioinformatics  information  in  respect  to  (i)  data  intensive nature of bioinformatics (ii) rate and pace  of  data  generation  (iii)  multiple  scale  of  data–size,  time  and  order  of  complexity,  and  (iv)  integration  of  the  data  in  from  one  product  to  another  product  for generating hypothesis for future research. Such  issues  have  been  discussed  in  some  of  the  earlier  woks  pertaining  to  the  bioinformatics  resource  integration19. 
This paper discusses about constructing metadata  element  sets  for  the  bioinformatics  information  resources  integration  in  the  project  iBIRA20.  The  aim  of  the iBIRA  project  is  to  develop  a  database  for  information  resources  available  over  web,  in  order  to  comprehend  their  accessibility  at  single  platform.  During  the  study,  based  on  the  nature  of  resources,  it  is  found  that  the  bioinformatics  resources primarily available in six broad categories.  These  categories  are:  
(i) Molecular  biology  databases  
(ii)  Software  tools  
(iii)  Patents  
(iv) web-servers  
(v)  Journals,  and  
(vi)  Educational  and  R&D  institutions  
iBIRA segregates all these information resource  and integrates them at single platform. In the process  to  build  a  base  for  the  project,  defining  metadata  element sets was one of the important aspects that  had  been  taken  into  consideration.  To  incorporate  information  into  the  local  database  of  iBIRA,  a  metadata integration framework schema was developed  as per DC metadata element set. The bioinformatics  information  sources  are  being  maintained  by  many  autonomous sources21. The resources available over  internet  are  often  being  changed  for  its  schema,  content,  and  addition  of  new  results  as  and  when  it  appears.  Due  to  volume,  diversity  and  dynamic  characteristics  of  bioinformatics  data  sources,  it  is  essential to create predefined schema with the help  of  available  standards  such  as  DCMI22.  
4. MetADAtA   Des CRIptIon AnD 
InFoRMAtIon  ResouRCe  IntegRAtIon  
usIng  XML 
XML is a markup language that allows identification  of  the  structure  of  a  document.  XML  sets  a  rule  that  can  be  used  to  control  the  creation  of  markup  

========3========

RAM  & R AO: METADATA  D ESCRIPTION  F RAMEwORk FOR  I NTEGRATION OF  B IOINFORMATICS  I NFORMATION  R ESOuRCES 
language  and  identify  document  content  so  that  information can be formatted consistently throughout  the document. The XML helps in exchange of data  with each other by sharing XML files. It provides a  tree-based structure for organising information storage.  Information  is  represented  as  text,  with  markup  describing the hierarchy of character data, container- like  element,  and  attributes  of  those  elements. 
The  markup  language  system  XML  is  being  used  in  the  description  of  metadata  elements  for  the  purpose  of  integrating  information  in  to  the  iBIRA.  Earlier  the  application  of  XML  in  presenting  information  was  not  popular.  But  now  a  days,  the  publishers are providing provisions for exporting the  data into XML format, used by different bibliographic  management  software  such  as  EndNote,  PubMed,  etc. PubMed is supplying not just metadata, but full  article text in XML. The migration of the data in the  form  of  XML  to  HTML  files  for  respective  category  of  information  resources  in  being  described  here  in  the  following  sections  ahead.  
The  detailed  XML  schema  for  the  description  of  the  bioinformatics  information  resources  has  been  depicted  in  Fig.  1.  Each  metadata  element  has  been  encoded  into  XML  tag  which  helps  in  interoperability with some of the standard database  such  as  NCBI  PubMed. 
4.1  Molecular  Biology  Databases 
Molecular  biology  databases  are  developed  on  the  principle  of  database  management  system. As  a part of every day tasks, database development is  one  of  the  primary  activities  in  bioinformatics.  The  data generated through experiments carried out by  the  scientists  in  laboratory  are  managed  through  databases. These activities have given rise to emergence  of  databases  for  the  management  and  access  of  primary  sources  of  information,  and  also  introduce  some secondary databases that systematically group  the data. The databases are being developed in the  
area of nucleic acids, proteins, genomics, proteomics,  plants,  organelles,  immunology  as  categorised  by  Nucleic  Acid  Research  journals  and  published  as  an  annual  database  issue  in  the  month  of  January  every  year23,  Bioinformatics  Link  Directory24,  and  BioMed  Central  Databases  Collection  summary25.  
Database  interoperation  is  an  important  area  of  bioinformatics  research,  particularly  molecular  biology26. Molecular Biology databases are the result  of extensive research in the area of molecular biology.  The  Institutions  such  as  European  Bioinformatics  Institute (EBI), European Molecular Biology Laboratory  (EMBL),  National  Center  for  Biotechnological  Information  (NCBI),  and  DNA  Databank  of  Japan  (DDBJ)  laboratories  are  pioneering  institutions,  working  for  management  of  data  in  the  area  of  nucleic  acids,  protein,  analysis  of  sequences  for  genomics, and proteomics. In last 10-15 years, the  scientists working in this area; collecting biological  data and setting up centralised database management  system  for  easy  access  and  long  term  availability.  However, with the exponential growth of experimental  data, owing to rapid biotechnological advances and  high-throughput  technologies,  as  well  as  advent  of  internet as new means of data exchange, the world  is  dramatically  changed.  The  enormous  amount  of  data  now  produced  on  daily  basis  requires  more  sophisticated management system and solutions and  the availability of the internet as modern infrastructure  for the scientific exchange has created new demands  for  data  accessibility  and  standardisation  of  the  information  parameters.  
Interoperability  of  the  information  parameters  in  case  of  databases  is  one  of  the  key  issues  for  consideration  in  today’s  internet  world.  The  databases grow in multifaceted arena. As discussed  above that the databases are the result of extensive  research in the area of molecular biology. Success of  utilisation of these databases depends on the clarity  in  information  architecture,  user-friendly  interface,  
Figure 1. XML schema for metadata description of bioinformatics resources. 
387 

========4========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
accurate information, authority, and specificity. Thus  the design parameter is one of the key concerns in  case of information interoperability. The DC metadata  element set has been used to describe bioinformatics  database  resources  as  given  in  Table  2. 4.2  Web  server Applications 
web  server  refers  to  either  the  hardware  (the  computer) or the software (the computer application)  that  helps  to  deliver  content  that  can  be  accessed  through  the  internet.  web  server  functions  as  a  delivery  agent  of  webpages  to  a  client  through  
internet. The contents (document, image, style sheet  and scripts embedded in a webpage) are delivered  through  web  server27.  web  servers  are  invaluable  resources  for  the  scientific  community  and  opens  access bioinformatics tool are available online to guide  and  enable  research  in  any  number  of  life  science  domains. Since Year 2005, in partnership with Nucleic  Acid Research, Bioinformatics Links Directory24  has  collected  and  organised  all  the  web  servers  and  published as a link directory. The information available  through these web servers are communicated based  on  logical  subject  categories  of  common  tasks. 
table 2. Comparative metadata element description for different categories of resources 
s.  DC terms Defnition Database no. 
1. Contributor An entity responsible for making  Creator 
contributions to the resource 
2. 
Coverage The spatial or temporal topic  
of the resource, the spatial  
applicability of the resource,  
or the jurisdiction under which 
 the resource is relevant Creator An entity primarily responsible  
for making the resource Date A point or period of time  
associated with an event in  
the lifecycle of the resource Description An account of the resource 
Subject area 
3. 
Creator 
4. 
Date of launch Date of launch 
5. 
Description of  Description of  
6. 
Format 
7. 
Identifer 
8. 
The fle format, physical  medium, or dimensions of  the resource 
An unambiguous reference  to the resource within a  given context 
A language of the resource 
database Type and  format of  database uRL as an  identifer 
Language 
Language  in which the  database is  produced 
9. 
Publisher 
An entity responsible for  making the resource available 
The institution/ The institution/ 
person 
10. Relation 
A related resource 
Related  database 
11. Rights 
Information about rights held  in and over the resource 
The Licensing  The licensing  terms of use of  terms of user  
12. Source 
13. Subject 
A related resource from  which the described resource  is derived 
The topic of the resource 
Database Database  source 
Major subject  Major subject  
14. Title 
15. Type 
A name given to the  resource 
The nature or genre of  the resource 
coverage Name of the  Database N/A 
388 
Web servers 
software tools 
Journals 
Institutions 
Creator 
Developer 
Authors 
N/A 
Subject area 
Primary function Subject  
Research area 
Creator 
web server Type and  format of web  server uRL as an  identifer 
Developer Editor Head of the  
institution Date of product  Publication  Start of  Bioin- launch date formatics Inf.  
at the institute Description of  Description  Description of  software tool of the journal institution Type of  N/A N/A software  
platform 
Name of the  ISSN N/A software 
Language in  which the web  server  developed 
N/A 
Language of  N/A publication 
developer 
Related web  servers 
of web server web server  source 
The developing  Publisher of  N/A company/ journal 
institution 
N/A Related  Related  
journals institutions Licensing terms  Copyright  N/A of use of  information 
software 
Company name Journal Institutions 
coverage Name of the  web server N/A 
Primary function Subject  
coverage Name of  Name of  software the journal N/A N/A 
Area of  research Name of the  institution N/A 

========5========

RAM  & R AO: METADATA  D ESCRIPTION  F RAMEwORk FOR  I NTEGRATION OF  B IOINFORMATICS  I NFORMATION  R ESOuRCES 
while working with iBIRA it has been noticed that  
rights  lies  with  the  companies,  which  are  involved  
there  is  variation  in  level  of  descriptions  available  with the inventions related to drug-screening methods,  in  Nucleic Acid  Research  and  Bioinformatics  Links  database rights, confidential information and copyright.  Directory.  For  this  reason  it  has  been  proposed  The government agencies are very keen to protect  to  standardise  the  level  of  description  of  such  the  intellectual  output  through  setting  up  different  resources, compliant with the DCMI terms to ensure the  policies and procedures. The European Patent Office  
interoperability of the resources for future works (Table 2). 4.3  Journals  publishing  Bioinformatics  
Research 
Journals  are  primary  source  of  information  for  publishing  research  articles.  Bioinformatics  is  also  serving  its  people  with  huge  amount  of  research  potential due to newness of the subject and multifaceted  activities in data handling. The key journals specialised  in  publishing  bioinformatics  research  includes  Bioinformatics,  Nucleic  Acid  Research,  Genomics,  Proteomics,  Medical  Informatics,  to  mention  few.  
(EPO),  united  State  Patent  and  Trademark  Office  (uSPTO)  and  Indian  Patent  Office  are  very  active  in  protecting  the  intellectual  output  in  European  region,  uSA  and  India  respectively.  
4.5 education  Institutions  for  Bioinformatics  
In  the  present  scenario  industry  and  academia  both  agree  that  there  are  not  enough  scientists  adequately trained in bioinformatics or computational  biology.  This  sentiment  stems  principally  from  the  difficulties  in  finding  employees,  graduate  students  and  post-docs  with  appropriate  skills  for  joining  
The iBIRA have a description of about 150 journals  
research and/or development teams in this field. The  references, whose domain specially covers the field  
recent  drain  of  academics  into  industry  threatens  of bioinformatics. The various information scientists  
to  reduce  ability  to  provide  the  training  needed  to  discussed  the  metadata  as  well  as  bibliographic  
meet the demand of the job markets. Bioinformatics  schemes for indexing journals. As for as the article  
being multidisciplinary field involved various subjects  is  concern,  the  XML  schema  is  used  to  describe  
in  its  daily  activities.  Because  of  multidisciplinary  journals and articles. The XML schema is compliant  
curriculum, bioinformatics has addresses inclusion of  with that of MEDLINE XML schema for interoperability  
multidisciplinary  people  for  teaching  and  research.  
of  the  articles  in  to  iBIRA.  The  DC  metadata  description  for  journals  is  given  in  Table  2. 4.4 patents  in  Bioinformatics 
In  the  area  of  bioinformatics  research,  huge  amount  is  being  invested  for  setting  up  laboratory  for  large-scale  analysis  of  data  generated  through  sequencing projects such as Human Genome Project  (HGP),  creation  of  database,  and  development  of  software  tool,  etc.  Yet  the  intellectual  property  protection available in return for those investments  has, until recently, seemed elusive. The bioinformatics  sector first came to the general public’s attention as  a  result  of  the  HGP.  In  reality,  bioinformatics  had  been  a  discipline  in  all  over  a  decade  for  these  projects. Although the business models have begun to  diverge, and the companies started off as essentially  database providers. They start intended themselves  to recover their investment by charging subscription  fees for access to their data. As the volume of data  produced grew exponentially, companies specialising  in mining the data (such as Lion Biosciences) started  emerging. Development of algorithms and software  becomes the crucial activities and companies started  using  the  software  for  analysis  and  manipulation  of  data  related  to  proteomic,  clinical,  and  medical  data.  Perhaps  as  a  result  of  their  proximity  to  the  patent-conscious  biotechnology  community,  bioinformatics  companies  are  increasingly  looking  towards patent protection in an attempt to capitalise  on  their  investments.  Furthermore,  the  protection  
Further,  it  addresses  the  issue  of  educating  new  generation  of  student  specialised  in  bioinformatics  techniques and training old biology, computer science  and  mathematics  student  to  gain  more  insight  of  the  subject.  Altman28   analysed  the  curriculum  for  bioinformatics.  According  to  Altman  analysis,  it  is  found  that  there  are  two  models  for  training  in  bioinformatics.  In  the  first  model,  post-doctoral  fellows with core training in a technical field (such as  computer  science)  or  in  a  sub-discipline  of  biology  receive specialised training in computational biology  to become a ‘computer scientist who specialises in  biology’ or a ‘biologist who specialises in computer  science’. while a valuable strategy, the post-doctoral  model suffers because it is an expensive way (both  in time and resources) to train individuals—learning  the ‘other’ field is in many cases like going back to  graduate school. In the second model, the graduate  students  are  trained  primarily  in  bioinformatics  or  computational  biology.  Thus,  to  strengthen  the  educational background, specialised training centers  and  educational  institutions,  are  coming  up  with  specialised training program in graduate, post graduate,  doctoral  and  post  doctoral  level.  Further,  to  train  existing graduate and postgraduate student, short- term courses like diploma and certificate programmes  are  also  being  run  simultaneously  to  educate  with  bioinformatics activities. This aspect of bioinformatics  has  been  considered  as  one  of  the  vital  activities  in iBIRA to integrate the information simultaneously  along  with  other  resources  of  bioinformatics. 
389 

========6========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
4.6 software tools  in  Bioinformatics 
There is an increasing need for the development of data analysis software that provides bioinformatics  functionalities  to  biologists  without  requiring  prior  knowledge of programming and scripting languages  and  it  is  essential  that  the  software  tools  should  fulfill  biologists’  needs29.  At  the  same  time,  these  biologist-friendly tools need to be useable on different  operating systems, and they need to provide a natural  language description of the results produced in order  to state assumptions made in the analysis. As a result  of continued demand, new tool are proliferating with  the automated facility for sequencing, genotyping and  studying gene expression. It indicates that the data  generation will be a continued process and generated  at ever increasing rates. This quiet revolution in the  biological sciences has been enabled by our ability  to  collect,  manage,  analyse,  and  integrate  large  quantities of data and powerful computational tools  are  a  paramount  requirement.  Many  of  these  tools  are not user friendly and can be platform dependent.  The  internet  allows  to  access  bio-computing  and  bioinformatics tools from the world wide web (www)  
at the click of a button from personal computer. The  information available about the software over internet  has  demanded  the  standardisation  of  the  basic  information  in  order  to  enhance  the  usability  and  specificity in bioinformatics analysis. Table 2 provides  the  details  of  metadata  information  for  software  incorporated in the process of development of iBIRA. 
5.   oB seRvAtIons 
The  metadata  is  the  key  concern  for  every  kind of information exchange in case of web-based  resources.  Interoperability  can  only  be  ensured,  when  the  information  description  framework  is  as  per  the  international  standard.  Bioinformatics  is  a  subject where heterogeneity is one of the key issues  where  the  information  resources  are  available  in  varied  format  and  media  as  well  as  the  resources  are  available  in  heterogeneous  categories.  The  standardising metadata description element could be  one of the solutions in integration of bioinformatics  resources.  There  are  varied  format  and  schema  used  by  different  kind  of  activities  in  integration  of  resources.  Here  we  have  used  XML  as  medium  of  exchange of information in the development of iBIRA.  
Figure 2. Resource tree of search result on iBIRA search page. 
 Figure 3. Detailed resource description (journal) on  iBIRA. 
390 

========7========

RAM  & R AO: METADATA  D ESCRIPTION  F RAMEwORk FOR  I NTEGRATION OF  B IOINFORMATICS  I NFORMATION  R ESOuRCES 
XML  has  the  potential  to  facilitate  many  features,  which  add  value  to  the  migration  of  electronic  journals, database, patents, etc., as may be the case  of  bioinformatics  resources.  There  are  enormous  potential  for  the  XML  to  enable  the  repurposing  of  components  such  as  e-journals,  databases,  patents and many components; powerful XML tools  such  as  XSLT  (Extensible  Stylesheet  Language  Transformation)  is  of  central  importance. 
The  resources  which  have  been  extracted  and  database  for  the  information  resources  has  been  shown  in  the  Fig.  2  and  3.  The  Search  facility  of  iBIRA  facilitates  development  of  a  tree  structure  of  the  information  distributed  in  different  broad  categories. The respective broad categories further  navigate  with  subcategory  and  land  up  the  option  for choosing information of users own interest areas  under different broad category (Fig. 2). when a user  navigates to individual category, it provides the detailed  information as per metadata description framework (Fig. 3). 
6. ConCLusIons 
Bioinformatics  is  one  of  the  subjects  where  heterogeneity is prominent in respect to availability of  information, resource format and resource availability  as  well  as  heterogeneity  in  tasks  undertaken  by  bioinformatics  scientists  for  solving  biology  related  problem.  During  such  activity  huge  amount  of  data  releases  and  management  of  data  is  one  of  the  important  tasks  in  bioinformatics  resulting  in  development  of  various  databases.  Simultaneously  scientists are also adopting different computational  methods  for  managing  the  data  and  information  resources  leading  to  origin  of  web  servers.  The  research works are being published in journals and  conferences paving the path for future research and  education for novice bioinformatics community. These  aspects  of  bioinformatics  are  so  fast  and  active  that  the  searching,  finding,  locating  and  accessing  the  bioinformatics  information  resources  become  difficult  for  this  community.  iBIRA  is  an  effort  to  
integrate  bioinformatics  information  resources  at  
single  platform  to  provide  and  facilitate  with  tailor  made  information  in  the  area  of  bioinformatics.  The  resources  in  the  area  of  bioinformatics  are  so  heterogeneous,  the  standardisation  of  information  is  becomes  essential.  Metadata  is  one  aspect  which  has  been  found  useful  in  standardisation  of  resource  description. 
This aspect used in the development of iBIRA open  the future path for further research in this area in order to  develop a standard so that interoperability of information  may  be  sought  and  uniformity  may  be  achieved. 
ReFeRenCes 
1. Lee, J. & wernerfelt, B. Integrating information  
from  disparate  contexts:  A  theory  of  semantic  
interoperability. MIT university uSA, 1996. PhD Thesis. 
2. Lakshmanan,  L.V.S.  &  Sadri,  F.  Information  
integration  and  the  semantic  web.  Bull.  IEEE  
Comp.  Soc.  Tech.  Commit.  Data  Engg.,  2003. 3. Sheth,  A.  &  Larson,  J.  Federated  database  
systems for managing distributed heterogeneous  
and  autonomous  databases.  ACM  Comput.  
Surveys,  1990, 22(3),  183-236.  
4. Eccles, J.R. & Saldanha, J.w. Metadata-based  
generation and management of knowledgebases  
from  molecular  biological  databases.  Comput.  
Methods  Prog.  Biomed,  1990, 32(2),  115-23. 5.   k irklin,  J.w.  &  Vicinanza,  S.S.  Metadata  and  
computer-based patient records. Annals Thorac.  
Surg.,  1999, 68(3),  S23-24. 
6. Schiffman,  R.N.;  et  al.  A  design  model  for  
computer-based guideline implementation based  
on information management services. J. Amer.  
Med.  Inf. Assoc.,  1999, 12(6),  99-103. 7. Magda  El-Sherbini.  Metadata  and  the  future  
of  cataloging.  Library  Review ,  2001,  50(1),  
16-27. 
8. Iannella R. & waugh, A. Metadata: Enabling the  
internet. In   CA uSE97  Conference,  April  1997,  
Melbourne,  . 
9. NISO. National Information Standard Organisation,  
understanding  Metadata.  NISO  Press,  2004. 10. El-Sherbini,  Magda  &  klim,  G.  Metadata  and  
cataloging  practices,  Electronic  Library,  2004,  
22(3),  238-48. 
11. Miller, P. Metadata for the masses. www.ariadne. 
ac.uk/issue5/metadata-masses/. 
12. Li; et al. A methodology for semantic integration  
of  metadata  in  bioinformatics  data  sources. In 
43rd ACM  Southeast  Conference.  18-20  March  
2005, kennesaw,  GA, uSA. 
13. iBIRA.  http://ibiranet.in. 
14. Hogeweg, P. & Hesper, B. Interactive instruction  
on  population  interactions.  Comp.  Biol.  Med .,  
1978, 8(4),  319-27. 
15. Hogeweg,  P.  The  roots  of  bioinformatics  in  
theoretical biology.  PLoS Comput. Biol. , 2011,  
7(3),  e1002021. 
16. Denn,  S.O.  &  MacMullen, w.J. The  ambiguous  
bioinformatics  domain:  A  conceptual  map  of  
information  science  applications  for  molecular  
biology.  In   ASIS&T  2002:  Proceedings  of  the  
65th  Annual Meeting of the American Society for  
Information Science and Technology (ASIS&T),  
18-21  November  2002,  Philadelphia,  PA. 17. Ge, H.; walhout, A.J.M. & Vidal, M. Integrating  
OMIC  information  a  bridge  between  genomics  
and system biology. Trends in Genetics ,  2002,  
19(10),  551-60. 
18.   w orldwideSize.Com,  2012. 
19. Haas,  L.;  et  al.   DiscoveryLink:  A  system  for  
integrated access to life sciences data sources.  
IBM  Sys.  J.,  2001,  40(2),  489-511. 
391 

========8========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEPTEMBER   2014 
20. Ram,  Shri  &  Rao,  N.L.  iBIRA  –  integrated  
About  the Authors 
bioinformatics information resourceome access:  
Organising  the  bioinformatics  resource. Refer.  
Serv.  Rev.,  2012, 40(2),  326-43. 
21. Navathe, S. & Patil, u. Genomic and proteomic  
databases  and  applications:  A  challenge  for  
database technology. In  DASFAA 2004: Proc. 9 
th 
International Conference on Database Systems  
for  Advanced  Applications  (DASFAA  2004),  
March  2004,  Jeju  Island, korea. 
22. Hernandez,  T.  &  kambhampati,  S.  Integration  
of  biological  sources:  Current  systems  and  
challenges  ahead.   SIGMOD  Record ,  2004,  
33(3),  51-60. 
23. Nucleic  acid  research  databases.  http://nar. 
oxfordjournals.org/. 
24. Bioinformatics  link  directory,  Canada.  http:// 
www.bioinformatics.ca/. 
25. BioMed Central database. http://databases.biomed 
central.com/ 
26. Robbins,  R.  Report  of  the  invitational  DOE  
workshop  on  genome  informatics.  universal  
Academy  Press,  Tokyo,  Japan,  1993.  27.   w eb  server,  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/web_ 
server/. 
28. Altman, R.B. A curriculum for bioinformatics: The time  
is  ripe. Bioinformatics,  1998, 47(7),  549-50. 29.   k umar, S. & Dudley, J. Bioinformatics software  
for biologists in the genomic era. Bioinformatics,  
2007, 23(14),  1713-17. 
392 
Mr  shri  Ram   is  working  as  Deputy  Librarian  at  Jaypee university of Information Technology, Solan  since 2002. Earlier, he has worked at Indian Council  of Medical Research, New Delhi and CEMCA India  in various capacities. He has completed Master’s in  Anthropology and MLIS. He is pursuing his PhD (LIS)  from  Osmania university,  Hyderabad.  Recently,  he  has been awarded with Commonwealth Professional  Fellowship  at  university  of  East  London,  uk.  He  has  published  more  than  25  papers  in  different  peer  reviewed  international  and  national  journals  and  conferences. 
prof.  n.  Laxman  Rao   after  serving  more  than  40  years  of  teaching  and  research  in  the  area  of  library  and  information  science  (LIS),  has  recently  superannuated as uGC Emeritus Fellow, Department  of  LIS,  Osmania  university,  Hyderabad.  He  has  more than 70 research publications, more than 150  conference  deliberations,  and  five  edited  books  to  his credit. He is member of various advisory boards  for  selection,  recruitment,  and  other  government  committees for accreditation of library and information  services. 

========9========

