DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 6, November 2014, pp.472-476 
  2014, DESIDOC 
   Electronic Repositories for Preservation of Legal Scholarships 
Priya Rai 
    National Law University, Delhi Sector-14, Dwarka, New Delhi-110078 
E-mail: priyalud@gmail.com 
 Ab StRAct 
The growth of electronic repositories (e-repositories) has been found remarkable in facilitating global  open access to legal scholarship. Legal repositories are evolved as reference tool by the law schools to  manage legal scholarship, working paper series, peer reviewed articles and other kinds of learning objects.  These kinds of services; developed over a decade, improve the visibility and sustainability of scholarly  produced literature, and help in winding information gaps between information rich and information poor  researchers.The article traces the initiatives in support of open access to scholarly literature and examines  how e-repositories improve communication access and bridges channels for legal scholarship. The article  fnds that certain primary crucial points like policy and standards, perceivable formats, accessibility and  management  of  rights  for  digital  materials,  economic  facts  should  be  considered  before  implementing  e-repositories. The study concludes that internationally there are number of initiatives supporting institutional  and  disciplinary  repositories  in  support  of  legal  scholarship,  but  lack  in  developing  countries  like  India  where no single law institution has approached the repository route of open access publishing. 
Keywords:   Institutional repositories, open access, open access repositories 
1. 
IntRoductIon 
Information  communication  technologies  in  various  aspects  have  contributed  in  the  progress  of scholarly information society and have proposed  a platform for healthier democracy and information  dissemination,  but  it  needs  to  be  reinforced  in  the  continuing  network  information  revolution.  Parker1 defines  two  types  of  open  access  publishing  first  deals  with  archiving  digital  e-prints  of  articles  in  institutional repositories (IRs) include both ‘preprints  and post prints’ and another form in which scholarly  journals are available online to public access without  subscription.  Institutions  scholarly  communications  are  the  extensive  brainstorm  of  creative  research  of  scholars  and  intellectuals.  Evident  development  of  institutional  repositories  unfolds  new  approach  that  allows  the  academic  and  research  institutions  to present the scholarly communications which are  polished,  archived  and  made  accessible  in  digital  medium. Electronic repositories (e-repositories) are  defined as the collection of organisation’s outcomes  supported by information technologies for migration  of scholarly communication into scholarly publishing  in  digital  format. 
Law libraries are responsible to procure, store and  disseminate evaluative and synthesised information of  
special nature, viz., parliamentary debates, legislation  or  code,  case  laws,  commissions  and  committee  reports,  international  comparative  laws,  treaties  and international agreements. Research activities of  concerned parental organisations are also visualised  by the law libraries for broader visibility and supporting  future  research.  The  legal  information  has  a  small  span of time as they have a nature to be outdated  immediately  due  to  applicability  of  new  laws  and  studies.  Here,  the  work  of  law  libraries  starts  for  weaving research outcomes of the legal institutions  and universities. Legal Research Network of SSRN,  Digital Commons from Bepress, and NELLCO Legal  Research  Network  are  some  examples  supporting  (IR)  movement  for  legal  scholarship. 
2.   oPE n AccESS   I nItIAtIVES 
Budapest  Open  Access  Initiative  (BOAI)  was  issued  in  February  2002  by  open  society  institute  (OAI)  and  Berlin  Declaration  on  Open  Access  to  Knowledge  in  the  Sciences  and  Humanities,  in  October  2003  supporting  open  access  to  scholarly  literature,  BOAI  relates  to  freely  accessibility  of  scholarly  literature  to  open  access  captured  by  the  publishers  while  submitting  by  the  authors.  Berlin  Declaration  enumerates  open  access  is  a  collection of human knowledge and cultural heritage  
Received 27 February 2014, revised 10 October 2014, Online published 19 November 2014 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2014 
contributed  by  scientific  community  but  without  transferring  close  rights  to  the  publishers.montreal  Declaration on Public Access to Law initiated during  fourth  Law  via  Internet  Conference  in  montreal  October 2002 stresses over the freely use of public  information  generated  by  government  or  public  institution  out  of  public  money  for  the  benefits  of  public.  The  Durham  Statement  on  Open Access  to  Legal Scholarship5, drafted by a group of academic  law  library  directors,  was  promulgated  in  February  2009.  It  covers:  (a)  open  access  publications  of  law  school–published  journals,  and  (b)  an  end  to  print  publication  of  law  journals,  coupled  with  a  commitment  to  keeping  the  e-versions  available  in  ‘stable, open, digital formats.’ Universal Declaration  of Human Rights and the International Covenant on  Economic Social and Cultural Rights states “Everyone  has the right to freely participate in the cultural life  of  the  community,  to  enjoy  the  arts  and  to  share  in  scientific  advancement  and  its  benefits.”  Apart  from  initiatives,  a  number  of  issues  and  concerns  also  effect  from  planning  to  create  IR  to  making  the  scholarly  literature  accessible. 
3.   REAS onS   of  bu IL dIng  IR   fo R   L EgAL 
SchoLARShIP 
Parker1   states  that  the  legal  scholarships  as  a  part  of  scholarly  communication  must  be  available  to the world free of cost through internet. Reasons  of  availing  benefits  out  of  IRs  preserving  literary  communications  are: 
(a) It  is  beneficial  to  have  separate  access  of  
scholarly  output  from  publications. 
(b) It  supports  download  counts  and  evaluation  
methods  of  legal  scholarships. 
(c) It  visualises  author  rights  and  law  journal  
publication  agreements. 
(d) It  provides  broader  access  to  material  not  
previously  published. 
(e) Legal IR is known as new avenue for publishing  
student  scholarship. 
(f) It  supports  overall  preservation  of  digital  legal  
scholarship  for  forever. 
The IRs work as an electronic bucket creating,  contributing,  controlling  and  consuming  of  legal  information  including  published  and  unpublished  research  of  students  and  faculty  members. 
4.   E -REPoSItoRIES:  ISSuES And  
concERnS 
The  key  drivers  like  low  cost  and  easy  to  use  multimedia formats make open access repositories  a  significant  tool  for  legal  education  and  research.  Lyunch7   discusses  the  significant  perspective  of  institutional  repositories  opening  up  now  forms  
473 
of  scholarly  communications  that  will  need  to  be  legitimised  and  nurtured  with  guarantees  of  both  short-and-long  term  accessibility.  In  addition  there  are  numbers  of  issues  and  challenges  IRs  face  while sharing institutions intellectual outcome. most  significant  challenges  are: 
• Deposit Policy: Unclear policy guidelines for deposit  
emendates  to  identify  desirable  content.  Open  
access deposit mandates providing relevant solution  
by  targeting  only  peer-reviewed  manuscripts  • Quality:  Institutional  repositories  mission  is  to  
organise and manage institutions published and  
unpublished  collection  of  teaching,  research  
and  administration  in  digital  format.  It  poses  
serious  issues  in  maintaining  quality  content  
and  validation  of  scholarly  literature. 
• Preservation  &  Standard:  Issues  associated  to  
maintain  standards  for  metadata  harvesting,  
long term preservation and identifying metadata  
errors are achieved by using metadata tools and  
policies  for  institutional  repositories  supporting  
Open  Archives  Initiative  Protocol  for  metadata  
Harvesting  (OAI-PmH). 
• Access  and  Training:  IRs  empowers  users  to  
effectively  and  efficiently  access  the  scholarly  
information  in  new  networked  environment.  
Librarians play a crucial role by feeding disciplinary  
information and organise orientation programmes  
to  overcome  with  technology  access.  • Copyright: The confusion in intellectual property  
issues  created  number  of  challenges  for  e-  
repositories.  The  broad  copyrights  laws  for  
owners and narrowing exceptions for fair dealing  
propound uncertainty for copying from repositories.  
The  unclear  nature  of  database  rights  and  
the  substantial  investment  concept  also  evolve  
problems  for  the  management  of  ownership  
rights  in  e-repositories  as  databases. • Cost: Examination and comparison of the costs  
associated to building and supporting IRs in terms  
of  values  the  repositories  adding  to  research  
community,  expenditure  in  implementation  of  
software and hardware, labour and human resource  
management and also annual maintenance cost  
associated  with  managing  IRs  in  long  period  is  
important. 
5. 
LEgAL   Scho LARShIP   R EPoSItoRIES 
The implications that digital world has posed by  new retrieval methods for scholarly communications  leads towards repository solutions supporting global  open  access  to  legal  scholarships.  Guedon8   finds  that  in  open  access  publishing  idea  of  replacing  traditional profit-driven journal publishing system with  freely accessible open access journal is referred as  ‘gold road’ where as ‘green road’ proposes alternative  approach by encouraging authors of scholarly work  

========2========

RAI: ELECTRONIC  R EPOSITORIES FOR  P RESERVATION OF  L EGAL  S CHOLARSHIPS 
to  self  post  or  self  archive  their  work  in  open  site.  Parker1  finds that e-repositories are either general in  nature, maintained by institution or discipline-based  maintained by commercialvendor’s. Repositories that  follow technical specifications of OAI i.e., OAI-PmH  are  complied  for  federated  searching  of  data  and  indexed  by  Google  Scholar.  Three  open  access  repository tools are popular supporting preservation  and  dissemination  of  legal  research  outcomes,  viz., (a) NELLCO Legal Scholarship Repository, (b)  SSRN  Legal  Scholarship  Network,  and  (c)  Digital  Commons  at  Bepress.  These  three  repositories  maintain  digitality  converted  or  born  information  in  the  form  of  law  journals,  research  papers,  working  paper series, reviews, project reports and conference  proceedings. 
5.1   n ELLco   Legal  Scholarship  Repository  
(LSR) 
NELLCO Legal Scholarship Repository9  is a legal  IR supported Berkeley Electronic Press Technology  with the aim to improve dissemination and visibility  of legal scholarships of legal research communities.  It  maintains  the  legal  scholarships  of  the  following  law  universities  and  institutions  as  mentioned  on  the  webpage  of  NELLCO  LSR. 
• American  University  Washington  College  of  
Law 
• Berkeley  Law 
• Boston  College  Law  School 
• California  Western  School  of  Law 
• Campbell  Law 
• Case  Western  Reserve  University  School  of  
Law 
• Columbia  Law  School 
• Cornell  Law  School 
• Duke  Law  School 
• Fordham  University  School  of  Law 
• George  Washington  University  Law  School • Georgetown  University  Law  Center 
• Harvard  Law  School 
• IIT  Chicago-Kent  College  of  Law 
• Lousiana  State  University  Law  Center 
• Loyola  University  Chicago,  School  of  Law • Maurice  A.  Deane  School  of  Law  at  Hofstra  
University 
• New  England  School  of  Law 
• New  York  University  School  of  Law 
• • • • • • • • • • 
• • • • • • • • 
• • 
Northwestern  University  School  of  Law Notre  Dame  Law  School 
Penn  State  Law 
Quinnipiac  University  School  of  Law 
Roger  Williams  University  School  of  Law Santa  Clara  Law 
Seattle  University  School  of  Law 
St.  John's  University  School  of  Law 
Suffolk  University  Law  School 
Touro  College  Jacob  D.  Fuchsberg  Law  Center 
University  of  Connecticut  School  of  Law University  of  Georgia  School  of  Law 
University  of  Maryland  School  of  Law 
University  of  Massachusetts  School  of  Law University  of  Pennsylvania  Law  School 
Vermont  Law  School 
Villanova  University  School  of  Law 
Western  New  England  University  School  of  Law 
William  &  Mary  Law  School 
Yale  Law  School 
NELLCO LSR has a wide collection of variety of  legal information. It includes law journals, selected  works, working paper series, thesis and dissertation  and  book  gallery  of  member  institutions. 
figure 1. nELLco  Legal Research Repository  collection  
(Year-wise growth). 
Table 1 present the growth of scholarly publication  in NELLCO’s LSR (Law Common) during the period  1985-2014  (Feb).  It  has  been  found  the  consistent  increase  in  number  of  publication  deposit  in  the  repository.  It  has  disseminated  total  178,693  full-  text  articles  and  42,829,345  download  by  the  end  February  2014.  
474 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  6, NOVEmBER   2014 
table 1. nELLco’s Legal Scholarship Repository: Law common (1985-2014 february) 
type of publication 
1985-1990 
1991-1995 
Journals 
Selected Works Series 
Thesis/ Dissertation Book Gallery 
6497 39 2988 25 38 
7768 670 4194 23 38 
4.2 Legal  Scholarship network  at  SSRn 
The Social Science Research Network (SSRN)  founded  in  1994  by  private  corporation  Social  Science Electronic Publishing Inc. (SSEP) with the  objectives of worldwide dissemination of social science  research in specialised subject area network including  Legal Scholarship Network (LSN)10  through eLibrary  which  consists  of  two  parts:  ‘Abstract  database’  of  scholarly  working  papers  and  forthcoming  papers,  and  ‘Electronic  Paper  Collection’  downloadable  full  -text  documents  in  pdf  format.  The  LSN  permits  both loading and downloading of openly accessible  eprint and hosting of subscription-based law schools  research  paper  series. 
Table  2  indicates  SSRN  eLibrary  statistics  till  January 2014. The eLibrary contain 526,763 scholarly  articles, 431,920 downloadable full-text papers and  244,403 authors have contributed their research in  SSRN  platform. 
The pattern of scholarly working paper distribution  of  legal  scholarship  shown  in  Table  3.  It  indicates  
table 2. SSRn  eLibrary statistics (as on January 2014) 
download (by type) Authors 
Full Papers 
Abstracts 
numbers 244403 431920 526763 
table 3.  Paper coverage under Legal Scholarship network  
(168,971) (as 26 february 2014) 
Legal Scholarship network  Papers papers 
LSN Conference & meetings 2,836 LSN Partners in Publishing  4,673 Journals 
LSN Subject matter eJournals 1,63,972 Law Research Centers Papers 4,337 Law  School  Research  Papers: 8,576 Law & Economics 
Law School Papers: Legal Stud- 39,210 ies 
Law  School  Research  Papers: 14,152 Public Law and Legal Theory 
downloads 
5,41,045 3,14,756 
27,772,375 11,56,370 3,749,395 
7,200,276 
4,164,361 
475 
1996-2000 
2001-2005 
2006-2010 
2011-2014 
8568 1114 5397 16 42 
9378 2299 9012 29 37 
11789 11109 15733 87 81 
18299 9222 8887 141 71 
total  of  168,971  has  been  submitted  by  the  end  of  January  2014.  1,  63,972  papers  were  contributed  and 27,772,375 downloads from LSN subject matter  e-journals among all other seven categories of legal  scholarship. 
5.3   b epress  Legal  Repository 
Berkeley Electronic Press11  has created an open  access repository for law faculty called the Bepress  Legal Repository. Authors may submit e-version into  ExpressO  Press  Series(EPS)  without  any  charge,  which  are  further,  reviewed  by  editorial  team,  and  indexed  subject-wise  in  Current  Index  to  Legal  Periodicals (CILP).  Bepress  created  an  application  for hosting law schools scholarships called ‘Working  Papers Series’. Unlike LSN, Bepress does not charge  for  e-mail-based  announcements.  ‘Research  Now’  open access search tool provides full open access  to  all  licensed  content  published  by  Bepress.  All  Bepress  applications  are  OAI-PmH  compliant  and  indexed  by  Google.  The  growth  of  law  and  legal  scholarship under Bepress can be traced in Digital  Common  Network  (Law  Commons)  (Fig.  2). 
figure 2. bepress digital common network: Law commons. 
During  the  period  of  the  study,  total  number  of  full text articles reached to 175,219 (69%) in various  sub-discipline and 79,624 (31%) authors’ contributed  their  research  output  from  216  institutions.  The  downloading  scale  reached  to  42,829345. 
6.   c oncLuSIonS 
The research conducted in developing countries  enfold  in  rapid  increase  in  worldwide  literature  explosion  of  published  information. An  institutional  and disciplinary repository proposes new sustainable  methods  and  strategies  in  modernising  academic  scholarship  and  raises  creativeway  to  develop  rational and synchronised method to capture, retrieve  

========4========

RAI: ELECTRONIC  R EPOSITORIES FOR  P RESERVATION OF  L EGAL  S CHOLARSHIPS 
and  dissemination  of  literature  in  digital  format. Institutional asset like datasets, courseware, research  series, occasional papers, project reports, thesis and  dissertations are now more visible at virtual platform  for best and optimum future usage. During the course  of  study  various  institutional  and  disciplinary  legal  repositories  were  analysed  and  observed  that  with  each  passing  year  there  is  a  substantial  growth  in  the  deposition  of  scholarly  communication.  The  study  finds  that  there  is  urgent  need  for  academic  law libraries in India to develop strategic plans and  upgrade  towards  implementation  of  new  models  of  scholarly  communications.  Librarians  in  complete  sense  count  a  special  role  as  essential  actors  and  subject  specialist  in  knitting  information  gap. 
REfEREncES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Parker, Carol A. Institutional repositories and the  principle of open access: Changing the way we  think about legal scholarship. New Mexico Law  Rev.,  2007,  32(2),  1-46.  http://works.bepress. com/carol_parker/1 
Budapest  Open  Access  Initiative.  http://www. budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/ 
Berlin  Declaration.  http://www.zim.mpg.de/ openaccess-berlin/berlin_declaration.pdf http://www.ittig.cnr.it/Ricerca/ProgettiEuropei/fal/ DeclarationFreeAccessToLaw.pdf 
Durham  Statement.  https://cyber.law.harvard. edu/publications/durhamstatement 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/ Pages/CESCR.aspx 
Lynch,  Clifford  A.  Institutional  repositories:  Essential  infrastructure  for  scholarship  in  the  
digital  age.  ARL,  2003,  226,  1-7.  http://www. 
arl.org/resources/pubs/br/br226/br226ir.shtml. 8. Guédon,  J.  The  ‘Green’  and  ‘Gold’  roads  to  
open access: The case for mixing and matching.  
Serials  Review,  2004,  30(4),  315-28. 
9. NELLCO  Legal  Scholarship  Repository:  http:// 
lsr.nellco.org/ 
10. Legal  Scholarship  Network  (LSN).  http://www. 
ssrn.com/en/index.cfm/lsn/ 
11. Berkeley Electronic Press. http://network.bepress. 
com/ 
About  the Author 
dr  Priya  Rai  is  Deputy  Librarian,  National  Law  University,  Delhi.  She  holds mPhil  and  PhD  in  LIS  from  Banasthali  University.  She  also  holds  LLB  degree and PGDLAN. She is the recipient of FCIL  Schaffer  Grant   from  American  Association  of  Law  Libraries-2012  and  Bitner  Research  Fellowship  from  Cornell  University  Law  Library  (USA).  She  has  co-edited  8  books  and  published  12  research  papers  in  referred  journals  and  conferences.  She  is  Editor  of  National  Law  University  Delhi  Faculty  Journal.  She  is  Consultant  to  various  academic  law  libraries  and  Royal  Supreme  Court  of  Bhutan  Library. She has more than 14 years of experience  in academic university libraries. She has worked in  GGSIP University & Indian Law Institute, India. Her  areas of interest are: Library automation, electronic  retrieval  and  dissemination  through  open  access  and  databases,  and  e-resources  training. 
476 

========5========

