DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 5, September 2014, pp. 401-406 DOI: 10.14429/djlit.34.6722 
  2014, DESIDOC 
  Data Mining: Competitive Tool to Digital Library 
Tariq Ahmad Lone and Raf Ahmad Khan The Business School, University of Kashmir, Srinagar-190 006 
E-mail: tariq380@gmail.com, mca_raf@yahoo.co.in 
AbsTrACT 
The increasing popularity of world wide web is providing an easy and quick alternative to get the  required  information  through  the  internet  which  has  threatened  the  existence  of  traditional  libraries.  The  human  capital  associated  with  the  management  of  libraries  in  the  contemporary  world  is  facing  the challenge of crafting strategies to continuously augment their services with the help of information  technology to provide quality customised services to the end users. To address this challenge libraries  can use data mining to extract strategic information from the data captured in the libraries’ data ases.  The capability of data mining to solve some of the vital problems has encouraged libraries to implement  this intelligent tool of data mining. In this paper, an attempt has been made to educate stakeholders on  the issues and applications of data mining in libraries.  
Keywords: Data  mining,  information  technology,  extraction,  transformation  and  loading,  Knowledge 
  discovery 
1.  InTroDuCTIon 
During the pre-web days, libraries were one of  the main sources for individuals seeking information.  With the increasing demand for information, the focus  of the libraries has been to build large collections and  repositories for knowledge in the form of print media1.  The  innovations  in  IT  have  made  the  accessibility  and storage of information so much easier and faster  that  the  demand  for  more,  specific  and  reliable  information  by  users  has  caused  the  libraries  to  introduce  new  IT  systems  in  the  transmission  and  preservation of their resources. The implementation  of new information technologies in the libraries has  improved  their  functions  and  the  services  provided  to  their  subscribers.  Libraries  today  are  not  just  facilities  for  printed  resources  or  places  to  sit  and  study, but have extended their services beyond the  physical  walls  of  the  libraries  to  provide  access  to  information  technology  media2.  
The  growth  and  exceeding  popularity  of  the  internet  has  made  the  world  wide  web  become  a  new concept of sharing information. The world wide  web  has  enabled  information  to  be  obtained  and  shared  quickly  and  easily  throughout  the  world  in  a  secured  environment.  It  has  revolutionised  the  information services by providing an alternative way  for  individuals  to  get  the  information  they  require.  The  exceedingly  popular  usage  of  it  by  individuals  has  imposed  a  threat  to  the  existence  of  libraries  as the main source for getting information. It could  cause  the  libraries’  patrons  to  move  away  from  
libraries  to  seek  the  information  they  require  from  the  web  instead.  Libraries’  management  need  to  plan strategically ways of enhancing and introducing  new services with the intention of encouraging their  patrons  to  use  their  libraries  to  obtain  information.  Libraries’ management need to maintain their patrons’  confidence to seek their libraries as a reliable source  of  information1.  In  fact,  information  professionals  are  trying  to  explore  newer  tools  and  techniques  for  knowledge  management  and  discovery3. 
One of the strategies of the libraries’ management  was  to  host  their  own  library  website  that  would  provide information about their collections and services  to  their  patrons,  within  and  outside  the  premises  of  the  library1.  The  libraries’  websites  should  be  able  to  provide  its  patrons  expedite  access  to  the  information  they  seek;  help  to  locate  the  answers  required  quickly;  and  at  the  same  time,  promote  the  awareness  of  their  library  to  the  public4.  The  implementation  of  the  libraries’  websites  and  the  use  of  new  IT  has,  indirectly,  forced  librarians  to  become  more  computer  literate  and  to  acquire  knowledge  about  internet  technologies  which  are  used  to  plan,  design  and  implement  the  services  required  by  their  patrons5.  
2.  LIbrAry sysTeMs 
Computers were used to overcome the difficulty  of retrieving documentation as early as in the 1950’s,  where files were stored on magnetic tapes and ran  on  mainframe  computer  systems6.  In  the  1970s,  
Received 11 March 2014, Revised 21 July 2014, Online published 4 September 2014 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEpTEMbER   2014 
computers  began  to  be  used  more  widely,  where  the  mainframe  computer  was  capable  of  storing  data  in  hard  disk  and  there  was  an  increase  of  processing power, memory and performance. Then  in  the  late  1970s  and  early  1980s,  there  was  the  introduction  of  ‘online  search’,  where  information  could  be  accessed  online6.  Libraries  began  to  implement the information communication technology  (ICT)  with  the  introduction  of  online  search.  This  system was to perform most of the functions in the  libraries,  which    included  collection  assessments,  acquisition, cataloguing, and circulation information7. As  large  corpora  of  data  accumulate,  automated  and  semi-automated  analysis  of  their  contents   reveals  patterns  and  allows  establishment  of  fact  patterns  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  Libraries  and  librarians  have  an  exciting  opportunity  to  support  this technology-based work8.  The integrated library  system  consists  of  the  following:  
2.1  Cataloguing 
The Online public Access Catalogue (OpAC) is  one of the common library information systems where  all the resources or information of all materials and  its’  location  in  the  library  are  stored.  The  OpAC  contains  information  of  the  materials  such  as  the  title,  authorship,  publication,  physical  description,  access method, unique call number, subject headings  and  other  necessary  information7.  
2.2  Information Acquisition 
The  acquisition  information  system  contains  information about items ordered from vendors, tracking  of the orders, delivery and processing dates of the  items by the library8. These acquisition systems do  not  have  some  of  the  important  features  such  as  the  ability  to:  
(a)   p redict  the  time  taken  to  purchase  the  
materials,  
(b)   p redict  the  cost  of  resources  in  the  future,  (c) Track the vendors’ performance, such as delivery  
of  the  ordered  materials  as  scheduled,  and  (d)  Automatically  track  missing  purchases  or  late  
delivery  of  materials.  
Without these features in their system, the libraries  would have difficulty in tracking and monitoring their  acquisition especially, with the increasing amount of  materials  demanded  by  the  patrons  and  the  need  to  increase  the  resources  in  the  libraries.  2.3   s earch  
The library database captures and stores patrons’  information. This information contains the clients’ name,  address,  contact  information  and  other  necessary  information7.  Often  the  library  management  needs  to  understand  their  clients’  to  serve  them  better,  
402 
and to perform analysis on the database to analyse  their  clients’  behaviour.  This  type  of  analysis  is  difficult  to  be  performed  by  the  librarian,  because  it  would  require  specific  skills  and  analysis  tools,  which  are  not  integrated  into  this  system.  2.4 Information  Circulation 
Circulation  of  information  is  the  information  related  to  the  resources  of  the  library,  such  as  the  checkout  date,  due  date,  call  number  and  some  basic information of the borrower or the user of the  resources. The information circulation also captures  information of resource materials that are requested  by the clients’ or reserved by the librarian but these  records are erased when the materials are returned  back  to  the  library7.  This  circulation  information  should  have  some  of  the  following  features,  which  are  useful  for  the  library  management:  
(a) Ability to produce information on the borrowing  
trend  of  books  or  resources  
(b)  Ability  to  determine  the  relationship  between  
the  patrons  and  the  materials  
(c) Ability to list materials, which are in demand or  
being  borrowed  very  frequently,  and  (d)  Ability  to  list  the  books  or  materials,  which  
are  not  being  borrowed  or  used  at  all  by  the  
patrons.  
These  features  are  very  useful  for  the  library  management,  because  it  could  help  the  libraries  to:  
(a)  Justify  the  purchasing  of  books  or  resources  
for  the  library,  
(b)   p repare budget reports – where these information can  
be  used  to  justify  or  support  their  reports,  (c)  Improve their services by increasing the resources  
which  are  in  demand,  and  
(d)  Remove  materials  or  resources  which  are  not  
being  used.  
3. ChALLenges  PoseD   by  IT 
The  IT  innovations  have  posed  the  following  challenges  to  libraries5: 
(a)  Libraries have had to implement a virtual method  
for  information  access 
(b)  Libraries have had to keep up with the technology  
enhancement  which  increase  their  budget (c)  Libraries’ staff needed training on the use of these  
new technologies, including maintenance ensuring  
the  availability  of  increasing  information (d)  Libraries  ought  to  ensure  their  resources  or  
collections  are  being  fully  utilised 
(e)  Libraries  that  have  chosen  to  adopt  the  new  
technologies  did  not  have  the  resources  and  
the  expertise  to  maintain  these  systems,  and 

========2========

Lone & KhAn: DATA  Mining 
(f)  Libraries’ online system has had to be accessible  
all  the  time  to  provide  digital  information  
continuously. 
To  overcome  some  of  these  challenges  and  issues the libraries’ management requires strategic  information to make decisions that would enable them  to establish their goals, objectives and monitor the  results.  ponniah9   states  that  strategic  information  has  the  following  characteristics:  
(a)  Integrated–a  single  and  complete  view  of  the  
organisation. 
(b)  Data  Integrity–information  has  to  be  accurate  
and  in  line  with  organisational  objectives. (c)  Accessible–easily  obtained  whenever  required  
for  analysis. 
(d) Credible–the  information  needs  to  be  
credible. 
(e)  Timely–the information has to be available within  
the  required  time. 
Strategic  information,  previously  not  easily  available,  has  been  facilitated  with  the  advent  of  a  new  paradigm  in  IT  called  Data  mining.  Data  mMining is specific to produce information based on  the pattern(s) generated by the data captured in the  systems. The libraries require strategic information  to  improve  the  services  they  provide,  as  a  result,  libraries  should  implement  data  mining  systems  to  obtain the required information. With the improvement  and  introduction  of  new  services  to  their  patron,  the  libraries  can  still  be  one  of  the  main  sources  of  information. 
4.  DATA   M InIng 
Data mining is defined as ‘The automatic extraction  of  useful,  often  previously  unknown  information  from  large  databases  or  data  sets’10.  One  of  the  popular  definitions  for  data  mining  is  the  process  of exploration and analysis, by automatic or semi- automatic  means,  of  large  quantities  of  data  to  discover  meaningful  patterns  and  rules11.  This  can  be simplified as a process of getting information or  knowledge from large amounts of data. That is why  sometimes data mining is also known as ‘knowledge  mining’,  a  synonym  for  another  popularly  used  term known as, ‘knowledge discovery in databases  (KDD)’12.    
Data  mining  may  be  described  as  a  process  of  discovering  interesting  information  from  large  amounts  of  data  that  are  stored  in  databases  or  other forms of repositories. These repositories include  multiple  IT  tools  such  as  database  technology,  machine  learning  tools,  information  retrieval,  and  data  analysis.  Data  mining  can  be  characterised  as the technology which incorporates the statistical  techniques and mathematical equations that are used  
in an attempt to identify the significant relationships  between variables in the historical data, to forecast  or  perform  analysis  on  the  data;  or  determine  any  significant  relationship  within  the  data  captured13. 
besides implementing new information technologies,  libraries  have  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  their  user  needs  and  expectations  to  serve  them  better14.  To  fulfil  their  users’  requests  and  needs  proactively, most libraries are performing their own  research and analysis to get information to improve  their  services.  One  way  of  getting  information  of  their users is by analysing the data captured in their  database systems. This analysis is useful because  it  provides  the  library  with  information  on  what  resources are being used, the quantity of resources  and the demographics of the patrons. Although this  research  or  analysis  produces  useful  information,  it  is  difficult  to  analyse  the  relationship  of  these  data.  The  librarians  who  perform  these  analyses  may  not  be  experienced  in  performing  a  complete  analysis  or  may  just  base  their  analysis  on  their  experiences, which may not result in a complete and  comprehensive analysis7.  Data  mining  tool  may  be  used to overcome the issues of performing analysis  on any form of data. Data mining is the process of  exploring  and  analysing  large  quantities  of  data  to  get  meaningful  information  and  make  discoveries  by  the  patterns  generated  in  these  data.  The  data  mining  processes  consist  of7:  
(a)  Defining  the  object  of  the  research  
(b)  Identifying  the  data  to  be  analysed  
(c)  Extracting  and  ‘cleaning’  the  data  
(d)  Using  the  appropriate  analysis  tools  
(e) Making discoveries from the patterns that arise  
from  this  process 
(f)  Analysing  these  patterns  and  generating  
reports.  
Data mining has two main types of functions, which  are  descriptive  mining  and  predictive  mining15: (a) Descriptive mining or discovery mining–the data  
mining  process  where  useful  information  is  
extracted from the databases or, the discovery  
of  potential  knowledge  from  the  databases. (b)   p redictive  mining–data  mining  process  that  
involves  using  machine  learning  to  predict  the  
unknown,  or  to  obtain  the  future  values  of  
certain  variables  of  interest  from  the  data  in  
the  database  or  repositories.  
The power of data mining is the ability of leveraging  on  the  existing  data  of  an  organisation  and  using  the information to make better strategic decisions16.  The proven capability of the data mining system to  produce information that is useful is the main reason  why most organisations are implementing this system17.  The data mining system utilises the data collection  
403 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEpTEMbER   2014 
in  an  organisation's  data  repoitories  viz,  legacy  systems, databases, files, etc., which are in different  format and structure. Therefore, it is important that  the data is formatted and structured to suit the data  mining activities to produce significant results18. The  process  of  preparing  the  data  for  mining  is  called  extraction,  transformation  and  loading  (ETL).    
5.   e xTrACTIon,  TrAnsforMATIon AnD 
LoADIng  (eTL) 
The  ETL  is  a  data  integration  function  that  involves extracting data from a number of sources,  transforming it to fit business needs, and ultimately  loading it into a data warehouse for data mining19.  An ETL process is the process of moving data from  multiple  sources,  cleansing  data,  transforming  and  reformatting  data,  and  finally  loading  the  data  to  another  database,  data  mart  or  data  warehouse  for  data  analysis20.  
6.   b enefITs  of  DATA   M InIng  for  
LIbrArIes 
Currently, most libraries are performing analysis  on  the  data  captured  in  their  database21.  This  analysis  is  useful  because  it  provides  the  library  with  information  on  what  kinds  of  resources  are  being  used  in  the  library  or  how  these  resources  are being used. These types of analysis are driven  by the librarians who perform the analysis based on  their hypothesis or from their experience to get the  statistical information. With the advancement of IT,  a new data analysis process has evolved known as  data  mining.  Data  mining  could  solve  some  of  the  issues  faced  by  the  library  by  making  knowledge  discoveries  from  the  library’s  data.  
Thus  data  mining  is  the  process  of  knowledge  discovery from data, by producing patterns and trends  of the raw data that may not have been analysed10.  The  libraries  today  are  challenged  to  provide  their  patrons  with  the  right  source  of  information  and  services  they  require.  Data  mining  can  benefit  the  libraries  by7:  
(a)  Improving  the  library  services  
(b)  being  a  support  tool  for  decision-making  by  
the  library,  and  
(c)  producing  reports  which  can  help  to  justify  
decisions  made.  
6.1 Improve  Library services 
Data mining can be used to improve the library  services  in  the  following7   ways.  
6.1.1  Collection  and  Borrowing Activities 
Trends  and  patterns  of  borrowing  of  resources  and materials could be provided by the data mining  system.  For  example,  the  type  of  materials  being 
404 
borrowed in relation to the demographics of the clients  would enable the libraries’ to provide or increase the  popular  materials  or  resources  for  their  clients.  6.1.2 Clients  Information 
 Data mining can be performed on the clients’  information  or  demographics  which  can  produce  patterns that may determine demographics of active  clients,  relationships  between  the  clients  and  the  materials demanded, behaviour pattern of the clients.  This information is useful for the libraries to improve  their services by providing the required services to  the  right  groups  of  clients.  
6.1.3 Web  Logs 
Data  mining  on  the  webpage  log  files  could  provide patterns on what, how and when the library  sites are being used. This could provide information to  the  librarians  on  how  to  improve  their  websites.  6.1.4 Circulation  Information 
When data mining is performed on the circulation  patterns of the library collection, it may provide the  librarians  with  the  knowledge  of  the  future  needs  of  their  clients.  This  can  guide  the  librarians  on  their  planning,  budgeting,  purchasing  of  materials  which  are  frequently  used  by  their  clients  and  can  provide  a  justification  for  removing  or  archiving  unused  materials.  
6.2 Decision-making  Tool  for  Library  
Management 
Data mining could help the libraries with decision- making  in  a  number  of  areas,  such  as7:  6.2.1 Removal  of  Unused  Material 
by  performing  data  mining  on  the  pattern  of  circulation, materials that are not in circulation could  be replaced with newer edition or the materials which  are  not  in  circulation  could  be  stored  somewhere  else.  
6.2.2 Staff  Management 
by performing data mining on the circulation of  materials a pattern could be discovered on when and  what type of services are in demand at a particular  time.  For  example,  if  there  is  a  pattern  that  shows  there could be less renewal and borrowing of books  in  the  morning,  the  librarian  could  be  assigned  to  other  library  activities.  This  would  ensure  that  the  library  staff  are  being  fully  utilised.  
6.2.3 Purchasing  of  Materials 
Data  mining  on  the  circulation  could  provide  patterns on what types of books or materials are in  demand and this may help the library in purchasing  the ‘right’ materials for their clients. This information  can  be  used  to  justify  the  purchasing  of  materials  to  the  libraries’  management.  

========4========

Lone & KhAn: DATA  Mining 
6.3 reporting  and  Justification 
Library  management,  as  most  entities,  have  to  provide reports and justification on decisions made.  Data mining could provide the required information  by7 following  reports:  
6.3.1 Library’s  Usage  
Data  mining  could  provide  management  with  projections of the future trends of the library usage.  This  could  justify  the  need  to  increase  the  budget  or  resources  allocated  to  the  library.  
6.3.2 Library’s  Staff  Justification 
Data  mining  can  produce  projection  on  the  future  requirement  of  the  library  and  the  growth  of  the library. The library management can justify and  increase  its  work  force  based  on  this  report. 
7.  ConCLusIons 
With the data mining systems, libraries can have the  right resources, better services, the ability to strengthen  their collections and information for the decision-making  process. The extraction, transformation and loading (ETL),  a  very  important  component  in  data  mining,  feeds  quality data for data mining. The objective, strategy  and  budget  of  the  data  mining  project  should  be  the main criteria for selecting a suitable ETL tool to  be  used  for  extraction,  transformation  and  loading  activities. Exploration and analysis by automatic or  semi-automatic means of large quantities of data in  order  to  discover  meaningful  or  relevant  patterns  and  rules  are  of  high  advantage,  competitive  and  time  saving  for  libraries  through  the  process  of  data  mining.  The  libraries  today  are  challenged  to  provide  their  clients  with  the  right  source  of  information  and  services  they  require,  and  this  has  been  made  possible  with  the  technique  and  process  of  data  mining.                
referenCes 
1. Conkling;  et  al.  Engineering  libraries:  building  
collections and delivering services. Sci. Technol.  
Lib.,  2001, 19(3),  208. 
2. Khosrowpour, Mehdi. Challenges of information  
technology management in the 21st  century.  In 
Information Resources Management Association  
international  Conference,  2000.  idea  group  
publishing,  2000. 
3. Jiban, K. Pal. Usefulness and application of data  
5. Sun  Microsystems  Inc.  Information  technology  
advances in libraries. http://www.sun.com/products- 
n-solutions/edu/whitepapers/pdf/it_advances.pdf.  
(Last  updated:  2003). 
6. Neufeld, M. Lynne & Cornog, Martha. Database  
history:  From  dinosaurs  to  compact  discs.  J.  
Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci., 1986, 37(4)  183-190.  doi:  
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(198607)37:4<183::AID- 
ASI2>3.0.CO;2-W. 
7.   n icholson,  S.  &  Stanton,  J.  gaining  strategic  
advantage through bibliomining: Data mining for  
management decisions in corporate, special, digital,  
and traditional libraries. In  Organisational Data  
Mining:  Leveraging  Enterprise  Data  Resources  
for optimal  Performance,  edited  by h. nemati  
&  C.  Barko.  idea  group  Publishing,  hershey,  
pA.  
8. Okerson, Ann. Text and data mining: A librarian  
overview,  IFLA  WLIC,  Singapore, Aug.  2013. 9.   p onniah, Raja. Date warehousing fundamentals:  
A  comprehensive  guide  for  IT  professionals.  
John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc.,  New  York,  2001. 
10. The  Free  Dictionary.  Farlex.  http://www. 
thefreedictionary.com/?data+mining.  (accessed  
on  4  June  2014). 
11. Thomas,  Connolly  &  Carolyn, begg.  Database  
systems:  A  practical  approach  to  design,  
implementation, and management, Ed. 3. Addison  
Wesley,  London,  2002. 
12. Jiawei, han & Micheline, Kamber. Data mining:  
Concepts and techniques, ed. 3. Morgan Kaufman  
publishers,  San  Francisco,  2001,  p.  5,  40. 13.   b ecker,  Shirley.  Data  warehousing  and  web  
engineering.  idea  group  Publishing,  hershey,  
2002. 
14.   b uckland,  M.  Five  grand  challenges  for  library  
research. Library  Trends,  2003, 51(4). 
15. Zhengxin,  Chen.  Data  mining  and  uncertain  
reasoning: An integrated approach. John Wiley  
&  Sons,  Inc.,  New  York,  2001. 
16. Nazem, S. & Shin, b. Data mining: New arsenal  
for  strategic  decision  making.  J.  Database  
Manag.,  1999, 10(1),  39-42. 
17. Mulvenna,  M.D.;  Anand,  S.S.  &  Buchner,  A.g.   
personalisation  on  the  net  using  web  mining.  
Communications of the ACM, 2000, 43(8), 122-25. 18. Charran,  Eric.  Introduction  to  data  mining  
with  SQL  server,  2006.  http://www.sql-server- 
performance.com/ec_data_mining.asp.  (Last  
updated:  2006). 
mining  in  extracting  information  from  different  19. The Tech Dictionary. The concise Tech Dictionary,  
4. 
perspectives. Annals  Lib.  Inf.  Stud.,  2011, 58,  7-16. 
Su,  Di.;  et  al.  Evolution  in  reference  and  information  services:  The  impact  of  the  internet.  The  Reference  Librarian ,  2001,  35(74),  2. 
2014.  http://www.thetechdictionary.com/?page_ 
id=195.  (accessed  on  5  June  2014). 
20.   b itpipe.  IT  Information:  White  papers,  product  
literature,  webcasts  and  case  studies  (1998- 
2006),  2014.  http://www.bitpipe.com/tlist/ETL- 
(Software).html/. 
405 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  5, SEpTEMbER   2014 
About  the Authors 
Mr  Tariq Ahmad  Lone   is  working  as  an Assistant  Professor at The Business School, University of Kashmir,  Srinagar. he  is  working  in  the  area  of information  Technology and is presently pursuing his phD from  Mewar University in the area of Image processing.  he obtained BSc from University of Kashmir and MCA  from  University  of  Jammu. he  has  published  many  research papers in professional journals in the areas of  datamining, decision support system, and image denoising. 
406 
Dr rafi Ahmad Khan  is working as Scientist at The  Business  School,  University  of  Kashmir,  Srinagar.  he is working in the area of information Technology.  he  obtained  BSc  from  University  of  Kashmir  and  MCA  from  University  of  Jammu.  he  obtained  his  PhD  from  University  of  Kashmir  in  the  area  of  Business intelligence. he has more than 20 research  publications  in  national  and  international  journals  in  the  areas  of  business  intelligence,  datamining,  and  decision  support  system.  

========6========

