DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 2, March 2014, pp. 87-96 
  2014, DESIDOC 
A Story of Great Expectations: Past and Present of Online/Virtual Exhibitions 
Cèsar Carreras* and Federica Mancini** 
*Department of Antiquity, Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB), Civic Square, Bellaterra, Cerdanyola, Spain 
E-mail: ccarreras@uoc.edu 
**Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, (UOC) Av. Tibidabo, 39-43 Barcelona, Spain 
E-mail: federicamancini3@gmail.com 
AbStrAct 
The present paper attempts to discuss the practices of virtual exhibitions covering topics that were not  taken into account a decade ago. Topics such as the effort involved in creating an online exhibition, which  also affects the time, costs and human resources that are not always available in memory institutions of  middle and small size. The best online exhibitions that enjoy international awards demand a high budget  only available to large institutions. Therefore, are they good models for the remaining cultural institutions?  Another issue is the degree of complementarity between a real and virtual exhibit and fears of competition.  Most memory institutions prefer to create their online exhibits once the temporary exhibition is fnished.  Virtual exhibitions become records of museum activities that are no longer in place. Public participation  in content creating was also a wish a decade ago, but new tools have facilitated such cooperation. Both  behaviours generate virtual communities (local or distant) around the cultural institution, which is one of  the aim of the current development of web 2.0. Of course, technical developments in IT have modifed  forms and possibilities of current exhibitions (i.e., virtual worlds, video, animations, XML, mobile phones)  that should be tested to overcome some of previous drawbacks. The use of participatory technologies  in some cases has led not only to bring nearer the museum to its audiences, but rather to subvert the  traditional unidirectional relationship between them. This paper combines theoretical discussions of such  topics  with  some  empirical  data  obtained  for  more  than  ten  years  of  developing  and  analysing  virtual  
exhibitions. 
Keywords: Virtual exhibitions, Catalan immigration, fash technology, museums, maps 
1.  INtrODUctION 
Virtual exhibitions are new potential applications  for  cultural  institutions  that  pretend  to  disseminate  contents  of  one  of  their  most  creative  products:  a  temporal  exhibit.  So  far  not  many  institutions  have  been  making  much  effort  in  creating  virtual  exhibitions,  since  they  have  not  foreseen  potential  outputs.  Experiences  from  the  late  90’s  up  to  now  demonstrate  that  a  virtual  exhibit  is  always  a  worthwhile  investment,  because  it  is  an  excellent  presentation  for  any  institution  and  gives  new  life  to  contents,  which  are  hidden  in  catalogues.  
  Almost  a  decade  has  passed  by  since  first  virtual exhibition was started. It was the time when  IT  appeared  to  solve  some  of  the  problems  of  dissemination  and  marketing  of  the  most  attractive  cultural products of museums and memory institutions:  temporary exhibitions. In 2001, A paper1   based  on  authors first experiences foreseeing great expectations  for  the  online  exhibitions  as  well  as  the  fears  from  curators, who believed that virtual exhibits could get  visitors  apart  from  the  museums  was  published.  
Received 22 March 2013, Online published 18 March 2014 
At  that  time,  virtual  exhibitions  were  expected  to complement real exhibitions in terms of content,  to  encourage  visitors  to  come  to  real  exhibits  (marketing),  to  recreate  virtual  worlds  costless?  In  real environments, to give access to new audiences,  to provide basic content background for real exhibits  and  to  become  a  fix  resource  when  temporary  exhibitions were dismantled. At present, only some  of those expectations have been completely fulfilled  and real practices have changed a little from those  idealistic  views.  
Moreover,  now  more  data  are  available  about  how  and  who  is  using  those  online  exhibitions  (i.e., educational contexts, tourism, digital archives),  which  require  further  reflection.  They  encourage  visitors  to  actively  participate  in  the  exhibits  with  the  help  of  special  mobile  phone  cameras  that  record  their  journeys  through  the  exhibition  and  instantly upload them on the museum’s website. A  number  of  institutions  have  contributed  to  reduce  the conventional separation between real and virtual  worlds.  

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
2.  ONLINE–VIrtUAL  EXHIbItIONS:  LAtE  90’S 
The  coming  of  world  wide  web  (www)  and  internet in the mid 90’s brought about many potential  applications of this technology into a myriad of fields  and  professional  sectors.  One  of  them  is  memory  institution (museums, libraries, and archives), which  generated great expectations about the potential of  such  a  new  media  because  of  their  dissemination  power,  which  could  widen  the  visitors  and  service  users  of  the  particular  institution. 
Temporary exhibits are one of the most outstanding  activities  of  memory  institutions,  but  require  much  effort in economic and intellectual terms, and hardly  provide  enough  material  return.  Only  few  cases  can  be  shared  with  other  institutions  which  have  similar conditions in the exhibition halls and objects  can be easily borrowed. however, most exhibitions  have  a  short-life  despite  its  important  creative  investment  and  sometimes  they  only  remain  as  a  memory  in  form  of  a  well-published  catalogue  or  CD-ROM/DVD. 
With  the  advent  of  www  in  the  mid  90’s,  many  curators, librarians, and archivists thought that these  could  be  an  excellent  alternative  to  keep  those  temporary  exhibitions  alive.  In  fact,  most  of  them  regarded the tool as a post-exhibition application, a  way  to  give  universal  access  to  a  temporary  event  that  was  no  longer  in  place.  First  effort  in  virtual  exhibitions  was  a  temporary  exhibit  in  1999  called  ‘Always  Ibiza  and  Formentera’2,  which  pretended  to  show  a  different  view  of  the  local  tradition  of  two  Balearic  Islands  (Spain)  that  international  tourism was systematically forgetting. The temporary  exhibit was a local initiative attempting to preserve  the  way  local  people  wanted  to  keep  these  two  islands. however, the temporary exhibition was only  presented  at  five  different  venues  in  the  Balearic  Islands and Barcelona in the winter season, so not  many  potential  visitors  could  easily  access  it.  This  is why a virtual exhibition was envisaged as a way  to disseminate the information to tourists coming to  see  the  islands  and  understand  local  traditions. 
The  virtual  exhibition  was  a  success,  mainly  in  English  version  because  it  was  used  by  foreign  travel  agencies.  It  was  complementary  to  the  real  exhibition because it included more images and text,  and a virtual reconstruction (3D model) of what was  expected  to  be  a  fix  venue  for  this  exhibition.  It  was realised from this early experience that virtual  exhibits  have  a  lot  of  potential  with  a  minimum  extra investment. With regard to its lasting life, this  virtual  exhibit,  still  online  (spring  2009  –  ten  years  later),  receives  at  the  present  1400/1700  visits  a  month  from  at  least  10  countries  like  Spain,  USA,  Great Britain, Japan, Netherlands, Canada, France,  and  Germany.  Therefore,  virtual  exhibits  have  a  
88 
long-lasting  life  or  value  which  is  admired  and  appreciated  by  everyone.  
The  study  of  logins  to  this  resource  as  well  as  questionnaires  with  specialists  and  focus  groups2 revealed that virtual exhibits were used in a different  way  than  a  presential  exhibit.  Virtual  visitors  tend  to  access  only  small  parts  of  the  resource  like  an  archive  of  multimedia  contents  (i.e.,  text,  images,  audio,  and  video)  perhaps  to  reuse  it  in  another  context. A small percentage of virtual visitors undertook  a  full  visit  of  the  virtual  exhibit,  whereas  most  users came with educational or tourist interests. In  other  words,  virtual  exhibits  are  used  in  different  contexts  and  forms  than  the  ones  in  which  they  were  initially  created. 
According to a survey carried out by Dutardre3 for  the  Direction  of  French  Museums,  it  was  observed  that  people  prefer  complementarities  between  real  and  virtual  museum.  In  most  cases,  they  browsed  websites  looking  for  present  and  past  exhibits  and  made a virtual tour within collections due to curiosity  and  desire  for  discovery  and  knowledge. 
A second project taken in 2000 was the digitisation  of an exhibition about books’ illustrations – ‘Aureum  Opus:  five  centuries  of  illustrated  books’4,  which  introduced  two  new  challenges.  According  to  the  organisers,  at  the  Frederic  Mares  Museum  of  Barcelona,  the  idea  was  that  the  virtual  exhibit  should  encourage  people  to  come  to  visit  the  real  exhibit also Therefore, timing was a key issue since  both  the  exhibits,  real  and  virtual,  needed  to  open  at  the  same  time.  This  generated  an  overstress  in  the whole project since organisers did not think that  virtual  exhibitions  could  require  an  extra  effort  to  create new complementary contents and translations.  In  the  end,  managed  to  make  the  virtual  exhibit  accessible  on  time,  but  it  was  observed  that  not  many  people  are  persuaded  by  virtual  exhibits  to  come  to  visit  the  real  one:  by  the  time,  the  virtual  exhibit is well-known the temporary exhibit is already  changing  venue  or  is  dismantled.  Therefore,  right  timing  did  not  encourage  new  visitors  to  visit  the  physical  museum. 
A later study5  revealed that many foreign visitors  showed a willingness to see the real exhibit that they  had  seen  on  internet.  however,  by  the  time  they  discovered  it,  the  exhibition  was  already  over.  
Another  challenging  issue  of  this  exhibit  was  content  creation  and  taking  advantage  of  digital  environments  to  provide  alternative  views  to  the  objects  and  exhibition  narratives.  In  this  case,  old  books  were  presented  in  the  real  exhibition  in  showcases  so  that  they  could  not  be  touched  and  browsed  despite  the  fact  that  the  main  subject  of  the  exhibition  was  book  illustration.  This  is  why most  illustrations  were  scanned  and  presented  in  

========2========

CARRERAS  & MANCINI: A  STORy OF GREAT EXPECTATIONS 
the  online  exhibition  providing  a  full  accessibility  to  the  collection.  Similarly,  other  exhibits  which  include  old  books,  manuscripts  or  delicate  objects  are  also  available  online. 
Since the value of old books’ illustrations depend  on  techniques  employed  in  the  past,  most  of  our  complementary content aimed at explaining techniques  such  as  xylography,  chalcography  or  lithography,  and a 3D reconstruction in QuickTime of a possible  engraver  workshop.  This  background  knowledge  has been quite useful for virtual visitors, who have  appreciated this basic information to understand the  collection. Actually, a constructivist educational approach  lies  behind  this  idea  of  providing  basic  information  to  link  general  and  specialised  knowledge6.  Only  media changes here, as it happened in the past with  audiovisual and TV communication media7,8, though  Internet  may  suppose  a  more  rooted  shift.  
A background or personalised information allows  users  to  fully  enjoy  the  real  as  well  as  the  virtual  visit.  Questionnaires  on  visitors’  opinions  show  that this is one aspect that they really appreciate5.  Exhibitions are no longer for specialists, but anyone  can  fully  appreciate  them.  In  terms  of  visitors,  nowadays the exhibition still receives an average of  5000  users  a  month  from  more  than  20  countries.  The presence of several images and old illustrations  makes  this  virtual  resource  very  popular  as  a  graphic  archive.  
Other  online  exhibits  created  in  2000  shared  the  same  features  although  subjects  were  slightly  different. For instance, “Will you write me a letter?”9 deals  with  the  subject  of  communication  through  correspondence from the origin of writing to e-mail with  special stories between famous people and special  cases such as war letters or prisoners’ letters. From  the technological point of view, a virtual environment  (QuickTime VR) was developed to navigate through  different  sections  as  an  alternative  to  the  typical  structured menu. From users’ comments it appeared  that the virtual navigation became so complex that  most visitors chose the traditional navigation through  menus.  yet,  the  most  popular  virtual  exhibitions  were fully using virtual environments such as ‘Virtual  Leonardo’10,  which  won  the  award  the  Best  of  the  Web  in  2000  as  best  online  exhibition. 
The success of exhibition about epistolary was  limited because there was only a version in the local  language–Catalan.  This  is  a  good  lesson  for  the  online exhibitions: only the major languages (English  or Spanish to less extent) make an online resource  really  global  for  any  visitor  all  over  the  world.  
The  last  exhibit  of  2000  was  ‘Treasures  of  Nature’11, a selection of 100 objects from the Natural  Science Museum of Barcelona that reflect research  and  researchers  in  the  field  of  natural  sciences.  It  
was an object-oriented exhibition complemented with  more multimedia documentation in its virtual version  as  well  background  or  personalised  information  for  the  diverse  audiences  that  could  access  it.  One  of  the  main  differences  of  this  exhibit  was  its  dissemination,  since  it  was  focused  on  educators  and  schools  apart  from  the  general  public.  One  of  the main surprises was that the virtual resource was  employed  in  formal  educational  contexts,  therefore  giving  a  second  life  to  the  display. 
Figure 1. Home page of ‘treasures of Nature’11. 
3.  FLASH tEcHNOLOGY AND cOMPLEXItY 
The Flash technology created a major revolution  in  online  exhibitions  and  a  more  demanding  effort  in  terms  of  cost  and  human  resources  for  memory  institutions. This increase in budget also generated  a  big  gap  between  small/middle  and  large  size  institutions,  since  only  the  last  ones  could  afford  to  create  regularly  high  quality  online  displays.  
In  the  late  90’s  new  multimedia  formats  came  into existence, such as audio and streaming video,  live  web  casts,  quizzes  and  games  (edutainment).  The website of the Tech Museum of Innovation in the  ‘Robotics: Sensing, Thinking, Acting’ already offered  in  2000  both  video  on  demand  and  streaming  (live  webcast), the latter being more complex to produce  and manage. Also the holocaust Memorial Museum  (USA) developed during the same period with different  interactive  solutions  for  their  users,  choosing  the  Flash Communications Server (Flashcom) software  as  its  technology  for  webcasts.  The  virtual  tour  was  made  up  of  online  galleries  representing  the  real  exhibitions.  Curators’  comments  on  video  and  audio, made some sort of soundtrack while browsing.  Interested  visitors  could  also  chat  in  real  time  with  historians  available  at  that  time.  Comments  and  interesting  questions  were  then  stored  online  in  a  database used by the public and shaping a sort of a  container of the key issues that users could explore  to  enrich  their  knowledge  about  the holocaust. 
Besides,  these  initial  years  also  represented  a  new pattern of exhibitions based on peoples’ stories.  A  kind  of  emotional  displays  (hearts-on)  in  which  
89 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
visitors  could  identify  themselves  with  anonymous  characters  as  it  happens  in  the  cinema.  These  displays  were  normally  tragic  experiences  such  as  war,  holocaust  or  immigration,  which  also  allowed  virtual  visitors  to  take  part  by  including  their  own  experiences  (precedent  of  web  2.0  philosophy).  
An  early  experience  was  the  Exploratorium  exhibition in 1999 ‘Remembering Nagasaki’12  about  the first nuclear bombing and results of such tragedy  in  Japanese  lives. There  was  an  open  section  that  allowed  visitors  to  explain  their  experiences,  so  many  Japanese  relatives  of  the  victims  revealed  a  completely different view that the Americans had. The  experience  was  so  enriching  that  became  a  model  for later exhibits. Therefore, it is not strange that the  winner  of  the  Best  award  of  the  Web  2002  was  an  exhibition  on  the  Croatian  holocaust  at  ‘Jasenovac  1941-1945’13   by the  holocaust Museum (Washington).  Using flash technology and be high quality images,  the  online  display  included  touchy  testimonies  and  oral  stories  of  this  historic  drama,  which  reminded  the  contemporaneous  Balkan  conflicts.  
In 2003, the authors were also involved in such  a  kind  of  hearts-on  exhibition,  which  became  quite  rewarding  in  personal  terms  (The  same  year  we  produced  an  on-line  exhibition  called  ‘Images  of  stone:  the  Tunisian  mosaics’14   which  displayed  a  selection  of  quality  Roman  mosaics  discovered  in  this country. The online exhibit attempted to explain  complementary information about mosaic techniques,  iconography, mosaic schools and same examples of  different  parts  of  the  Roman  Empire.  It  included  a  3D reconstruction with Shockwave 3D of the Roman  villa  of  Els  Munts  (Tarragona,  Spain).  It  was  an  online  version  of  a  temporary  itinerant  exhibition  about the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939) ‘Memories  of  our  childhood:  The  war  children’15,  still  a  taboo  subject in contemporary Spain. however, the virtual  version  changed  completely  its  structure,  since  it  was believed that the most attractive part were the  testimonies of those former children that were now  old  people.  It  was  decided  to  see  the  whole  war  conflict  through  the  eyes  of  children  who  left  their  families to become refugees all over the world (Great  
Figure 2. Home page of ‘Memories of our childhood: the  
war children’15. 
90 
Britain, France, Mexico, Belgium, Russia, Argentina…)  and  who  sometimes  never  came  back. 
The personal life stories were so touchy and had  a lot of impact on the public. We received messages  of  people  crying  to  see  the  images,  identifying  some  of  their  loved  ones  and  asking  for  copies  of  films  and  photographs.  For  many  of  these  refugee  children  living  in  Argentina,  Mexico  or  France  it  was  the  first  time  that  they  could  remember  their  own  story.  The  authors  received  a  yahoo  prize  in  cultural  webs  in  2003.    Despite  being  in  only  two  languages  (Catalan  and  Spanish),  it  still  enjoys  a  big  popularity,  with  more  than  1500  visitors  a  month from more than 10 countries including USA,  European  and  Asian  countries.  For  a  long  time,  this  resource  has  been  used  in  secondary  schools  to  teach  students  about  the  Civil  War  through  the  eyes  of  testimonies  of  their  same  age. 
Like in the case of ‘Remembering Nagasaki’, we  created a section in which virtual testimonies could  record  their  own  story,  and  in  fact  many  people  still  keep  introducing  new  stories  and  comments  until  now  (again  a  precedent  of  web  2.0). Another  distinctive feature was connectioning past testimonies  with  present  ones  keeping  the  same  exhibition  structure  from  other  war  contemporary  conflicts  in  which  children  are  also  victims. 
Introducing flash technology normally meant for  creating  a  more  complex  online  exhibition,  which  involved a team of multimedia developers from private  companies or collaboration with ICT institutions such  as universities. Some large institutions have invested  part of their budget to produce high quality products  such as the Best of the Web winners, while others  developed strategies for low-cost exhibitions taking  advantage  of  database  formularies.  
For  instance,  the  Best  of  the  Winner  as  online  exhibitions in 2003 was ‘Corridos sin Fronteras’16, a  high quality flash website with an important budget  created  by  the  Smithsonian,  which  explained  the  Mexican  history  from  its  ‘corridos’  songs.  It  played  with  audio  files  from  a  timeline,  which  was  an  innovative application at that moment. There were also  educational applications that allowed users to create  their  own  lyrics  from  a  standard  corridos  song.  
An alternative way was the so-called ‘exhiblet’  from the Science Museum of London17, that attempted  to create online exhibits from the temporary exhibition  but  at  a  very  low  cost.  Multimedia  contents  used  in  the  real  exhibition  were  stored  in  a  database  (basically  images  and  text),  and  then  downloaded  with  the  appropriate  format  in  a  website.  The  idea  was  to  make  available  contents  of  all  activities  of  the  institution  at  a  very  low  cost  and  in  little  time.  Of  course,  those  resources  normally  lack  a  story  and  special  treatment  regarding  the  type  of  virtual  visitor  that  can  access  them.  

========4========

CARRERAS  & MANCINI: A  STORy OF GREAT EXPECTATIONS 
Similarly,  in  2004  a  collaborative  work  with  the Catalan Immigration history Museum18, a small  institution with limited funding that wished to promote  its temporary exhibitions was done and a series of  hTML templates were created for easily downloading  images and texts from the real exhibitions in order  to  generate  an  online  resource.  
Figure  3.  Online  exhibit  from  the catalan  Immigration  
History Museum. 
Those online exhibits were rather simple with a  hierarchical menu on the left, a group of images or  other multimedia, and the main body of text. It was a  way to publish raw documentation from an exhibition,  but not a format that took advantage of all the potential  of  cybermuseography  (internet  museography). 
A  more  technical  approach  was  employed  for  the  ‘Voices’  exhibition  in  200419,  in  which  flash  technology;  audio  and  video  files  were  employed  to  create  capsules  of  content.  Every  application  identified a concept or idea related to the exhibition.  There  were  special  applications  and  itineraries  for  children. 
4.   r EAL  AND  VIrtUAL:  NEW  
cOMPLEMENtArItIES 
With new technological innovations, online exhibitions  have  been  enriched  with  multiple  media  formats,  which  make  virtual  presentations  more  engaging.  They have also contributed to overcome the idea that  the  online  exhibition  was  just  a  competitive  replica  of  the  real  one.  Some  of  the  studies  carried  out  in  recent  years  have  indeed  contributed  to  dissolve  the  initial  reluctance  of  some  professionals  of  the  field  towards  the  virtual  exhibitions.  According  to  the  survey  conducted  by  Statistics  Canada  for  the  Canadian  heritage  Information  Network,  the  more  people  visit  the  virtual  museum  the  greater  will  be  the probability they will also decide to come to the  real  one20. 
Virtual exhibitions seem to generate some benefits  because  they  contribute  to  convey  the  power  of  physical exhibits to those who cannot visit personally,  as well as to offer a closer interaction with artifacts  
through  the  use  of  web-based  technologies.  The  Dutardre’s  investigation3   comes  to  the  conclusion  that most internet users access the museum website  because  they  do  not  have  a  chance  to  visit  the  real  museum  and  exhibitions. 
The exhibition ‘Woman of Letters-Irene Nemirovsky  and Suite Francaise’21  organised by the Museum of  Jewish heritage of Manhattan shows lot of advantages  that  an  online  exhibition  can  bring  to  the  real  one,  enhancing significantly the in-person experience and  creating an intimate view of the author’s life for those  viewers  who  do  not  visit  the  physical  exhibition. 
Similarly,  the  Moma  in  collaboration  with  the  Behaviour  Design  succeeded  in  representing  the  expressive  force  of  the  works  displayed  in  its  exhibitions by using flash technology. The exhibitions  ‘Georges  Seurat:  The  Drawings’22   on  display  from  October  2007  to  January  2008,  and  ‘Kirchner  and  the  Berlin  Street’23   on  show  from  August  to  November  2008  acn  be  cited.  In  these  websites,  visual  language  and  interactive  design  were  used  to  convey  contents.  
In both cases, the exhibitions use flash technology  and  allow  visitors  to  explore  some  interactive  sketchbooks  left  by  the  authors  and  digitised  by  the  museum,  where  visitors  can  view  notes  and  drawings  by  turning  the  pages  and  zooming  to  details with a simple click. Through the manipulation  of these sketchbooks, users are allowed to browse  the  sketches  of  Ernst  Ludwig  Kirchners’  renowned  Street  Scenes  series,  created  between  1913  and  1915,  and  Georges  Seurat’s  beautiful  drawings  balancing between light and shadow. Choreographic  elements and the intuitive interface gracefully reveal  the  artwork  and  invite  users  to  marvel  and  explore  at  will. 
Figure  4.  Online  exhibit  using  interactive 
    sketchbooks. 
Technological advances have allowed museums  to  tell  more  and  more  complex  stories,  immersive  through high-end sites. however, we are witnessing  movements  towards  content  syndication  which  separate  content  from  design  in  order  to  secure  a  faster  dissemination  through  blogs,  podcasts,  
91 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
vodcasts,  youTube,  Flickr,  Drupal,  SlideShowPro,  SoundSlides, RSS and other database-driven sites.  This  is  primarily  due  to  independent  producers  of  web  content  who  have  benefited  from  the  use  of  applications  easy-to-use  to  distribute  their  content.  This produces an interesting phenomenon, i.e., the  web content becomes a multimedia archive. Visitors  access contents in the virtual exhibit through search  engines  instead  of  taking  a  formal  virtual  visit.  In  terms  of  login  data,  this  system  generates  a  short  visit  of  all  the  viewers  in  less  than  a  minute.  
5. 
PArtIcIPAtOrY  tEcHNOLOGIES:  cHALLENGES AND   OPPO rtUNItIES  FOr MUSEUMS 
During  the  last  years  internet  has  changed,  allowing anyone to upload images, video and audio  files  as  well  as  to  create  and  publish  exhibitions,  and  to  connect  with  other  users  within  a  virtual  environment.  
Initially,  curators  were  interested  in  creating  open source exhibitions that allowed them to update  contents  in  the  following  months.  Some  of  those  ‘under  construction’  exhibits  required  a  technical  interface  that  was  simple  enough  for  anyone  to  update  contents  and  files.  This  is  why  CMS  (content  management  systems)  were  introduced  not  only  for  managing  institutions  portals,  but  also  for running virtual exhibitions. The exhibit ‘Pictures  from  Traiguera’24,  a  history  of  a  small  community  from magazine photographs, is managed by a local  collaborator  who  administers  an  image  database  with  textual  formularies.  
Nowadays,  some  open  source  CMS  such  as  Joomla 1.5!25  are being used to create virtual exhibits  that  can  be  updated  both  by  creators  and  visitors.  Some  web  2.0  tools  are  also  included  in  this  new  generation  of  CMS  for  setting  up  low  cost  virtual  exhibitions. One example is virtual exhibit about the  DNA26   created  for  educational  purposes  combining  Joomla  1.5!  and  some  flash  applications.  
Around 2003-2004, cultural websites start talking  about  web  2.0.  A  paper  from  the  Victoria  &  Albert  Museum entitled ‘Learning From Amazon and eBay:  User-Generated  Material  for  Museum  Web  Sites’27 peeps the word user-generated content to describe  the content produced by users. Although this concept  seems  to  challenge  the  traditional  role  of  curators  and  mediators,  technologies  2.0  associated  with  web  do  not  necessarily  constitute  a  problem  for  the  conventional  museum,  but  rather  offer  many  opportunities.  The  advantages  detected  until  now  regarding  their  use  in  virtual  exhibitions  are: (a) Ability  to  capture  new  audience  or  retain  the  
old  one. 
(b) Possibility to evaluate the success or failure of the  
exhibition  and  the  audience’s  preferences, 
92 
(c) Capacity to promote events and initiatives at low  
cost and to develop vital marketing phenomena,  
and 
(d) Benefits  of  exploiting  the  educational  potential  
of  the  constructivist  learning  model  through  
collaboration  and  online  dialogue. 
Apart from helping museums to obtain a greater  visibility,  the  use  of  web  2.0  applications  seems  to  attract  a  higher  number  of  visitors  to  the  virtual  space.  
It is evident that the audiences, now fully used to  move within the internet, often look at other visitor’s  comments to decide whether to visit an exhibition or  not. This basically happens for one reason: people trust  more their peers’ than institutional voices. It is very  likely  that  the  comments  of  users  are  sincere. 
A  study  involving  the  audience  of  the  Museum  di Arte Moderna e Contemporanea (Mart) to analyse  users’  practices  in  the  museum’s  virtual  space  shows  that  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  (10)  users  out  of  the  total  (36)  interviewed  told  that  they  got  influenced  to  visit  the  real  exhibition  with  the  help  of  the  information  provided  by  other  users.  This  shows that the adoption of a participatory philosophy  and  the  use  of  appropriate  tools  can  offer  a  real  added  value  to  the  public  that  undertake  a  visit  to  the  real  exhibition. 
The museums that have embraced a philosophy  of  participation  have  also  the  possibility  to  use the  network  to  monitor  the  dialogue  between  users  getting  feedback  and  responses  about  their  exhibitions.  Similarly,  monitoring  posted  photos  on  Flickr  or  videos  on  ‘you  Tube’  can  be  very  useful  to  understand  which  exhibits  mainly  impressed  the  visitors,  to  help  replicate  these  for  displaying  in  future  occasions. 
The case of the exhibition ‘Graffiti’, carried out  by  the  Brooklyn  Museum,  opens  new  strategies  for  exhibition  dissemination  by  using  sites  such  as  Flickr  and  MySpace  to  highlight  the  exhibition  as  well  as,  its  in-gallery  and  online  interactive  projects. Thanks to a local street artist who is very  popular  in  MySpace  participated  in  the  exhibition,  in  addition  that  the  museum’s  staff  were  able  to  attract  many  users  through  a  good  word-of-mouth  that contributed to promote the gallery, the podcasts  and  the  other  initiatives  within  the  group  of  virtual  friends.  Therefore,  the  initiative  allowed  greater  participation  by  joining  two  audiences:  Web  2.0  community  and  the  one  from  Brooklyn  Museum´s  web.  User  participation  generated  also  the  first- ever Museum archive of local street artist28  through  which  the  museum  had  the  opportunity  to  attract  many  more  visitors  to  its  virtual  space. 
Finally, with the aim of stimulating public participation  in  the  exhibition,  the  museum  provided  to  virtual  

========6========

CARRERAS  & MANCINI: A  STORy OF GREAT EXPECTATIONS 
visitors  an  online  drawing  tool  created  in  2005  for  the  exhibition  ‘Basquiat’  through  which  visitors  at  the  Graffiti  exhibition  page  could  create  their  own  virtual graffiti by using virtual spray and other drawing  tools.  The  positive  results  from  such  experience  demonstrate that creating a virtual community does  not  mean  necessarily  to  produce  new  contents  for  the  web  itself,  but  rather  to  capture  audiences  in  communities  from  other  sites  as  well  as  readapt  old  tools  for  new  exhibitions.  
In  all  cases,  any  well-designed  content  about  an  exhibition  created  by  the  community  should  encourage  users  to  focus  discussions:  the  same  dialogue visitors may have in front of an exhibition  at  the  museum  could  be  established  by  users  of  an online content of the virtual space. however, as  stated by Mitchell29, communities must still find ways  to  provide  and  maintain  places  of  get-together  for  their members, whether these places are virtual, or  physical, or a combination of the two: if these places  are to serve their purposes successfully, and they may  allow both freedom of access and freedom of expression. 
Likewise,  the  exhibition  ‘Take  your  Time’30 of  the  contemporary  artist  Olafur  Eliasson,  staged  in  2008  at  MOMA,  lifted  a  long  internal  debate  about  the  legitimacy  of  removing  content  considered  not  relevant  to  the  theme  of  the  exhibition.  In  this  case  the  event’s  goal  was  testing  new  ways  to  encourage  participation.  The  initiative,  conducted  by  the  Scandinavian  artist,  intended  to  encourage  visitors  to  describe  and  comment  his  work  without  the museum’s interference31  through an environment  designed by ‘SFMOMA new media group’ where they  could give expansion to their views. The interactive  kiosk/website offered background commentaries and  information  about  the  artist’s  philosophy  but  left  to  the  visitors  the  description  of  the  individual  works  in  detail  of  which  each  of  them  have  a  personal  experience of the show. The traditional presentation  of  the  exhibition  in  internet  was  therefore  replaced  by  a  customised  WordPress  blog. 
Figure  5.  Video  about  the  website  showing  the  
  installation ‘seeing yourself see’ undertaken  
  by Olafur Eliasson. 
Despite  the  efforts  of  professionals  to  achieve  their  objectives  by  making  the  best  use  of  the  technology,  only  the  options  that  respond  to  the  user’s  needs  will  consolidate  themselves32.  These  needs can lead the audiences to use technological  applications  in  a  different  way  than  they  were  originally conceived. hence, it is recommended that  memory institutions undertake new ways of assessing  the  impact  of  technology  on  their  virtual  visitors  by  choosing  qualitative  methodologies  besides  the  quantitative  ones33. 
6. 
INtErActIVE  MAPS:  A  NEW  tYPE  OF  ONLINE  EXHIbItION?  
With  the  introduction  of  Earth  representation  software  (Google  Earth,  MSN  Live  Search, yahoo  maps,  etc.)  new  virtual  public  spaces  began  to  spread. In these geographical environments, people  can  make  virtual  trips  and  discover  new  ways  to  access  information  or  objects.  More  and  more  institutions  are  experimenting  with  this  opportunity  by  launching  initiatives  where  the  activity  of  geo- tagging  is  at  the  core  of  their  proposals. 
Public participation in publishing geo-referenced  information through latitude and longitude coordinates  seem  to  offer  a  new  way  of  organising  content,  which  is  clearer  and  more  attractive  for  the  visitor.  An  example  of  this  technology  can  be  seen  at  the  exhibition ‘1620-1800–Style in the Age of Magnificence’,  in  which  under  the  heading  of  ‘Global  Interactive  Baroque’34   users  can  add  their  own  images  of  baroque style objects in the Google map, uploading  them  first  in  Flickr,  then  adding  references  in  the  map  and  finally  sharing  the  photos  with  the  V&A  group. 
Geotagging  also  may  help  users  find  a  huge  variety  of  location-specific  information  looking  for  images by entering the coordinates into a Geotagging- enabled  image  search  engine.  In  addition  to  this,  this  kind  of  system  can  potentially  be  used  to  find  location-based  links,  information  and  other  kind  of  resources.  Some  interesting  cultural  activities  of  geo-content  are  being  developed  within  blogs.  The birth of the geoblog is the core the concept of  social net-working: creation, communication and the  weave  of  relations.  The  geoblog  is  a  collaborative  platform  because  it  is  shared  and  stimulates  the  collaboration  not  only  between  users,  but  also  between  media,  history,  citizenship,  and  between  teachers,  students  and  institutions. The  ‘Emotional  Map of Antifascist Memory Places’35  is an example  of  ‘how  to  write  stories  in  geographies’,  sharing  experiences  through  personal  commentaries. 
Another  experience  of  great  interest  is  the  new  ‘geoblog’  from  the  US  holocaust  Memorial  Museum’s Genocide Prevention Mapping Initiatives,  
93 

========7========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
in partnership with Google Earth: World is Witness.  The  space  aims  at  documenting  and  mapping  genocide  and  related  crimes  against  humanity  that  affected the populations of various countries around  the  world.  By  using  Google  Earth,  the  museum  is  mapping  holocaust  sites  with  historic  content  from  its collections and developing high-impact initiatives  such  as  that  focused  on  the  Darfur  Conflict. 
The geo-referenced documents are visible through  the two new Google Earth’s layers under the Global  Awareness layer folder: ‘UShMM: World is Witness’  and ‘Crisis in Darfur’. The layers are designed around  the  geoblog  of  UShMM  and  information  goes  from  pictures taken in places of war, to links to podcasts,  videos,  and  other  content  on  the  web  site  and  at  Facebook.  ‘World  is  Witness’  geoblog  also  uses  a  Google  Maps  interface  into  the  site  to  show  the  location  related  to  the  published  comments. 
Figure  6.  Genocide  sites  in  Darfur  region  shown  by  a 
 Google earth layer 
Could this way of representation enhance virtual  exhibitions?  It  probably  depends  on  whether  the  exhibition’s subject fits in a way of representation such  as combination of historical and spatial events. For  example, at the TU Delft collection: WatWasWaar36,  the platform was designed for disclosing historical- geographical  information  on  the  Netherlands  to  a  wider audience by searching through time and place  maps,  images,  and  family  history.  There  are  also  some  widgets  such  as  ‘EXhIBIT’  that  combines  geographical  information  with  timelines37.  
The creation of Placemark kml or kmz files could  also create virtual visits on ad hoc basis. Applications  such  as  Google  Earth  show  KML  files  as  web- browsers display the hTML pages. Out of all these,  an interesting example is, the KML file ‘Art Museums  3D Tour’, made available by Google, which enables  to  take  a  tour  of  3D  models  featuring  museums  around the world. Models of the Museum of Modern  Art of San Francisco, Museum of Contemporary Art  of Chicago, the Smithsonian American Art Museum  of  Washington  DC,  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  and  the  Guggenheim  Museum  of  New  york,  
94 
the  Rijksmuseum  of  Amsterdam,  the  Tate  Modern  and  the  National  Gallery  of  London,  the  Louvre  of  Paris,  the  Guggenheim  Museum  of  Bilbao  and  the  Museo  del  Prado  of  Madrid  are  also  located  in  the  Google  3D  Warehouse38. 
7.  VIrtUAL  WOrLDS: tHE  LASt   F rONtIEr? 
Over  the  past  five  years,  there  have  been  a  number  of  applications  of  3D  models  and  virtual  worlds in real exhibits. There have been also some  online  applications,  though  they  constituted  simple  tastes  of  potential  uses.  however,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  before  fulfilling  most  expectations  of  virtual  worlds  in  online  exhibits. 
There are many real exhibitions recreated within  virtual worlds. One of these is an exhibition designed  by  the  Museo  Mart  on  ‘La  Parola  nell’arte’.  The  exhibition was built by Style’s editorial staff whereas  the  virtual  layout  was  designed  and  set  up  by  the  architects  of  Second-Key  (a  team  of  developers,  designers  and  creatives hiTech,  specialised  in  the  creation  of  communication  events  in  Second  Life).  It  occupied  an  area  opened  on  January  2008  and  was  inaugurated  by  the  avatar  of  the  museum’s  director  with  the  participation  of  a  special  guest  from  the  New  Museum  of  New york.  Both  avatars  together  led  a  visit  through  the  Mart  museum’s  art  collection,  explaining  details  about  exhibit  as  well  as presenting scientific projects. The video of such  event was subsequently made available on youTube39.  Among  the  works  built  on  Second  Life,  there  are  paintings,  sculptures  and  installations  by  Nanni  Balestrini,  Jean-Michel  Basquiat,  Alighiero  Boetti,  Fortunato Depero, Marcel Duchamp, Giuseppe Chiari,  Sabrina  Mezzaqui,  Gino  Severini,  Kurt  Schwitters,  Ben  Vautier,  and Andy  Warhol. 
Sometimes  the  use  of  a  virtual  environment  enables user activities impossible in the real world,  such as seeing exhibits from inaccessible points of  view, observing details of an artifact or experimenting  on it without causing any damage. With this goal in  mind, the staff of the Exploratorium of San Francisco  explored in 2006 the possibilities provided by Second  Life.  From  these  experiments  it  was  born  shortly  after ‘Splo’, a virtual museum located in Second Life that offers the possibility of carrying out impossible  experiments  in  reality    such  as  flying  through  the  solar  system,  scanning  a  body,  changing  gravity  without  falling  down,  as  well  as  creating  content  and  organising  public  events.  
The  Exploratorium  virtual  world  in  Second  Life  has a growing number of interactive exhibits, many  of  which  would  be  impossible  to  recreate  in  the  real  museum  in  San  Francisco.  Staff  members  set  up  public  events  periodically  and  use  the  virtual  word also for prototyping exhibitions and arranging  

========8========

CARRERAS  & MANCINI: A  STORy OF GREAT EXPECTATIONS 
provocative  installations  following  the  spirit  of  the  Exploratorium.  Although  users  are  probably  alone  when experiencing the exhibitions, they are social in  the online space by participating in virtual encounters,  creating  jam  sessions,  making  movies  with  other  friends,  etc.  
Another  innovative  project  is  the  The  Tech  Museum  of  Innovation  (opened  in  December  of  2007  in  Silicon  Valley  in  San  Jose)  which  aims  at  inspiring  innovation  in  everyone  and  testing  new  exhibition  contents.  The  best  co-developed  virtual  designs  are  then  used  to  set  real  exhibits  at  The  Tech Museum. Since its opening in December 2007,  166  members  have  initiated  70  exhibition  projects  on  The  Tech  Virtual  website,  and  some  of  them  have  been  selected  to  co-develop  real  exhibits  in  the  real  museum. 
8.   c ONcLUSIONS 
Almost a decade has passed by since reflection  on  virtual  exhibits1   and  those  expectations  have  not  been  completely  fulfilled.  On  the  contrary,  new  technological  developments  have  provided  new  potential tools to be applied in virtual exhibits as a  way to disseminate displays that reflect intellectual  initiatives  and  creations  of  memory  institutions.  
Although virtual exhibits were seen as complementary  to  real  displays,  they  have  become  independent  despite coming from the same source. It has become  difficult  to  combine  real  and  virtual  exhibits  as  a  common  experience  because  of  timing,  distance  and  diversity  of  e-users.  Due  to  this  difficulty,  only  in  a  few  cases  they  have  managed  to  encourage  visitors to come to the real exhibit, acting as basic  content background for the real visit. Actually, most  common cases reveal that the real and virtual exhibits  have  probably  different  audiences.  Nevertheless,  the  virtual  exhibit  becomes  an  excellent  way  to  disseminate  real  displays  though  in  a  different  virtual  format,  which  will  have  a  long-lasting  life.  Therefore, virtual exhibits are in fact fixed resources  once  the  real  one  is  dismantled,  and  they  could  be used in different contexts (i.e., educational) and  forms  such  as  multimedia  archives  (i.e.,  content  syndication  RSS). 
As mentioned earlier, virtual exhibits have their  own new audience that does not normally coincide  with the real auidence. Many applications expect the  virtual  audience’s  contribution  or,  in  other  words,  that  they  take  part  in  content  creation.  Web  2.0  tools have stimulated the public participation, which  contributes with its own experiences, creativity and  comments in exhibitions. It is still difficult to foresee  how  the  social  media  will  change  types  of  virtual  exhibit,  though  they  are  providing  fresh  ideas  and  
contributions. 
New  technologies  such  as  Flash  or  Google- Earth  have  provided  new  potential  narratives  and  aesthetics  for  virtual  exhibits  that  can  become  powerful alternatives to real experiences. however,  some of those applications involve a high investment  that  not  all  the  museums  can  afford.  Therefore,  a  clear distinction between high- and low-cost virtual  exhibitions is also envisaged. A series of tools such  as  CMS  and  widgets  have  become  easy  solutions  for  low-cost  online  displays.  
One of those powerful narratives and aesthetics  comes also from virtual reality and recreation of 3D  models  that  have  enjoyed  so  far  a  secondary  role  in online exhibits. When Second Life arouse, many  cultural  institutions  thought  it  was  an  interesting  environment for museum replica as well as displays,  however  there  have  not  been  many  experiences  in  this  sense.  There  is  still  a  feeling  that  virtual  reality  will  bring  us  to  new  frontiers,  but  one  still  has  to  wait…and  see  such  exhibitions  which  may  uses  4D,  5D  and  7D  models.  
AcKNOWLEDGEMENtS 
We wish to thank Laia Pujol (Aegean University)  who reviewed an early draft of this paper and gave  comments  and  useful  suggestion.  
rEFErENcES 
1. Carreras, C. Initial thoughts for setting up a virtual  
exhibition.  IChIM  2001,  Milano,  pp.  93-104. 2. http://oliba.uoc.edu/eivifor/.  
3. Dutardre,  Nadège.  Public  museums  and  public  
online  real  museums  links?  Ministry  of  Culture  
and  Communication.  Direction  des  Musées  de  
France,  2003. 
4. Aureum  Opus.  http://oliba.uoc.edu/aureum/. 5. Carreras,  C.  &  Munilla,  G.  Patrimonio  digital,  
Barcelona,  2005. 
6.   h ein,  G.E.  Learning  in  the  museum.  London,  
1998. 
7.   h ooper-Greenhill,  E.  (Ed.)  Museum,  media  &  
message.  London,  1995. 
8.   h ooper-Greenhill, E. (Ed.) The educational role  
of  the  museum.  London,  1996. 
9. http://oliba.uoc.edu/carta/. 
10. Virtual Leonardo. http://www.museoscienza.org/ 
leonardo/leonardovirtuale/default.asp/. 11. Treasures  of  nature.  http://oliba.uoc.edu/ 
natura/. 
12. Remembering Nagasaki. http://www.exploratorium. 
edu/nagasaki/mainn.html/. 
13. Jasenovac  1941-1945. http://www.ushmm.org/ 
museum/  exhibit/online/jasenovac/. 
14. Tunisian  mosaics.  http://oliba.uoc.edu/mosaic/. 
95 

========9========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
15. Carreras, C. & Ferran, N. Preserving memories  
online: The exhibition memories of our childhood  
and the catalan history of immigration museum.  
En  IChIM  2004,  Berlin,  2004.  http://oliba.uoc. 
edu/nens/. 
16. Corridos  Sin  Fronteras.  http://www.corridos. 
org/. 
17. Science  Museum  of  London.  http://www. 
sciencemuseum.org.uk/onlinestuff.aspx/. 18. Catalan  Immigration  history  Museum.  http:// 
www.mhic.net/. 
19. Carreras,  C.  Voices:  A  virtual  exhibition  as  
alternative model to the forum 2004. DESIDOC  
J.  Lib.  Inf.  Technol.,  July  2008, 28(4),  92-100.  
http://oliba.uoc.edu/veus/. 
20. http://www.chin.gc.ca/English/Digital_ 
Content/2004Survey/index.html/. 
21. Woman  of  Letters-Irene  Nemirovsky  and  Suite  
Francaise.  http://www.mjhnyc.org/irene/index. 
html/. 
22. Georges Seurat: The drawings. http://www.moma. 
org/interactives/  exhibitions/2007/seurat/. 23. Kirchner and the Berlin street. http://www.moma. 
org/interactives/exhibitions/2008/kirchner/. 24. Pictures  from  Traiguera.  http://oliba.uoc.edu/ 
traiguera/. 
25. Joomla  1.5!  http://www.joomle.org/. 
26. DNA26.  http://oliba.uoc.edu/adn/.  
27. Learning from Amazon and eBay. http://conference. 
archimuse.com/biblio/learning_from_amazon_ 
and_ebay_user_generated_material/. 
28. http://www.flickr.com/photos/brooklyn_museum/ 
sets/72157594168613271/ 
29. Mitchell, W.  E-topia: Urban life, Jim -- but not as we  
knew  it.  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  MA,  1999. 30. Take your time. http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/ 
exhibitions/31/. 
31. Samis, P. Who has the responsibility for saying  
what we see? Mashing up museum, artist, and  
visitor voices, on-site and online. In   Museums  
and  the  Web  2008,  edited  by  J.  Trant  and  D.  
Bearman.  Proceedings  (CD-ROM)–Archives  &  
Museum  Informatics,  31  March  2008,  Toronto.  
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2008/papers/samis/ 
samis.html/. 
96 
32.   h ealey, W.L. The voice of the user: Where students  
and faculty go for information. http://www.outsellinc. 
com/  (accessed  on  4  November  2002). 33. Chan,  S.  Towards  new  metrics  of  success  for  
online museum projects. In     Museums  and  the  
Web 2008, edited by J. Trant and D. Bearman.  
Proceedings  (CD-ROM)–Archives  &  Museum  
Informatics, 31 March 2008, Toronto. http://www. 
archimuse.com/mw2008/papers/chan-metrics/ 
chan-metrics.html/. 
34. Global  interactive  baroque.  http://www.vam. 
ac.uk/microsites/baroque/interactive-map.html/. 35. Map of Antifascist memory places. http://memoria. 
acmos.net/. 
36. WatWasWaar.  http://watwaswaar.nl/. 
37. EXhIBIT.  http://www.simile-widgets.org/ 
exhibit/. 
38. Google  3D  Warehouse  http://sketchup.google. 
com/3dwarehouse/. 
39.   y ouTube.  http://www.youtube.com/. 
About  the Authors 
Dr  césar  carreras   is  a  Senior  Lecturer  at  the  Department of Antiquity of the Autonomous University  of  Barcelona  (UAB).  he  had  been  Lecturer  of  humanities  at  the  Open  University  of  Catalonia  (UOC) since 1997. he has a PhD in Ancient history  from  the  University  of  Barcelona,  another  PhD  in  Archaeology  from  the  University  of  Southampton  (UK),  and  a  Master  in  Computer  Science  Applied  to Archaeology from the University of Southampton  (UK). he has published numerous papers on classical  archaeology  and  digital  heritage.  
Dr Federica Mancini  is specialised in the evaluation  of  ICT  applied  to  cultural  heritage.  After  her  PhD  thesis titled ‘Towards a participatory museum:  Analysis  of  models  and  participatory  experiences  based  on  ICT  for  museums’  in  the  Internet  Interdisciplinary  Institute  (UOC)  of  Barcelona,  she  is  collaborating  with  the  Science  and  Technology  Center  of  Prato  (University of Florence). her area of interest include:   Analysis  of  new  ways  to  communicate  heritage  for  regional  development,  tourism,  and  public  cultural  participation. 

========10========

