DESIDOC Journal of Library & Information Technology, Vol. 34, No. 2, March 2014, pp. 97-102  
  2014, DESIDOC 
Design and Development of Web-based Online Exhibitions 
Leong Chee Khoon* and Chennupati K. Ramaiah**  *Educational Design and Technology Department, Institute of Technical Education 
ITE Headquarters, Podium A, 10 Dover Drive, Singapore-138 683 
E-mail: edt@ite.edu.sg 
**Department of Library & Information Science, Pondicherry University, Puducherry-605 014 
E-mail: ckramaiah.lis@pondiuni.edu.in 
AbstrAct 
Online exhibitions are web-based multimedia information systems, which were came into existence  with technological advances in computer processes, communications, multimedia, and the introduction of  internet. Never before, now there are better opportunities for various types of communities worldwide to  share their cultural and heritage with one another in an easily accessible yet interactive and entertaining  way. This article proves an overview of trends in the design and development of online exhibitions in the  world. Along with users requirements analysis needed to any systems design and the key technologies  involved for developing an online exhibition were discussed.  
Keywords: Web-based exhibitions, virtual reality, internet, shockwave 
1.  INtrODUctION 
The  majority  of  the  cultural,  art,  and  other  related  organisations  in  the  world  are  moving  from  physical exhibitions to online exhibitions for the past  two  decades.  Long  before  the  words  ‘interactive’  and  ‘multimedia’  became  buzzwords  in  the  1990s,  museums and other archival institutions were already  presenting  multimedia  displays  and  exhibitions  to  their  visitors  and  encouraging  interaction  between  the  visitor  and  the  exhibit  objects1.  Interactive  multimedia  and  computer  technology,  in  the  form  of  kiosks,  was  recognised  as  a  way  of  allowing  a  greater degree of public participation and involvement  in  the  learning  experience. 
The  current  trend  shifts  the  focus  of  electronic  exhibitions from static kiosks on the web, where they  are  called  as  online  exhibitions.  Online  exhibitions  cover  a  wide  range  of  topics,  ranging  from  art,  geography, history, literature to science in general.  They  are  mostly  of  archival  and  library  content,  e.g.,  archival  audio  and  video  resources,  print  arts  (classic  postcards,  etc.),  manuscripts,  etc. 
2.  ONLINE  EXHIbItIONs   VE rsUs   PHY sIcAL  
EXHIbItIONs 
Online exhibitions are basically electronic web- based  versions  of  physical  exhibitions,  so  it  is  worthwhile  comparing  the  two  types  of  exhibitions,  in order to understand the increasing pervasiveness  of  the  former. 
Physical  exhibitions  suffer  from  their  bulk  and  size.  Although  ‘travelling  exhibitions’  offer  some  degree of mobility, expensive resources (manpower,  time  and  costs)  have  to  be  expended  to  shift  the  contents  from  one  site  to  the  next.  Being  manned  by  humans,  with  their  associated  working  hours,  these  exhibitions  are  open  for  public  access  only  during certain times of the day, further limitation is  their  temporal  reach.  In  addition,  limitations  in  the  size of the display area available often result in the  organisers  being  forced  to  leave  out  much  of  the  collections  (sometimes  by  as  much  as  80  %)  from  being put on display. Furthermore, as the content is  presented  in  the  form  of  static  information  panels,  visitors  often  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  take-away  copies of the materials for future use (e.g., teachers  may  wish  to  incorporate  the  materials  into  their  learning  structures).  In  certain  remote  regions,  it  may  not  be  possible  for  the  physical  exhibitions  to  reach  out  to  the  widest  possible  audience,  due  to  their  locations  at  geographical  distribution  areas. 
Online exhibitions can overcome these limitations  in time, distance and space, by being available around  the clock via the internet. Visitors, especially school- children, need not travel all the way to the exhibition  site  to  see  it:  the  exhibition  is  delivered  to  them  through the internet. Digital storage of the artifacts  helps to reduce maintenance costs. There is no longer  the need to dismantle and re-build the exhibition to  make it available to new audiences. New materials  
Received 22 March 2013, revised 4 January 2014, Online published 18 March 2014 

========1========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
can be added relatively easily, and existing content  can  be  upgraded  in  a  shorter  time.  These  factors  dramatically reduce the lead-time and eliminate costly  physical space needed to mount a physical exhibition.  
Once  an  exhibition  is  put  online,  it  becomes  immediately  available  to  visitors  around  the  world  with an internet connection. This helps to share the  local cultural and heritage reaches to the international  community, as part of the global cultural exchange.  Teachers can easily download the digital resources  for inclusion into their teaching syllabi. Students learn  to  gather  information,  organise  it,  create  meaning,  reach  insight  and  present  their  findings  online,  effectively creating new information products in the  process. This provides a different and dynamic kind  of learning experience, as compared to conventional  static  classroom  instruction. 
It  should  be  noted  that  online  exhibitions  are  generally designed to play a complimentary (rather  than competitive) role to their physical counterparts,  although there are some exhibitions that exist solely  in virtual form. The contents of web-based exhibitions  provide background information to prepare potential  visitors  for  their  Feventual  visit,  and  can  also  help  to  fill  gaps  in  the  visitors’  information  needs  after  their  visit,  by  providing  additional  resources  to  augment  the  static  information  panels  at  the  physical  exhibition2. 
3.    tr ENDs   IN  ONLINE  EXHI bItION  DEsIGN 
With  the  widespread  availability  of  internet  connections worldwide, there has been an ongoing global  trend in putting information online to facilitate easier  access3-7. This trend has also been encouraged by  recent technological advances in computer engineering,  telecommunications and multimedia systems8-10. The  impact  of  such  advances  and  their  implications  in  content  delivery  have  not  been  lost  on  museum  and  other  archival  professionals.  In  recent  times,  museums  and  galleries  have  been  aggressively  migrating  their  collections  on  the  web11. 
Over a short period of time and with improvements  in  web-based  multimedia  technology,  these  web- based  exhibitions  have  progressed  from  being  the  static  online  versions  of  their  physical  cousins  to  providing  an  enhanced  virtual  experience  to  their  web-surfing visitors12. Increasingly, creative applications  of  commercial  off-the-shelf  technologies  such  as  Shockwave, multimedia Java applets, Flash animations  and  virtual  reality  authoring  tools  (e.g.,  QuickTime  Virtual  Reality)  have  enabled  online  exhibitions  to  deliver  their  content  more  effectively  than  their  physical  counter  parts  with  fixed  passive  layouts. 
4.  IMPAct   OF  tEcHNOLOGIcAL  
INNOVAtIONs 
Over  the  last  few  years,  higher-speed  internet connectivity speeds have been made commercially  
98 
available  using  cable  modems  (which  use  optical  fiber  cables  to  transmit  data  as  light  waves)  and  digital  subscriber  loop  (DSL)  modems  (which  use  normal  telephone  lines  to  transmit  data  at  faster  rates  using  efficient  compression  and  transmission  techniques).  While  cable  connections  require  the  installation  of  special  lines  and  modems,  DSL  connections typically make use of existing telephone  lines which helps the subscriber to save costs, at the  same time web-surfing can proceed with telephone  conversation  concurrently  on  the  same  line.  
Demand  for  such  broadband  connections  is  spurred by the trend towards more multimedia content  on  the  web.  The  average  size  of  files  transferred  across  the  internet  is  now  in  tens  of  kilobytes  (KB),  nearly  20  times  bigger  than  what  it  used  to  be  when  the  web  was  still  basically  a  text-based  communications medium. Such large file-sizes render  dial-up modem connections increasingly inadequate,  even  for  56  kbps  connections,  which  represents  the  upper  limit  for  modem  communications  over  ordinary  telephone  lines.  The  current  drawback  of  broadband  connections  is  the  high  recurrent  costs  of subscription, although this is expected to drop as  competition  between  service  providers  intensifies;  this  could  help  to  make  such  connections  more  affordable  to  the  masses,  but  is  driven  by  market  conditions  and  can  differ  significantly  between  country  to  country. 
Great strides have been made in the development  of  microprocessors  –  the  ‘brains’  of  computers.  While  the  earliest  Zilog  Z80  microprocessor  ran  at  2.5  Mhz,  the  Pentium  IV  and  PowerPC  G4  chips  of  today  blaze  above  3  Ghz:  a  1200-folds  speed  improvement  over  a  short  period  of  20  years.  While  such  high  processing  speeds  may  seem  extravagant  for  users  who  typically  do  word  processing, they are absolutely essential for delivering  multimedia content over the internet. The integration  of  native  multimedia  instructions  support  into  the  microprocessor  core  architecture,  as  well  as  more  efficient instruction execution design, are the essential  process  improvements  that  make  microprocessors  the key hardware enablers of web-based multimedia  information  systems,  together  with  advances  in  modem  technology.  
The  release  of  QuickTime,  the  world’s  first  digital  video  and  animation  system  in  1990  was  followed by the development of the world wide web  (www) at CERN in Switzerland. In 1995, these two  technologies converged when QuickTime movies first  appeared  on  the  web.  This  was  quickly  followed  by  the  appearance  of  RealAudio,  the  world’s  first  streaming media (audio) format. Since then, digital  movies  have  become  commonplace  on  the  web,  and the major web multimedia formats (QuickTime,  RealMedia and Windows Media) are now delivered  in streaming format. Streaming audio and video files  

========2========

KhOON  &  RAMAIAh: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF WEB-BASED ONLINE  Exh IBITIONS 
mean  that  web  users  need  not  wait  for  the  entire  file  (which  can  be  very  large  in  the  case  of  digital  video) to finish downloading – the first few frames can  usually be sent in seconds after the page is loaded.  Such streaming media technologies are the software  enablers  of  web-based  information  systems. 
5.  KEY  tEcHNOLOGIEs 
Although  the  internet  started  off  as  a  text- based  communication  medium,  the  introduction  of  the Mosaic graphical browser has enriched the web  browsing  experience.  Initially  only  simple  images  were  available.  Later  on,  with  the  incorporation  of  audio and video support by web browsers, the web  became  a  full  multimedia  communication  channel.  The  following  are  the  key  technologies  for  the  developing  of  online  exhibitions:    
5.1 Images  
Web  image  formats  can  be  generally  divided  into two main categories: raster and vector graphics.  Raster  graphics  describe  a  picture  by  its  image  composition  information  (in  terms  of  pixel  location  and  colour),  while  vector  graphics  are  represented  by  mathematical  equations.  By  far,  raster  images  are  more  popularly  supported,  but  vector  graphics  are also emerging in importance due to the fact that  they take up less space on disk (thus making them  faster to download and render). Raster graphics are  mainly  in  GIF,  JPG  and  PNG  formats,  while  vector  graphics  are  exemplified  by  the  Flash  format. 5.2 Audio 
Audio  files  come  in  many  formats,  but  only  a  few  are  practical  for  use  on  the  internet. The  WAV  (waveform)  sound  file  format  is  playable  across  many  computer  platforms,  but  its  use  is  limited  to  very  short  clips  on  the  web  due  to  its  large  file  size.  MIDI  (Musical  Instruments  Digital  Interface)  sound  files  are  generated  using  a  series  of  sound  notes information, similar to the way vector graphics  are  drawn.  MIDI  files  are  very  small  in  size,  but  the  output  is  artificial  machine-like  tones.  MP3  and  MP4  are  other  forms  of  popular  web  audio  formats  –  they  can  compress  CD-quality  audio  up  to  10–20  times  smaller  than  the  WAV  format.  The  major  problem  with  WAV,  MIDI  and  MP3  is  their  download-and-play  delivery  model,  which  means  that  the  listener  has  to  save  the  entire  audio  file  to  disk  before  the  file  can  be  played.  This  can  result  in  an  unacceptably  longer  waiting  time  for  the  user,  besides  the  additional  issue  of  copyright  enforcement. 
5.3  Video 
Web-based video come mainly in three formats:  AVI, QuickTime and MPEG. Like WAV file, the Intel  AVI  (Audio  Video  Interleave)  video  file  format  can 
be  played  across  many  platforms,  but  its  use  is  limited  to  very  short  clips  due  to  its  large  file  size.  QuickTime is the most widely used digital video format  and  is  widely  supported  in  the  industry,  making  it  ideal  for  use  on  the  web.  MPEG  (Moving  Pictures  Expert  Group)  has  good  compression  and  image  quality,  but  playback  on  the  major  web  browsers  is  not  consistent.  Both  AVI  and  MPEG  are  based  on  the  download-and-play  delivery  model.  5.4  Media  Delivery 
Streaming media technologies represent advances  made  in  audio  and  video  file  formats  that  are  previously based on the download-and-play delivery  model.  Streaming  is  the  process  of  transmitting  media  over  a  network  for  real-time  viewing.  The  media file is not downloaded into the user’s computer  and  it  is  played  back  by  the  specific  media  player  or  plug-in  as  the  file  is  being  received  on  the  user’s hard-disk. This solves the issue of copyright  enforcement.  Another  advantage  comes  from  the  buffering  of  the  media  data  –  the  viewer  can  start  playing  the  clip  as  soon  as  sufficient  data  has  been  received.  They  do  not  have  to  wait  for  the  entire  media  to  complete  downloading.  Examples  of streaming media are QuickTime, RealMedia, and  Windows  Media. 
5.5  Web technologies 
Dynamic  hTML  (DhTML)  refers  to  techniques  used  to  extend  the  current  set  of  standard hTML  elements (tags), by allowing them to be accessed and  modified by a scripting language, e.g., JavaScript or  VBScript. Using the Document Object Model (DOM),  a  scripting  language  can  be  used  to  modify  the  attributes  and  behaviours  of  individual hTML  tags,  e.g.,  change  the  colour  of  the  background.  Such  dynamic  facilities  allow  web  pages  to  come  alive  with movement and interactivity. Unfortunately, due  to the slightly differently implementation for DhTML  scripting support in the major web browsers, DhTML  elements  must  be  carefully  coded  if  cross-browser  support  is  required.  For  example    
5.6  Programming tools 
Java is an object-oriented programming language  targeted for cross-platform applications development.  On the internet, Java is used to create applets (mini  applications) that run within the browser environment  itself. The use of Java applets to deliver streaming  content  is  attractive  because  there  is  no  plug-in  to  install  or  update13.  In  addition,  due  to  the  Java- based  implementation,  users  can  receive  content  developed  on  nearly  any  platform.  For  example    5.7  Virtual reality  (Vr) 
This  environment  allow  the  viewer  to  rotate  an  object around an axis and see it in three dimensions,  e.g., when exploring a small artifact14. The user may  
99 

========3========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
also  be  placed  in  the  middle  of  a  virtual  sphere.  This  lets  the  user  pan  in  any  direction,  creating  a  pseudo-reality  experience  in  a  panoramic  space.  hotspots  can  also  be  embedded  inside  the  VR  environment  to  link  to  other  pages,  or  provide  a  different view (e.g., zoomed view). QuickTime Virtual  Reality (QTVR) is used to create such virtual space  for  the  users  to  move  around  in  virtual  mode.  For  example  Smithsonian  museum  
5.8 shockwave 
It  is  a  popular  plug-in  for  delivering  complex  animations created using Director or Flash software.  Director  is  a  multimedia  authoring  tool  used  to  create complex animation, interactive presentations,  games, and multimedia applications. Sound effects  can  be  synchronised  with  video  and  animation,  buttons  can  be  used  to  trigger  events,  etc.  Flash  is another similar product used for creating vector- based  animated  user  interfaces  for  web-sites.  The  Shockwave  engine  is  used  to  compress  Director  and Flash applications to smaller sizes suitable for  web  delivery.  For  example    
5.9  Database technology 
This  is  needed  for  the  effective  and  efficient  indexing  and  retrieval  of  the  many  resources  in  an  online  exhibition,  via  a  search  engine.  This  is  especially  important  for  multimedia  resources,  to  facilitate  searching  along  both  the  spatial  and  temporal  dimensions  –  a  problem  that  has  yet  to  be  addressed  adequately  with  the  major  industry- standard  database  technologies  available  today.  Active research is being carried out on the methods  of  describing  multimedia  resources  so  that  they  can  be  retrieved  using  conventional  search  engine  interfaces. 
6.  UsEr rEQUIrEMENts  ANALY sIs 
In collecting the user requirements for an online  exhibition, it is important to understand the general  demographics of the survey population. The survey  participants should be chosen to be representatives of  the potential visitors of the online exhibition. This is  because different groups have different expectations,  e.g.,  the  younger  generation  (with  their  shorter  attention  span)  seeks  dynamic  content  presented  in short snippets, while more mature audiences are  generally  interested  in  full  details  of  the  content  rather  than  its  presentation. having  a  large  survey  population, together with an even distribution of the  professions targeted for the intended audience, will  help  to  ensure  that  sufficient  relevant  feedback  is  gathered  to  meet  the  user  requirements. 
In general, when profiling the demographics of the  survey population, the specific areas of interests are:  the age groupings, gender distribution, educational  qualifications,  profession,  domain  knowledge,  work  
100 
experience, subject background and areas of work.  Often,  these  factors  will  in  turn  determine  the  systems  design  based  on  the  results  obtained  in  the  study  of  users’  requirements  analysis. 
When  gathering  data  on  the  users’  computer  usage skills, the areas of concern are their computer  usage experience, the types of computers they are  familiar  with,  the  operating  system  they  are  most  familiar  with,  the  size  of  their  displays  and  their  internet  connection,  etc. The  first  three  factors  will  determine  the  complexity  of  the  help  system  to  be  implemented,  because  a  highly  computer-literate  user population would require a less extensive help  system. however,  computer  literacy  should  not  be  used  as  an  absolute  measure  and  must  never  be  taken  an  excuse  to  provide  a  sloppy  help  system  or,  worse  yet,  to  do  away  with  the  help  system  entirely.  The  fourth  factor  is  the  screen  resolution  selected  for  the  online  exhibition.  The  final  factor  is  the  best  techniques  used  to  deliver  high-quality  multimedia  content  to  the  users,  over  the  limited  shared  bandwidth  of  the  internet.  This  involves  a  delicate  balance  between  information  compression  and  content  quality,  which  has  only  recently  been  addressed to a certain extent with such technologies  as  streaming  media  (e.g.,  RealVideo)  and  web  vector  graphics  (e.g.,  Flash). 
Online  exhibitions  are  broadly  web-based  information  systems,  so  the  potential  users’  web  usage  skills  should  be  investigated  as  well.  Users  are  surveyed  on  their  frequency  of  web  surfing,  the  average  amount  of  time  spent  on  web  surfing,  the  types  of  browsers  being  used,  and  the  types  of  web-sites  they  would  prefer  to  visit.  Similar  to  the  computer  usage  skills,  the  first  two  factors  will  determine  the  depth  of  coverage  of  the  help  information to be made available to the users. The  third  factor  (type  of  browser)  has  a  major  impact  on  the  design  of  the  online  exhibition,  particularly  in  the  scripting  of  dynamic  content,  because  the  two  major  web  browsers  on  the  market  (Internet  Explorer and Communicator/Navigator) offer different  levels of support for such content. It should also be  noted  that  in  some  parts  of  the  world,  users  only  have access to text-only browsers, e.g., Lynx, so it  helps  to  extend  the  reach  of  the  online  exhibition  to  these  users  by  providing  a  text-only  version  of  the  exhibition.  Without  doubt,  the  requirement  to  accommodate  users  who  use  different  browsers  complicates  the  task  of  delivering  the  content,  but  catering  to  these  users’  needs  will  ensure  that  the  content  is  distributed  to  the  widest  possible  population. 
Finally,  the  expectations  of  the  users  about  the  online  exhibition  should  be  examined.  Users  are  surveyed  on  whether  they  have  visited  online  exhibitions, their experiences of such exhibitions, the  

========4========

KhOON  &  RAMAIAh: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF WEB-BASED ONLINE  Exh IBITIONS 
types of media suitable for use in online exhibitions,  the  level  of  detail  of  the  content,  the  appropriate  length of the multimedia elements, requirements for  search  facilities,  and  a  general  section  to  gather  feedback  on  other  user  requirements,  e.g.,  any  other  essential  features  not  covered  in  the  survey.  This  important  section  is  where  the  content  and  format  of  presentation  of  the  online  exhibition  will  be  determined. 
7.  EVALUAtION  crItErIA 
Fundamentally, online exhibitions are web-based  information delivery systems, and they are evaluated  in  six  major  areas  of  interests.  These  are:  (a)  design, (b) content and organisation of information,  (c)  navigation  structure,  (d)  help  information,  (e)  evaluation  of  multimedia  elements  (if  any),  and  (f)  total  exhibition  in  general. 
In  design  evaluation,  an  online  exhibition  is  examined on its effectiveness as a web-site. Points  to  note  are  text  readability  (font  type,  size,  colour  and  style),  appropriate  use  of  colours,  appropriate  use  of  icons  and  buttons,  visual  consistency,  site  attractiveness  and  user  friendliness.  For  content  and organisation of information, factors to look out  for  are  information  organisation,  content  coverage  (detail), ease of finding information, and appropriate  links  to  related  sites. 
When  evaluating  the  navigability  of  an  online  exhibition,  the  hypertext  structure  of  the  site  is  analysed. Navigation aids (e.g., buttons) are measured  in  terms  of  helping  in  the  users’  exploration  of  the  site,  e.g.,  ease  of  navigation  from  one  screen  to  another,  ease  of  returning  to  the  page  last  visited,  etc.  Problems  surfaced  by  the  users  while  using  the  system  are  to  be  addressed  quickly  in  the  next  version  of  the  online  exhibition.  This  is  because  the  hypertext  nature  of  the  web,  while  being  representative  of  humans’  natural  way  of  seeking  information,  may  lead  to  disorientation  if  not  designed  carefully. 
In terms of help information, an online exhibition  is  reviewed  on  the  usefulness  of  its  help  system,  if  one  is  available. At  the  minimum,  a  help  system  consists  of  a  few  web  pages  obtaining  information  organised into a help section. A ‘help Section’ should  contain sufficient details for the users to locate the  information of their interests within the site is in the  shortest  possible  time.  Ideally,  an  online  exhibition  should be designed to be intuitive enough for first- time visitors to use without ever looking at the ‘help  Section’. however,  owing  to  the  disparate  level  of  computer  literacy  among  the  potential  visitors  to  the site, as well as the increasing sophistication of  multimedia technologies and web-based information  systems, it is still recommended that a help section  be  available  for  users  to  fall  back  on  if  they  need  some  guidance  along  the  way. 
Today, commercial multimedia technology (e.g.,  digital movies, computer animations, three-dimensional  graphics)  is  being  increasingly  incorporated  into  online  exhibitions.  Whether  or  not  the  users  are  able to enjoy the enhanced experience provided by  the  multimedia  elements  depends  on  the  internet  connection, the client computer used to access the  site, and the server hosting the site. Factors such as  the  quality  and  length  of  the  multimedia  elements,  and their window size, should be evaluated for their  usefulness in reinforcing the visitors’ understanding  of the topics being presented. If possible, audio clips  should be accompanied by text transcripts, e.g., in  case  the  visitor’s  computer  does  not  have  sound  playback,  or  the  visitor  is  aurally  challenged.  Such  user-oriented  features  can  go  a  long  way  towards  extending  the  reach  of  online  exhibitions  beyond  the  limits  of  their  multimedia  elements. 
Finally,  in  the  general  evaluation  of  the  online  exhibition  system,  the  site  should  be  evaluated  on  whether it has met the users’ expectations as gathered  in the initial user requirements study. Visitors should  be  polled  on  the  features  found  to  both  sufficient  and  lacking  in  the  site,  and  encouraged  to  share  other observations and recommendations. Feedback  gathered  from  this  kind  of  open-response  section  then become part of the new user requirements used  to further refine the online exhibition to increase its  effectiveness  in  meeting  the  users’  needs. 
8.  cONcLUsIONs 
While  online  exhibitions  can  be  viewed  as  web-based  multimedia  information  systems,  they  have  an  important  educational  role  to  play  as  well.  The  design  of  effective  online  exhibition  is  a  compromise of the application of technology versus  the users’ needs and expectations. A hypertext-based  information  organisation  for  non-linear  access  to  the resources provides alternative navigation paths  to  the  resources,  mimicking  the  natural  human  way  of  finding  information.  This  must  be  carefully  designed so that it will lead to disorientation in the  users’  search  for  information  within  the  site,  e.g.,  there  must  be  means  for  the  user  to  return  to  the  previously visited page at any point of time. Dynamic  animation elements have an aesthetic purpose and  are often well-received by users, although they may  not  have  any  educational  value.  Therefore,  there  should  be  a  balanced  mix  of  animated  interactive  interfaces  to  attract  and  retain  the  attention  of  the  visitors,  especially  the  younger  generation.  The  web presents an active learning environment where  users can make decisions about the tasks, content,  navigation,  presentation  and  assessment  activities  that  they  make  in  the  course  of  learning.  Riding  on  such  a  rich  communications  medium,  online  exhibitions  offer  an  exciting  environment  where  
101 

========5========

DJLIT,  VOL.  34,  NO.  2, MARCh  2014 
visitors  can  ‘take  back’  portions  of  an  exhibition,  and  return  for  more  information  or  new  features  and  updates  in  the  future. 
rEFErENcEs 
1. Kassay, M. Interactive multimedia in museums.   
1995.  http://online.anu.edu.au/CNASI/pubs/ 
OnDisc95/docs/ONL21.html/  (accessed  on  12  
December  2013). 
2. Monfort,  C.C.  Virtual  exhibitions:  Extending  
museum potential, 2000. http://www.cultivate-int. 
org/issue2/virtual/  (accessed  on  12  December  
2013).  
3. Pool, R. Beyond databases and e-mail. Science ,  
1993, 261(5123),  841-43. 
4. Chu  Khoon,  Leong;  Ramaiah,  C.K.  &  Foo,  
S.  The  design  and  development  of  an  online  
exhibition for heritage information awareness in  
Singapore.  Program:  Electr.  lib.  and  inf.  sys. ,  
2003, 37(2),  85-93. 
5. Chern Li, Liew. Online cultural heritage exhibitions:  
A  survey  of  strategic  issues. Program:  Electr.  
Lib.  Inf.  Sys.,  2006, 40(4),  372–88.  
6. Alonso,  José  M.  et  al.  Improving  Access  to  
Government  through  Better  Use  of  the  Web,  
2009.  http://www.w3.org/TR/egov-improving/  
(accessed  on  12  December  2013). 
7. Gnanasambandam, Chandra; et al. Technology, Media,  
and Telecom Practice: Online and upcoming: The  
internet’s impact on India. McKinsey & Company,  
New  York,  2012.  www.mckinsey.com/. 8. Kathuria,  R.  &  Kedia,  Mansi  India:  The  Impact  
of  internet,  ICRIER,  IAMAI,  and  DIT,  2011.  
www.icrier.org/pdf/Internet_Release_20jan12. 
pdf/.  (accessed  on  12  December  2013). 
102 
9. McKinsey. Global institute, internet matters: The Net’s  
sweeping impact on growth, jobs, and prosperity,  
McKinsey  &  Company,  New  York,  2011. 
10. Kende, Michael. Internet global growth: Lessons  
for the future. Analysys Mason Limited, London,   
2012. www.analysysmason.com/. (accessed on  
12  December  2013). 
11. Taylor, J.h. & Ryan J. Museums and galleries on  
the internet. Internet Research: Electr. Network. 
Appli.  Policy,  1995, 5(1),  80-88.  
12. Wee hin; Leo Tan & Subramaniam, R. E-learning  
and virtual science centers. Information Science  
Publishing,  Singapore,  2005.  
13. Lawton, G. Video streams into the mainstream.  
Computer,  2000, 33(7),  12-17. 
14. de Almeida, P.  & Shigeo, Y. Interactive conversational  
character  as  a  virtual  tour  guide  to  an  online  
museum  exhibition.  In   Proceedings  of  the  
International Conference on Computers in Education,  
3-6  December  2002,  2002.  vol.1,  pp.  215-16. 
About  the Author 
Mr  Leong  chee  Khoon   is  working  as  Systems  Analyst  with  Educational  Design  and  Technology  Division  of  Institute  of  Technical  Education  (ITE)  headquarters. he  supports  users  of  the  e-learning  system  used  by  ITE  campuses  in  Singapore.  his  formal  education  includes  a  Master’s  degree  in  Information Studies from the Nanyang Technological  University,  Singapore. 

========6========

